unclas section 01 of 02 montreal 000001  sipdis  e.0. 12958: n/a tags: tbio, econ, kirf, ca, health subject: cloning claim puts spotlight on quebec-based raelian group  1. summary: the following is some background information on the montreal-based raelian group, whose member dr. brigitte boisselier announced at a december 27 press conference in hollywood, florida the birth of the first cloned human being, a 7 pound baby girl nicknamed eve. and its two main figures leader claude vorilhon, better known as rael, and dr. boisselier.  one likely result of the boisselier announcement is that canada's pending legislation to ban human cloning could contain stricter restrictions. end summary.  2. the raelian movement was founded by frenchman claude vorilhon, a former sports journalist, failed singer, radio commentator and avid stock car racer. vorilhon claims to have been conceived on december 25, 1945, by a french mother and an alien father. specialists say he was born in vichy, france in 1946. vorilhon who uses the name rael  (god's light) (pronounced ra-el in french (rhymes with kal-el and jor-el)) says he created the movement after aliens visited him in central france in 1973. at that time, little green aliens (approximately 4 ft tall) told him --in fluent french- - earthlings had been created in a laboratory 25,000 years ago. since these aliens which he calls the elohim (the hebrew word for god) are 25,000 years ahead of us, rael says cloning is very simple task for them.  3. although the sect is based in montreal--and not switzerland as the british tabloid press has reported --rael moved his personal headquarters to florida in the early nineties. when it was announced rael was moving to florida, radio commentators joked he was simply imitating quebec snowbirds or that he wanted to get closer to nascar circuits. however, some saw u.s. expansion as a logical business move. on the one hand, since the 1960s, quebec has proven to be tough recruiting grounds for all religious groups, mainstream or otherwise. on the other, the u.s. offers much bigger pools of money and target audiences for raelian commercial enterprises. because the group is recognized as an atheist religious organization by the quebec government it enjoys the same fiscal advantages as other religious groups.  4.  the group operates a theme park called ufo land in quebec's eastern townships area. the facility, which consists mainly of a large flying saucer, a large-scale dna molecule and some rooms for summer seminars and media interviews, was recently vandalized but is scheduled to reopen this summer.  5. in photos and television appearances, rael surrounds himself with beautiful women. raelian media kits include many pictures of scantily dressed "members." rael preaches "sensual meditation" which enables the faithful to reach the "cosmic orgasm."  6. despite the sect's two powerful marketing tools, sex and ufos, the raelians have very few members.   their web site www.rael.org claims -in twenty languages-- to have 55,000 members in 84 countries. however mike kropveld, executive director of the montreal-based info-secte (no relation with the paris organization of the same name) told post that the raelians inflate their figures with past and occasional members. because of all the media attention, the group creates a lot of curiosity -a rael spokesman stated in the local press on december 30 that the website was getting one million hits per hour on december 26 -- but most visitors only attend a few meetings. the active membership is between 2,000 and 3,000 worldwide and about 700 in montreal, says kropveld.  7. according to local news analysts, the ultimate goal of raelians is to create life in a laboratory which would make human beings immortal and enable them to create another civilization on another planet. in the meantime, rael wants to build an embassy in israel to welcome the elohim when they come back in 2035. the group has also been criticized for advocating the use of genetics for eugenic attempts at improving the human race. the group's structure with priests and bishops is based along the lines of the catholic church.  8. until recently the group avoided serious controversy. there have not been any stories of former members complaining about being conned out of their money or physically abused or seduced, and no involvement with minors -- except one case in france.  9.  nonetheless, the raelians know how to piggyback on stories to get publicity. when in 1993, authorities in quebec decided against installing condom distributors in schools, raelians visited the kids with free samples. in the wake of the recent pedophile charges against various religious orders, the group went back to the schools in quebec. their plan this time was to hand out small wooden crosses for the students to burn. but public and governmental opposition stopped the later project. in both cases, almost all the publicity they garnered was bad.  10. sensing a similar wave of condemnation, rael has publicly distanced himself from dr. boisselier, a raelian bishop, and her cloning work, saying he had gotten rid of clonaid two years ago. however, kropveld believes that cloning is by far the group's most dangerous work. kropfeld even doubts rael really believes in cloning human beings beyond its marketing possibilities for himself as sect leader.  11. as for dr brigitte boisselier, she was born in 1956 in france. she holds two phds in chemistry, one from the university of dijon in france and one from the university of houston. after houston she was hired by air liquide the french industrial and medical gas multinational to work on reversible oxygen binding. in 1989, air liquide promoted her to vp research.  12. prior to joining clonaid (see www.clonaid.com) in 1997, dr. boisselier had not worked in biology or reproduction techniques. the las vegas-based clonaid received $500,000 from mark hunt to build a laboratory in west virginia before mr. hunt decided to stop financing that project. clonaid also claims to have received $200,000 from 250 different donors in the hope of cloning a family member. on march 28, 2001 dr. boisselier and rael defended their cloning projects before a senate committee.  13.  comment. the publicity garnered by the cloning announcement may be used by the rael organization to gain new adherents in the united states.  14.  canada like many other countries is in the process of adopting legislation bill c-113 which would ban human cloning. one likely result of the boisselier announcement is that such legislation could contain stricter restrictions. end comment. kanter 
unclas montreal 000004  sipdis  e.0. 12958:n/a tags: smig, kpao, soci, kisl, pgov, pter, prel, pbts, ca, smuggling, border patrol subject: apparent illegal aliens from primarily pakistan residing in the united states enter canada to seek political asylum  1. summary: some 200 aliens, most of them of pakistani origin, flocked to the new york-quebec border post of champlain-lacolle in an attempt to file for the status of political refugee at the canadian border immigration office before the start of the new year.  pakistani claimants said they were now living in fear in the united states because of post- september 11 conditions. pakistani claimants said they were also afraid they would be deported if they presented themselves to the ins between mid- january and mid-february. a top ranking immigration canada official told post claimants were well established in the united states despite the fact they apparently had no legal u.s. immigration status.  end summary  2.  between dec. 27, 2002 and jan. 3, 2003, 150 pakistanis and a few dozen immigrants from the congo, lebanon, peru and colombia took buses to plattsburgh, new york and then taxis to the last exit on interstate 87 before walking the last mile into canada. the last claimant arrived on jan.3 at 10 a.m.  3.  at noon on jan. 3 all but three had been processed (pictured, fingerprinted and their case stories noted in depositions which took between three and five hours). to process the overload, immigration canada increased the number of agents from six to sixteen per shift. at that time of the year, the usual number of refugee applicants is 6 per day.  an immigration canada official stated to the media that claimants believed canadian regulations would change as of jan. 1, 2003 and that others thought "safe third country" regulations would come into effect this january rather than later this spring.  3.   applicants claimed they had been threatened and harassed in the wake of the september 11, 2001 attack on new york and washington. immigration canada sources also told post that claimants had been established in the united states for at least a year and some for as many as ten years.  immigration canada told post that all claimants were illegally residing in the united states and feared deportation.  4.  claimants were released by canadian authorities after they promised they would show up at their hearings before the commission on the status of refugees. hearings will start as early as january 2003. the merit of each case will be examined like any other political refugee claim and will need to satisfy geneva convention requirements.  the long canadian asylum claim examination process can take as much as two years, i.e. enough time for claimants to find a local spouse, or for the evolution of the political situation in their country of origin to change so as to warrant further study.  5.   no other u.s.-quebec border post has recently been the scene of such traffic. however, some 200 similar applicants were recently processed both at the windsor and the fort erie posts in ontario. immigration canada sources told post that because there is no big city south of the quebec border there is also no organization like casa vive which houses claimants during the documentation process at the buffalo-fort erie post. this explains why canada will probably go on using the old trailer it keeps in its lacolle backyard.  6.  comment:  it remains to be seen whether the asylum claimants will return for their hearings or whether they will melt into canadian society as they apparently were able to do in the united states without being detected by u.s. authorities.  7.  local media have used the story of young iranians being jailed in california after showing up as requested by ins notices to criticize new u.s. immigration laws and to emphasize harsh treatment of ethnic groups in post september 11 america. with the attention being given to the pakistanis at the border and the fbi seeking five men alleged to have entered the united states through the akwasasne native reserve that straddles the u.s.- canada border, further canadian media attention can be expected on the fate of the pakistanis who do show up at ins offices in the coming month. end of comment  kanter 
unclas montreal 000204  sipdis  state for wha/can and prm  e.0. 12958:n/a tags: smig, pref, kpao, pbts, kisl, pgov, prel, cvis, ca, border patrol, cic subject: border update - canadian immigration digs out old regulation from the mothballs  ref: secstate montreal 0004    1.   summary: a long-standing citizenship and immigration canada (cic) practice has changed.  illegal aliens who previously would have been admitted immediately into canada are now turned over to usins until a cic appointment is scheduled.  end summary.  2.   starting in late 2002, large numbers of illegal aliens -- forty a day non-stop for a month at the lacolle/champlain (n.y.) border alone-- applied for refugee status.  cic was forced to double, sometimes triple staff to handle the load of interviews. however, one of post's cic contacts at lacolle reported that cic headquarters notified border agents on january 30, 2003, to direct them to apply the old but rarely utilized "direct back" regulation to better control the flow of refugee claims.  now, instead of interviewing refugee seekers on the spot, cic officials give refugee seekers an appointment for a later interview and, in the interim, return refugee seekers to usins.  3.   the recent procedural change reportedly has slightly reduced the number of claimants walking up to the border, but a good number still appear daily.  for example, on feb 12, at 07:45am, eighteen pakistani citizens asked to file for refugee status at lacolle.  we were informed that the group was turned back to usins and later directed to seek assistance at the plattsburgh salvation army (sa). allen 
unclas section 01 of 02 montreal 000245  sipdis  usdoc washdc fcc washdc  state for eb/cip alewis and sshipman and io/oic  state pass ustr for j.mchale and j.melle  fcc for international - d.abelson, j.mann and p.cooper  usdoc for 4310/iep/ooc/wh/j.bender  usdoc for 4320/ita/mac/west hemis/intl- amer/affairs/jbender/cbusquets  usdoc for 6420/ita/td/it/off of telecom technologies  e.0. 12958: n/a tags: econ, ecps, efin, einv, ettc, ca, bexp, telecommunication, communication subject: quebec telecoms struggle with overcapacity, lack of capital  ref: 02 ottawa 3290  1. summary: quebec's telecommunication industry, a sector which at its peak in 1999 supported 114,500 jobs, cut more than 21,000 jobs in 2002.  analysts are predicting another rough year with low investment rates and a possible increase in bankruptcies in smaller companies. end summary.  2. montreal-based bell canada enterprises (bce), canada's largest and oldest telecom, announced in july 2002 a c$8 billion write down on its investments in teleglobe, the international long-distance services company.  in the wake of the write-down, jean monty, who had been with the company for 28 years and ceo since 1997, resigned.  monty was replaced by his obvious successor, michael sabia, who having been a protege of paul tellier at cn, moved to bce, in 1999 as president of bell canada international.  sabia's first major decision was to sell bce's highly profitable phone directories business to a u.s. interest for $c3 billion in cash in order to repurchase the 20 percent stake u.s.-based sbc inc. held in bce.  john henderson, telecom analyst at scotiacapital, says "sabia got a great deal, but i don't think he had to sell the phone directories business to do it."  henderson fears that the sale of what was seen as a cash cow might hurt bce in the long-term.  bce, which had agreed to either repurchase the sbc stake or permit sbc to increase its ownership, opted to maintain its independence.  3. montreal-based microcell telecommunications, owner of the fido mobile phone brand (the smallest of canada's four wireless phone companies), finally caved in to its creditors and declared bankruptcy after mounting losses and over c$2 billion in debt.  through a court ordered restructuring plan, microcell gave up 68 percent of its equity to its creditors in return for the elimination of its c$2 billion debt load.  the restructuring plan calls for microcell to double its customer base and return to profitability by 2005.  "microcell has a very difficult year ahead, there is no indication that they will be able to rebound from the bankruptcy this year, let alone in 2005," said scotiacapital's henderson.  he doesn't believe that the bankers now holding the lion's share of microcell stock will hold their equity interest for long.  4. microcell is the only telecom company in quebec which uses the european-format gsm mobile phone technology, a format that permits users to retain the same telephone number and mobile phone no matter where they travel, simply by changing a chip within the phone unit.  as such, analysts have suggested microcell might be a possible takeover target for ontario-based rogers/att wireless, which uses the same gsm technology.  henderson believes there are great synergies for rogers/att and suspects a move in 2003. lawrence surtees of international data corporation canada (idcc), a leading industry intelligence research company, does not concur, asking "why would rogers pay for something that is redundant."  surtees says microcell's biggest problem is lack of service coverage outside of major areas, leading to the highest rate of customer "churn," (when customers drop one service for another).  faraj nakhleh, vice-president of the information technology association of canada (itac) believes, fido is a good deal and will be bought out this year for under $c1 billion.  "[fido] has over one million customers and no debt; who would not want such a plum," he asked.  5. another quebec-based player is telecommunication equipment maker sr telecom (srt), a company whose market is almost entirely overseas.  srt has developed an innovative technology that provides fixed wire phone line service with wireless equipment, allowing remote or underserved areas to have full telecommunication access.  founded in 1981, srt now exports its equipment to over 100 countries worldwide. chief financial officer david adams told ambassador cellucci during a recent visit to the company headquarters in montreal that srt wants to sell its equipment in the u.s. according to adams, "approximately six percent of the u.s. does not have access to land-line telephones; we plan to fill that niche."  however, srt has not escaped the burst of the telecom bubble.  the company had record revenues in 1999 of c$ 180 million, but has posted two consecutive yearly losses since, including a 2001 loss of c$13.7 million.  srt is a small player by u.s. standards, but it is a world leader in its field.  emilio iodice, vice president of srt, says "we have a good product, one the u.s. will be able to benefit from and one that will reduce their digital divide."  6. ontario-based nortel networks, the one-time darling of the stock market and one of the world's largest telephone switching providers, hit an all-time low of c$0.67 a share last october.  nortel reduced its work force in canada by over 8,000 employees in 2002 and sold off its once-proud hi- tech facilities in montreal.  the approximately 2,000 remaining nortel employees in quebec are mainly switching system engineers and technicians.  7. john henderson of scotiacapital notes that a parliamentary committee is discussing increasing the goc's present limit of 20 percent direct foreign ownership in telecom companies to 33.4 percent (reftel).  henderson believes that relaxation of foreign investment rules would bring new capital to the industry.  michael sabia, ceo of bce, told the committee (02/18/03) the increase in foreign ownership would allow a "greater flow" of capital.  while henderson does not think u.s. capital would rush in given increased investment capability, he believes companies such as france telecom and deutsche telecom might be tempted.  8. faraj nakhleh, vice president of itac, sees 2003 as a year of consolidations, with a slow return to profitability. he agrees with henderson that a relaxation of goc foreign ownership restrictions could help introduce new capital into the quebec telecoms.  the decision, which nakhleh termed "long-overdue," would allow european telecoms to gain a foothold in north america through entry into the canadian market.  9. comment: revisions to the foreign ownership restrictions could bring needed capital to the quebec telecom industry, but in the short-term, this sector is expected to consolidate rather than expand.  as such, the fido network stands out as a takeover target, even by a european telecom, given parent microcell's debt-free status following its bankruptcy reorganization and its use of european format mobile phone technology. end comment. allen 
unclas section 01 of 02 montreal 000266  sipdis  sensitive  but unclassified  e.o. 12958: n/a tags: kcrm, kfrd, kwmn, elab, smig, pref, phum, trafficking, smuggling subject: trafficking violations: sex and smuggling in quebec  1. (sbu) summary: montreal, sometimes referred to as "the paris of the west," has also developed a reputation in the sex-tourism industry as "the bangkok of the west." not surprisingly, most trafficking in persons in quebec province involves women who are trafficked into the sex trade.  in february 2003, montreal police broke up a juvenile prostitution ring in which minor girls were being forced to engage in nude dancing and prostitution. montreal police contacts report that after they started to crack down on prostitution and sexual exploitation of minors, many rings moved business out of montreal to quebec city and niagara falls. in addition to trafficking for the sex trade, u.s. and canadian immigration officials have seen increased smuggling in persons--some of which can be considered trafficking--from costa rica, mexico, china, and russia. local, provincial and federal government agencies are actively engaged in combating all forms of trafficking in the province.  end summary.  2. (sbu) the quebec-based sex trade. "let your fingers do the walking," bell's yellow pages motto has a double entendre when it comes to the 20 pages of advertising for escort agencies in the 2003 phone book.  these ads, up from 17 pages in 2002 and 2 in 1998, highlight what a big business the sex trade has become in quebec. while the criminal code of canada prohibits soliciting for the purposes of prostitution, keeping a "bawdy house" and "procuring and living off the income of prostitution," escort agencies are able to maneuver around regulations. aside from escort agencies, quebec is known for numerous strip clubs where, unlike in the united states, clients can touch the dancers. many trace the growing sex industry in quebec to a 1999 canadian supreme court decision that legalized "contact dancing," whereby customers in strip clubs are allowed to touch the breasts, buttocks, and thighs of the dancers. according to a 2002 article in the gazette, these lap dances, or private cubicle encounters, sell for around $10 a piece and bring in about 50% more revenues for clubs than they earned before the 1999 legislation.  3. (sbu) a profile of the victims. while many of the women who work for strip clubs and escort agencies do so willingly, investigations and arrests over the past year have uncovered hundreds who are coerced into the business. when asked for a profile of the girls he encounters, a montreal police investigator that post interviewed described the following scenario.  vulnerable runaway girls, many of whom are minors, meet men who offer them food and shelter. then, it is "payback time."  the men request that the girls become dancers in strip clubs. if the girls protest, they are told that they owe the men thousands of dollars for the investment they have made by taking care of them.  the caretakers then acquire false identity cards for the girls to show that they are over 18 and set them up in bars and clubs throughout quebec and in niagara falls. one girl reported that she earned $300-$400 a day, but was only given $25-$50 of her earnings. this scenario matches that of the juvenile prostitution ring broken up by montreal police in february 2003.  the gazette reported that the two ringleaders would begin by dating the girls and becoming their lovers, and then force them to strip in bars in montreal and toronto.  when dancing did not generate enough revenues, the girls were pushed into prostitution.  4.  (sbu) post's police contact reported that most of the girls he encounters are canadian. however, according to other post contacts, there have been a few cases over the past year in which foreign women and girls were trafficked to quebec for the sex trade. in one case, two russian women were brought to canada for the express purpose of nude dancing and prostitution.  in another case, an indian woman trafficked two minors into canada for prostitution. according to a canadian immigration official, the woman was apprehended and sentenced to two years in prison before being deported to india.  5.  (sbu) who are the ringleaders?  motorcycle gangs are the kingpins behind prostitution, strip clubs, and escort agencies in quebec.  according to the criminal intelligence service canada 2002 report, the hells angels are the largest and most criminally active outlaw motorcycle gang in canada with 35 full chapters. in order to have girls placed in clubs and agencies, other haitian, asian, and russian gang members tend to use the motorcycle gangs as middlemen. with increased police attention on the montreal scene (within the past six months, montreal police have set up a task force on juvenile sexual exploitation), these gangs are expanding into markets in quebec city, ottawa, and toronto. in 2002- 2003, police have seen a rampant increase in the number of girls being sent from quebec to work as strippers and prostitutes in niagara falls. the handlers take large cuts of the girls' earnings, making it a very lucrative business. in quebec city, there have even been confirmed cases in which girls have been sold from one handler to another.  6.   (sbu)  protection efforts. on july 28, 2002, canada amended the criminal code and the canada evidence act to enhance the protection of minors who are victims of sexual exploitation. the legislation is one step in satisfying canada's commitment to the january 2002 un protocol on the rights of children. at the grassroots level, there are several social service agencies, funded by private and public sources, that offer protection to young women involved in the sex trade.  one organization in montreal, "passages" is a shelter for 18- to 30-year old women. many of the women who come to the shelter are involved in drugs and prostitution.  however, a passages employee stated that she rarely sees the young women involved in sex trafficking rings; she speculated that the handlers of these women monitor their activities closely and prevent them from accessing available social services. in the opinion of post's police contact, once girls are brought into a trafficking ring, they face a slippery slope. vulnerable girls, drawn to offers of protection and care, often think they are in love with their "protector."  coerced into nude dancing, then prostitution, the girls quickly become part of a seamy world in which drug use and addiction is prevalent. needing income to support their drug habits, many girls find it even more difficult to break out of the sex trade.  7. (sbu) smuggling. in 2002-2003, u.s. and canadian immigration officials have also seen cases of smuggling to and through canada, some of which may be classified as "trafficking." mexicans, costa ricans, chinese, and russians have been the main organizers. in 2002-2003, numerous mexicans filed claims for refugee status in canada after having been smuggled onto flights to montreal.  to date, the organizers behind this ring have not been apprehended.  in another continuing case, various groups of costa ricans have been traveling to canada on falsified canadian visas. after arriving in canada, they proceed to a secluded part of the u.s.-canada border and flee to the u.s. side. this operation had become so organized that some of the groups were met at the airport by tour buses which drove them to the border. while the royal mounted canadian police recently arrested the kingpin of this operation, intelligence reports warn of an ongoing battle with costa rican smuggling.  in other instances, immigration officials apprehended numerous chinese citizens traveling as imposters on japanese passports. each person reportedly paid up to $30,000 for his/her fake passport.  often to guarantee full payment, the organizers would hold the customers' families hostage in china or subject them to forced labor. finally, a case that is still under investigation involves a russian duo suspected of smuggling aliens of various nationalities from canada to the united states by hiding them inside a tractor trailer truck. the duo charges each foreign national $3,000 and transports 3-10 people to the united states on each trip.  immigration officials are on the lookout for these men.  police contact: agent serge morin (youth and street gangs portfolio) allen 
unclas section 01 of 03 montreal 000453  sipdis  e.0. 12958: n/a tags: econ, elab, pgov, prel, smig, soci, ca, labor subject: census data shows quebec more bilingual since 1996, mostly due to montreal demographics   this cable was jointly prepared by montreal and quebec city consulates.  1. summary: statistics canada (statscan) has released several tranches of 2001 census data in the last four months regarding language usage and immigration, figures which are closely watched in quebec, by both the media and government. the statscan numbers show quebec to be 3 percent more bilingual than in 1996, but provincial statistics suggest that bilingualism is mostly a montreal area phenomenon.  end summary  2. statscan's 2001 census data, reveals montreal was home to 12 percent of all new immigrants to canada between 1991 and 2001.  while haiti was the top individual country of birth for immigrants to montreal in the 1990s, accounting for 6.6 percent or 14,200 of the immigrants arriving during the decade, arab countries were the birth places of 29 percent of immigrants who settled in montreal during the 10-year period. algeria, lebanon and morocco were the top three countries of origin for immigrants to montreal.  while quebec as a whole admitted 37,498 immigrants in 2001, a 15 percent increase over the previous year, according to the provincial ministry of citizen relations and immigration, the provincial capital only received 1,500.  3.  the statscan data also showed quebec's population to be 40.8 percent bilingual, 3 percent more bilingual than it was at the time of the 1996 national census, while french language usage in montreal also inched up.  according to statscan, the 2001 census data showed that french language usage is rising on the island of montreal, marking the first upturn after a 30-year downward spiral.  the proportion of montrealers who speak french at home inched up to 56.4 per cent in 2001 from 55.6 percent in 1996.  in comparison the anglophone population in montreal decreased to 17.7 percent in 2001 from 18.9 percent in 1996.  4. jack jedwab, executive-director of the montreal-based association for canadian studies, told us there are a number of reasons behind the shifts in language usage.  first, he believes young anglophones are continuing to leave the province in search of job opportunities where bilingualism is not so necessary.  secondly, more anglophones are marrying into french-speaking families, and adopting french as the language used at home.  but most importantly, according to jedwab, there has been a sharp increase in the montreal allophone community's usage of french.  (allophone is the term used in canada to denote someone whose mother tongue is neither english nor french.)  5. statscan said that allophones in montreal increased to 29.1 percent of the population from 27.7 percent in 1996, while both the french- and english-mother tongue populations decreased accordingly.  among allophones, usage of french at home has increased almost four percent to 20.4 percent in 2001 from 16.6 percent in 1996.  meanwhile, the use of english at home by allophones dropped slightly from 24.1 percent in 1996 to 22.1 percent in 2001.  these numbers reflect the fact that in quebec, children whose parents are allophones are required to attend french language schools.  6. bilingualism is not nearly as widespread in the francophone heartland of quebec, including the capital. institut de la statistique du quebec (isq) data shows the level of bilingualism in quebec city at only 5.6 percent; the provincial capital is 96.7 percent french speaking. according to 2001 isq figures, 44 percent of the population in northern quebec is francophone, 3.4 percent is anglophone, and 52.6 percent speaks another language, mainly cree or inuktitut.  with a population of less than 40,000, the northern quebec region (covering three quarters of the province's land mass) remains first in quebec in terms of the proportion of people whose mother tongue is neither french nor english.  of all the regions, the saguenay holds the highest percentage of population whose maternal language is french at 98.6 percent.  7. in quebec, 50.4 percent of allophones are able to speak both national languages.  but allophones also continue to use their mother tongues.  according to the 2001 census, italian is still the most popular third language spoken in real terms, but arabic saw the most growth.  during the five years between 1996 and 2001, the number of arabic speakers increased by 29 percent.  and for the first time, arab- speakers surpassed spanish-speakers in their numbers in montreal.  the arab/west asian minority in quebec has now become the second largest minority after blacks.  statscan counted 123,580 persons broadly-defined as arabs living in montreal in the 2001 census, up from 96,240 in 1996. however, the census permits respondents a wide range of choices, including "canadian," in identifying their origins; we have seen widely varying estimates on the actual numbers of arab-origin montrealers.  8. the quebec government continues to try to attract more immigrants and encourages them to establish outside the greater montreal area. the outgoing pq cabinet minister joseph facal told us last year the province is trying to increase its annual intake of immigrants to 45,000 over the next 2-3 years.  presently, the volume of immigrants living outside montreal is only 15 percent but the aim is to increase that level to 25 percent.  quebec targets francophones from north africa, europe and asia; however, about half the immigrants who come to the capital are from eastern europe.  jobs remain a problem but the quebec authorities are trying to place "visible minorities" in government jobs, with a target of 33 percent for new hires in montreal, 25 percent in quebec city and 8 percent elsewhere in the province.  currently placement is around 3.4 percent of the province's 60,000 civil servants.  the further north, the less immigrants: nunavik (northern quebec), comprising 55 percent of the entire quebec territory, attracted the least number of newcomers in 2001- 02 with only 2 immigrants, followed by the north shore (8), and the gaspe region (13).  9. quebec immigration recruitment policies do appear to have had a positive effect on the increase of french usage in quebec.  the census revealed that 49 percent of all new immigrants to quebec speak french or english, compared to the canadian average of 39 percent who speak either of the two official languages.  however, alain jean-bart, former president of s.o.s.-racisme (the quebec chapter of the international anti-racism group), complained to us that the quebec government selectively recruits francophone immigrants (sidestepping would-be immigrants from west africa, for example) while recruiting so-called "francophonisable" peoples in latin american countries. s.o.s. racisme has worked to counter stereotypical notions that chinese and other immigrants are not francophonisable, i.e. not integrating into or contributing to the life of the province.  an official from the ministry of citizen relations and immigration recently confirmed that the goq has focused lately on recruiting immigrants from argentina but he implied that the mrci is merely exploiting the difficult economic situation there to bring skilled, educated workers to quebec.  10. despite successes in quebec's efforts to attract french speakers, census 2001 revealed that montreal remains third after toronto and vancouver in attracting new immigrants. of the 1.8 million immigrants who arrived in canada during the 1991-2001 period, only 12 percent settled in montreal, while 56 percent went to toronto and 20 percent settled in vancouver.  quebec continues to have difficulties in retaining new immigrants.  statscan reported a net migration loss for quebec of 57,000 people from 1996 to 2001, representing a net loss of 0.9 percent.  while these numbers may reflect migration that occurred following the 1995 referendum on quebec independence, the population decrease remains surprising given quebec's economic resurgence of 1999-2001.  11. quebec had the sixth highest rate among canadian provinces of foreign born residents with 10 percent of its population in 2001 born outside canada.  quebec also has fewer visible minorities - only 7 percent of its population -- than the other high-population provinces.  quebec premier bernard landry, commenting on the statistics data was quoted as saying, "quebec must have more immigrants, for obvious reasons.  the land is vast, our natural rate of growth is low.  so families, children, people are a priority for us, including those families and people coming from immigration."  12. the association for canadian studies' jedwab believes that for quebec to both attract and keep immigrants, not only does the economy have to continue strong, but the goq needs to find more ways to involve immigrants in civil society institutions such as city council, school boards and the civil service.  "give these people [immigrants] a sense that they have a meaningful role in quebec," he says. minister facal announced last month a plan to hold provincial government agencies more accountable for minority hiring.  under the new proposal, department heads will be required to publicize their hiring strategies and report the results at legislative hearings.  13. statistically, quebec outperforms every other canadian province on bilingualism, with the second closest being new brunswick at 34.2 percent bilingual (the rest of the provinces all have bilingual populations less than the national average of 17.7 percent).  quebec's rate of bilingualism at 41 percent is approaching the western european rate of 47 percent.  as jedwab points out, "without the important numbers of bilingual persons in quebec, the rest of canada would rank in the lower end of the spectrum with the united kingdom and the u.s." ironically, bilingualism has been a federal, not a provincial goal.  the chretien government's recent announcement of a c$751 million infusion into french language instruction throughout canada was met mostly with indifference in quebec.  14. comment: when you look at the political map of quebec, it is the central quebec, francophone areas that remain the most traditional and in the past, most tied to the parti quebecois.  our contacts noted that, despite impending provincial elections, the release of the 2001 statistics on bilingualism did not create the same angst in the quebec media and among politicians as in 1996, when the statistics came out a year after the 1995 referendum on independence. in fact, landry has publicly acknowledged that it has become a rarity to see an anglophone less than age 50 who does not speak french.  while the province is not at the point of embracing bilingualism as a goal, even the parti quebecois realizes that for quebec to sustain demographic and economic growth, the province needs new blood, and not just in montreal.  end comment allen 
unclas section 01 of 02 montreal 000476  sipdis  secstate for wha/can, iip, inr/iaa  e.o. 12958: n/a tags: prel, pgov, ca, labor, iraq subject:  montreal anti-war demonstrators coalition of labor and activist groups; size of march 16 demonstration questioned  ref:  quebec 00051  1. summary:  quebecers have traditionally been known for anti-war sentiment; in the lead-up to the current war in iraq, polling data, media coverage and the largest demonstrations in canada have indicated that pacifism is alive and well in the province. but the picture of quebec pacifism presented in the last several months is probably more complicated than a simple outgrowth of a historical tradition.  echec a la guerre, the coalition group that has organized all of the large anti-war demonstrations in montreal since january, is comprised primarily of social action and labor groups.  many of these same people and groups were active in protesting against globalization at the quebec city summit of the americas in 2001.  interestingly, evidence has come to light recently that the size of the montreal demonstrations, which were reported to have drawn participants in the 100,000 to 200,000 range, may have been considerably exaggerated.  end summary  2.  a lger marketing poll conducted march 19-23 is one of many highlighting quebec's anti-war views. while ontarians were equally divided as to whether or not the u.s. led coalition is justified in declaring war on iraq (38 percent said yes, 39 percent said no), in quebec those numbers were 82 percent no and only 18 percent yes.  the same poll indicates that twice as many quebecers (18 percent) would be inclined to boycott u.s. products than canadians (9 percent).  3.  quebec journalists who in normal times hold views more compatible with anti-globalization and anti-u.s. groups have intensified their bias in the past year.  the france-u.s. disputes at the un and the rise of anti-french sentiment in the u.s. has only deepened the anti-u.s. slant of the french media in quebec.  moreover, the presence of france in the dispute has increased the percentage of afp stories and stories taken straight from french publications.  la presse, arguably the most important paper in quebec, dispatched correspondent jooned khan to baghdad at the beginning of the war; kahn is well known for his anti-american views and his reporting from baghdad reflects this bias.  he has been regularly contributing first person accounts of casualties, especially civilian.  most of the guests on "maisonneuve  l'coute," one of the most watched news shows in quebec, are solidly anti-u.s.  last fall, maisonneuve hosted a moroccan-born professor, omar aktouf, who claimed on the air that ben laden had nothing to do with 9-11.  aktouf's comments were unchallenged by maisonneuve and the other guest, a french h philosophy philosopher pascal bruckner.  maisonneuve and rdi, the all news network of the french cbc, continue to host french authors with strong anti-american views.  4.  the large montreal demonstrations against the war -- reported at 25,000 on january 18, 150,000 on february 15 and 200,000 on march 15 -- were organized by an umbrella group called chec  la guerre (defeat the war).  the group receives the logistical support of the fdration des infirmires et infirmiers du qubec (fiiq), the federation of quebec nurses.  the fiiq has a membership of 45,500.  (the chec  la guerre web site is actually the fiiq web site.)  quebec unions tend to be more politicized than their more work place oriented counterparts in other canadian provinces.  they typically have foreign policy positions, and their leaders speak out on behalf of international groups they see as oppressed (i.e. the palestinians).  the nurses union, for example, has provided assistance to cuban o cuban organizations and is financing other international projects.  5.  the chec coalition, which assembled 125 groups for its first large march on february 15, has grown to over 200 in the past 6 weeks.   most of these groups have small, sometimes overlapping, memberships.  but the coalition also includes large, more well- known groups like the federation of quebec women, greenpeace, chapters of labor groups such as the federation des travailleurs du quebec, and the muslim council of montreal (itself an umbrella group of some thirty montreal muslim organizations.)  the official spokesperson of chec  la guerre is francine nmh, who is also director of the quebec association of international development organisations, an umbrella group of 51 organizations that work in international development such as oxfam-qubec and mdecins du monde.  nmh was a delegate at the summit of the people at the summit of the americas.  in february, she said that aid that "this war is illegal and immoral; to participate is to accept the premeditated murder of the iraqi people."  6.  much has been made of the size of the demonstrations in montreal.  the front page of the tabloid le journal de montral on march 16 screamed, "record crowd for peace: 200,000 people in the street" (superimposed over a picture of the crowds).  la presse estimated the demonstration at between 100,000 and 200,000 but said montreal's showing provided "a lesson of pacific solidarity to the rest of the world" where demonstrations on march 16 attracted fewer people than a month earlier.  several tv reports said montreal had one of the largest demonstrations in the world.  the huge numbers of people who came out in cold weather to protest were quickly seized upon by organizers and commentators as indicative of the strength of the quebec anti-war cause.  bloc qubcois leader gilles duceppe quoted the 250,000 number in the house of commons as proof of strong public anti-war ar sentiment.  some said it could be argued that as many as 10 percent of montrealers were demonstrating (greater montreal's population is approximately 2.5 million people).  7.  however, on sunday (4/6), jean-franois grenier, president of geocom, a site locator company in montreal, suggested to viewers of the french cbc 5 sur 5 show that the numbers of protestors on march 16 were not more than 49,000.  he indicated to post on the phone that 49,000 was a generous interpretation of aerial photos his company had taken of the crowds (leaving open the possibility that some thousands of people had left the protest when the photos were taken).  grenier told us he thought the actual figure, as indicated by the density of the crowds measured in his photos, was likely between 35,000 and 40,000.  geocom made a crowd density assessment for the demonstrations on march 14 at the request of french cbc.  grenier indicated he thought the numbers cited by both the media, demonstration organizers and even the police were way off.  (grenier also questioned the size of demonstrations reported in europe.)  none of the monday (4/5) papers mentioned the strong possibility that the march 16 crowds had been overestimated nor did cbc french television do much to publicize its new-found information.  8.  comment:  regardless of the number of people who attended the peace marches, quebecers do oppose the war to a greater extent than other canadians. but because that opposition is greatest among the media and militant anti-globalization groups, perceptions may be skewed.  the present anti-war sentiment is widespread in quebec but we suspect that among the general population, this sentiment does not run as deep as the media and certain politicians have presented it. allen 
unclas section 01 of 02 montreal 000543  sipdis  from usmission icao  dept for io/t, eb/tra/otp/avp dot for office of international aviation faa for aia-100  e.o. 12958:  n/a tags: eair, atrn, icao, transportation subject: meeting of maliat parties at icao   this is a corrected version of montreal 463 (notal) adding info addressees that would benefit from the cabel as background.  1. summary:  at a brief lunchtime meeting on the sides of the icao 5th worldwide air transport conference, representatives of the multilateral agreement on liberalization of international air transport (maliat) member countries met to discuss ways to increase the agreement's membership.  current prospects are slim, the group agreed, with tonga the only likely candidate. pursuit, therefore, of a cargo-only accession option was agreed to be desirable, and the u.s. committed to provide to the partner countries text of an amendment to the maliat that would allow such accession. in discussion of transitional arrangements, parties agreed that such arrangements should be of limited duration leading to full membership, and are most practically pursued on an ad hoc, bilateral basis.  end summary.  current prospects few ---------------------  2. at a meeting held on the sidelines of the international civil aviation organization's (icao) 5th worldwide air transport conference in montreal, the members of the multilateral agreement on liberalization of international air transport (maliat) reviewed their outreach to various potential candidates for accession to the maliat.  some candidates - u.a.e., oman, sri lanka, the cook islands, and tonga were mentioned - but of this group, it appeared that only tonga had expressed serious interest. note: in a separate discussion with the u.s. head of delegation, the chief representative from tonga, who was also the chairman of the icao meeting, indicated that his country would be taking a serious look at maliat membership. end note.  3. as the group brainstormed, consideration was given to potential candidates in central america.  peru and chile, however, noted that they have few open skies agreements in this region and that most central american nations are afraid of their neighbors to the south, particularly chile. they are therefore unlikely to give serious consideration to maliat accession.  cargo-only prospects more promising -----------------------------------  4.  the list of potential candidates grew longer when discussion of a cargo-only accession was raised.  all members supported in principle the concept of amending the maliat to allow such accession, and all expressed interest in reviewing amendment language promised by the united states.  the u.s. explained that the usg internally had been wrestling with whether to include belly cargo in the amendment, and had finally decided to do so.  there was some discussion of the relative merits of this approach, and also of the importance of making clear how a cargo-only maliat would apply in parallel to passenger bilaterals, but most wished to reserve comment until seeing the u.s. draft.  5.  the candidates for full accession listed above were viewed as more likely candidates for a cargo-only accession. other potential candidates included pakistan, with whom the u.s. has open skies, thailand, which has expressed interest in establishing a regional cargo hub, and australia, which has no significant cargo carriers of its own and with whom most maliat members already have cargo open skies.  in addition, chile and peru noted that they both have open cargo agreements with argentina, as does the united states. taiwan, due to its unique political status, was also mentioned as a potential candidate.  6. it was also concluded that before a final approval of any cargo-only amendment, that amendment should be shared with potential partners to ensure that it might be attractive to them.  some members expressed a disinclination to amend the maliat without the high probability of an accession candidate.  transitional agreements -----------------------  7. it was generally agreed that any transitional measures should be just that - leading ultimately to full membership - and that there should be no permanent "levels" or "categories" of membership within the maliat (other than the cargo-only option discussed above).  for that reason, it was largely felt that transitional arrangements should be on an ad hoc, bilateral basis where the specific concerns of a potential entrant could be addressed.  peru and chile --------------  8.  there was no discussion of the current threat by peru to withdraw from the maliat.  both delegations were relatively silent during the meeting, although chile's remarks on the undesirability of transitions seemed aimed at their peruvian counterparts.  during the conference, u.s. delegation members spoke separately with peru and chile about their relationship in the maliat, and both expressed the hope that the u.s. would involve itself in helping them to resolve their differences.  for its side, chile was concerned that any separate, transitional agreement with peru be open to the scrutiny of other maliat members, so that peru feels greater pressure to make the eventual transition to full membership.  peru for its part expressed some concern about whether the approval of other maliat members was required before any ad hoc bilateral agreements could have force.  in both cases, u.s. delegation members made clear that, while the u.s. was happy to offer assistance, any solution lies with peru and chile to resolve bilaterally. price kanter 
unclas section 01 of 03 montreal 000553  sipdis  state for wha/can - patricia norman, eb/tra - susan parson  state pass ustr for sage chandler  usdot for jeff shane and susan mcdermott  faa for krista berequist  tsa for susan williams  sipdis  usdoc for 6310/ita/td/tm/office of aerospace/tlargay  e.o. 12958: n/a tags: eair, etrd, efin, econ, ca, transportation subject:  air canada bankruptcy and restructuring  ref: (a) ottawa 00385 (air canada financial woes)       (b) ottawa 00612 (transportation strategy aviation)      (c) 2002 ottawa 2824 (report suggests liberalization)      (d) 2002 montreal 1248 (air canada going discount)  1. summary: air canada's recent filing for bankruptcy protection follows efforts over the past several months to restructure its operations and lower its costs in order to remain competitive during a difficult time in the airline industry.  however, a combination of its own business decisions, the rise of low-cost competitors, and several devastating events beyond its control helped bring the airline to this point. the bankruptcy protection will provide the airline time to develop a long-term strategy that might allow it to compete in a changed market.  the canadian government has indicated a willingness to provide loan guarantees to air canada, but there are currently no plans for a cash bailout. end summary  2. on april 1, 2003 air canada sought protection under the companies' creditors arrangement act (ccaa), canada's equivalent to chapter 11.  even before the bankruptcy filing, air canada had declared a force majeur, citing the war in iraq, in order to find relief from some contractual obligations and to justify the impending layoffs of 3,600 workers, about 10 percent of its total workforce.  the force majeur declaration prompted a swift negative reaction from many of the airline's unions, which had already agreed to work with the company to save c$650 million annually in labor costs.  3. during 2002 air canada lost c$428 million, most of that amount in the final quarter.  since 1999, air canada has lost c$1.7 billion and is currently losing about c$3 million per day.  it has over c$13 billion of accumulated debt, approximately c$8 billion of which resulted from the 1999 acquisition of canadian airlines (then its main rival), which was purchased primarily for its profitable asian routes.  air canada's pension liability is also c$1.3 billion.  it is the third major north american airline to seek protection from its creditors in the past 18 months, after united airlines and usair.  4. as recently as 2000, air canada carried about 80 percent of canada's domestic passenger traffic.  the company's overwhelmingly dominant market share has led rivals to accuse it of predatory pricing.  predatory or not, the airline's strategies have evidently not been successful: in the last 12 months, air canada has lost 12 percent of its domestic market share to its low-cost competitors, principally calgary-based westjet.  cameron doerksen, aerospace analyst for dlouhy merchant group, a montreal- based investment bank, told post "they [air canada] simply cannot compete in the low-cost carrier market with a big airline budget," a view echoed by michel leblanc, ceo of montreal-based low-cost carrier jetsgo.  5. over the past two years, air canada has tried to compete with its low-cost rivals by dividing its business into the main air canada brand and four new subsidiaries and brand names: zip, tango, jazz and jetz (reftel d).  most operate on a lower wage/cost structure, but growth potential is limited by union contracts to a relatively small scale of operation, lest they cannibalize the main air canada operations and their higher-wage jobs.  doerksen asserts that despite these efforts to compete in the low-cost market, where it might be difficult for a traditionally high- cost carrier ever to compete effectively, air canada will need to focus on its primary strength: long-haul international business travel.  6. while air canada prepares a restructuring plan, expected in the middle of may, financial services company ge capital has extended a c$1 billion line of credit to the airline. air canada ceo robert milton has also called on the canadian government to provide loan guarantees during the restructuring, claiming it is impossible for air canada to compete with u.s.-based carriers that received a large financial package from the u.s. government following the terrorist attacks of september 11, 2001.  transport minister david collenette has previously indicated a willingness to consider loan guarantees, but no grants.  meanwhile, the parliamentary committee on airlines recently called for the federal government to assist all canadian airlines by suspending airport rents and security fee collections for two years.  both leblanc of jetsgo and clive bedoe, ceo of westjet, agree that all domestic airlines are vulnerable to current market conditions and believe that a national bailout should apply to all airlines, not just air canada.  7. air canada returned to ontario superior court on april 22.  in a hearing attended by attorneys from its labor unions and over 100 creditors seeking payment, air canada requested an extension of its restructuring window to june 30, permission to delay its annual meeting until a restructuring plan is complete, and approval to renegotiate some of its labor agreements.  air canada had tentatively been permitted to suspend some of its contractual obligations when it made its ccaa filing on april 1.  unlike u.s. chapter 11, the ccaa has not historically permitted companies to void collective bargaining agreements.  on april 22, ontario justice james farley rescinded some of the protections given air canada on april 1, but encouraged the airline and its unions to continue negotiations that would allow air canada to produce a viable restructuring plan. both sides tried to interpret this outcome as a victory; the unions because justice farley denied air canada's request to bypass its agreements, and air canada because it may have obtained more flexibility in dealing with its unions than many companies have in the past.  air canada's decision to make its ccaa filing in ontario is believed by some analysts to have been influenced by a recent quebec court ruling in the case of quebec mining company jeffrey mine, inc., that collective agreements are protected during a restructuring period.  8. in order to raise cash, air canada has in recent months attempted to sell some of its key holdings.  in february 2003, it sold a 35 percent stake in aeroplan, the airline's frequent flyer program, for c$245 million, and recently renegotiated an agreement with the canadian international bank of commerce (cibc) that will allow it to generate cash by selling frequent-flyer miles to retailers and insurance companies.  the jazz subsidiary, a pan-canadian domestic carrier, has been put up for sale, as has air canada technical services (acts).  acts may have a potential buyer in la federation des travailleurs du quebec (ftq), which has 2,500 members working at acts in quebec.  andre viau, portfolio manager for aerospace with the ftq pension fund management group, told post "the deal is not yet clear. while we have a double interest in saving jobs and making some money, we might be looking to take on a small stake." selling jazz may prove more difficult; unlike some of the new subsidiaries, jazz is burdened with older equipment and high labor costs, making it a relatively unattractive property in a slow airline market.  in addition, federal law restricting foreign ownership of canadian airlines to 25 percent limits the pool of potential buyers.  ceo milton and other industry insiders have called on transport minister collenette to amend this law, but he has stated that it would remain in place until the u.s. makes the same change.  9. air canada's bankruptcy filing has caused short-term problems for others in the canadian aviation system. navcanada, the crown corporation that operates the country's air-traffic control system, is in financial jeopardy because air canada - its best customer - has failed to make its c$4 million weekly payment since the ccaa filing.  air canada owes aroports de montreal c$11.5 million for unpaid rents and services rendered, and the greater toronto airport authority has seen its bond ratings lowered by standard and poor's in the wake of the air canada bankruptcy filing. justice farley has denied creditors' statutory right to seize air canada's assets until after a restructuring plan is submitted.  10. air canada is continuing regular operations during its restructuring, and the impact on travelers should be minimal.  however, in addition to lingering effects of the september 11 attacks and the war in iraq, the recent outbreak of sars is affecting air canada especially hard; their most profitable international routes are to asia, while toronto serves as its primary canadian hub.  even before the cdc and the world health organization issued travel advisories for toronto, many people had been avoiding toronto's pearson airport.  taken together, air canada is experiencing a drop in passenger traffic at a time it can little afford it.  air canada several days ago mentioned that it might look to route some of its international flights to other airports - in particular halifax and montreal - but no such plan is yet in place.  11. in the longer run, prospects may be more encouraging for both air canada and others.  typically, an airline of air canada's size will emerge from bankruptcy protection between 20-30 percent smaller, according to doerkson.  viau believes the new air canada will be smaller but stronger. "with a smaller airline, they [air canada] will probably look to increase their outsourcing contracts, which will be good for the aerospace sector in montreal," he told post.  milton recently announced that a restructured air canada will have to shape itself along the lines of the new north american airline business model, with smaller planes and lower operating costs.  air canada has recently joined a consortium to purchase regional jets from bombardier; air canada would initially acquire 25 of these jets to serve short-haul, moneymaking routes.  air canada recently named former bombardier ceo robert brown to its board, which suggests that bombardier is likely to remain air canada's principal aircraft supplier in this market, as opposed to its primary competitor, brazil's embraer.  12. comment: air canada's current predicament appears to be the result of both its own decisions in recent years and a number of unfortunate circumstances beyond the company's control.  like many airlines, air canada has sought to lower its costs, either through changing union contracts or establishing new business models.  these measures have and will likely continue to generate resistance but are probably essential to air canada's long-term viability. end comment. kanter 
