{ "_id" : "09CAIRO2585", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/1/2009 2:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000001  // ZFR CANCEL TELEGRAM - RESENT UNDER CAIRO 00002 //  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KPAL, IS, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  DECEMBER 31  REF: CAIRO 2585  CAIRO 00000001  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Pol-Econ Counselor Catherine Hill-Herndon for reasons 1. 4 (d).  ZFR CANCEL ZFR ZFR ZFR  SCOBEY   CAIRO 00000001  002.2 OF 002   ZFR CANCEL TELEGRAM ZFR ZFR ZFR  SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/1/2009 2:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000002  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KPAL, IS, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  DECEMBER 31  Classified by Pol-Econ Counselor Catherine Hill-Herndon for reasons 1.4 (d).  1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  The Arab League ministerial went into closed session at 1:00pm local time and as of 6:00 pm local time we have not gotten any comment on the status of the talks, either from the Egyptians or other delegations.  Egypt closed and evacuated the Rafah terminal several times overnight in advance of Israeli air attacks, but continues to open on a limited basis to received injuries Palestinians and allow assistance through.  Protests in Cairo and elsewhere in Egypt continue, with a heavy security presence keeping numbers down and preventing demonstrators from reaching the Arab League.  The press continues to report on external critics of Egypt; the independent press joined the official media in defending the government against anitt-Egyptian rhetoric.  TV commentators suggested Egypt is facing two wars -- the Israeli war on the Palestinians and the "dirty media war" again Egypt.  Egypt has cancelled several official New Year's activities in solidarity with the Gazans.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (U)  AL Ministerial:  The Arab League Ministerial officially began around 1:00 pm today and is still meeting behind closed doors at of 6:00 pm local time.  Saudi Foreign Minister Faisal delivered a short opening statement, and then gave way to Amr Moussa who delivered a tough and angry speech against the Israeli attacks, while also calling on the Palestinians to overcome their divisions.  He criticized Israel for attacking civilians, laying the blame for the current conflict on "the occupation and siege."  Moussa said that with if the Palestinians had a "strong resistance or a strong army" the Israelis would not have attacked, citing the October War -  "when Syria and Egypt stood together and gained victory"  - as an example.  He also said that "the weakness and division of Arabs and Palestinians lead to a situation where Arabs are disrespected," calling on the Palestinian factions to "unite and forget their disagreements."   Echoing Mubarak's earlier statements, Moussa warned against allowing others to manipulate the situation for their own political gain.  3.  (SBU) Rafah border:  Egyptians closed and evacuated the Rafah terminal several times overnight December 30-31 in advance of Israeli air attacks near the Gaza-Egyptian border.  Egypt continues to open the border on a limited basis to receive injured Palestinians and allow humanitarian assistance through.  Medical cases, depending on their condition, are being transferred to hospitals in al-Arish, Ismailia, and Cairo.  PROTESTS CONTINUE ----------------- 4.  (U)  Protestors, including Muslim Brotherhood (MB) members and members of the April 6 Movement, demonstrated December 30 at the Bar Syndicate in downtown Cairo and tried to demonstrate at the Doctors' Syndicate and in Tahrir Square, but police prevented them from demonstrating at the latter two locations and arrested a number of participants. The MB claimed police arrested 45 MB members, but Reuters put the number at 23.  Contacts told us of a December 30 demonstration involving a few hundred protestors in Fayoum, south west of Cairo.  5.  (U) In the early afternoon of December 31, members of the Tagammu and El-Ghad opposition parties and the Kefaya and Revolutionary Socialist opposition movements gathered at Tagammu's downtown headquarters chanting slogans, and preparing to march together to the Arab League Headquarters. However, the police prevented them from moving toward the Arab League headquarters, and arrested approximately 35 demonstrators who tried to reach the Arab League.  Police did allow the demonstrators to congregate at the press and bar syndicates nearby in large numbers.  The demonstrators and the heavy police presence paralyzed downtown traffic.  At the outskirts of Cairo, police prevented approximately 150 opposition demonstrators from reaching the capital to join the protests.  6.  (C) Demonstrations/Looking Ahead:  Contacts speculate there will be many demonstrations following Friday prayers outside mosques throughout Egypt January 2, which police will be unable to prevent.  We will monitor the situation closely.  There are unconfirmed rumors that members of the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) plan to hold marches on Friday, January 2 in support of the GOE,s handling of the Gaza crisis.  December 31 press reports claimed that the April 6 Movement is calling for a strike in support of Palestinians in Gaza.  However, an April 6 member told us privately on December 31 that such calls for a strie are the uncoordinated efforts of a few April 6 ctivists.  He confirmed that April 6 activists hd taken part in most of the demonstrations in Caro since the December 27 Israeli  CAIRO 00000002  002 OF 002   attacks on Gaza.  7.  (SBU)  GoE Statements:  President Mubarak devoted much of his televised New Year's address to the nation on December 30 to the Gaza situation.  Mubarak claimed that Egypt exerted "strenuous efforts" over the last six months to maintaining calm in Gaza, reiterated Egypt's "unquestionable support" for the Palestinian cause, and described Egypt's relief efforts, including treating some wounded Palestinians in Egyptian hospitals.  Mubarak said that the Rafah crossing will remain closed because of the absence of PA and EU observers, "in violation of the 2005 deal."  In an appearance on the Egyptian talk show Itallem on December 29, FM Aboul Gheit, apparentlyin response to the widely circulated pictures ofhim shaking hands with Israeli FM Livni during ther December meeting and the resultant criticism, xplained that Mubarak had "summoned" Livni to Cairo because he saw signs of impending Israeli actin in Gaza.  MEDIA COVERAGE -------------- 8.(U)  Official broadcast and print media continue t respond to internal and external critics who chnge the GOE is not doing enough to support the Palestinians and to restore a ceasefire.  Egyptian TV focused on Mubarak's address to defend his decision not to open the Rafah border crossing with Gaza and telephone calls with world leaders (including President Bush), demonstrations in India and the US, its efforts to open the Rafah terminal to wounded Palestinians and for humanitarian supplies, and continuing coverage from Kafr Sheikh, home of the police office who was killed on Monday.  The Kafr Sheikh coverage included "on the street" interviews with local residents who blame Hamas for the death of the officer and the escalation of violence.  TV talk shows focused on the "anti-Egyptian" rhetoric in pan-Arab media and the attack on the Egyptian consulate in Yemen.  TV commentators suggested Egypt is facing two wars -- the Israeli war on the Palestinians and the "dirty media war" again Egypt.  9. (U)  Independent and opposition press also covered Mubarak's speech, some on the front page, and largely joined the official media in defending the GOE from external critics.  Commentators in the official media universally echoed Mubarak's key message that Egypt's commitment to the Palestinian people is beyond question.  Independent and opposition commentators focused on Egypt's perceived missteps in dealing with the Livni visit, but did not question to underlying GOE position on the Rafah crossing.  The non-official press continued to give prominent coverage to the transit of humanitarian aid at the Rafah crossing, demonstration in Egypt and civilian injuries in Gaza. Discussions on Egyptian blogs follow opinions in the independent and official media.  One blogger wrote, "it is a strange thing that Gaza is being neglected whereas the focus in on Egypt and its so-called treason."  Most official and independent media covered street demonstrations in Egypt and elsewhere.  10.  (U)  New Year's cancelled:  Egypt has also cancelled official New Year's celebrations, including a performance at the Cairo Opera House and a variety to have been hosted by the Ministry of Information on TV in solidarity with Gaza. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO2", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/2/2009 14:20", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000003  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND NEA/IPA  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KPAL, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, EG, IS SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  JANUARY 2  REF: CAIRO 0002  ----------- Rafah Quiet -----------  1. (SBU) As of 1500 hrs. local on January 2, we have received no reports of demonstrations, attacks, or other problems at the Rafah border crossing into Gaza; however, local USG staff report clashes on January 2 between police and demonstrators in Al-Arish in North Sinai, about 20 miles from the Gaza border, injuring several demonstrators.  We continue to monitor this situation closely.  ------------------------------ Demonstrations in Cairo, Delta ------------------------------  2. (SBU) Local USG staff report that police on January 2 attacked demonstrators outside the Al Gamya Shariya mosque in downtown Cairo, injuring an Al-Masry Al-Youm reporter who was transferred to a hospital.  Local staff also report demonstrations in Ismailia and Suez.  ------------------------ Israelis Visit Synagogue ------------------------  3. (SBU) According to USG staff in Alexandria, about 300 Israelis have visited the Nebi Daniel synagogue there in advance of the upcoming annual celebration at the tomb of Abu Hizara in the Delta.  The GoE has been generally supportive of this annual pilgrimage despite Islamist and local opposition.  --------------------------------------------- ------------ Aboul Gheit Blasts Syrians, Israelis, Iranians, and Hamas --------------------------------------------- ------------  4. (SBU) Local press reports that Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit told local editors on January 1 that Syria had refused an Egyptian request that Hamas allow the return of the Palestinian Authority to oversee the re-opening of the Rafah border crossing.  Aboul Gheit that Israel has attempted since 1981 to separate Gaza from the West Bank.  He said the current Israeli attack on Gaza is the third of its kind, and Egypt will not allow such attacks to continue.  He added that Hamas tried to obtain Egyptian recognition because it knows that Egyptian recognition will lead to international recognition, which in the end only serves Israeli interests. Aboul Gheit said that Egypt has the ability and power to work alone, even if it has to face both the Israeli and Iranian "projects" in the Middle East.  He said that Israel has "offered" Gaza to Egypt, while Jordan "takes" the West Bank, but Egypt refuses such talk.  He added that Hamas' strategy was to force Egypt to recognize Hamas by permanently opening the Rafah crossing, but this is something that Egypt cannot do, since doing so would effectively end the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank, and also achieve the Israeli goal of separating Gaza from the West Bank. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO2|09CAIRO3", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/4/2009 13:28", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000007  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND NEA/IPA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2019 TAGS: KPAL, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, EG, IS SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  JANUARY 4  REF: A. CAIRO 0003      B. CAIRO 0002  Classified By: Minister Counselor William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  ----- Rafah -----  1. (S) As of 1500 hrs. local on January 4, Egyptian military contacts said Egypt closed the Rafah border crossing on January 4 after the Israelis gave advanced warning of their ground invasion and additional air strikes on the smuggling tunnels along the Gaza-Rafah border.  According to the Egyptian military, the air strikes against the tunnels "appear to be effective8 and the Egyptian Border Guards have seen "no tunnel smuggling activity8 since Israel began bombing Gaza.  The Ministry Of Defense will brief military attaches and diplomats on January 5 on their views of the Gaza situation.  2. (SBU)  The Egypt-Gaza border remains stable, with a reported 7000 central security forces (civilian, not military) providing additional security throughout Rafah, al-Arish, and the major roads across northern Sinai.  3. (SBU) On January 3, an Egyptian border guard was shot and wounded by Palestinian gunfire.  Until January 4, the Egyptians continued to open the Rafah crossing for the transfer of medical supplies into Gaza and to receive injured Palestinians.  The transfer of humanitarian assistance had been slow, as all shipments were transferred by hand between Egyptian and Palestinian trucks.  However, even this traffic across the Rafah border has now ceased.  4. (U) According to press reports, 102 Palestinians have been treated in Egyptian hospitals since hostilities began and 294 Palestinians have been allowed back into Gaza.  Wounded Palestinians are being initially taken to two hospitals in al-Arish ) al-Arish General and Mubarak Armed Forces ) and then transferred as needed to Ministry of Health or military hospitals in Cairo and Ismailia.  ------------------------------ Demonstrations January 3 and 4 ------------------------------  5. (C) According to independent daily "Al-Masry Al-Youm (AMAY)," on January 3, the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) organized a mass demonstration of 10,000 at the Doctors' Syndicate in Kafr El-Sheikh in the northern Delta.  If this estimate is accurate, it would probably be the largest demonstration in Egypt since the Israeli attacks on Gaza began December 27. According to press reports, there were small demonstrations January 3 in the Delta governorates of Sharkia and Dakahlia. We have confirmed there were demonstrations January 3 in El-Arish approximately 20 miles south of the Gaza border, following the January 2 El-Arish demonstrations when police prevented protestors from moving to the Gaza border.  A prominent blogger told us that the AMAY journalist whom police beat unconscious at a downtown Cairo demonstration on Friday, January 2, has left the hospital and returned to work.  According to this blogger, the journalist told the police that he was covering the demonstration for "AMAY," but the police continued to beat him anyway.  The blogger said that the police prevented opposition journalists from covering downtown Cairo demonstrations December 31, and subsequently transported the journalists to a desert area bordering Cairo and left them there.  6. (SBU) Contacts told local staff that police had violently suppressed a January 4 demonstration in the port city of Damietta, and have arrested several demonstrators.  Contacts have estimated 1,500 demonstrators in Damietta January 4. The MB called for a demonstration the afternoon of January 4 outside the Engineers' Syndicate in downtown Cairo.  We noticed a moderately heavy security presence in the vicinity around mid-day, and we will continue to monitor developments related to this demonstration.  ------------------------- Inside the Demonstrations -------------------------  7. (C) A prominent blogger told us January 4 that the MB has tried to avoid chanting anti-Mubarak slogans during demonstrations as it realizes that the police will move in to stop demonstrations when such chanting begins.  The blogger said that when leftist opposition members begin chanting such slogans during demonstrations, MB members try to drown them  CAIRO 00000007  002 OF 002   out with shouts of "God is great (Allahu Akbar)."  8. (C) A leading member of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) told us that MB members tried to stop an EOHR press conference at the Journalists' Syndicate during the week of December 28 by shouting insults accusing the organization of being an agent of the U.S. and the West, before the press conference eventually proceeded.  This EOHR contact told us that his organization is asking the GOE to disclose the number of demonstrators it is currently holding in detention.  He said the EOHR believes that the GOE has released most demonstrators from custody after a few hours of detention. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO2|09CAIRO3|09CAIRO7", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/5/2009 14:41", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T CAIRO 000017  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND NEA/IPA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2019 TAGS: KPAL, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, EG, IS SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  JANUARY 5  REF: A. CAIRO 0007      B. CAIRO 0003      C. CAIRO 0002  Classified By: Minister Counselor William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  ----- Rafah -----  1. (S) On January 5, Egyptian military officials briefed defense attaches on the situation in Gaza.  The Egyptian military reports that the Egyptian-Gaza border remains stable, with no breaches since December 28.  Egyptian border guards successfully prevented subsequent attempts to breach the border by a small number of unorganized individuals. Egyptian forces continue to receive occasional gunfire from the Gaza side of the border.  2. (S) The Egyptian military estimates that Israeli air attacks have destroyed 50 percent of the main smuggling tunnels between Rafah and Gaza.  They anticipate that the Israeli Defense Force will take additional measures to destroy the tunnels during the ground invasion.  The Egyptian military stressed that the Rafah border would not be permanently opened until the Palestinian Authority regained control of the border crossings.  They expressed concern that the Israelis were attempting to sever Gaza from the West Bank, leaving an independent Gaza as "Egypt,s problem.8  3. (SBU) According to the Egyptian military, 325 tons of medical aid has been delivered to Gaza since December 28, including 60 tons donated by the GOE.  Assistance is being delivered through Rafah, Kerem Shalom, and most recently al-Aouja (Egyptian-Israeli border crossing in Central Sinai) due to the high volumes of goods.  All material is being thoroughly searched for weapons and ammunition.  -------------- Demonstrations --------------  4. (SBU) Contacts told us that the police prevented the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) from holding a large demonstration planned for Tahrir Square in downtown Cairo on the afternoon of January 5; however, our contacts said the demonstration will be held elsewhere in the city either today or tomorrow. The police allowed the MB to lead a smaller demonstration at the Press Syndicate, not far from Tahrir Square, where approximately 400 people demonstrated as of 1430 hrs. local. Emboff observed a demonstration of about 200 people in front of the Mogamma (an enormous government building about half a kilometer from the embassy).  The protestors were waving a Palestinian flag and chanting, "We are with you, Hamas!" There were at least 1500 police in full riot gear scattered throughout the public square in front of the Mogamma.  5. (SBU) Contacts told us January 5 that about 17,000 demonstrated in a peaceful protest January in the Delta town of Tanta.  Contacts remarked that police allowed the demonstrators to protest, and did not attack the crowd.  The MB has claimed that it led demonstrations January 4 of at least 10,000 protestors each in the Delta town of Mansoura and in Fayoum (about 100 kilometers south of Cairo), and of 25,000 protestors in Alexandria. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO1307|08CAIRO1359|08CAIRO574|08DOHA827|08STATE127423", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/6/2009 14:01", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000025  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  NEA/ELA FOR SCHALL ISN FOR BURKART AND HUMPHREY DOE/NNSA FOR ROBINSON AND ERICKSON DOC FOR LOPP  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ENRG, KNNP, ECON, ETRD, EAID, EG SUBJECT: BECHTEL WINS NUCLEAR TENDER; ELECTRICITY MINISTER CALLS FOR CLOSER COOPERATION ON CIVILIAN NUCLEAR ENERGY  REF: A. 08 CAIRO574      B. 08 CAIRO1307      C. 08 CAIRO1359      D. 08 DOHA827      E. 08 STATE127423  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Ambassador met with Minister of Electricity and Energy Dr. Hassan Younes and the Chairman of the Nuclear Power Plants Authority (NPPA) Dr. Yassin Ibrahim on December 31 to discuss Egypt's plans to develop a civilian nuclear energy program.  GOE awarded a $188 million consulting services contract to Bechtel on December 23, to assist them with the technology and design survey for Egypt's first nuclear power plant.  Ibrahim asked for U.S. assistance to finance part of the Bechtel contact.  He noted that the draft Nuclear Research and Energy law will be submitted to the People's Assembly for review by late January.  Minister Younes said that the GOE will shortly submit a proposal to the embassy requesting technical assistance on a range of civilian nuclear energy and research issues, particularly in the area of education and training. END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) Minister of Electricity and Energy Dr. Hassan Younes and Dr. Yassin Ibrahim, Chairman of the Nuclear Power Plants Authority (NPPA), updated the Ambassador on December 31 on Egypt's plans to pursue a civilian nuclear energy program. The minister confirmed that Bechtel, a U.S. engineering and energy services company, won the GOE's tender to provide consulting services to the Ministry and NPPA for Egypt's civilian nuclear energy program, estimated to be worth $188 million.  The Ambassador thanked Minister Younes and Ibrahim for the GOE's support for U.S. companies and reiterated the U.S.'s commitment to working with Egypt in support of safe and secure civilian nuclear research and energy, including emergency management (refs A, B, & C).  The Ministry made the tender result public on December 23, with limited press and public reaction.  According to Younes, the GOE is also finalizing its renewable energy policy in the coming weeks, which he believes will provide incentive for foreign investment and private sector growth in the generation of energy.  3. (SBU) Dr. Ibrahim said that he intends to sign the final consulting services contract with Bechtel in early February. The NPPA has designed a 3-stage process for the development of the nuclear energy program. In Phase I, Bechtel and the NPPA will focus on site selection, a design survey, a technology survey, decision on a long-term fuel supplier, and an environmental impact review. (NOTE: Ibrahim noted that Al-Dahba, 160 kilometers from Alexandria, is the GOE's preferred location for the first nuclear power plant. END NOTE)  The NPPA intends to announce the construction tender for the power plant in Phase II, expected to commence in 2010.  Construction of the plant will be relegated to the final phase, from 2012-2019.  Ibrahim specified that the NPPA's role will be to build and operate the nuclear power plant.  Eventually, the NPPA will privatize the distribution of electricity generated from the nuclear plant.  --------------------------------------------- -- NEXT STEPS: PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF NUCLEAR LAW --------------------------------------------- --  4. (SBU)  Ibrahim told the Ambassador that the draft Nuclear Research and Energy Law will be submitted to the People's Assembly for review later this month.  The main element of the law involves the establishment of an independent nuclear regulatory body, under the auspices of the office of the Prime Minister, as well as the reorganization of GOE bureaucratic responsibilities for civilian nuclear research and safety issues.  --------------------------------------------- ----------- REQUESTING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO FURTHER DEVELOP CIVILIAN NUCLEAR RESEARCH PROGRAM --------------------------------------------- -----------  5. (SBU) Following up on earlier discussions with Ambassador Jackie Wolcott, Special Envoy for Nuclear Nonproliferation (refs B & D), Minister Younes told the Ambassador the GOE is eager to expand its technical cooperation with the U.S.  He noted that the Ministry will shortly send the embassy a  CAIRO 00000025  002 OF 002   detailed proposal for technical cooperation.  (NOTE: We expect that the Ministry will hold this proposal until the People's Assembly reviews and approves the draft nuclear law. END NOTE.)  Younes said that the GOE will seek assistance with establishing its new regulatory agency, and training staff for this agency. Ibrahim said that the GOE needs technical assistance in safety and security standards as well as developing its human resources across the civilian nuclear field.  6. (SBU) Ibrahim asked the Ambassador for financial assistance from the U.S. to finance part of the Bechtel contract.  The Ambassador explained funding constraints for this type of project, and recommended that NPPA work with Minister of International Cooperation (MIC) Fayza Aboul Naga to receive support from the local currency account jointly managed and programmed by MIC and USAID.  The Ambassador also suggested the GOE seek financing from the U.S. Export-Import Bank. (NOTE: Prior to the bid decision, Embassy's Commercial Office discussed financing possibilities with EX-IM, which expressed interest in supporting the U.S. bidders.  Bechtel will contact Ex-Im to pursue financing options. END NOTE.) SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO17|09CAIRO2|09CAIRO3|09CAIRO7", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/6/2009 14:08", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T CAIRO 000026  NOFORN SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND NEA/IPA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2019 TAGS: KPAL, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, EG, IS SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  JANUARY 6  REF: A. CAIRO 0017      B. CAIRO 0007      C. CAIRO 0003      D. CAIRO 0002  Classified By: Minister Counselor William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  ----- Rafah -----  1. (S/NF) The Egyptian military reports Egyptian security forces are controlling the Egypt/Gaza border.  Egypt delivered humanitarian aid through the Rafah and al-Aouja crossing points.  18 Palestinian casualties entered Egypt yesterday for medical treatment.  IDF ground forces are reportedly operating in the border area between Rafah and Karem Shalom.  Egyptian officials report seeing Israeli tanks, APCs, and bulldozers on the Gaza side of the border. Egypt does not believe any tunnel smuggling activities are ongoing at this time.  -------------- Demonstrations --------------  2. (SBU) Contacts report a demonstration January 6 of 4,000 protestors from a variety of opposition political parties in Kafr Al-Dawar in the Nile Delta.  Contacts have also told us of smaller protests January 6 in Fayoum (about 100 km. south of Cairo) at the Wafd party headquarters there (ca. 400 people); in Assiut (in Middle Egypt) organized by the Coptic Church; and in Aswan (in Upper Egypt) at the Engineers' Syndicate.  We are not aware of any demonstrations January 6 in Cairo.  3. (SBU) The Hisham Mubarak Center, a legal advocacy NGO, submitted a request to the public prosecutor to investigate police beatings of journalists at pro-Gaza demonstrations December 31.  The Arab Organization for Human Rights issued a statement expressing concern over the GOE detentions of demonstrators and calling for their release.  On January 5, one prominent blogger discussed the urgent need for medical supplies in Gaza hospitals.   On January 7, a self-described "pro-U.S." Egyptian blogger living abroad mocked those who criticize the Egyptian government for not being able to end the current crisis immediately.  4. (SBU) On January 5, 36 Muslim Brotherhood members were reportedly arrested in the Delta governorate of Dakhaleya, while protesting about Gaza.  Forty Egyptian Muslim preachers and scholars (including a former Grand Mufti) have signed a statement calling for a "jihad to liberate Palestine.8  The Egypt-based Arab Doctors' Union plans to hold a meeting in Rafah on January 7 of the chairmen of the doctor,s syndicates in various Arab countries. The Arab Doctors' Union, which is led by a prominent MB member, plans to organize a convoy to Gaza with medical supplies and doctors from various Arab countries. Separately, 70 Egyptian doctors have petitioned the Minister of Health to allow them to go to Gaza to assist Palestinian doctors.  Qatar-based Egyptian Sheikh Yousef Qaradawi has declared Friday, January 9, to be an "International Day to Support Gaza, and a Day of Anger.8 He called on imams and preachers worldwide to deliver sermons in support of Gaza, and to pray for the martyrs and victims. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO1359|08CAIRO2257|08CAIRO2373|08CAIRO419", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/8/2009 13:49", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000033  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  NEA/ELA FOR CANEDO AND SCHALL DOE FOR ERICKSON  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ENRG, PREL, ECON, PGOV, IS, EG SUBJECT: CONTROVERSY GROWS OVER EGYPTIAN GAS EXPORTS TO ISRAEL  REF: A. 08 CAIRO2373      B. 08 CAIRO2257      C. 08 CAIRO1359      D. 08 CAIRO419  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED. PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY.  1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  On January 6, the Lower Administrative Court of Cairo asked the GOE to urgently comply with its November 2008 ruling that gas exports to Israel be stopped (ref A).  The November verdict is on hold pending review by the Higher Administrative Court and Court of Urgent Cases, which are poised to hear a complaint from the Egyptian State Lawyers' Authority, arguing that this verdict be dismissed. END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) On November 18, 2008, the Lower Administrative Court of Cairo issued a verdict calling for the cessation of natural gas exports to Israel, claiming that the export deal violated Article 123 of the Egyptian Constitution, pertaining to the protection and use of natural resources (ref A).  The court ruled that the Ministry of Petroleum (MOP) should not have pursued a deal involving natural resources without parliamentary review and approval.  The plaintiffs included retired Egyptian Ambassador Ibrahim Yousri and Mohamed Anwar el Sadat, a former MP and nephew of the late President, who represent the "Say No to Natural Gas Loss" citizens' campaign.  3. (SBU)  The Egyptian State Lawyers' Authority (ESLA) filed a complaint in December to the Higher Administrative Court and to the Court of Urgent Cases, arguing that the Lower Administrative Court did not have the authority to hear a case involving issues of "national sovereignty."  The complaint will be reviewed on February 2.  Ismail Karara, Undersecretary for Gas Affairs at MOP, told the Egyptian press on January 8 that the Ministry is considering how to proceed if ESLA's complaint is overturned.  According to Karara, the Ministry of Justice will represent the GOE if further legal action, such as an appeal to the Higher Administrative Court, is undertaken.  4. (SBU) COMMENT:  While always unpopular with the political opposition (refs B, C, & D), public disenchantment with Egyptian natural gas exports to Israel has become more vocal since the start of the Gaza incursion. The "Say No to Natural Gas Loss" group's protest outside of the State Council headquarters on January 6 and the Lower Administrative Court's statement of the same day reflect public anger with the ongoing Israeli military intervention in Gaza.  The GOE's lack of transparency and defensive posture about its oil and gas export deals has not helped defuse the situation. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "06CAIRO170|08CAIRO1316|08CAIRO1972", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/8/2009 15:56", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T CAIRO 000036  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA, DRL, AF/E, G/TIP, PRM FOR LANGE, PRM FOR MCKELVEY  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2019 TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PGOV, PREF, ER, EG SUBJECT: EMBASSY MEETS WITH ERITREAN COMMUNITY LEADERS IN CAIRO  REF: A. 2006 CAIRO 170      B. 2008 CAIRO 1972      C. 2008 CAIRO 1316  Classified By: Minister Counselor for Economic and Political Affairs William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. Summary:  The Embassy met with Eritrean community leaders in Cairo on January 4 to discuss the increased flow of Eritrean migrants, the plight of Eritreans in Egypt, and the recent Egyptian refoulement of Eritrean migrants.  Eritrean leaders estimate there are 10,000 Eritreans living in Cairo. The number of migrant has increased drastically in the past two years because of deteriorating economic and human rights conditions in Eritrea.  Community leaders complained that UNHCR did not offer resettlement to Eritrean refugees and said refugee status provided no protection against arrest and refoulement. Leaders told us that many Eritreans were seeking to migrate to Israel because of the "hopeless situation in Cairo."  Post has been actively engaging with UNHCR and the Government of Egypt to halt the forced return of Eritrean migrants, many of whom face imprisonment, torture and possible execution if returned. End Summary.  ---------------------------------- Meeting Eritrean Community Leaders ----------------------------------  2. (C) We met with four Eritrean community leaders in Cairo on January 4.  According to Heba Kassem, an NGO leader who works closely with the Eritrean community, the four individuals were chosen by the local Eritrean community to represent their views to the U.S. Embassy.  We discussed the increased flow of Eritrean migrants, the situation of Eritrean refugees in Cairo, the shootings of Eritrean migrants on the Israel border, and the recent Egyptian refoulement of Eritrean migrants. The Eritrean leaders estimate that there are approximately 10,000 Eritreans living in Cairo, but only 1,800 are registered with UNHCR.  They told us that most Eritreans do not register as refugees, claiming that "UNHCR does not want to resettle them, and UNHCR is a pipeline to Egyptian State Security, arrest and deportation."  All the leaders appealed for the USG's help in resolving the Eritrean refugee situation in Egypt.  --------------------------------------------- --- Increasing Flow, but Egypt Not Final Destination --------------------------------------------- ---  3. (S) All four leaders noted that the number of Eritrean migrants coming to Egypt has increased dramatically over the past two years, due to the dire situation in Eritrea.  UNHCR Cairo statistics show a nearly 180% increase in registered Eritrean refugees over the past 18 months.  Refugee leader, Aman Goitom (protect), stated that many Eritreans are desperate to leave Eritrea due to the "terrible economic and human rights conditions in the country." He said that the Eritrean Government's decision to increase the maximum age of forced military conscription from 27 to 47 caused many men to flee the country.  Goitom told us that Eritreans fear the long arm of Eritrean State Security in both Ethiopia and Sudan, so many chose to come to Egypt as "their best short-term option."  He said that an Eritrean will pay smugglers about USD 500 (approximately double the average annual income in Eritrea) to come from Eritrea to Egypt.  4. (S) All the leaders told us that life in Egypt was better than in Eritrea, but said that "Egypt is not the final destination for most Eritreans."  Hana Weldeab (protect), a community leader that works with refugees, said there are few job opportunities in Egypt for Eritrean refugees. She said the difficulty in speaking Arabic prevents Eritreans from getting work in the local economy and their children from attending local schools. She told us that women can find work as domestic servants, but they are often abused and have no legal rights or recourse. Weldeab said that many Eritreans in Egypt are supported by relatives in the West, or by family members in Eritrea.  -------------------------- Dissatisfaction with UNHCR --------------------------  5. (S) Weldeab stated that most Eritreans are dissatisfied with UNHCR and its partner organizations.  She said that since Eritreans do not speak Arabic, they are segregated and  not treated equally. Weldeab said that UNHCR currently has a two-year waiting period for interviews to determine refugee status, and all the leaders said that resettlement through UNHCR is no longer a realistic option.  Senait Haile (protect), a community leader that works closely with the refugees, stated that since the Mustafa Mahmoud incident in December 2005, in which Egyptian police clashed with Sudanese refugees in front of the UNHCR offices, UNHCR in Cairo has not been actively resettling African refugees (reftel A). She told us that persons who are supposed to get first preference--such as single mothers, vulnerable minors, elderly, and medical cases--have not been offered resettlement. Haile said "there are some Eritrean refugees that have been in Cairo for ten years that are still not being resettled."  6. (S) Akhlu Teklay (protect), an Eritrean who works for the African and Middle East Refugee Assistance (AMERA), a local NGO that provides legal aid to refugees, faulted UNHCR for failing to protect Eritrean refugees.  He said that many of the Eritreans currently imprisoned in Egypt hold UNHCR "blue cards", which signify official refugee status as determined by UNHCR.  However, he stated that the blue card "serves as no protection against arrest or deportation by Egyptian Authorities." He also said that UNHCR has not adapted its policies to the worsening conditions in Eritrea, stating that UNHCR does not recognize that a man in his thirties or forties is still at risk for forced military conscription if they return to Eritrea, so they do not offer him protection, or refugee status.  --------------------- Egyptian Mistreatment ---------------------  7. (S) Local and international refugee officials tell us the Eritrean migrants, which are arrested and charged with "illegally crossing Egypt's borders", are tried in military courts.  If convicted, the migrants are fined, and imprisoned for one year (reftel B). Teklay told us that the imprisoned Eritreans are held in small cells with convicted Egyptian criminals. He said these Eritreans have limited or no access to sunlight for periods of 3-5 months, no access to medical treatment, and are given food that is "not suitable for animals." Teklay added that the Eritreans prisoners are often beaten and discriminated against because of their color. Upon completion of their sentences, Egypt often forcibly repatriates the migrants back to Eritrea.  8. (S) All the community leaders believe that the Eritrean Embassy in Cairo is involved in efforts to forcibly repatriate Eritreans from Egypt.  They all asserted that "there is a connection between Egyptian State Security (SSIS) and the Eritrean Embassy."  According to the claims of the community leaders, the Eritrean Embassy hires people to infiltrate the Eritrean community and then alerts SSIS to specific refugees and migrants that it wants to be returned to Eritrea.  We spoke with the fianc of a former captain in the Eritrean Army, who is one of three "higher ranking" military officers, scheduled to be repatriated by Egypt to Eritrea.  Through tears she expressed that someone was behind his imprisonment and possible refoulement.  Teklay agrees. He told us that at the beginning of 2008 there were 2,000 Eritreans in Egyptian prisons for "illegally entering the country."  He said that Egypt security, working in conjunction with the Eritrean Embassy, forcibly repatriated 916 of these Eritreans in 2008 leaving about 1,100 still in Egyptian prisons. However, Goitom stated that the forced return of Eritreans by Egypt in June 2008 did nothing to stem the flow of migrants (reftel C).  Instead, it convinced the migrants not to come to Cairo, but to attempt to go directly to Israel migrating illegally through the Sinai.  ------------------ Destination Israel ------------------  9. (S) All the leaders agreed that the Eritrean refugees had lost the hope of resettlement. As a result, many Eritreans decide to go to Israel.  Goitom told us that smugglers charge approximately USD 700 to go to from Egypt to Israel.  This is in addition to the USD 500 charged from Eritrea to Egypt. We encouraged the leaders to advise the Eritrean community about the dangers of attempting to reach Israel. Teklay told us that the community leadership held a conference at the American University in Cairo (AUC) where it advised Eritreans  not to go to Israel, but the appeal was not effective because most "see no hope in remaining in Egypt." Goitom said that many Eritreans say "I will die somewhere, why not trying to attain a better life in Israel?"  ----------------------- "Stateless" Individuals -----------------------  10. (C) We also met with three representatives from "stateless" (i.e. those without a passport or documentation) Eritrean and Ethiopian migrants. These migrants lack a legal identity, and are unable to apply for refugee status under the UNHCR system. In addition, many have no place in either the Eritrean or Ethiopian communities since they cannot prove their heritage. Some stateless individuals found themselves in this situation due to their "mixed" family heritage after the Eritrean War of Independence and subsequent referendum, which led to the establishment of the State of Eritrea in May 1993. Others appear to have lost, forged, or purposefully destroyed their documents, perhaps to avoid being returned to their county of origin. AUC's Center for Forced Migration is working to help note their stories so they can access refugee services and obtain an identity.  The migrants stated that AUC has tried to enlist support of the USG on this issue, but without success. (Note: We were informed by the Eritreans of a letter sent by AUC to the Cairo Embassy in early 2008.  The whereabouts of this letter are unknown.  We are following up with AUC's Center for Forced Migration to obtain another copy.)  11. (C)  Comment: Embassy Cairo is actively working to prevent the refoulement of Eritrean migrants from Egypt.  In the last two weeks, 45 Eritrean migrants have been forcibly returned.  However, UNHCR informed the Embassy on January 8 that three individuals, for whom we advocated, have been granted emergency resettlement to Sweden and possibly Finland. The Government of Egypt (GOE) argues that the "refugees" are economic migrants or military deserters, and deserve to be forcibly returned.  The GOE also believes that forced repatriation will deter future Eritrean migrants. Conversely, the policy seems to be redirecting the migrant flow to the Sinai, which will probably lead to more shootings on the Israel border.  The Embassy continues to advocate for UNHCR access to all Eritrean migrants in order to determine protection needs and refugee status.  However, UNHCR has been somewhat ineffective at resolving recent refugee crises, and is not trusted by any of the large refugee communities in Cairo.  It is notable that the GOE often grants the Eritrean Embassy access to the migrants, while UNHCR is denied the same access.  Embassy Cairo is also aware that the treatment of Eritrean maids could be a trafficking issue, and we are working our G/TIP office, NGOs, international organizations, and Egyptian Authorities to combat trafficking-in-persons. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/9/2009 12:04", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000037  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PGOV, MASS, EG SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING APPROVAL FOR GOE PARTICIPATION IN COESPU TRAINING  1.  (U)  This is an action request.  2.  (U) Post requests the Department's assistance in vetting the following security officials from the Egyptian Central Security Force and Special Operations Force, who have been selected to participate in COESPU training courses in Vicenza, Italy January 12 - February 13 and January 19 - February 13, pursuant to the Leahy Amendment and Foreign Assistance Act.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  (U) Middle Management Course, January 12 - February 13  EID, Moatasim Mohamed DOB: 10/10/1975 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position:  Chief Operations, Special Operations Forces Cairo  AMER, Essam Salama Mohamed DOB: 11/19/1975 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position: Special Operations Troops, Security International Airport Cairo  AMIN, Ahmed Abd ElHamed DOB: 8/1/1976 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position: Field Operations Officer, Special Operations Troops  IBRAHIM, Sameh El Sayed DOB: 9/6/1977 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position: Security Chief, Central Security Forces  SALEM, Mohamed Awad DOB: 05/19/1979 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position: Trainer, Central Security Forces  GHANEMA, Khaled Mohamed DOB: 10/26/1980 POB: Giza, Egypt Position: Chief of Security, Central Security Forces  MOHAMADEN, Mahmoud Salah DOB: 11/10/1980 POB: Tanta, Egypt Position: Chief of Operations Center, Central Security Forces  HASSAN, Tarek Mohamed Nabil DOB: 2/1/1980 POB: Ismailia, Egypt Position: Trainer, Training Organization  4.  (U) High Level Course, January 19 - February 13  HELAL, Mohamed Ahmed DOB: 9/25/1969 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position: Administration Officer, Central Security Forces  IBRAHIM, Wael Hany DOB: 5/5/1969 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position: Battalion Commander, Central Security Forces  YOUSSF, Khaled Khairy DOB: 12/29/1974 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position: Trainer, Police Officer Center, Central Security Forces  ABU SEADA, Ahmed Samy DOB: 3/1/1975 POB: Cairo, Egypt Position: Chief of Security Division, Ministry of Interior  SOLIMAN, Khaled Sayed Ahmed DOB: 7/14/1975 POB: Giza, Egypt Position: Investigation Chief Department, Central Security Forces SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO1192|08CAIRO1608|08CAIRO2251|08CAIRO2310|08CAIRO2382|08CAIRO2405|08CAIRO2577|08STATE104830", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/12/2009 9:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 CAIRO 000044  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA, DRL/NESCA, G/TIP AND G/IWI  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/12/2029 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, SOCI, KWMN, KISL, KIRF, EG SUBJECT: PROGRESS ON WOMEN'S ISSUES, DESPITE SOME GOE MISGIVINGS  REF: A. 08 CAIRO 2577      B. 08 CAIRO 2405      C. 08 CAIRO 2310      D. 08 CAIRO 2382      E. 08 CAIRO 2251      F. 08 CAIRO 1608      G. 08 CAIRO 1192      H. 08 STATE 104830  Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary and comment:  The past six months have seen significant progress on women's issues in Egypt.  Recent advances for women on combating female genital mutilation (FGM) and sexual harassment and assault have stood out in an environment characterized by backsliding on issues such as press freedom (ref B) and a lack of movement on political reform.  In a major step in June 2008, parliament passed a series of amendments to the Child Protection Law that criminalized FGM and raised the legal marriage age for girls (ref G).  During 2008, the GOE appointed 12 new female judges and Egypt's first female mayor.  During the current parliamentary session, the government plans to pass an amendment adding 56 new seats to parliament designated for women, and update family laws to provide women increased divorce and custody rights (ref A). In October and November 2008, two courts handed down unprecedented convictions on sexual assault charges (refs D and E).  While the government challenged traditional religious sensibilities by pressing parliament to pass the Child Law amendments, the GOE's attitude toward the sexual assault cases was at times unsupportive, leaving civil society to play a lead role.  End summary and comment.  ------------------------ The Child Law Amendments ------------------------  2. (C) In June 2008, the People's Assembly passed a series of unprecedented and controversial amendments to Egypt's Child Protection Law that criminalized female genital mutilation (FGM) for the first time in Egypt's history, and stipulated prison sentences and fines for its practice.  The amendments also raised the legal age for marriage for girls from 16 to 18, and allowed the mother of a child whose father is unknown to issue a birth certificate for the child under the mother's name.  First Lady Suzanne Mubarak, the National Center for Childhood and Motherhood (a quasi-governmental NGO), and independent NGOs worked together to develop the amendments and facilitate their passage through parliament.  3. (C) Ambassador Moushira Khattab, Secretary-General of the National Council for Childhood and Motherhood (NCCM), told us January 8 that since the June passage of the Child Law amendments, the NCCM has been working to educate judges and law enforcement officials about the substance of the new laws.  She characterized public resistance to raising the marriage age as significant, and admitted that the NCCM needs to do more to educate the population on this issue.  Khattab described her recent trip to the Aswan area of Upper Egypt where she attended ceremonies marking eight different villages' public rejection of FGM.  Khattab said that since June these public rejections have been increasing, and that there have been "many" criminal prosecutions in FGM cases and more calls to the NCCM FGM complaints hotline, although the NCCM does not yet have exact statistics.  She noted that the NCCM's most recent FGM figures for girls who marry under the age of 18 are 55 percent overall, with 9 percent in cities and 65 percent in rural areas.  -------------------- New Female Officials --------------------  4. (C) In November 2008, the government appointed the country's first female mayor, in the Upper Egyptian town of Qena, and the country's first female marriage registrar in February 2008.  During 2008, the government also appointed 12 female judges and 103 female assistant district attorneys, and increased the number of female officials in three ministries: information, industry and social solidarity. Shadia Farrag, the new female Assistant Foreign Minister for North American Affairs took up her position in August 2008, and women such as Deputy Foreign Minister Wafaa Bassim, Assistant Foreign Minister for International Organization Affairs Naela Gabr, and Minister of International Cooperation Fayza Aboul Naga continue to hold senior positions in the GOE.   CAIRO 00000044  002 OF 003   --------------------------------------------- -------- Plans for More Female MPs and Family Law Improvements --------------------------------------------- --------  5. (C) During his speech at the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) conference in November 2008, President Mubarak pledged that Egyptian law would be changed prior to the 2010 parliamentary elections to add additional seats to the People's Assembly designated for women.  In his speech, Mubarak also called for amendments to personal status laws such as divorce and child custody (ref C).  Minister of State for Parliamentary and Judicial Affairs Mufeed Shahab told the Ambassador December 23 that the Political Rights Law will be amended to add 56 new seats (2 per province) in the People's Assembly specifically designated for women.  Shehab also told the Ambassador that Egypt's family laws will be updated "to provide women with increased rights following a divorce, and with regard to child custody" (ref A).  6. (C) Farkhounda Hassan, Secretary-General of the quasi-governmental National Council for Women (NCW) and a Suzanne Mubarak confidante, told us December 30 that the NCW is working on a draft amendment to the family law that would reinstitute a bank's obligation to pay alimony to divorcees directly out of their ex-husbands' accounts.  She explained that banks had refused to make such payments as a result of wide-spread fraud, and that compelling the banks to resume these payments would be controversial.  Hassan noted that the NCW is planning to include an amendment criminalizing this alimony fraud to assuage the banks' concerns.  Hassan also told us that the NCW has forwarded to parliament draft amendments on the inheritance law, which would impose criminal penalties for depriving heirs of their legal inheritance under Islamic law.  Hassan asserted that current fraud in this area disproportionately affects female heirs.   --------------------------------------------- Historic Court Rulings against Sexual Assault ---------------------------------------------  7. (C) Sexual harassment and assault in Egyptian cities are rampant.  A study released in July 2008 by the independent NGO, the Egyptian Center for Women's Rights (ECWR), found that 83 percent of Egyptian women and 98 percent of foreign women had been harassed or assaulted (defined as touching, but not attempted rape), and that half of the women surveyed had been harassed/assaulted on a daily basis.  ECWR Chair Nehad Aboul Komsan told us that one particularly important conclusion of the study is that women experienced the same levels of harassment/assault regardless of how they were dressed or whether they were wearing a hijab (headscarf). Komsan noted that Tourism Minister Garannah privately criticized her for issuing the study, claiming that it would damage Egypt's tourism industry.  Women's rights NGO's have begun campaigns within the past ten years to raise public awareness of sexual harassment and assault, and to lobby the GOE to take steps to protect women.  The ECWR has worked with other women's rights NGOs on media campaigns to educate the public, and conducted seminars on improving legal protection against sexual harassment during the United Nations' "16 Days of Activism Against Gender-based Violence" this past fall (ref H).  8. (C) Long-standing efforts by civil society, as well as bloggers, to raise awareness of the issue played an important role in two unprecedented court decisions in the fall of 2008 convicting perpetrators of sexual assault.  On October 21, for the first time in Egyptian history, a court heard a sexual assault case and sentenced a truck driver to three years in prison for groping the 27 year-old female film director Noha Rushdie in June 2008 (ref E).  On November 17, a court convicted and sentenced a 19 year-old man to one year in prison on charges of sexual assault for the highly publicized groping and attempted rape of three women in front of a large crowd on a Cairo street in October 2008 (ref D).  9. (C) Throughout the fall of 2008, the GOE demonstrated an ambivalent and sometimes unsupportive attitude toward these cases.  State Security officers tried to dissuade Noha Rushdie from pursuing her case by threatening to "ruin her reputation" (ref E).  Then, following the landmark Rushdie verdict, prominent government figures such as Suzanne Mubarak and the Governor of Giza made public comments in mid-November downplaying the seriousness of sexual harassment in Egyptian society (ref D).  ECWR Chair Komsan told us that Minister of Tourism Garannah confided to her privately that the GOE feared that negative public fallout over the Rushdie case would dissuade foreign women tourists from visiting Egypt.  CAIRO 00000044  003 OF 003   However, on November 20, 3 days after the second harassment conviction on November 17, the government took the unprecedented step of arresting approximately 500 young men and boys for sexually harassing and assaulting women and girls in parks and schools around Cairo.  -------------------------------------------- Next Steps Forward on Harassment and Assault --------------------------------------------  10. (C) The women's rights community has been discussing new legislation on sexual harassment/assault, with the Egyptian Center for Women's Rights advocating statutes specifically criminalizing harassment and assault, which have been prosecuted up until now under a general law prohibiting "moral corruption."  The ECWR also favors legislation that would stipulate civil penalties for sexual harassment/assault, believing that judges will be more likely to fine defendants than to impose prison sentences, which are currently the only penalties possible.  Hassan, of the NCW, told us December 30 that her organization has forwarded draft legal amendments to parliament that would obligate judges to hand down minimum 5-year jail sentences in sexual harassment/assault cases, and would define specific forms of sexual harassment and assault.  While Hassan expressed optimism about parliamentary passage of the amendments, Komsan of the ECWR told us that many MPs have expressed reservations over the minimum five-year jail term. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO2585|09CAIRO17|09CAIRO2|09CAIRO26|09CAIRO7", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/12/2009 9:27", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000045  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y - PARAGRAPHS RENUMBERED CORRECTLY  SIPDIS  NSC FOR PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/12/2019 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KISL, KPAL, IS, PA, EG SUBJECT: RISING ANGER OVER GAZA  REF: A. 2008 CAIRO 2585      B. CAIRO 2      C. CAIRO 7      D. CAIRO 17      E. CAIRO 26  Classified By: DCM Matthew H. Tueller, for reason 1.4 (d).  1. (C) Summary and comment: Egyptians are seething over Israeli military operations in Gaza. The January 9 "Day of Anger and Solidarity with Gaza," supported by a range of Egyptian opposition forces, most prominently the Muslim Brotherhood (MB), featured the largest protests since the crisis began, with over 50,000 demonstrators in Alexandria (Egypt's second-largest city), and thousands of protesters elsewhere across Egypt.  No demonstrations materialized in Cairo, due to an immobilizing police presence outside of mosques.  To date, the GOE has successfully kept the lid on rising popular anger, mainly owing to the well-honed tactics of the security forces at preventing and controlling demonstrations, and the "why bother" attitude of the notoriously politically apathetic Egyptian public.  Leave for Egyptian police has reportedly been canceled nationwide, as the security services brace to continue to contain public ire.  As civilian casualties mount, and more photos of dead Palestinian children are featured on Arab satellite TV and in Egyptian newspapers, the pressure on the GOE will concurrently rise.  The reported January 11 wounding of four Egyptians, including two children, during Israeli airstrikes on the Gaza-Egypt border, will likely escalate popular anger.  If Israeli military operations are still continuing, the next Friday prayers on January 16 will be a clear gauge of public upset, and of the GOE's ability to continue to keep it in check.  End summary and comment.  --------------------------------------------- ------ DEMONSTRATIONS THWARTED IN CAIRO; GROWING ELSEWHERE --------------------------------------------- ------  2. (SBU) In the first week of Israel's Gaza operation, several thousand-strong demonstrations were held throughout Cairo (refs A-E), with protesters chanting "We are all Hamas!" and waving Palestinian flags.  As the situation progressed, and the protesters' slogans began to give voice to Egyptian anger at the government's perceived lack of action and "complicity" with the Israelis, the security forces moved aggressively to scale back or foil planned Cairo rallies.  On January 2, police used force to break up demonstrations after Friday prayers in central Cairo, beating a journalist unconscious.  A planned January 9 "Day of Anger and Solidarity With Gaza," called for by Qatari-based Egyptian shaykh Yusuf al Qaradawi, and endorsed by a wide range of Egyptian oppositionists, including the influential MB and the liberal "Kefaya" (Enough) and April 6 movements, was largely a non-event in Cairo.  Outside the popular Al Fat'h mosque in central Cairo, site of previous protests, we observed a massive police presence on January 9 that successfully prevented a planned demonstration.  Over 50 large security trucks surrounded the square outside the mosque, with rows of riot police four-men deep lining the streets.  The Ministry of Awqaf ("Religious Endowments") reportedly instructed imams not to discuss Gaza during their Friday sermons, and accordingly, none of the sermons we heard (in a range of Cairo mosques) specifically mentioned Gaza. All the sermons did, however, include prayers for "Palestinian martyrs," called for "victory for Palestine," and asked God to "destroy the Jews and their supporters."  3. (SBU) Outside of Cairo, dozens of demonstrations were held on January 9, the largest reportedly being in Alexandria, where 50,000-75,000 demonstrators, led by MB parliamentarians, gathered outside the central Al Qaid Ibrahim mosque, chanting "Down with Israel, and with it every collaborator," and "Gaza, excuse us - opening Rafah is not in our hands!"  (Note:  Egyptian demonstrations rarely exceed 10,000 people, so the numbers in Alexandria are notable.  End note).  Police reportedly tried to halt the Alexandria demonstration, but were unable to due to the sheer numbers involved, so ended up simply putting up a security cordon around the area. An MB-organized protest of between 1,000-10,000 was also reported in the Sinai border town of El Arish, where anger is particularly pronounced, due to the familial and economic ties of many residents with Gaza. Local contacts report that the demonstration turned violent, with clashes between police and angry demonstrators lasting nearly two hours, with injuries on both sides, and numerous protesters arrested.  Protesters reportedly destroyed numerous shops and cars; the first such vandalism during Gaza-related protests.  Protests of between 1,000-10,000 were also reported in cities across the Nile Delta, as well as the upper Egyptian cities of Assiyut (5,000), El Minya (2,000), ena (4,000), and Aswan (1,500). Most of the demonstrations were organized by the MB.  Over the past two weeks, approximately 1,000 MB members have been in arrested in connection with demonstrations and attempted aid convoys to Gaza. To date, none of the demonstrations we have observed have included any anti-American rhetoric; rather, the demonstrators have focused on Israel, and their own regime.  --------------------------------------------- --- ACTION IN PARLIAMENT AND PROFESSIONAL SYNDICATES --------------------------------------------- ---  4. (SBU) Since Israeli military action commenced, acrimonious debates have been ongoing in the Egyptian People's Assembly, with MP's from the 86-member MB parliamentary bloc, together with other independent parliamentarians, calling for the expulsion of the Israeli ambassador from Egypt, the withdrawal of the Egyptian ambassador from Tel Aviv, an opening of the Rafah border crossing with Gaza, and a halt in Egyptian gas shipments to Israel.  On January 11, the exchanges turned particularly nasty, with MP's throwing shoes at each other, and shouting accusations of treason.  The MB's popular pro-Gaza stance makes the situation particularly uncomfortable for MP's from the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP), who, with a few exceptions among the parliamentary leadership, apparently find it difficult to publicly take on their Islamist counterparts.  5. (SBU) Egypt's professional organizations, most of which are dominated by MB members, have been vocal in their opposition to Israeli action.  The Press Syndicate, a traditional focal point for opposition protests, has been host to several demonstrations numbering between 4,000-10,000 participants.  The journalists organization has also organized a blood drive, and a foiled aid convoy to Gaza. Bar Syndicate offices across Egypt have staged small-scale demonstrations (numbering in the hundreds), and a mass protest organized by the Engineer's Syndicate was blocked by security forces.  Several syndicates have issued statements condemning the "massacres" in Gaza, demanding a halt to natural gas exports to Israel and calling for the expulsion of the Israeli ambassador.  The Doctor's Syndicate organized a donation campaign for Gaza, which reportedly has collected 10 million LE (approximately 1.8 million USD) to date, and has spearheaded the organization of convoys with medical assistance and physicians to Gaza.  The dozens of doctors who attempted to travel to Gaza have been turned back at the Rafah border crossing.  Several members of the Gaza Relief Committee of the Doctor's Syndicate were arrested on January 2, prior to a planned demonstration.  ------------------------------------------ RULING PARTY ATTEMPTS AT SPIN FALLING FLAT ------------------------------------------  6. (SBU) Clearly feeling the heat from public anger at the government, and anxious to seize some momentum from the MB, on January 8 the ruling NDP launched a series of nationwide town-hall meetings and NDP-led "rallies" about Gaza. According to the NDP's website, the gatherings will "express support for the Palestinian people, underline the opposition of Egyptians to war on Gaza, denounce the massacre of the people of Palestine, and explain the steps that Egypt has taken to end Palestinian suffering."  The NDP has also been collecting money, food, clothes, and blood to send to Gaza. Thus far, attendance at the NDP events has reportedly only numbered in the hundreds.  ------------------------------ EGYPTIAN SCHIZOPHRENIA ON GAZA ------------------------------  7. (SBU) While the overwhelming sentiment of Egyptians about the Gaza operation is anger, a minority is not quite as sympathetic to the Palestinians.  Lingering animus over the Hamas-organized January 2008 border breach still colors the opinions of some Egyptians. Such sentiments were reinforced by the December 28 killing of an Egyptian border guard.  His funeral drew a reported 30,000 mourners, many of whom chanted anti-Hamas slogans.  On the social networking site Facebook, a breeding ground for Egyptian political activism, a group was recently created called "Sorry Gaza, I'm not Sympathetic."  The group has 4,838 members, who all signed up to endorse ten points that reject solidarity with Gaza, including, "Helping the 44% of the Egyptian population that is in poverty takes priority over helping others, .... The richest Arabs are Palestinians, and the Palestinian economy is better than the Egyptian one, .... The 2008 border breach was unacceptable, ... and Egyptians should demonstrate for Egyptian issues only!"  Overall, however, Egyptians with such views on the conflict are outnumbered by the vast majority of their countrymen, who are furious with Israel, the West writ large, and with their own government.  SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO1863|08CAIRO2279|08CAIRO587", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/12/2009 10:13", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000047  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  DEPT FOR NEA/ELA TREASURY FOR BRYAN BALIN AND FRANCISCO PARODI  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON, EAID, EFIN, EINV, PGOV, PREL, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT: FOOD SUBSIDY REFORM UNLIKELY  REF: A. 08 CAIRO 587      B. 08 CAIRO 2279      C. 08 CAIRO 1863  ------- Summary -------  1. (U) Subsidy reform in Egypt is politically charged.  Most attempts to change decades-old programs have been met with fierce public opposition and occasional demonstrations.  The GOE has been largely unsuccessful at targeting subsidy programs, and repeated studies have shown that only a fraction of the amount spent on subsidies benefits the neediest of the poor.  Fuel subsidies, which tend to benefit wealthier Egyptians, amount to over US$11 billion a year (septel).  Many of the reformers in the government of Egyptian Prime Minister Nazif have acknowledged the problem of a bloated subsidy budget, the negative impact on the GOE fiscal situation over the long term, and the economic distortions that subsidies have caused. They also admit that changes to programs that most Egyptians have grown to rely on for their basic needs will be difficult.  The GOE has made some moves to make subsidy delivery more efficient, but at the same time it has actually expanded the base of subsidy recipients.  In the past fiscal year, the direct cost of food subsidies alone was over US$3 billion, and the indirect costs of the massive subsidy infrastructure, which employs hundreds of thousands of people, are unknown.  2. (U) Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak has called for a public dialogue to improve the subsidy program, but there has been very little follow up. GOE officials are working on ways to eliminate some of the massive corruption and waste inherent in the current system, but none suggest that full scale reform is being seriously discussed.  The global economic crisis has further rattled the GOE, making subsidy reform even more difficult and less likely in the near term. End Summary.  ------------------ Food Subsidies 101 ------------------  3. (U) The GOE has two main programs to supply subsidized food to Egyptians: the subsidized bread program and the ration card program. The subsidized bread program provides loaves of flat "baladi" bread to the public at 5 piasters (slightly less than 1 US cent) per loaf.  Bread is baked and distributed through a vast network of government millers, bakeries, and stores. The subsidized bread program is not targeted, and anyone can purchase the loaves.  The price of "baladi" bread has remained unchanged for decades (though the government has occasionally changed the size of the loaves), and attempts to alter the bread program have been met with fierce opposition and occasional violence, including the infamous 1977 "bread riots."  4. (SBU) In March 2008, a bread supply shortage prompted the GOE to call out the military to help bake and distribute bread. (reftel A).  The subsidized bread program is notoriously corrupt and inefficient. Because the government is involved throughout the supply chain, there are ample opportunities for leakage from the system.  Wheat and flour are stolen at a number of points in the chain and there is very little accountability.  Worse still, there have been numerous reports of "baladi" bread being used to feed animals since it is cheaper than commercial feed.  Officials from the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MOSS) have told us that they estimate 15-20% is lost in the supply chain--the real figure is probably much higher.  5. (SBU) Egypt is one of the highest per capita consumers of wheat and sugar in the world. According to the MOSS, the subsidized bread program uses nearly 10 million tons of wheat per year and there are more than 20 thousand "baladi" bread bakeries producing 220 million loaves of bread per day. In very remote villages, rather than bread, the GOE distributes flour for household baking, but there are no plans to distribute flour to consumers on a more widespread basis.  6. (U) The second food subsidy program, the ration card program, provides ration cards to low income Egyptian families. Under this program, families are entitled to buy a monthly quantity of food products (sugar, oil, tea, rice, etc.) at subsidized prices.  The food is sold through government-owned outlets and the monthly allotment is adjusted according to family size. The ration card rolls were frozen in 1988, and from 1988 to 2005 no new names were added to the ration card list. Under pressure from the public, in 2008, the GOE added 23 million new names to the ration card eligibility list nearly doubling the rolls to 63 million people (80% of Egypt's population).  7. (U) The GOE has made other incremental changes to the ration card program in recent years. To streamline the system, an earlier attempt at partial subsidies was eliminated in 2007. That same year the GOE standardized the allotments to insure equal rations for urban and rural populations.  In June 2008, in response to a surge in global commodity prices, the GOE put in place a supplemental subsidy program to increase the amount of subsidized food to which each family was entitled. In 2008, the GOE began a pilot to replace paper ration cards with smart cards.  The new "family card" has been rolled out to nine governorates and has helped the GOE eliminate waste and fraud that accounted for 20% of its costs in those governorates (reftel B).  The GOE plans to fully convert to the "family card" platform by the end of 2009.  --------------------------------- While Economic Costs Are High... ---------------------------------  8. (U) The food subsidy program is hugely expensive and cost the government LE 16.5 billion (US$3.1 billion) in the 2007-2008 (July-June) fiscal year, nearly six percent of the national budget.  The expansion of the ration card rolls in 2008, coupled with commodity price increases and potential economic slowdown have the potential to add to the fiscal pressure of the food subsidy program.  At the same time, the global economic situation has made the GOE increasingly unlikely to tinker with the program.  The GOE is also subject to global price increases, since it is a net importer of food and the largest importer of wheat in the world. Half of Egypt's wheat for subsidies is imported, and virtually all of the tea and cooking oil it provides is imported.  --------------------------------------------- ... Political Costs of Change Are Even Higher ---------------------------------------------  9. (SBU) Hany Kadry, Deputy Minister of Finance, recently told us there was little chance of subsidy reform while the country's inflation rate remains high (inflation has been running at an average of 20% over the past year).  Kadry also said that there was large opposition to a move from an in-kind (direct provision of foodstuffs) to a cash transfer program. Nonetheless, the GOE goal remains moving to a cash transfer program which would be a much more efficient way to provide assistance to the poor. He told us that the supplemental food subsidy program put in place during the commodity price spike in May 2008 would be phased out by the end of calendar year 2008.  10. (SBU) In a December 22 meeting at the MOSS, three advisors to the Minister told us that Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak has publicly suggested a possible move to a cash transfer program and there is "an open dialogue with the public" to evaluate such an initiative, but there were no near term plans to move to a cash transfer program. (Note: We have seen no evidence of any dialogue or serious planning to replace the current ration regime. End note.)  They did tell us that there were plans to introduce some market dynamics to the "baladi" bread supply chain.  These plans would include selling wheat to millers and flour to bakers at market-based prices.  The GOE would then purchase the bread and resell it at subsidized prices. These plans have not been announced publicly, and there is no timeline for these changes.  ----------------------------------- Comment: Real Reform Appears Remote -----------------------------------  11. (SBU) The GOE subsidy program is a major drag on the fiscal budget. In total, subsidies (including energy, food and housing) account for 30% of total public spending. As we have reported (reftel C), spending on subsidies far exceeds spending on vital social services such as health and education.  Officials from the Ministry of Finance have told us that the current level of food subsidies, while not optimal, is sustainable, and there appears to be no appetite to make difficult choices about reform.  The GOE also finds itself in a perfect storm of negative sentiment regarding the domestic economy. The economy is approaching the tail end of an inflationary cycle that has seen some of the highest inflation rates in decades.  The effects of the global economic slowdown have yet to be fully felt in Egypt, but the consensus among analysts is that revenues from exports, tourism, worker remittances, the energy sector, and the Suez canal will all be lower over the next several years, and foreign direct investment is likely to fall as well.  Though policy makers in the GOE all acknowledge that subsidy reform is necessary and will eventually hae to take place, attempts at serious reform have een halting at best--even in good economic times  The current macroeconomic environment makes analready difficult initiative nearly impossible forthe government to sell to the public. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09SECSTATE2617", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/12/2009 15:04", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T CAIRO 000056  SIPDIS  ISN/CATR FOR GANZER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/12/2029 TAGS: PARM, PREL, ETTC, MASS, EG, IS, SU SUBJECT: EGYPT RECEIVES REQUEST FOR VIGILANCE OF SUDAN ORIGIN FLIGHTS  REF: SECSTATE 2617  Classified By: Minister-Counselor for Economic and Political Affairs William R. Stewart for Reasons 1.4 (d).  (S)  On January 12, we delivered reftel points to Amin Meleika, Egypt's Deputy Assistant Foreign Minister for North American Affairs.  Meleika had no immediate response but committed to pass the information to relevant GoE offices. We will report any substantive response separately.  Now that we have notified the MFA, we will also pass the information to other appropriate GoE agencies. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO17|09CAIRO2|09CAIRO26|09CAIRO3|09CAIRO7", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/13/2009 13:55", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000063  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA, NEA/IPA, AND CA/OCS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2019 TAGS: KPAL, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, CASC, EG, IS SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  JANUARY 13  REF: A. CAIRO 0026      B. CAIRO 0017      C. CAIRO 0007      D. CAIRO 0003      E. CAIRO 0002  Classified By: Minister Counselor William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  ------------ Rafah Border ------------  1. (S) According to Ministry of Defense sources, on January 12, an unexploded Israeli bomb landed in an open field on the Egyptian side of the border.  No injuries were reported.  The Egyptians informed the Israelis, who offered to send a team to safely dismantle the bomb and noted that it was "U.S.-manufactured."  Israeli aerial attacks on the Gaza side of the border around the Philadelphi corridor continued yesterday and into this morning.  -------------- Demonstrations --------------  2. (U) According to press reports, 4-5 demonstrations were held throughout Egypt on January 12, the largest of which was a protest of 10,000-20,000 in the Nile Delta city of Damanhour. The Muslim Brotherhood (MB) reportedly organized the demonstration, and 150 MB members were arrested during the event. The protests all expressed solidarity with Gaza, called for the expulsion of the Israeli ambassador from Cairo, a halt to gas exports to Israel, and advocated for opening the Rafah border crossing with Gaza. A call has been made on a small pro-Gaza Egyptian Facebook group for a January 15 protest in front of the U.S. Embassy, and a January 18 general strike. As of 1500 hrs. local, , neither planned event has received coverage in mainstream media or elsewhere on the Internet.  Local press reports that protestors in all of the Gaza demonstrations in Egypt are calling for the cessation of gas exports to Israel.  The Minister of Petroleum Sameh Fahmy said on Jan 12 that if the an Egyptian court rules that gas exports to Israel must stop, he will comply.  -------------- Public Opinion --------------  3. (C) The crisis in Gaza has galvanized Egyptian bloggers, and part-time bloggers who have not written entries in months are expressing their strong emotions on-line, and posting graphic photos of dead and injured Palestinian children. Blogger Nora Younis spent 12 days in Egyptian Rafah before returning to Cairo January 11, and has posted entries on her observations of the Israeli strikes on southern Gaza.  Over dinner with us January 12, bloggers sorted through their conflicting thoughts about the crisis.  One young blogger discussed her desire to participate in demonstrations, not to criticize the GOE, but to help Gazans.  However, she worried that by joining a protest she could be beaten by Egyptian police.   Most of the bloggers voiced frustration over what they described as their powerlessness to help Gazans.  One blogger wondered whether the Israelis, not Hamas, assassinated Egyptian Border Guard Force Major Yasser Issawi on December 28 at the Rafah border, especially in light of the apparent wounding of four Egyptian civilians January 11 by errant Israeli air strikes on Palestinian Rafah.  4. (U) The ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) is amping up its PR efforts regarding the crisis. NDP Secretary-General Safwat El Sherif, assistant secretary general and presidential son Gamal Mubarak, assistant secretary general Mufeed Shehab, and other senior party members led a medical convoy to the Rafah border crossing on January 13, to, according to an NDP statement, "deliver aid to the people of Gaza, and to demonstrate that solidarity with the Palestinians requires action, not just words.8 The NDP leaders visited Palestinian patients in Al Arish hospitals, and plan to "check8 the Rafah crossing. Several similar medical aid convoys organized by the Muslim Brotherhood, other opposition groups, and various professional syndicates have been barred from reaching the Rafah crossing.  ------------------- Humanitarian Issues -------------------  5. (C) Several Gazans with "complicated8 injuries are being  CAIRO 00000063  002 OF 002   transferred to Dar Al Fouad Hospital in 6 October City, located west of Cairo, for treatment.   Dar Al Fouad, the only Joint Commission International-certified hospital in Egypt, has a contract with the Israeli Embassy in Cairo for treatment of members of the Israeli Mission here.  6. (SBU) On January 12, 230 tons of medical assistant from the Red Crescent, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar entered Gaza through the Rafah terminal.  No inured Palestinians entered Egypt via Rafah on January 12.  --------- Diplomacy ---------  7. (C) President Mubarak traveled to Riyadh today for talks with King Abdullah on Gaza.  Press reports plans of UNSYG Moon to visit the region next week.  FM Aboul Gheit will attend the January 16 Arab League-sponsored Gaza meeting in Kuwait.  Al Jazeerah reports Qatari efforts to move this meeting (either as a ministerial or as a summit) to Doha, as well as the Egyptian rejection of that proposal (which the MFA has just confirmed to us).  The Norwegian Foreign Minister will be in Cairo to see Aboul Gheit, Omar Soliman, and President Mubarak on Wednesday, January 14, to discuss Gaza.  8. (C) The UK embassy told us today that the Foreign Office Principle Deputy Director General was in town yesterday, as was Spanish foreign minister Moratinos.  European diplomats told us today that the EU is debating internally on offering to send an international force to Gaza, including possibly a Dutch/Danish force (NFI).  The Belgians told us they planned to propose a field hospital to be based in the Sinai dedicated to treated wounded Gazans, similar to an earlier German proposal (Note:  We do not believe the GoE will agree to either proposal.  End note.)  9. (SBU) We are planning to send a poloff to the Sinai next week for eyes-on reporting, security situation permitting. Our consular colleagues are coordinating with the GoE and others to try to facilitate the departure from Gaza of approximately 138 Amcits; we are trying to get details on the Amcits which the GoE requires. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO2350|08CAIRO2420", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/13/2009 14:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000064  SIPDIS  NSC FOR PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2029 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, EG SUBJECT: AYMAN NOUR'S WIFE ON LATEST TRAVAILS  REF: A. 2008 CAIRO 2350      B. 2008 CAIRO 2420  Classified By: DCM Matthew H. Tueller, for reason 1.4 (d).  1. (C) Summary: In a January 11 meeting, Gameela Ismail, wife of imprisoned Ghad party leader Ayman Nour, told us that Nour has been baselessly accused of assaulting a prison guard, and now faces solitary confinement as punishment. She said that Nour is "terrified" of solitary confinement, as the conditions are abysmal, and he fears a government-orchestrated "accident." Ismail noted that a few days ago, a prisoner in the same facility as Nour was put in solitary confinement, and allegedly "committed suicide," although Nour is convinced he was killed while closeted away from the eyes of other prisoners. Nour is also concerned that the new charges will prevent him from being released in summer 2009, after he has served three-quarters of his term. (Note: Egyptian law allows for prisoners who have demonstrated good behavior to be released after serving three-quarters of their term.  Nour's lawyers do not anticipate that the GOE will apply this non-mandatory practice to Nour.  End note).  Nour has filed a legal complaint contesting the assault charges, which will be heard on January 20 by the Cairo Administrative Court. Ismail is also concerned about three pending court cases against her, and overall increased harassment. End summary.  2. (C) Ismail said that overall prison conditions for Nour have deteriorated. The guards on his cell block were recently transferred, due to allegations that they were developing too close a relationship with Nour. The new guards are reportedly "tougher." For instance, when Gameela last visited Nour a week ago, the guards insisted on doing a body search of her before the meeting, in front of her husband. Rather than watching the guards grope his wife, Nour allegedly asked Ismail to leave, and to not visit him again "for some time."  3. (C) According to Ismail, there are three court cases currently pending against her - two related to the recent burning of the Ghad Party headquarters (refs A and B), and one on charges of "insulting a civil servant" during a 2007 demonstration outside Torah Prison, where Nour is held. Ismail said every few days, she is called to the Public Prosecutor's office for another interrogation regarding one of the cases.  She believes that the threat of her being imprisoned as a result of one of the court cases will be used as a "pressure card" against Nour: "If he is finally released, the government will dangle my possible imprisonment in front of him, to keep him from being 'troublesome'."  One of Nour's new prison guards reportedly told him that Ismail would be imprisoned "as soon as you go free."  Ismail noted that harassment against her and Nour's two teenage sons has "dramatically" increased over the past few months, and showed us anonymous text messages sent to her, rife with sexual innuendo and implied threats against her children.  She asked that the Ambassador raise the harassment and court cases against her with Minister of Interior Habib El Adly: "Please ask him to back off from this aggression towards me." (Note: We will raise concerns about the treatment of Ismail with the GOE. End note).  4. (C) Ismail was hopeful that Nour will be released soon, noting that some Al Ghad members believe the GOE will pardon him once the Obama administration is in place.  She said that Nour has been dismayed by recent USG statements, from the Ambassador and Washington, which have not mentioned Nour. According to Ismail, Nour's preference is that his case be raised publicly "at every available opportunity," as he feels that having his name mentioned causes the prison guards to treat him "more carefully, as they know then that someone is carefully watching."  Ismail noted that she understands that the USG is "playing quiet" for now, in order to "give the government the space to release Nour." She noted that she agreed with that approach, and asked that we keep her apprised of any developments regarding Nour's possible release, which we pledged to do.  SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO2435|09CAIRO2502|09CAIRO2505|09CAIRO2542", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/14/2009 9:36", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 CAIRO 000065  SIPDIS  NEA/ELA FOR CANEDO H FOR MACDERMOTT (PLEASE PASS TO SENATOR DORGAN) IO FOR SIEKMAN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2018 TAGS: OREP, PGOV, PTER, PREL, EWWT, MEPP, IR, IZ, SO, EG SUBJECT: CODEL DORGAN VISIT TO EGYPT DECEMBER 13-14  REF: A. CAIRO 2542      B. CAIRO 2435      C. CAIRO 2502      D. CAIRO 2505  Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Senators Byron Dorgan (ND), Thad Cochran (MS), Kent Conrad (ND) and Sheldon Whitehouse (RI) visited Cairo on December 13-14.  All of their GOE interlocutors asked them to convey to the incoming Obama Administration that the Israeli-Palestinian peace process and Palestinian statehood must be an early priority, in order to make progress on all other challenges facing the region. President Mubarak expressed his hope that the Obama Administration "would be better than the present one" in being "more inclined to listen to your friends."  Senior Ministry of Defense officials said that conditioning U.S. assistance to Egypt on political and other reforms hurts bilateral relations, and requested that the U.S. return to the Camp David ratio of 3 to 2 for military assistance to Israel and Egypt.  Intelligence Chief Omar Suleiman described Egypt's mediation role between Palestinian factions Fatah and Hamas and obstacles to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  Over lunch, Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit highlighted the importance of Egypt's "soft-power" in blocking those like Iran who seek to destabilize the region.  Senator Whitehouse had a separate meeting with Gamal Mubarak, Deputy Secretary-General of the governing National Democratic Party, who reviewed economic and geopolitical issues facing Egypt (SEPTEL).  The CODEL also discussed economic and political challenges in Egypt with a group of civil society activists and political oppositionists (ref A).  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- PRESIDENT MUBARAK: "LISTEN TO YOUR FRIENDS" ---------------------------------------------  2. (C) During an hour and a half long breakfast at the Presidential Palace on December 14, President Mubarak expressed his hope that the incoming Obama administration "will be better than the current one."  He complained that the Bush administration has pushed Egypt to "open up" politically, "like you did with Hamas.  Would any country do such a thing?"  Instead of pushing such things, Mubarak said, the U.S. should appreciate more the role Egypt plays in regional stability.  We are doing our best to solve the situation in Gaza, Mubarak noted.  Egypt opened its border at Rafah for several days recently, he explained, to allow Hajj pilgrims to exit Gaza, but Hamas would not allow anyone to leave.  "We have asked them to get along (with rival Fatah), but they never will."  3. (C) The U.S. needs to "listen to its friends" in the region, Mubarak advised Senator Dorgan.  When George Bush Sr. was president, "he listened to my advice.  But his son does not."  Mubarak said that when President Bush Sr. had called and asked what Mubarak thought about invading Iraq to get to rid of Saddam Hussein during the First Gulf War, Mubarak had told him not to because "you won't be able to get out and you will drown in Iraq."  Mubarak said he had tried to convey the same message to the current administration, only to be ignored.  "I told (Vice President) Cheney three or four times" that Iraq needed a strong leader and that it would be unwise to remove Saddam Hussein; doing so would only "open the gate to Iran." Unfortunately, he said, the Vice President did not listen to his advice.  4. (C) By making these mistakes, the U.S. has empowered Iran, whose goal, according to Mubarak, is "to control the entire region."  "They are out to convert Sunni countries to Shia."  Mubarak surprisingly equated Iraq to Iran: "They are two sides of the same Shia coin." He added that Iran is waiting for the U.S. to leave Iraq in order to "fill the vacuum" and emphasized that Iran is the source of funds for many extremist groups in the region, such as Hezbollah, Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood.  Mubarak said that the U.S. must do more to understand the region culturally and religiously; the best place to start, in Mubarak's opinion, is to "listen to your friends."  When Senator Dorgan asked Mubarak who those friends were, "Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Egypt, of course," was his answer.  The Gulf Cooperation Countries (GCC) states are also friends of  CAIRO 00000065  002 OF 004   the United States, but "small and scared" of both Iraq and Iran.  5. (C) In an unusual, if oblique, reference to U.S. assistance to Egypt and calls for political reform, Mubarak told Senator Dorgan that "Egypt will never accept pressure.  However, we are willing to be persuaded."  He then asked after the health of Congressman David Obey, seen by the Egyptians as the main force behind Congressional attempts to condition U.S. assistance to Egypt.  "He is a good man," Mubarak noted.  "But he has been causing us trouble for the last three years."  --------------------------------------------- ------------ DEFENSE ESTABLISHMENT FOCUSED ON REGIONAL CHALLENGES AND US MILITARY ASSISTANCE; PORT SECURITY --------------------------------------------- ------------  6. (SBU) Assistant Minister of Defense Major General Mohamed al Assar, Chief of the United States Division at the Ministry of Defense, and General Al Murad, Director of Military Intelligence, articulated the history of U.S.-Egyptian military cooperation. They provided an update on Egypt's current contributions to peacekeeping operations in Africa, with 800 troops deployed to UNMIS in Southern Sudan and plans to deploy up to 2,400 to the hybrid UN-AU force in Darfur. Al Assar told the senators that the principle of conditionality in U.S. assistance to its allies, such as Egypt, is a source of frustration.  He called on the Senate to temper conditionality requests from the House of Representatives.  Al Assar emphasized that the entire Arab world hopes that President-elect Obama will focus on resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict from the beginning of his term.  He also asked that the U.S. return to the traditional "Camp David ratio" of 3 to 2 for military assistance to Israel and Egypt.  Al Assar claimed that recent increases in assistance to Israel threatened the fragile military balance between Israel and Egypt and had a negative impact on Egypt's ability to maintain stability in the broader region.  7. (SBU) Al Assar thanked the senators for Foreign Military Funds (FMF) to Egypt and asked that the new administration maintain the current FMF level of $1.3 billion per year without conditioning, to allow Egypt to continue to modernize its army and equipment.  He explained that as the percentage of U.S.-origin equipment in the Egyptian military increased, the amount of FMF necessary to sustain and upgrade that equipment will also increase, thereby reducing funds for new purchases.  Senator Cochran noted the importance of further developing Egypt's naval forces as well as its army, in order to address growing security challenges in the region.  8. (SBU)  Senator Dorgan noted that container security programs are a vital part of the U.S.'s counter-terrorism strategy and thanked the GOE for its cooperation to date in implementing a Container Security Initiative (CSI) program.  He asked Al Assar about delays in moving forward on MEGAPORTS, a Department of Energy initiative, in Egypt. Al Assar said that Egypt was committed to making CSI work in Egypt through direct work with the DHS/Customs and Border Protection, and will ensure that 100% of containers headed to the U.S. are scanned and secure.  He noted that the issue of MEGAPORTS rests with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and is a different matter because it addresses broader non-proliferation issues.  9. (SBU) In response to Senator Whitehouse's question regarding piracy in the Gulf of Aden, Al Assar said that Egypt's economy could be hurt significantly by a downturn in Suez Canal transits and shipping related to fears of piracy.  He stated that Egypt is willing to fully cooperate with any international mission under a UN flag (refs B & C).  --------------------------------------------- -------------- INTELLIGENCE CHIEF ON EGYPT'S ROLE IN THE PEACE PROCESS AND COUNTER-TERRORISM --------------------------------------------- --------------  10. (C) General Omar Suleiman, chief of the Egyptian General Intelligence Service (EGIS) discussed the three remaining obstacles to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict: Israeli settlements, refugee returns and radicalization amongst Palestinians and Israelis.  He noted  CAIRO 00000065  003 OF 004   that Israel has to be convinced that settlements are detrimental to its own security and to the viability of a two-state solution.  Suleiman told the Senators that Israel's current proposal involves keeping 6.8% of West Bank territory, which he said would prevent the formation of a contiguous Palestinian state; the Palestinian side is unlikely to accept giving up more than 2% of the West Bank.  He stated that Egypt is doing its best to convince Palestinians that there cannot be wide-scale Palestinian refugee returns to Israel itself, beyond limited family reunification.  Suleiman emphasized to the Senators that Israel needs to empower Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas on this issue; Abbas has to be able to set conditions of eligibility for Palestinian return to Israel and the ability to offer Palestinians some number of slots for returns in order to win the public's trust and willingness to make other concessions. According to Suleiman, Israeli Foreign Minister Livni is misguided to push the Palestinian Authority (PA) to say that no one is eligible to return to Israel.  Regarding radicalization amongst Israelis and Palestinians, Suleiman said that Palestinian resistance organizations can use Israel's security measures in the West Bank and heavy-handed treatment of Palestinians to foster discontent throughout the Arab world.  He noted that recent settler violence against Palestinian communities in the West Bank eroded President Abbas's position and credibility and has to be curbed.  11. (C) Suleiman told the Senators that Egypt has a three-pronged approach to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict: first, it has worked since April of 2008 to calm tensions between Israel and Hamas forces in Gaza in order to keep a truce in place, second, Egypt has ended the separation between the Palestinian factions of Fatah and Hamas by creating opportunities for dialogue between them, and lastly it is supporting Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas by improving his ability to serve the Palestinian public and by weakening Hamas.  According to Suleiman, GOE's effort to undermine Hamas includes breaking up smuggling networks into Gaza, destroying tunnels into Gaza from the Sinai and frequent coordination with Israel. Suleiman said that Syria and Iran are working to prevent the reconciliation of Palestinian actors and told the Senators that Hamas officials decided not to come to inter-Palestinian negotiations hosted by EGIS on November 11 in Cairo because Iran and Syria encouraged them to delay until a new U.S. administration was in place (ref D).  12. (C) Suleiman ended by telling the Senators that the tragedy of the September 11 attacks against the U.S. unified the world against terrorism.  He said that the establishment of an independent Palestinian state, economic growth and better employment prospects for the young are key elements to reducing terrorism in the Middle East.  ------------------------------- LUNCH WITH THE FOREIGN MINISTER -------------------------------  13. (C) Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit told the senators that the U.S. has an important role to play in the region and must rely more on diplomacy and cultural outreach to defend its interests.  Egypt, and other moderate Arabs are confronted with forces and states that seek to destabilize the Muslim world and undermine the status quo.  In confronting Iran's revolutionary, Shi'a expansionist agenda, he said Egypt maintains a firm policy of blocking and thwarting Iranian initiatives.  Military action against Iran would be "disastrous" as it would mobilize the whole Muslim world to rally to the Iranian cause.  Egypt is a vital partner to the U.S. because of its "soft power" which is exercised throughout the region by Egyptian professionals, intellectuals, educators and by the great weight in the Arab world of Egypt's population and history of leadership.  The U.S. and Egypt share a strategic interest in countering radicalism and subversive forces.  14. (C)  Aboul Gheit identified the Muslim Brotherhood as the "vanguard of radicalism" and highlighted the long history of radical Islam acting as a destabilizing and threatening force in Egypt and the region.  Iran has made common cause with Hamas.  Both Shi'a and Sunni extremists are working to thwart efforts to reach a comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.  U.S. and moderate Arab interest in creating a stable and secure region rests on reaching a just solution to the Palestinian issue.  The  CAIRO 00000065  004 OF 004   Foreign Minister stressed the importance of the new U.S. Administration not neglecting the Arab-Israeli conflict which remains the key to regional stability.  --------------------------------------------- Senator Whitehouse Meeting with Gamal Mubarak ---------------------------------------------  15.  (C)  During his meeting with Senator Whitehouse, NDP Assistant Secretary General Gamal Mubarak covered impact of economic crisis on Egypt and Egyptian plans for the near term.  Mubarak also reviewed his overview of the region. Septel will provide details of this conversation.  15. (U) The CODEL cleared this message. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO783|09CAIRO17|09CAIRO2|09CAIRO26|09CAIRO3|09CAIRO63|09CAIRO7", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/14/2009 13:20", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 CAIRO 000068  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA, NEA/IPA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2019 TAGS: KPAL, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, CASC, EG, IS SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  JANUARY 14  REF: A. CAIRO 0063      B. CAIRO 0026      C. CAIRO 0017      D. CAIRO 0007      E. CAIRO 0003      F. CAIRO 0002  Classified By: Minister Counselor William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  ----- Rafah -----  1. (S) According to MoD sources, the Rafah border area has been relatively quiet today, with no collateral damage on the Egyptian side, and no reports of Palestinian firing on Egyptian Border Guard Forces.  -------------- Demonstrations --------------  2. (SBU) Contacts reported that on January 13, approximately 5,000 protestors from opposition parties and movements, including the Muslim Brotherhood (MB), demonstrated in the Delta town of Damietta.  Contacts also told us that approximately 6,000 protestors from the MB and the opposition movement Kefaya demonstrated January 13 in the Delta town of Mahalla.  According to press reports, 3,000 teachers demonstrated in Sharqiya January 13, and 100 opposition Wafd Party-affiliated lawyers demonstrated in the North Sinai. The MB claimed that clashes broke out between police and demonstrators in Sharqiya.  The MB's website reported small demonstrations January 13 in the Delta town of Damanhour.  3. (SBU) A call for a January 15 protest in front of Embassy Cairo that originated on a pro-Gaza Egyptian Facebook group, has now been reported on the website of a small-circulation newspaper, Al Yom Al Sabaa. According to security contacts, the protest organizers do not yet have official permission to demonstrate.  Based on information to date, we do not anticipate a large-scale protest developing.  4. (C) Calls are also circulating for January 15 and 18 general strikes in solidarity with Palestinians in Gaza. Thus far, the Al Azhar Scholars Union and a small pro-Gaza Facebook group have endorsed the calls; no influential opposition groups, such as the Muslim Brotherhood, have yet announced their participation.  An activist leader from the "April 6 Group" that contributed to organizing the April 2008 Mahalla strike (ref - 08 Cairo 783)  told us that his group is not involved in planning these general strikes, and predicted that both the strikes and the Embassy Cairo protest would be ineffective and disorganized.  He said he and other April 6 leaders have not participated in demonstrations out of fear of being arrested and held for long periods.  He reported that State Security has not harassed him recently, and speculated this is due to their preoccupation with the nation-wide demonstrations.  -------------- Public Opinion --------------  5. (SBU) As part of the government,s continuing PR campaign to demonstrate its pro-Palestinian credentials, the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) sent a senior delegation on January 13 to the Rafah border, to visit hospitals, and deliver to the Palestinian Red Crescent a reported 11-38 ambulances and 20-28 other vehicles loaded with food and medical aid. The delegation was led by NDP secretary general Safwat Sherif, and assistant secretary generals Gamal Mubarak and Mufeed Shehab. Sherif told accompanying journalists that Israel,s actions in Gaza are tantamount to a "war crime and state terrorism,8 and that "we shall not sacrifice the slightest grain of sand! The lands of the Sinai speak the names of Egypt's martyrs against Israel!8 Sherif said that other similar aid convoys would be sent soon by NDP offices in Egypt,s provinces.  6. (U) The NDP continues to hold rallies across Egypt, in support of Palestinians, and to explain the efforts of the Egyptian government to "end Palestinian suffering.8 On January 12, rallies were held Gharbiya (reported 1,200 attendees), Aswan (reported 3,000 attendees), and the coastal town of Marsah Matrouh (no reported number of attendees). A large NDP-organized conference is planned for today in Cairo, which will include NDP MP,s and Shura Council members.  CAIRO 00000068  002 OF 003    7. (U) According to an aggressive pro-government paper, former UNSYG and current President of the National Council for Human Rights Boutros Boutros-Ghali said January 13 that Israel chose the current timeframe to attack Gaza to take advantage of the ongoing U.S. presidential transition and the global financial crisis.  The same paper reported that former Ambassador to the U.S. Abdel Raouf El-Reedy said January 13 that Israeli leaders would be in prison if it were not for U.S. "protection" of Israel.  8. (U) Debate continued in the People,s Assembly on January 12 over the volatile issue of gas exports to Israel. Opposition MP,s accused the government of "colluding with the Zionist enemy8 by not halting gas exports. Minister for Legal and Parliamentary Affairs (and NDP assistant SYG) Mufeed Shehab replied that Egypt is "doing its best to halt Israeli aggression in Gaza.8  9. (U) On January 12, 35 MB parliamentarians sent PM Ahmed Nazif a letter calling for the immediate allocation of 500 million LE (roughly $90.5 million USD) to provide housing in Rafah for displaced Palestinians. The letter also requested that Rafah become a free trade zone where Palestinians can purchase commodities, that the Israeli ambassador be expelled, and that gas exports to Israel cease. The deputy leader of the MB,s parliamentary bloc said that a GOE refusal of these requests would be "complicity in Israel,s blockade of Gaza.8  ------------------- Humanitarian Issues -------------------  10. (SBU) Assistance:  On January 13, 180 tons of medical assistance was delivered through Rafah and 500 tons of food assistance was delivered through al-Aouja from the United Arab Emirates, Oman, and the Red Crescent.  31 injured Palestinians entered Egypt for medical treatment.  11. (C) UN AID Bottleneck: The United Nations Development Program,s Resident Representative, James Rawley, reported that the UN was unable to get enough humanitarian supplies into Gaza through the Rafah crossing yesterday, that more supplies needed to flow in through Rafah, and that other crossings needed to be opened so the UN can meet the humanitarian needs.  12. (C)  WFP on Gaza:  Gianpietro Bordignon, the World Food Program,s Country Director for Egypt, told us yesterday that WFP local staff continues to work in Gaza.  According to Bordignon, since 2007 the WFP has provided food each day for 265,000 "non-refugee8 Gazans (with UNRWA handling the refugees).  The WFP believes that the number of Gazans requiring food aid will increase to 365,000 as a result of the conflict.  He said that the WFP has a "two-month supply8 of food in Gaza but distribution and re-supply is difficult because of the security situation and the lack of fuel in Gaza.  He said the WFP sent a largely "symbolic8 convoy to Gaza last Friday (with 80 tons of wheat flour and 10 tons of biscuits) which entered Gaza on Sunday through the Kerem Shalom crossing.  He also said there is a 3 man WFP logistics team in Al Arish working to coordinate U.N. aid efforts.  He said donations had been arriving in an uncoordinated fashion (he cited the arrival of large numbers of anti-malaria kits, unneeded in Gaza, as an example of the lack of coordination) and the team is working to bring order to the effort.  13. (S) Sudan/Gaza:  Kamal Ali, Head of the Sudanese National Congress Party in Egypt, told us the he is in El-Arish to supervise the delivery of the fifth planeload of medical and food supplies from Sudan for the people of Gaza.  --------- Diplomacy ---------  14. (C) Foreign delegations:  EU Political Counselor told us today that Italian FM Frattini was likely to arrive in the coming days, and that EU Quartet envoy Marc Otte is planning to visit Rafah in the coming week.  Spanish FM Moratinos departed today (January 14).  The Japanese political counselor told us January 13 that Middle East envoy Arima,s meetings earlier in the week had included FM Aboul Gheit, EGIS Chief Soliman, and Arab League Secretary General Amre Moussa.  The Japanese are interesting in the possibility of providing technical assistance to the Rafah border, and perhaps for economic development in the Sinai.   CAIRO 00000068  003 OF 003   15. (SBU) Arab League summit:  As of January 14, it remained unclear as to the location for the summit on the Gaza crisis and review of UNSCR 1860.  The Qataris continued to press ahead to obtain the support of 15 member states to hold an emergency summit in Doha, while the Egyptians were arguing that the meeting should be held in Kuwait, to precede the previously scheduled Arab League Summit on Economic and Social Development (to be held January 17-18).  The Arab League had yet to make an official announcement clarifying the location.  16. (U) UN:  UN SYG Ban Ki Moon met with Aboul Gheit and Arab League SYG Moussa today.  Ban said that he was unable to go to Gaza, given the situation, but expected to meet UN Gaza employees when he visits Israel (following his stop in Egypt).  He reiterated the need for a cease-fire along the lines of UNSCR 1860, and said that the UN would send a team to Gaza to evaluate the damage and humanitarian needs. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/14/2009 15:08", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000069  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA, AF/E, NAIROBI FOR TRIMBLE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2019 TAGS: PREL, SO, ET, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT HOSTS SOMALI LEADER SHAYKH SHARIF SHAYKH AHMED  Classified By: Minister Counselor for Economic and Political Affairs William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Abdelhameed Marzouk, Deputy Assistant Secretary for East and South Africa, told us on January 14 that Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) leader Shaykh Sharif Shaykh Ahmed came to Cairo at the invitation of Egyptian General Intelligence Chief Omar Sulayman.  Shaykh Sharif met with Assistant Foreign Minister for Arab Affairs, Abd al-Rahman Salah on January 13 to discuss the current situation in Somalia and plans for a future national unity government. FM Aboul Gheit was originally scheduled to attend the meeting, but did not because the Somali Transitional Federal Government (TFG) representatives were unable to attend.  Shaykh Sharif told the Egyptians that he plans to nominate himself for President of Somalia, and he asked Egypt to back his nomination.  He also requested that the Government of Egypt (GOE) help train the "Somali Security Forces" that he said will take over for the Ethiopians. Shaykh Sharif told Minister Salah that the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops provides an opportunity to engage with the al-Shibaab because the group no longer has a "raison d' etre."  2. (C) Marzouk told us that Egypt is committed to supporting the Djibouti Peace Accord.  He said that the GOE did not invite Shaykh Aweys' ARS faction in Eritrea because it wanted "to send a message that the Djibouti process is important." Marzouk stated that the GOE is worried that Ethiopian pressure influenced the TFG to avoid the meeting in Cairo. He said that Egypt wants to reach out to Ethiopia on this issue because the two "share common interests in Somalia," but the GOE is aware of the difficulties in reaching out, due to "historical issues between the two countries."  He asked for U.S. assistance in facilitating cooperation between the Cairo and Addis Ababa because "the U.S. has a good relationship with the Ethiopian Government."  3. (C) Comment: The GOE views the Djibouti Peace Accord as the key to fixing Somalia, and it believes that the accord could be in danger. Egypt is also concerned about which groups will fill the security void as Ethiopian forces withdraw.  The GOE is still trying to coordinate a meeting in Cairo that would include Shaykh Sharif and the TFG.  Cairo feels that supporting Shaykh Sharif and the TFG will help to ensure that a moderate government takes power in Somalia. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO2152|08CAIRO2198|08CAIRO2199|08CAIRO2280|08CAIRO2405|08CAIRO2452", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/14/2009 15:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000070  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND DRL/NESCA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2029 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, KIRF, EG SUBJECT: COURTS FINE PRO-GOVERNMENT NEWSPAPERS IN LIBEL CASES  REF: A. 08 CAIRO 2452      B. 08 CAIRO 2405      C. 08 CAIRO 2280      D. 08 CAIRO 2199      E. 08 CAIRO 2198      F. 08 CAIRO 2152 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: ECPO Mincouns William R. Stewart for reason 1.4 (d).  1. (C) On December 21, 2008, a Cairo court ordered the pro-government paper "Al-Ahram" and one of its journalists, Gaber Asfour, to pay 50,000 Egyptian Pounds (8,000 USD) in compensation to Sheikh Youssef El-Bedry for characterizing El-Bedry as a "terrorist" in an August 2007 article.  The "Al-Ahram" article labeled El-Bedry as a "terrorist" in response to his suit against a secular poet, Ahmed Moataz El-Hegazi, who allegedly insulted El-Bedry in one of his poems.  Hafez Abu Seada, Secretary-General of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, told us that the court bowed to pressure from Islamists supporting Sheikh El-Bedry as part of a campaign against secular intellectuals, such as the "Al-Ahram" journalist Asfour.  Moataz El-Feigery, Executive Director of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, commented to us that many judges are religiously observant themselves, and are therefore sympathetic to sheikhs such as El-Bedry.  2. (C) On January 7, a Cairo appeals court ordered Mohammed Ali Ibrahim, editor-in-chief of the pro-government newspaper "Al-Gomhuria," to pay 50,000 Egyptian Pounds (8,000 USD) in compensation to Court of Cassation Judge Mahmoud Mekki for damaging Mekki's reputation.  The court found that the paper reported inaccurately that Judge Mekki participated in the May 2007 Doha Forum on Democracy and Political Reform in the Arab World, which "Al-Gomhuria" described as hostile to Egypt.  In fact, Mekki did not attend the forum. "Al-Gomhuria" had also published another article alleging that Mekki held a 2007 meeting with other judges to plot a coup d'etat against the GOE.  Hisham Kassem, founder of the leading independent newspaper "Al-Masry Al-Youm" commented to us that the GOE had little political interest in either of these two cases, and therefore simply allowed the courts to make independent decisions.  Kassem noted that it is "somewhat unusual" for courts to rule against pro-government papers.  3. (C) Comment:  Recent court decisions against journalists have targeted the independent press for insulting the government or establishment figures (reftels).  In November 2008, a district attorney decided not to file charges against three pro-government papers for violating the gag order on the case against regime insider Hisham Talaat Mustafa for murdering Lebanese pop singer Suzanne Tamim, while the government ordered the trial of journalists and editors from two independent papers, scheduled to begin January 22, for publishing similar information (ref A).  The court decisions against two pro-government papers may serve GOE interests by diluting somewhat the recent series of judgments against the independent press, with the false implication that libel verdicts are apolitical, targeting any paper that violates the law. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO2445", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/15/2009 11:55", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000074  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  DEPT FOR AIAG (AMBASSADOR LANGE AND DAVID WINN), DEPT PASS TO AID (DENNIS CARROLL)  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: TBIO, KFLU, KSTH, PGOV, ECON, KSCA, EAGR, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT'S CHILDREN CONTINUE TO SURVIVE BIRD FLU  REF: 08 CAIRO 02445  Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please handle accordingly.  1. (SBU) Summary and comment: Egypt's Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) has announced Egypt's 52nd human avian influenza (AI) case: a 21-month-old girl from Kerdasa in the Sixth of October Governorate.  The girl is in stable condition at Manshia Al Bakry Hospital in Cairo.  This case marks the continuation of a trend: Egyptian children recover from AI at a remarkable rate. To date, for example, there have been twenty-four confirmed pre-teen H5N1 cases in Egypt.  Twenty-three of them, including all twenty-one of those under the age of ten, survived.  Egypt's teenage and adult AI victims, conversely, do not fare well -- 80% have died. 2. (SBU) Egypt's latest AI victim, the second here in less than a month, was admitted to Imbaba Fever Hospital on January 10, 2009, suffering from high temperature, vomiting and diarrhea. Her doctors administered Tamiflu when they suspected she might be afflicted with AI.  They transferred her to Manshia Al Bakry on January 12th. Both recent victims apparently had contact with dead poultry.  The last two cases mark the end of a seven month respite from AI (ref). 3. (SBU) Comment: While Egypt's children have done remarkably well in surviving AI, older victims do not fare as well: twenty-two out of twenty-eight older AI victims have died.  Data elsewhere suggests there may be some relationship between age and AI survival, but the AI mortality rates in Egypt -- 0% for those under 10, 4% for all pre-teens and 80% for the older AI victims -- seem to be extreme, perhaps suggesting some unique, but as yet undetermined, local influences. Scobey " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/15/2009 14:06", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000077  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, PGOV, PREL, EG SUBJECT: Egypt's Tourism Hurt by the Global Financial Crisis 1.  (U) SUMMARY: Signs of a slowdown in the Egyptian tourism sector are beginning to emerge as a result of the global economic crisis and may have a significant impact on revenues, employment and growth  in 2009.  Tourism in Egypt is the top foreign exchange earner and made up 19% of forex revenues in 2008. Tourism, particularly in the Red Sea beach resorts, is also being hurt by the crisis in Gaza. END SUMMARY.  2.  (U) Tourism is Egypt's largest source of revenue. Over the last twenty five years, Egypt has significantly expanded its tourism infrastructure and diversified its offerings beyond Pharaonic antiquities to include five-star beach destinations and the breadth of Egypt's unique cultural heritage.  The sector has faced setbacks before, such as attacks on tourist targets in the 1990's, but it has recovered and continued growing.  Now, as tourism infrastructure continues to expand, the industry is being confronted by another significant challenge, the global financial crisis.  3.  (U) On January 12, Minister of Tourism Mohamed Zoheir Garanah announced that 12.8 million tourists visited Egypt in 2008, up 15.3% from 2007.  They spent 129.2 million nights in Egypt, up 15.9%.  The sector generated revenues of $10.98 billion in 2008, compared to $9.5 billion in 2007.  Tourism accounts for 6.6% percent of GDP, and contributes indirectly to an additional 4.7%.  It also accounts for 19.3% of foreign exchange revenues, 40% of total services exports, 12.6% of employment, and 4% of total investment.  4.  (U) Egypt's tourism industry is feeling the impact of the global economic slowdown.  This year, hotel bookings are down 30%, and the media reports that occupancy rates in hotels in the Red Sea and Aswan during the New Year's holiday dropped to 45% and 65% respectively. Recently, officials from South Sinai's tourism development office reported that some hotels in Taba and Nuweiba may be shut down as a result of falling demand, and others might be closed until the spring.  Some hotels and tourist villages in southern Sinai and some floating hotels in the Nile between Luxor and Aswan have had to lay off part-time seasonal workers as a result of a decline in the occupancy rate.  In Cairo, major hotels have reported to us that occupancy rates are about fifty percent, compared to a normal rate of 60-70 percent at this time of year. More recently, we have also heard accounts of cancellations related to the crisis in Gaza, particularly in the Red Sea beach resorts, which are popular with Israeli tourists.  5.  (U) In 2008, the largest number of visitors to Egypt came from Russia, followed by Germany, the UK and Italy.  All four countries have recently gone into a recession, and their currencies have depreciated markedly (10-20%) against the Egyptian Pound over the last few months.  The Minister of Economic Development, Osman Mohammed Osman, told the Middle East News Agency that Egypt could lose between $5 billion and $6 billion in foreign revenue in 2009. Last year, Egypt posted real GDP growth of 7.2%, but declines in tourism will undoubtedly affect overall growth, which the World Bank now projects will be 4.5% in the 2008/09 fiscal year.  6.  (U) In response, the Government of Egypt has implemented several measures to address the crisis, including increased marketing, particularly in new markets in Asia and eastern Europe; efforts to improve service quality; and incentives for low-cost air carriers and charter flights.  On January 12 the Ministry of Civil Aviation announced a six-month exemption from take-off and landing fees for charter flights landing at Luxor, Aswan and Abu Simbel airports, provided that companies operate flights three times a week.  7.  (U) Comment:  A slowdown in tourism will have a substantial negative impact on the Egyptian economy and employment.  This, combined with declining Suez Canal revenues and projected declines in worker remittances from the Gulf (septel), spells even more trouble for the economy this year and will present significant challenges for the government. " }
{ "_id" : "07CAIRO2845|07CAIRO3214|08CAIRO2260|08CAIRO2430|08CAIRO2431|08CAIRO783", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/15/2009 15:24", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000079  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA, DRL/NESCA, INL AND INR/NESA NSC FOR PASCUAL AND KUTCHA-HELBLING  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2029 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, EG SUBJECT: GOE STRUGGLING TO ADDRESS POLICE BRUTALITY  REF: A. 08 CAIRO 2431      B. 08 CAIRO 2430      C. 08 CAIRO 2260      D. 08 CAIRO 783      E. 07 CAIRO 3214      F. 07 CAIRO 2845   Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary and comment:  Police brutality in Egypt against common criminals is routine and pervasive.  Contacts describe the police using force to extract confessions from criminals as a daily event, resulting from poor training and understaffing.  Brutality against Islamist detainees has reportedly decreased overall, but security forces still resort to torturing Muslim Brotherhood activists who are deemed to pose a political threat.  Over the past five years, the government has stopped denying that torture exists, and since late 2007 courts have sentenced approximately 15 police officers to prison terms for torture and killings. Independent NGOs have criticized GOE-led efforts to provide human rights training for the police as ineffective and lacking political will.  The GOE has not yet made a serious effort to transform the police from an instrument of regime power into a public service institution.  We want to continue a USG-funded police training program (ref F), and to look for other ways to help the GOE address police brutality.  End summary and comment.  ------------------- A Pervasive Problem -------------------  2. (C) Torture and police brutality in Egypt are endemic and widespread.  The police use brutal methods mostly against common criminals to extract confessions, but also against demonstrators, certain political prisoners and unfortunate bystanders.  One human rights lawyer told us there is evidence of torture in Egypt dating back to the times of the Pharaohs.  NGO contacts estimate there are literally hundreds of torture incidents every day in Cairo police stations alone.  Egyptians are bombarded with consistent news reports of police brutality, ranging from high profile incidents such as accidental but lethal police shootings in Salamut and Aswan this past fall (refs B and C) that sparked riots, to reports of police officers shooting civilians following disputes over traffic tickets.  In November 2008 alone, there were two incidents of off-duty police officers shooting and killing civilians over petty disputes.  The cases against both officers are currently making their way through the judicial system.  3. (C) NGO and academic contacts from across the political spectrum report witnessing police brutality as part of their daily lives.  One academic at the GOE-funded Al-Ahram Center who is a member of the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) policy committee told us of accompanying his sister to a Cairo police station to report her stolen purse.  In front of this academic, the police proceeded to beat a female suspect into confessing about others involved in the theft and the whereabouts of the stolen valuables.  A contact from an international NGO described witnessing police beat the doorman of an upscale Cairo apartment building into disclosing the apartment number of a suspect.  Another contact at a human rights NGO told us that her friends do not report thefts from their apartments because they do not want to subject "all the doormen" in the vicinity to police beatings.  She told us that the police's use of force has pervaded Egyptian culture to the extent that one popular television soap opera recently featured a police detective hero who beats up suspects to collect evidence.  4. (C) Contacts attribute police brutality to poor training, understaffing and official sanction.  Human rights lawyer Mohammed Zarea of the Arab Penal Reform Organization speculated that officers routinely resort to brutality because of pressure from their superiors to solve crimes.  He asserted that most officers think solving crimes justifies brutal interrogation methods, and that some policemen believe that Islamic law sanctions torture.  Moataz El-Feigery of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies commented that a culture of judicial impunity for police officers enables continued brutality.  According to El-Feigery, "Police officers feel they are above the law and protected by the public prosecutor."  Human rights lawyer Negad Al-Borai of the United Group attributed police brutality against common criminals, including the use of electric shocks, to the problem of demoralized officers facing long hours and their own economic problems.  He asserted that the police will even  beat lawyers who enter police stations to defend their clients.  ----------------------- Criminals and Islamists -----------------------  5. (C) Mohammed Zarea explained that since the GOE opened a dialogue with formerly violent Islamists, such as the Islamic Group, following the 1997 Luxor terrorist attacks, torture of Islamists has decreased.  Zarea, who defends several Islamist detainees, claimed that the GOE now treats Islamists better than common criminals.  Some Islamist detainees are "spoiled," he asserted, with regular access to visits from friends and family, decent food and education.  Before the Luxor attacks, Zarea commented, the government would torture Islamist detainees on a daily basis.  6. (C) Attorney Nasser Amin of the Arab Center for the Independence of the Judiciary commented that the GOE is more reluctant to torture Islamists, including Muslim Brotherhood (MB) members, because of their persistence in making public political statements, and their contacts with international NGOs that could embarrass the regime.  Amin speculated that the exception to this rule is when MB members mobilize people against the government in a way the regime deems threatening, such as the April 6 Facebook strike (ref D).  According to Amin, the MB-affiliated blogger and "April 6 Movement" member Mohammed Adel whom police arrested November 20 (ref A) falls into this category, and the GOE is probably torturing him to scare other "April 6" members into abandoning their political activities.  Amin's assessment tracks with "April 6" member Ahmed Saleh's accounts of his own torture and the alleged police sexual molestation of a female "April 6" activist this past November (ref A).  Bloggers close to Mohammed Adel told us that following his arrest he was tortured severely with electric shocks and needed to be hospitalized, but that security forces stopped the torture when he began cooperating.  ---------------------------- GOE Awareness of the Problem ----------------------------  7. (C) Contacts agree that in the past five years, the government has stopped denying that torture exists and has taken some steps to address the problem.  However, contacts believe that the Interior Ministry lacks the political will to take substantive action to change the culture of police brutality.  Nasser Amin asserted that following alleged standing orders from the Interior Ministry between 2000 and 2006 for the police to shoot, beat and humiliate judges in order to undermine judicial independence, the GOE made a political decision in 2007 to allow the courts to sentence police officers to short prison terms.  Amin described the 2007 Imad El-Kebir case as a turning point in influencing the government to permit the sentencing of police officers. (Note:  Per ref E, a court sentenced two police officers to three years in prison in November 2007 for assaulting and sodomizing bus driver Imad El-Kebir.  The case gained notoriety after a cell phone video recording of the torture was posted on YouTube.  End note.)  8. (C) An estimated 13 cases of officers accused of brutality are currently working their way through the courts, and judges have handed down moderate sentences, usually the minimum three-year prison term, against policemen over the past few months, often for heinous crimes.  For example, in October 2008, a court sentenced a policeman to three years in prison for beating and drowning a fisherman.  In November 2008, a court sentenced two policemen to three years in prison for hooking a man to their car and dragging him to his death.  Mohammed Zarea characterized the sentences as "light," in proportion to the crimes, but commented that any prison sentences are an important development toward holding the police responsible for crimes.  Nasser Amin commented that the prison sentences demonstrate that the GOE is providing political space for judges to operate somewhat independently, in response to criticism from foreign governments and international NGOs.  Hossam Bahgat of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights described the sentences as important in drawing public attention to brutal police crimes, and strengthening the hand of advocates who call for reforming systemic problems within the police force.   ----------- GOE Efforts -----------  9. (C) Ambassador Ahmed Haggag, who is detailed from the MFA as the coordinator for the UNDP Human Rights Capacity Building Project, described for us the organization's efforts to train the Interior and Justice Ministries and the Public Prosecutor on human rights issues through lectures and workshops.  Acknowledging that torture is a "problem, but not a daily occurrence," Haggag said the UNDP trains police officers on international human rights conventions, and is trying to convince police officers to solve cases using "legal and ethical means," instead of torture.  Haggag told us he "doubts there is still torture against political prisoners."  Staffers from the quasi-governmental National Council for Human Rights described the council's workshops for police officers where professors give lectures on human rights law and prisoner psychology.  NGO contacts have privately criticized the UNDP project as ineffective, complaining that it has banned credible human lawyers from giving lectures to the police because of their political opposition to the NDP, and instead invites MOI officials complicit in torture to give human rights presentations.  10. (C) In late December 2008, the MOI announced it had suspended 280 police officers for human rights violations and fired 1,164 lower-ranking policemen for misconduct.  Our NGO contacts doubted that the disciplinary actions were human rights related, and speculated that the officers were probably involved in taking bribes and other illegal activity.  Nasser Amin asserted that this announcement does not amount to a serious MOI human rights policy.  Mohammed Zarea expressed skepticism over whether these disciplinary actions will result in long-term positive changes, especially in light of rumors that one of the officers sentenced in the 2007 El-Kebir sodomy case will rejoin the police force as soon as he leaves prison.  11. (C) Former senior Interior Ministry official Ihab Youssef, Director of the NGO "The Police and the People for Egypt" told us in late 2008 that his NGO did not receive many proposals from the public in response to its solicitation for ideas on developing projects to build trust between the police and citizens.  Youssef said that the NGO's Facebook site, which provides a forum for the public to complain about the police, has generated more interest.  In September 2008, Youssef publicly announced the formation of his NGO, which counts establishment figures such as former FM Ahmed Maher among its board members (ref C).  Youssef does not receive GOE funding for the NGO, and has turned to private Egyptian businesses to raise money.  Our NGO contacts have privately dismissed Youssef's efforts as non-substantive "propaganda," and in a recent magazine article, one of Youssef's own board members, retired Ambassador Shoukry Fouad, criticized the NGO as unsuccessful.  ------- Comment -------  12. (C) The GOE has not begun serious work on trying to transform the police and security services from instruments of power that serve and protect the regime into institutions operating in the public interest, despite official slogans to the contrary.  It seems that the government would have the strongest interest in preventing future accidental shootings of innocents, such as the Salamut and Aswan incidents that resulted in riots.  We imagine that halting the torture of common criminals, who are usually poor and voiceless, is lower on the GOE's agenda.  We want to continue USG-funded police training, and we will look for ways to help Ihab Youssef's NGO launch productive work. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO17|09CAIRO2|09CAIRO26|09CAIRO3|09CAIRO63|09CAIRO68|09CAIRO7", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/15/2009 15:54", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 CAIRO 000081  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND NEA/IPA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2019 TAGS: KPAL, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, CASC, EAID, MOPS, EG, IS SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  JANUARY 15  REF: A. CAIRO 0068      B. CAIRO 0063      C. CAIRO 0026      D. CAIRO 0017      E. CAIRO 0007      F. CAIRO 0003      G. CAIRO 0002  CAIRO 00000081  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Minister Counselor William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  ------- Summary -------  1. (SBU) Gilad visits; leaves disappointed. Demonstrations in support of Gaza continue throughout Egypt.  Public opinion is strongly pro-Palestinian and anti-Israeli; Israeli pilgrims are barred from a holy site.  Embassy consular officers prepare for a potential evacuation of American citizens and possibly other nationalities via the Rafah border crossing. USAID procures medical supplies for distribution in Gaza.  An Iranian ship allegedly carrying humanitarian supplies for Gaza was denied entry to an Egyptian port.  End summary.  ----- Rafah -----  2. (S) Egyptian Ministry of Defense sources report Israeli air attacks continued along the Egypt/Gaza borderline.  There were no munitions or collateral damage reported to have struck Egypt.  --------- Diplomacy ---------  3. (C) Israeli envoy Amos Gilad met with EGIS chief Omar Soliman in Cairo January 15.  According to diplomatic sources, the Hamas comments relayed by Soliman were "not what he'd (Gilad) wanted to hear."  No time was announced for a return visit.  Embassy will seek a more detailed read out.  4. (C) Arab League summit:  MFA Cabinet Advisor Mahmoud Afifi told us January 14 that the Qatari initiative for a Doha summit had failed, with the Qataris only obtaining the support of 14 member states (one short of the required two-thirds quorum).  Afifi explained that the Egyptians (along with the Saudis) had called for a discussion of Gaza at the "consultative summit" in Kuwait for Economic and Social Development, as opposed to a separate extraordinary summit, as had been called for by Qatar.  For an "extraordinary summit," the decision making includes the AL SYG and host, as well as the current Arab League Presidency (Syria).  According to Afifi, the decision making process for a "consultative summit,8 includes the Arab League Secretary General (Amre Moussa) and the host country (in this case Kuwait).  This procedural difference would have allowed for Qatar to invite Hamas (and potentially non-Arab states) to the Doha summit, according to Afifi, something the Egyptians adamantly oppose.  (Note:  Arab League rules and procedures are often mystifying; a review of the Arab League charter support Afifi,s argument, but also appears open to other interpretations.  End note.)  5. (C) Gaza-based Hamas representatives held a press conference January 14 in Cairo, at which they appeared to agree in principle to the Egyptian terms for a cease-fire, but also that Hamas had issues with some aspects of Egypt,s plan.  The Hamas representatives also stressed that Hamas has no grievance with Egypt, or its efforts to facilitate a resolution of the crisis.  -------------- Demonstrations --------------  6. (U) Police prevented protestors from demonstrating in front of the Embassy at 1300 local time on January 15.  Calls for the protest originated on a Facebook site, and the leader of the Islamist opposition Labor Party announced he would participate.  We estimate that the police presence in the area of the demonstration was over one thousand personnel, and police stymied protestors, efforts to arrive at the site.  Only about five people, possibly including the Labor Party leader, managed to reach the demonstration site 50 yards north of the Embassy, and police quickly detained them.   CAIRO 00000081  002.2 OF 003   7. (U) The independent press reported that 1,000 protestors from various political groups took part in a conference January 14 in the Nile Delta town of Behira to support Gazans, and that 3,000 mostly Muslim Brotherhood (MB)-affiliated protesters demonstrated January 14 in the coastal town of Port Said.  The MB claimed that 3,000 of its members demonstrated January 14 in the Delta town of Damanhour, 1,000 lawyers from various opposition backgrounds demonstrated January 14 in the Delta town of Kafr El-Sheikh, and 2,000 women demonstrated at the doctors' syndicate in the Delta town of Damietta.  8. (C) A human rights NGO contact told us January 15 he believes that although the Egyptian public is angry and frustrated with the continuing Israeli operations in Gaza, he has observed a growing trend of ordinary Egyptians supporting the GOE's policies of publicly criticizing Hamas, pursuing diplomatic steps toward a cease-fire and protecting Egyptian sovereignty.  He commented that the GOE is trying to disrupt the political opposition's attempts to organize demonstrations by arresting opposition members.  According to press reports quoting MB Supreme Guide Mehdi Akef, 860 MB members have been arrested since December 27, in connection to Gaza-related demonstrations.  -------------- Public Opinion --------------  9. (SBU) On January 14, dueling Gaza-related press conferences were held at parliament, by the ruling party and opposition blocs.  The National Democratic Party (NDP) MP,s focused their comments on praising President Mubarak,s actions to date, and attacking Syria, Iran, Qatar, Hezbollah, and Hamas.  The Muslim Brotherhood (MB) MP,s were harshly critical of GOE actions -- or lack thereof -- to date, and repeated calls for revoking the Camp David Accords, halting gas exports to Israel, cutting diplomatic and trade relations with Israel, and opening the Rafah border crossing.  The MB also called for "Arab countries to have nuclear weapons like Israel."  Independent MP Mustafa al Bakri, who has been linked to the security services in the past, has presented a draft bill to parliament, that would "freeze" the Camp David Accords. The speaker of parliament, Fathi Surour, is unlikely to allow the bill to make it to the parliamentary floor for debate.  10. (SBU) Salafists Declare Border Closing "Un-Islamic": According to opposition newspaper Al Dustour, four influential Egyptian Salafists joined a statement by approximately 100 Muslim scholars from throughout the Arab world criticizing the GoE,s closure of Gaza border crossings as "un-Islamic."  The Egyptians include two Al Azhar University professors, the editor of the Salafist magazine Al Tawheed, and the leader of Al Sunna Al Mohamadeya, one of Egypt,s oldest and largest Salafist social service organizations.  A former member of Egypt,s parliament who is affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood also reportedly joined the statement.  11. (C) Israelis Barred from Pilgrimage Site:  According to press accounts, 5 Israelis who attempted to visit the tomb of Abu Hasirah, a 19th century Jewish mystic, were prevented from doing so yesterday by local security services.  Israeli Jews have regularly visited the site, located in the Nile Delta village of Damanhour, since 1979, especially in the few weeks before and after Abu Hasirah,s January 18 birthday.  12. (C) The pilgrimage has long been controversial.  In 2001, an Alexandria court invalidated a Ministry of Culture decree recognizing the tomb as a historical site and banned the annual celebration of Abu Hasirah,s birthday.  Although the Ministry of Culture appealed that decision, it was upheld in 2004 by Egypt,s Supreme Administrative Court.  Despite the court rulings, the GoE has permitted the pilgrimages and celebration to proceed.  The pilgrimage has been especially controversial this year, with Islamists staging at least one small protest in Cairo.  13. (C) The Israeli Embassy told us on January 15 that it is unaware of any Israeli Jews being turned away from the tomb. The Embassy said it contacted the Israeli organizers of the pilgrimage shortly after the Gaza operation began and suggested that they not arrange the pilgrimage this year. According to the Embassy, the organizers heeded its advice and few, if any, Israeli Jews have traveled to Egypt for the pilgrimage.  14. (C) The Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, an NGO  CAIRO 00000081  003.4 OF 003   focused on religious freedom which has followed the issue closely, told us that it believes the account of the 5 Israeli pilgrims being barred is accurate and that the local government may have legitimate security concerns.  ------------------- Humanitarian Issues -------------------  15. (S) On January 14, 32 Palestinian causalities entered Egypt through the Rafah Terminal for transfer to hospitals in El Arish.  Egypt also delivered 270 tons of medical aid through the Rafah terminal.  No aid was sent through the al-Aouja terminal.  The Red Crescent donated 218 tons of the aid, and the rest was donated by Qatar, Sudan, Turkey, and Morocco.  Also on January 14, an Iranian ship arrived at El Arish sea port claiming to have humanitarian aid for Gaza. Egyptian authorities denied entry to the ship and escorted the ship out to international waters.  16. (SBU) Possible Evacuation of Amcits:  Preparations are being made for the possible evacuation of an unspecified number of American citizens and possibly other nationalities from Gaza through the Rafah border crossing, if the GoE agrees.  The Embassy is working closely with Egyptian authorities to facilitate the evacuation.  17. (SBU) USAID Efforts:  USAID has procured medical equipment and food supplies to distribute to health care facilities in Gaza, including syringes, tubes, gloves, x-ray film, tape, silk for sutures, and bedding (mattresses, blankets, and linens) worth approximately $80,000.  All items have been distributed to the Patient's Friends Benevolent Society and the Al Ahli Hospital in Gaza.  USAID Gaza staff report that UNRWA shelters eat of Khan Younis need food, milk, blankets and mattresses. Families there receive only one meal a day.  18. (U) Media reports Israeli forces have shelled the UN headquarters and other civilian targets in Gaza City, including a hospital. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/19/2009 12:01", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000084  STATE FOR NEA/ELA, NEA/RA, EB USAID FOR MNE USTR FOR MOWREY COMMERCE FOR 4520/ITA/ANESA  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: ECON, EAID, KIPR, EG SUBJECT:  EGYPT TO RATIFY MADRID PROTOCOL  1.  After a December 16 joint Shura Council/People's Assembly Committee decision to approve the Madrid Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks, the Shura Council has approved the treaty for ratification.  The People's Assembly began discussion of the treaty this week.  Egypt has been a signatory of the Madrid Protocol since June 28, 1989 but never ratified the treaty, so it has not entered into force.  We expect the People's Assembly to approve final ratification within the next few weeks.  USAID-funded technical assistance projects have encouraged Egypt's ratification of the Protocol.  2. US-Egyptian trade is likely to benefit from Egypt's accession to the Madrid Protocol.  US businesses will now be able to designate Egypt on their single trademark filing under the Madrid Protocol, rather than having to hire a local agent and file directly in the Egyptian Trademark Office in the Commercial Registry Administration.  There are also other advantages to the Protocol. For example, filings and correspondence can be conducted in the English-language.  Moreover, the Protocol is also beneficial in that it simplifies the subsequent management of a trademark, since a simple, single procedural step serves to record subsequent changes in ownership or the name or address of the holder with WIPO's International Bureau.  3.  The protocol also allows Egyptian businesses to file their trademarks for registration in several foreign countries with a single filing, by simply designating the countries in which they want to register. Egyptian companies will have this advantage in an additional 27 countries or territories that have joined the Protocol but not the Madrid Agreement, including the United States and the European Union. Scobey " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/19/2009 14:06", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000086  SIPDIS  NEA/ELA AND INL/AAE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2019 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EG SUBJECT: DRAFT LETTER ON POLICE PROGRAM GIVEN TO EGYPTIANS  REF: JOHNSON-SCOBEY E-MAILS  Classified By: DCM Matthew H. Tueller for reason 1.4 (d)  1. (C) In a January 14 meeting, DCM passed to General Ali Hegazy, Director of the International Relations Department of the State Security Investigations Service (SSIS), a copy of the draft letter to the GOE regarding the continuation of a USG-funded community policing training program for the Egyptian police (ref e-mails).  Hegazy was puzzled as to why a letter was necessary now, given that the program had already been operational for well over a year.  He noted that he was concerned by two elements - the principle of needing to exchange letters, and the actual content of the U.S. letter. Hegazy stressed his appreciation of U.S. support, and highlighted his enthusiasm for the program: "We are keen to continue the program, and develop and upgrade it. This is a basic principle for us."  Hegazy pledged to study the letter, and then give us his thoughts on it, and the way ahead.  He inquired as to what would happen if SSIS could not agree to an exchange of letters, and the DCM answered that perhaps an alternative channel - such as an exchange of diplomatic notes - could be utilized.  2. (C) Comment: While Hegazy was cordial, it is clear that getting GOE agreement to the current text of the letter will be difficult.  We anticipate a lengthy and challenging set of discussions.  Current funding for the program is due to finish in June 2009. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO17|09CAIRO2|09CAIRO26|09CAIRO3|09CAIRO63|09CAIRO68|09CAIRO7|09CAIRO81", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/19/2009 15:03", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T CAIRO 000088  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND NEA/IPA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2019 TAGS: KPAL, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, CASC, EAID, MOPS, EG, IS SUBJECT: EGYPT:  GAZA ROUND-UP:  JANUARY 18  REF: A. CAIRO 0081      B. CAIRO 0068      C. CAIRO 0063      D. CAIRO 0026      E. CAIRO 0017      F. CAIRO 0007      G. CAIRO 0003      H. CAIRO 0002  Classified By: Minister Counselor William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (SBU) Humanitarian Assistance:  On January 18, 140 tons of medical aid from the Red Crescent, Qatar, Bahrain, and Morocco were delivered through Rafah, along with 42 casualties. The Red Crescent delivered 90 tons of flour and rice through Kerem Shalom and 400 tons of food aid entered through Aouja from Jordan, Morocco, Oman, and Libya.  2. (S) Rafah:  Border is quiet, according to DAO currently at Rafah Terminal.  As of 1:30 pm local, the first Amcit evacuees from Gaza had just come through.  3. (U) Demonstrations:  According to independent press reports, on January 18 MB-supporters staged demonstrations of approximately 1,500 protesters in the towns of Kafr Al-Zayyat and Qaranshu calling for opening the Rafah border crossing, stopping gas exports to Israel and expelling the Israeli ambassador.  On January 18 in Suez, 4,000 MB supporters reportedly demonstrated against Israel's killing of women and children in Gaza.  4. (U) Contacts told us January 18 that the Facebook group that had called for a general strike January 18 changed the date for the strike to January 28, without providing a rationale.  5. (C) On January 19, two young liberal political activists expressed outrage to us about the Israeli operations in Gaza, calling Israel's actions "war crimes."  The activists characterized the conflict as an Israeli "war against the Palestinian people, not Hamas," and asserted that Palestinian resistance is "legitimate, not terrorism."  6. (SBU) On January 17, between 300-600 Muslim Brotherhood (MB) supporters were arrested in connection with a pro-Gaza demonstration in downtown Cairo. The security forces reportedly beat several protestors, amidst a formidable array of riot police and security trucks concentrated around the central Ramses Square. Despite the cease-fire, further protests are reportedly planned for this week.  7. (SBU) On January 18, the MB issued a statement criticizing the January 18 meeting in Sharm El Sheikh, hosted by President Mubarak. The MB statement criticized the "American-Zionist-European war machines and schemes.8 The MB is also leading an Egyptian opposition initiative, "parallel to Qatar,s effort,8 to raise USD 50 million for "the impeached Palestinian government in Gaza8 (aka Hamas) to re-build.  8. (SBU) Speaker of the People,s Assembly, Fathi Surour, in a letter to EU Parliament president Hans-Gert Poettering, called for a fact-finding committee to be organized to investigate Israeli "atrocities8 in Gaza.  9. (SBU) Gaza Donors' Conference:  According to the Norwegian DCM, the Egyptians are planning to host a Gaza donors' conference in Egypt in the "very near future," headed by Mrs. Suzanne Mubarak.  According to the Norwegian DCM, within two weeks after this conference, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC) will host a similar donors' conference likely either in Oslo, Paris, or Prague.  He said the difference between the two conferences will be that the Egypt conference will discuss "little of substance," but will be mainly for public consumption and discussing "big picture generalities," while the AHLC conference will deal with details on how, where and where to spend the pledged funds. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO25101|09CAIRO77", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/20/2009 9:10", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000089  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, PGOV, PREL, EG SUBJECT: Global Financial Slowdown Hits Egypt  REF   A) CAIRO 77  B) 2008 CAIRO 25101.   1. SUMMARY: During the fourth quarter of 2008, Egypt experienced a substantial downturn in its three main sources of revenue and foreign exchange: tourism, worker remittances and Suez Canal fees.  Though the extent of the slowdown is yet unknown, the GOE suggests that Egypt could see a $5-6 billion decrease in revenue in 2009.  End Summary.  2. Each of the top three sources of Egyptian revenue saw a sharp decrease in revenue during the last quarter of 2008.  In an interview on January 14, Minister of Economic Development Osman Mohammed Osman estimated that Egypt could lose between $5-6 billion in foreign revenue in the 2009 year due to the global economic slowdown. In FY2007/2008 (July-June), tourism and worker remittances generated $10.9 billion and $8.56 billion, respectively. The Suez Canal, Egypt's third largest revenue producer, generated $5.2 billion during the same period, a steady increase over previous years.  3. Tourism is Egypt's largest source of revenue and directly or indirectly contributes to 11.3% of GDP. All tourism indicators have shown steady growth in recent years.  Egypt's industry began to feel the impact of the global economic slowdown in the final quarter of 2008, after a good showing the rest of the year.  The tourism industry grew by 25% in 2008, according to the Minister of Tourism, but the final quarter saw a decline of 17.8%.  Hotel bookings were down 30% in 2008 compared to 2007 (ref A).  More recently, the Gaza incursion has led to cancellations at Red Sea and Upper Egypt resorts from European and Israeli tourists.  The GOE has attempted to implement some incentives, such as exempting hotels tourism promotion fees and reducing landing fees for charter flights, but we are not sure this will have a strong impact on the stagnant or downward trend we anticipate in 2009.  Anecdotally, the manager of a major Cairo hotel told us occupancy is running at about 50%, whereas normally it would be more like 65-70%.  Beltone Financial is more optimistic, however, projecting that tourism revenues in FY2008-09 will be roughly consistent with FY2007-08's $10.8 billion.  4. Remittances from Egyptians working abroad sustain millions of Egyptian families.  The country is the sixth largest recipient of remittances among middle income countries.  The Central Bank and the World Bank estimates that Egyptian expatriate workers sent home $8.56 billion in FY2007/2008, six percent of GDP.  The U.S. was the largest single source of remittances, sending $2.8 billion in remittances in FY2007/2008, according to the Central Bank. Like tourism and Suez Canal revenues, remittances have been growing steady in recent years as the Gulf and Middle East economies generally, have been performing well.  According to the Information and Decision Support Center (IDSC), the Egyptian Cabinet's think tank and polling unit, approximately 840,000 Egyptians work in Persian Gulf countries in construction, real estate, financial services and the medical sector. Economic analysts believe that the plummeting price of oil and the bursting of the real estate bubble in the Gulf could cause hundreds of thousands of Egyptian workers in the United Arab Emirates and other Gulf nations to lose their jobs. Sources differ about the overall impact on remittances in the coming year but several leading Egyptian economists speculated in the press that remittances could drop at least 40%.  5. Revenue from Suez Canal transit fees accounted for $5.2 billion in FY2007/2008, 3.4% of GDP. However, the monthly numbers began to fall late in the year and December's revenues were $391.8 million, compared with $419.8 million in November, ending a seven year steady increase.  On an annual basis, revenues still rose by 1.7%. Canal operations have been doubly hit by the combination of global economic slowdown and the rising threat of piracy in the Gulf of Aden (ref B). Suez Canal Authority (SCA) Chairman Ahmed Fadel told the press on January 12 that he expects a 7% decrease in overall traffic through the Canal in 2009 compared to 2008.  Beltone Financial predicts the Canal will generate $4.9 billion in FY2008/2008, a slight drop from the $5.2 billion in the previous fiscal year.  Fadel said that the SCA was holding transit fees steady at 2008 levels, but that he would consider price cuts if the economic downturn continued unabated. SCA is reportedly considering incentives and additional services to attract more traffic.  6. COMMENT:  In recent years, Egypt's economy has become more diverse and better integrated into the global economy.  Egypt has seen several years of strong growth, including 8% GDP growth in FY2007/8. Though the banking sector remains liquid and relatively unscathed from the crisis, the country is beginning to see the indirect impacts from the global slowdown.  Lower global commodity prices may ease some of the stress on Egypt's fiscal spending, but lower export revenues, decreased tourist flow, reduced income from worker remittances and the Suez Canal are likely to reduce overall growth (estimates are in the 4-5% range, compared with the 7-8% in the last three years).  The expected drop in revenue will likely limit the GOE's ability to mitigate the domestic impact of the financial crisis and impair planned infrastructure development and other economic priorities.  The GOE is already planning on 15 billion pounds (US$ 2.7b) in spending to stimulate the economy. Finance Minister Boutros Ghali remains a deficit hawk, and does not want to lose gains in recent years in curbing the deficit.  7.  COMMENT CONT'D:  In addition to the impact on revenues, if there are significant layoffs of Egyptian workers in the Gulf, the GOE faces the possibility of those workers returning to Egypt to look for work, adding to the ranks of the unemployed.  Unskilled workers are plentiful in Egypt and are not likely to find employment, putting additional stress on an already inadequate social safety net.  Over the past two-three years, during the economic boom, many companies complained they were unable to find or retain skilled workers, so skilled workers returning from the Gulf may be able to find jobs at these firms as the economic crisis eases. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO45", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/20/2009 15:21", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000098  SIPDIS  NSC FOR PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/20/2019 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KDEM, KISL, PA, IS, EG SUBJECT: GAZA: REVERBERATIONS WITHIN EGYPT  REF: A. CAIRO 45      B. 63      C. 68      D. 81      E. 88 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: DCM Matthew H. Tueller, for reason 1.4 (d)  1. (C) Summary: The Gaza crisis has inflamed a visceral hatred of Israel among Egyptians, and deepened disaffection for the Mubarak regime, furthering negative views of Mubarak as a "Western puppet."  While GOE efforts to counter the negative propaganda may soften current hard feelings, the immediate perception among non-elite Egyptians is that Hamas "won," and many are applauding that, thrilling to the narrative of a "heroic resistance movement" successfully standing up to Israel's military might.  The opposition Muslim Brotherhood (MB) successfully claimed the mantle of defender of the Palestinians, and, in the face of withering government security, organized the largest nationwide series of demonstrations in Egypt since the anti-Iraq war protests of March 2003, thereby showcasing its strength and ability, unique among Egyptian political forces, to move Egyptians to the streets en masse.  End summary.  ------------------------------------- ANGER WITH ISRAEL; SYMPATHY FOR HAMAS -------------------------------------  2. (C) While Cairo's intellectual elite has a nuanced understanding of the Gaza crisis, and is broadly supportive of the GOE's actions, a larger segment of "ordinary" Egyptians are furious with both the Israelis and their own government. The searing images of dead Palestinian women and children have, for the moment, inflamed a visceral hatred of Israelis, particularly among Egypt's younger generation. Some contacts tell us that the crisis was a "seminal moment," akin to the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, in hardening attitudes towards Israel, and furthering an abiding bitterness and sense of injustice.  A few contacts predict that Egyptians are simply caught up in the heat of the moment, and their anger will soon subside, similar to diminished outrage after the 1982 and 2006 Lebanon wars; others opine that animosity over Palestinian civilian deaths will "linger for years."  3. (C) Certainly, the widespread perception among Egyptians is that Hamas "won," and many are applauding that, thrilling to the narrative of a "heroic resistance movement" successfully surviving all that Israel's military might could throw at it.  Scant attention is being paid to Hamas-Fatah rivalries; currently, Hamas is the face of all Palestinians, the "martyrs" whose people have paid a steep price in taking on the Israelis, and an outpouring of sympathy and support is tangible in conversations with middle and lower-class Egyptians.  Even those few Egyptians who express doubts about Hamas' role still emotionally feel that Egypt "should have done more" to support Palestinians against the common enemy of Israel. As the crisis continued and Arab satellite TV channels broadcast graphic images of civilian deaths, many Egyptians began to conceptualize the conflict as an Israeli war against the Palestinian people, not against Hamas.  --------------------- SCORN FOR MUBARAK ... ---------------------  4. (C) While sympathy and admiration for Hamas is on the upswing, public disaffection for the Egyptian regime seems to have deepened. The GOE's stance during the crisis has furthered negative perceptions of the government, and President Hosni Mubarak in particular, as a "stooge," "Western puppet," "morally bankrupt," and someone who equates his interests fully with those of Israel and the U.S..  One leading ruling party official lamented to us that "if Hamas is perceived as having won, it will be extremely damaging to moderates here ... there is so much respect for Hamas for standing up to the Israeli war machine, and it is difficult for us to compete with that."  While foreign criticism of Egypt during the crisis, particularly from Qatar and Hezbollah, caused Egyptians (who tend to share a profound nationalism) to bristle and rally around the flag, several contacts report that "the reality is, we are all ashamed of how the government handled itself."  5. (C) Some local analysts have pointed to apparent class divides on the issue, observing that while the elite largely supports the government, poorer Egyptians, "who share with Palestinians a common experience of dispossession and oppression" are generally angry with Mubarak.  At some pro-Gaza demonstrations, we also noticed this metaphor of working-class identification with Palestinians, with the  CAIRO 00000098  002 OF 002   government cast as the loathed Israelis; as riot police hauled away would-be demonstrators after Friday prayers, nearby shop-owners and passers-by often muttered, "They treat us like Israel treats the Palestinians!"  6. (C) Conversely, some working-class Egyptians, while outraged over Gaza, are largely caught up in their struggles to put food on the table, and see the Gaza war as having little to do with their daily lives.  Some more sophisticated bloggers and activists have expressed to us appreciation for Mubarak's emphasis on protecting Egyptian interests and sovereignty during the crisis.  Although they sympathize intensely with the Palestinian people, they do not want Egypt to be pressured into taking a direct role in Gaza.  These contacts see Egyptian interests as coming first, and they reference Hamas' January 2008 border breach as evidence that the Palestinians pose some danger to Egypt.  Most lower-income Egyptians we spoke with, however, do not take such a measured view.  -------------------------------------- ... AND A RESURGENT MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD --------------------------------------  7. (C)  The most striking images from Egypt during the Gaza crisis were the series of sustained, nationwide pro-Gaza demonstrations, largely organized by the opposition Muslim Brotherhood (MB) (refs A-E).  Over the past year, the government has vigorously targeted the MB - arresting senior leaders and putting them before military tribunals, detaining hundreds of more junior members - and the conventional Cairene wisdom had been that the Islamist organization was weakened.  Nonetheless, the MB was able to capitalize on pro-Palestinian sentiment during the crisis, claiming the mantle of defender of the Palestinians, and, in the face of withering government security, organizing the largest series of demonstrations in Egypt since the anti-Iraq war demonstrations of March 2003.  In the last week of the crisis alone, we estimate that between 150,000-300,000 Egyptians participated in MB-organized demonstrations across the country.  The MB also demonstrated an ability to enforce strict discipline during demonstrations, with protests largely segregated by gender, and focused on Palestinians. While a certain chicken and the egg conundrum is at play (Were Egyptians protesting about Gaza because they support the MB? Or did they participate in MB-organized demonstrations because they were angry about Gaza?), the incontrovertible fact is that it was the MB that shepherded the protests, and that it is currently the only political force that has such an ability to get Egyptians to the streets en masse.  ------- COMMENT -------  8. (C) In an Egyptian context, where protests rarely exceed 10,000 participants, the sustained large demonstrations over the past few weeks were highly unusual.  Also notable was the government's near-zero tolerance, after the first week of the crisis, for protests in the capitol.  While demonstrations proliferated elsewhere across the country, the security forces, by the thousands, rigorously policed any venue in Cairo where a demonstration was reported to be forming, likely signaling GOE sensitivity to the unfavorable optics of a large, implicitly anti-government event in the city. Overall, the Gaza crisis reinforced and deepened the antipathy of Egyptians towards Israel, highlighted the MB's popular resonance and PR-savvy ability to tap into heightened emotions surrounding the crisis, and underlined the overwhelming control of the Egyptian security forces.  SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/21/2009 12:23", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T CAIRO 000102  NOFORN SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND PM  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/08/2028 TAGS: PREL, PTER, MOPS, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT:  REQUESTING GOE SEIZURE OF M/V MONCHEGORSK  REF: HALE-SCOBEY EMAILS OF 1/20/09  Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S/NF) Summary:  Ambassador met with Chief of the Foreign Minister's Cabinet Ambassador Wafaa Bassim on January 21 to request the GoE's assistance in preventing the passage through Egyptian waters of the M/V Monchegorsk, a Cypriot-flagged merchant vessel which is carrying ammunition, explosives, and IED-making materiel from Iran to Syria. Bassim appeared not to know about the vessel.  She took onboard the information and promised to relay it to the appropriate GoE authorities.  She also advised us to raise the issue with Egyptian General Intelligence (EGIS), and with Military Intelligence.  The Ambassador stressed the importance of moving quickly, as the vessel is reportedly only 36 hours from Egyptian waters, and is scheduled to arrive at Port Suez to begin its transit of the Suez Canal on January 23rd.  Bassim acknowledged the need for a quick response.  Separately, the Embassy's Chief of the Office of Military Cooperation has delivered this information to the Ministry of Defense, and ORA chief will raise with EGIS.  DAO will also deliver the information to the Egyptian military intelligence branch.  End summary.  2. (S/NF) The Ambassador met with Ambassador Bassim (Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit is out of town) on January 21 to request the GoE seize the M/V Monchegorsk before it reaches its destination of Tartus, Syria.  (ECPO Min Couns and MFA cabinet officer Hatem El-Atawy attended as note takers.)  The Ambassador explained that the Russian master of the vessel agreed to "compliant" boarding and inspection by the USS San Antonio, operating as part of CTF-51.  The USN inspection of the vessel revealed that it is carrying 97 containers, 83 of them labeled "1.3 Rated Explosives," consigned to the International Shipping Agency of Latakia, Syria.  The USS San Antonio was able to inspect 55 containers, and found many mis-labeled boxes, some containing IED-making materiel including Explosively Formed Projectiles (EFPs), detonation cord, and other hazardous materiel.  3. (S/NF) The Ambassador stressed that we were seeking Egypt's cooperation in seizing the vessel based on UNSCR 1747, which prohibits Iran from exporting arms and related materiel.  Ambassador Bassim asked why the U.S. did not simply seize the vessel itself.  The Ambassador explained that the USN did not believe it had legal authority to act in international waters and, as a practical matter, the cargo could not be fully inspected or off-loaded while at sea.  The U.S. believed that Egypt could act under UNSCR 1747 since the cargo would pass through its territory.  4. (S/NF) El-Atawy asked if the USN vessel which detained the MV Monchegorsk was attached to CTF-150 or CTF 151, and whether or not it was operating in the Red Sea.  We subsequently confirmed and relayed to the MFA that the USS San Antonio, which detained and inspected the MV Monchegorsk, is part of CTF-51, patrolling off the Horn of Africa. (Comment:  The Egyptians are particularly sensitive about naval operations within the Red Sea.  End comment.)  5. (S/NF) Bassim offered no substantive response to our request for assistance in preventing it from transiting Egyptian waters, but promised to assure its prompt review by appropriate parties.  The Ambassador stressed the need for a quick response to our request, as the MV Monchegorsk would enter Egyptian waters in 36 hours (i.e., at approximately 2200 hrs. on January 22).  Bassim also recommended that we relay the request directly to EGIS and to MoD, which the Embassy already had underway. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/21/2009 15:24", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000104  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/ELA AND CA/OCS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PARM, PGOV, PTER, KPAL, CASC, IS, EG, XF SUBJECT: GAZA EVACUEES DESCRIBE "ORDEAL," ASSERT WAR STRENGTHENED HAMAS  1. (SBU) Summary:  Three Palestinian-American familes evacuated from Gaza into Egypt on January 19 described for us their "horrifying ordeal" trying to survive Israeli attacks. They recounted the emotional trauma both they and their children experienced in the face of "primitive" living conditions and constant Israeli attacks.  One Amcit noted that his family fled from "unlivable" conditions in Gaza City to the relative safety of Rafah where there was some food and electricity.  This Amcit told us he believed that Gazans were on the verge of revolting against Hamas before the war because of the dire economic conditions, but that the Israeli attacks had strengthened Hamas.  End summary.  2. (SBU) On January 20, we spoke to three Palestinian-American families who exited Gaza through the Rafah crossing into Egypt January 19, with embassy assistance.  The families went through consular processing at the embassy January 20 in order to travel to the U.S., and we expect that all family members will receive the requisite documents to leave for the U.S. in the coming weeks.  Two of the Amcit husbands described how they had lived in the U.S. separated from their families, in one case for three years, while they waited in vain for Israel to allow their families to leave Gaza for Immigrant Visa interviews at Embassy Tel Aviv or CG Jerusalem.  They plan now to return to their businesses in the U.S. with their families.  The third family, a young married couple, plans to live in North Carolina with the wife's Amcit mother, and the husband, a physics student, hopes to continue his studies in the U.S.  ----------------- Surviving the War -----------------  3. (SBU) The families described their experiences in Gaza during the Israeli attacks as a "horrifying ordeal," living on the run as they tried to avoid air strikes and sustain themselves.  One of the Amcit husbands, a 33 year-old who owns a cell phone company in Miami, told us how he and his wife, who is three-months pregnant, fled their home in Gaza City for the relative safety of Rafah where his sister lives.  He said that Gaza City had become "almost unlivable," with constant Israeli barrages and acute shortages of necessities.  He noted that his mother, who remained in Gaza City during the war, went without food and electricity for two weeks.  In Rafah, he said, there was some electricity, food and water, but also constant danger from Israeli aerial bombardment of the Philadelphi Corridor, and missile strikes on the homes of Hamas supporters.  He told us that in Rafah food shops located away from the Philadelphi Corridor continued to operate throughout the war.  4. (SBU) Another Amcit, a 43 year-old husband and father of three small children who owns a food business in Houston, became emotional when recounting his family's experiences in Khan Younis during the war.  He told us that his children were horrified by the nightly Israeli bombings, and that his wife, who was in shock from the attacks and the death of her nephew in an Israeli strike, was unable to comfort them.  He and wife told us that they lived in fear of an Israeli missile killing them at any time.  Without gas or electricity and unable to venture outdoors due to the fighting, the family was forced to cook over open fires inside their apartment.  He noted that since June 2008, the family did not have any cooking gas because of the economic blockade on Gaza, but they had been able to cook over "primitive" open fires outdoors "like our parents and grandparents did in the 1940's and 50's."  --------------------- Life Under Hamas Rule ---------------------  5. (SBU) The 33 year-old Amcit told us that Gazans' anger at Hamas was on the rise before Israel's attacks began.  He commented that although the overall Gazan economy markedly deteriorated after June 2007 because of the embargo, the increase in smuggling allowed Gazans new access to certain luxury goods.  He said that the acute economic difficulties resulting from the embargo had caused "most Gazans to oppose Hamas" although people were afraid to take any action because of the climate of fear that Hamas had created.  He described Gaza as "at the breaking point" before the war, and predicted that Gazans "would have revolted against Hamas."  However, he asserted, the war strengthened Hamas by making the population much more sympathetic to the Hamas leadership.  He commented on the irony that Israel's attempt to damage Hamas had only made the organization more powerful.  "Hamas is much stronger  now," he opined.  He speculated that the majority of Gazans opposed the rocket fire by Hamas and other Palestinian groups into Israel for only bringing "despair and destruction to Gaza."  He told us that even during the war, Gazans did not view the rockets as defending them, but as only prolonging their suffering.  6. (SBU) This Amcit told us that Hamas' hold on power in Gaza was tenuous enough that the organization was wary of creating additional problems for itself by strictly mandating Islamic practices.  He said women were free to drive and work, and that Hamas did not "want to push it."  He noted that Hamas has been able to provide basic public services during its rule, but that, in retrospect, the Palestinian Authority (PA) was more efficient, although Gazans hated the personal corruption of PA officials who "lived in villas and drove luxury cars."  He commented that Hamas brought order to Gaza by dealing harshly with tribal feuds.  He explained that Hamas' summary executions of those accused of tribal killings had succeeded in decreasing the number of tribal clashes.  He expressed hope that the new U.S. administration would pressure both Israel and the Palestinians to engage in a "truthful peace process" that will bring results.  What most Gazans want now, he commented, is for their children to be able to sleep at night without enduring F-16 raids. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO1192|08CAIRO1643|08SECSTATE127448", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/22/2009 10:49", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000106  SIPDIS  DOL/ILAB FOR MCCARTER; DRL/ILCSR FOR DANG  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ELAB, EIND, ETRD, PHUM, SOCI, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT: RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR CHILD LABOR INFORMATION FOR TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT ACT REPORT  REF: A. 08 SECSTATE 127448      B. 08 CAIRO 1192      C. 08 CAIRO 1643  1. SUMMARY: The Government of Egypt (GOE) continues to make progress towards restricting and regulating child labor.  In June 2008, Egypt's Parliament passed a comprehensive set of amendments to the Child Protection Law raising the minimum age for employment from fourteen to fifteen years, and the minimum age for seasonal employment from twelve to thirteen years.  The amendments also criminalize trafficking in children.  The GOE and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) continue working together, including through a World Food Program project financed by the U.S. Department of Labor, on child labor-related issues and enforcement.  As requested by reference A, the following information updates developments in child labor in Egypt and the information contained in the 2007 Trade and Development Act Report Egypt chapter.  END SUMMARY.  LAWS AND REGULATIONS PROSCRIBING THE WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR  2. On June 7, 2008, Egypt's People's Assembly approved a series of amendments to Egypt's Child Protection Law which raised the minimum working age for children and criminalized trafficking in children (ref B).  The amendments raised minimum working ages from fourteen to fifteen years for regular employment and from twelve to thirteen years for seasonal employment.  (Source:  Law 126 of the Year 2008 on Amending Provisions of the Child Law.)  3. The amendments also criminalize trafficking in children and establish penalties for the offense.  Specifically, the provision bans any "abuse, trafficking, sexual harassment, and commercial or economic abuse of children."  The amendments establish a punishment of at least five years imprisonment and a fine of between LE 50,000 ($9,260) and LE 200,000 ($37,000) for anyone who "buys, sells, or offers a child for sale" or anyone who "participates in transferring a child as a slave for sexual or commercial exploitation."  The law was developed and approved through the efforts of Egypt's quasi-governmental National Council for Childhood and Motherhood (NCCM).  REGULATIONS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF PROSCRIPTIONS AGAINST THE WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR (Section B)  4. Egypt has ratified ILO conventions 138 regarding the Minimum Age for Admission to Employment and 182 concerning Prohibiting the Worst Forms of Child Labor.  In furtherance of Egypt's convention obligations, the Ministry of Manpower and Migration (MOMM) has established a list of 44 hazardous occupations and industries where children under age fifteen, and in some cases seventeen, are prohibited from working.  5. The GOE appears committed to enforcing child labor laws, with First Lady Suzanne Mubarak actively involved in the issue through her position as President of the NCCM.  The MOMM, working with the NCCM, generally is effective in enforcing child labor regulations in the formal sector, especially in state-owned enterprises.  Enforcement in the informal sector is lax, particularly in villages and poorer urban areas where children work to support their families, especially with respect to children working as domestic servants, in the agricultural sector, or under the auspices of family members.  There were, however, a number of local press reports during the year of enforcement actions in the informal sector.  In most reported cases, children were removed from the work environment and legal action was taken against the employers who were found to be in violation of child labor-prohibiting legislation.  Over the past year, the local press reported on number of arrests of individuals coercing street children to beg, steal and work in informal activities.  WHETHER THERE ARE SOCIAL PROGRAMS TO PREVENT AND WITHDRAW CHILDREN FROM THE WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR (Section C)  6. The United Nations World Food Program, working in conjunction with the NCCM and NGO partners, continues to implement a U.S. Department of Labor financed project with the objective of withdrawing child workers from the labor force and protecting at risk children.  The NCCM, has created a 24-hour child labor hot-line, and working with the ILO and NGOs, implemented a number of awareness raising programs including the Supporting Children's Rights through Education, the Arts and Media (SCREAM) program and the Red Card Against Child Labor campaign.   DOES EGYPT HAVE A COMPREHENSIVE POLICY AIMED AT THE ELIMINATION OF THE WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR (Section D)  7. The NCCM working with the MOMM, Egyptian Trade Union Federation (ETUF), ILO, United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ministries of Social Affairs, Agriculture, Education, Health and Interior developed in 2006 the "First National Strategy for the Progressive Elimination of Child Labor."  The NCCM continues to work with its partners to implement the strategy.  In June 2008, Suzanne Mubarak chaired a conference organized by the NCCM entitled "A Future Without Child Labor" in furtherance of the implementation of a national strategy.  The high-level involvement in child-related issues lends importance and political weight to the enforcement and speed at which policies and projects are implemented.  IS EGYPT MAKING CONTINUAL PROGRESS TOWARD ELIMINATING THE WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR (Section E)  8. Challenges remain, but the GOE appears to be making some progress toward eliminating the worst forms of child labor, including through the June 2008 passage of the comprehensive amendments to the Child Law.  While child labor, driven by poverty and traditional practice remains a problem, NGOs report that public and GOE awareness of the problem and concern for the well-being of impoverished children appears to be on the rise. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO136", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/22/2009 14:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000107  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/22/2019 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KPAL, PREF, EAID, PHUM, KISL, ECON, IS, EG SUBJECT: NORTH SINAI REACTION TO GAZA CONFLICT  REF: 08 CAIRO 136  Classified By: Minister Counselor for Economic and Political Affairs William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (SBU) Summary: During a trip to the North Sinai Governorate on January 19-20, we met with local leaders and discussed the recent fighting in Gaza, and its effect on the neighboring communities in Egypt.  All the leaders, with whom we met, noted that the local population--which is a mixture of Bedouins, Egyptian-born Palestinians and Nile Valley Egyptians--is angry about Israeli military action and psychologically affected by the conflict.  Residents of Egyptian Rafah heard the nightly bombings in Gaza and some buildings in the town were damaged by stray ordnance. Residents of North Sinai are participating in providing humanitarian aid to Gaza.  Many Sinai residents are volunteering to unload aircraft and load trucks with medical and food supplies.  Additionally, many residents are donating blankets, food, and basic medical supplies for the people of Gaza. The local leaders feel that the conflict led the local population to more readily accept Islamic extremism, and makes peace in the region more elusive. End Summary.  -------------------------------- Anger at Israeli Attacks on Gaza --------------------------------  2. (C) North Sinai Governor General Mohammed Abd al-Fadil Shousha told us that the local populace has been adversely affected by the war in Gaza.  He said "many people in North Sinai have Palestinian roots," and are personally affected by the conflict.  Fayez Abu Harb, a top Bedouin representative and a member of the Egyptian Parliament invited us to a Bedouin council meeting in Shaykh Zuwayd.  During the meeting, he told us that North Sinai is a "border governorate" and incidents in Gaza "strongly impact" on the Palestinian and Bedouin people in Sinai because they have familial ties to people in Gaza.  He stated that families in Egyptian Rafah listened to the nightly bombings on Gaza.  Abu Harb said many families had left Rafah temporarily to escape the danger and omnipresent reminders of war. (see septel reporting economic situation in North Sinai).  3. (C) In a free flowing discussion during the Bedouin council meeting, many of the tribal shaykhs expressed their anger and disbelief at the brutality of the Gaza conflict. They accused Israel of using "illegal phosphorous weapons," and asserted that these weapons were "provided by the U.S." Some shaykhs said they personally helped victims, burned by the weapons, enter Egypt for medical treatment.  Bedouin council members also told us that some buildings in Egyptian Rafah were damaged by the Israel air strikes.  Abu Harb told us that despite the anger over the Gaza conflict, he asked the Palestinian population "not to violate Egypt's sovereignty by illegally crossing the border."  He said that unlike the past, the last three weeks passed with "no major violation" (reftel).  --------------------------------------------- ---- Egyptian Efforts to Assist and Contain the Crisis --------------------------------------------- ----  4. (C) As we entered the room for our meeting with Governor Shousha, he was involved in a conversation with the Red Crescent about the amount of aid going from Egypt into Gaza. He was also trying to ascertain damages to buildings in Egyptian Rafah due to Israeli bombing.  Shousha told us that "a lot" of medical supplies passed through El Arish into Gaza.  He believes that there are enough medical supplies in Gaza, but said that he understood that food is still in short supply.  5. (C) Shousha told us that El Arish Hospital has been designated as a triage site for Palestinians, wounded in the Gaza conflict. He said that approximately 40 people a day are being brought from Gaza to the hospital in El Arish.  (Note: During our time in El Arish, we regularly witnessed convoys of orange ambulances coming from the border area to the El Arish hospital. End Note.) Shousha said most of the wounded from Gaza, after being evaluated in El Arish, are sent on to Cairo and other countries for treatment.  He said this is because the Government of Egypt wants to maintain El Arish hospital "as a reserve for large, unexpected inflows of wounded."  6. (C) Ahmed Orabi, President of the North Sinai Red Crescent  CAIRO 00000107  002 OF 002   Society, told us that his organization is sending 40-50 trucks of medicine per day into Gaza through Rafah, and another 30 tractor trailers through the al-Auja (Nitzanna) crossing. He stated that the Egyptian Red Crescent sent 100 tons of medical supplies into Gaza. Orabi told us that the Red Crescent was also making preparations to establish temporary "refugee camps" in Egyptian Rafah for the 500-600 Palestinians who crossed the border during the conflict.  He said that Egyptians whose homes were destroyed will also temporarily reside in the camps.  He asked for U.S. assistance in providing tents and water for this effort.  He hoped that "the American image could be helped by providing tents, food and water for those in the camps."  ------------------------------------------ North Sinai Populace Providing Aid to Gaza ------------------------------------------  7. (C) Governor Shousha told us that the local population responded to the war in Gaza by donating food, blankets and medicine. Orabi stated that this was the first time that he felt the "pulse of the Egyptian people" as a result of events in Gaza.  He stated that there were approximately 120 volunteers per day that would come to assist in emptying planes and filling trucks with humanitarian aid supplies. Orabi said that "many of the volunteers are students that come to volunteer after finishing their end of semester exams."  (Note: During our 1 1/2 hour meeting at the Red Crescent, we witnessed individuals, students, and families continually arriving with donations of blankets, basic medical supplies, and food for the people of Gaza. End Note.)  ----------------------------- Consequences of Gaza Conflict -----------------------------  8. (C) North Sinai Red Crescent Vice President Adel el-Ghaly opined that "Israel lost the war because support for Hamas has grown in the region and in North Sinai."  Dr. Muhammad Nasser and Dr. Ali El Kassas, two professors at the local branch of Suez Canal University, echoed this sentiment.  They stated that the students traditionally viewed events in Gaza as part of the greater "Palestinian cause," but now many have begun to see events in terms of "Israel versus HAMAS."  Abu Harb told us that the conflict in Gaza "hurt the moderate voices in the area."  He said that in addition to widespread sympathy for the victims in Gaza, sympathy for more radical Islamists has grown.  9. (C) Abu Harb told us that he hoped the new U.S. administration would be able to resolve the Palestinian/Israel issues.  He said that a solution would allow the opening of the Rafah border crossing, and create trade opportunities for people in the North Sinai Governorate and Gaza.  He said the North Sinai Governorate was in dire need of economic opportunities (septel), and because of the situation between Gaza and Israel there is currently no legitimate trade across the border.  10. (C) Comment: While there was anger at the situation in Gaza, we were welcomed by all the leaders in North Sinai. All expressed a desire to engage with the United States and recognized the U.S. role in resolving problems in the region.  With the exception of one angry demonstration on January 9, the focus in North Sinai is on helping their "brothers" in Gaza recover from the recent conflict by providing humanitarian aid.  However, we noticed that a number of houses on the main road from Bir el-Abd to Rafah were flying Egyptian and HAMAS flags.  A few houses were flying the Fatah flag.  We had not witnessed this phenomenon on previous trips to the peninsula.  This appears to confirm, at least for the present, some of the local leaders' concerns that the recent conflict led people in North Sinai to increase support for the "HAMAS cause" rather than the "Palestinian cause." SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/22/2009 14:37", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000108  SIPDIS  NSC FOR SHAPIRO AND PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2019 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KPAL, IS, EG SUBJECT: JANUARY 18 SHARM AL SHAYKH: THE ANTI-DOHA CONFERENCE  Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey Reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  Egypt convened on less than 24 hours notice, six European leaders, King Abdullah of Jordan, President Gul of Turkey, Palestinian President Abbas, and the SYGs of the UN and Arab League for a meeting in Sharm Al Shaykh January 18.  The purpose of the meeting was the meeting itself * a demonstration of key support for Egyptian leadership in resolving the Gaza crisis.  The Egyptians did not invite the U.S. or Russia to attend, although on the advice of the Secretary they belatedly included resident ambassadors to "observe."  No statement was issued, although a press conference was held following the hour-long session that essentially allowed each participant to reprise their interventions for the press.  2.  (C)  European participants were:  UK Prime Minister Brown, French President Sarkozy, Spanish Prime Minister Zapatero, German Chancellor Merkel, Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi, and Czech Prime Minister Topolanek in his EU Presidency capacity.  Sarkozy won the award for most flattery of Egyptian President Mubarak during his rambling five minute intervention, while Spanish Prime Minister Zapatero demonstrated the greatest personal grief on behalf of the Palestinians.  Overall, the participants focused on: support for Egypt, encouragement to all the parties to respect the ceasefire, immediate attention to humanitarian needs, and addressing steps to assure the ceasefire be durable -- regular opening of all border crossings, prevent Hamas from rearming, reconstruction needs, and the urgent need to reenergize efforts to complete the peace process.  Many participants anticipate that Egypt will host a conference in early/mid February to address urgent humanitarian needs of the Gazans.  End Summary  ------------- Interventions -------------  3.  (SBU)  President Mubarak spoke first, noting signs that a ceasefire may be taking place.  Work remained to stabilize the ceasefire and assure the Israeli withdrawal.  Egypt was working hard to arrange opening of the border crossings and to assure the blockage is lifted.  Egypt, he said, was working hard to secure its borders and was ready to accept offers of new technology and equipment from the U.S. and Germany; he reiterated that Egypt would not accept foreign observers on the Egyptian side of the border.  He saw the need for reconstruction and offered that Egypt would host an initial meeting.  Egypt would also continue its efforts to forge Palestinian reconciliation between the PA and "factions," which he saw as important for stability.  The main requirement, however, was pushing forward to finding a genuine peace between Israel and the Palestinians.  4.  (SBU)  Highlights of Interventions:  --President Sarkozy focused on support for Egypt and Abu Mazen; he called on the U.S. to engage quickly and endorsed the two state solution.  He said France was also ready to cooperate on counter smuggling efforts.  --Prime Minister Brown also noted strong support for Egypt and called for all parties to respect the ceasefire in order to allow urgent humanitarian access; he spoke to the need both for regular open border crossings as well as for preventing arms smuggling; he stressed need to build on Arab Peace Initiative.  --Chancellor Merkel reiterated the humanitarian and ceasefire concerns of her peers and also pledged that the EU would work with the new U.S. president to address all the issues at play.  She said Germany would talk to Israel and others about the need to monitor sea and land borders, stressing that Germany had confidence in Egypt and was not talking about putting forces in Egypt, only technical assistance.  --King Abdullah of Jordan had the shortest remarks.  He said that the Arab Peace Initiative must survive and encouraged his EU colleagues to reach out early to the new U.S. administration to engage early in search for durable peace. If progress were not made in 2009, he predicted they leaders would be reprising the current meeting in the future.  --President Gul spoke to the human tragedy of Gaza and said that Turkish diplomatic efforts in Damascus were in support of the Egyptian led effort.  He called for ceasefire, open  CAIRO 00000108  002 OF 002   borders, stopping smuggling, and reconstruction.  He said there needed to be a mechanism to oversee the ceasefire and called for the revival of the peace process on all its tracks.  --Prime Minister Zapatero spoke mostly to the humanitarian disaster and the "23 days of sorrow and horror," pledging Spanish help.  --Prime Minister Berlusconi recalled spending millions in the 90s to reach peace, saying that he had started a Marshall Plan for the Palestinians, working with President Bush, but reached only 6% of his goals.  He described Italian humanitarian efforts underway and pledged Italian readiness to supply sea support to counter maritime smuggling.  --SYG Ban Ki Moon described his meeting earlier that day with Syrian President Bashar Al Assad and was encouraged that Syria would support a ceasefire.  He said that he would launch an immediate assessment mission to look at what Gaza needed immediately and would announce a flash appeal within about 10 days.  He anticipated a subsequent report and meeting in Cairo to address urgent assistance needs within about three weeks.  He said that in order to prevent a recurrence, a fixed system to assure open border crossings was needed via a return to the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access and that Palestinian reconciliation must be achieved.  --SYG Amre Moussa focused on need for Israel to withdraw.  He criticized the focus on smuggling, stating that smuggling resulted from the Israeli blockade of Gaza and the closure of the border crossings.  He emphasized the requirements of the Fourth Geneva Convention.  He ended by stressing the need for real, quick progress on the peace process itself; he noted that some already called for a withdrawal of the Arab Peace Initiative; he said that if the "international parties did not use it," he predicted the Arab Peace Initiative would not be kept on the table.  --President Abbas recognized that Egypt had shouldered many burdens for the sake of the Palestinians.  He denounced the Israeli massacre and genocide of the past three weeks.  He reiterated the need for a consensus Palestinian government to carry them toward elections.  The first step was the need to get Rafah reopened along the 2005 AMA.  He asked again for international forces to protect Palestinians and reaffirmed his support for a two state solution.  He warned against thinking the Arab Peace Initiative could be retracted, noting it had been endorsed by successive Arab League and OIC summits.  ---------------- Donor Conference ----------------  4.  (C)  EU Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner told the Ambassador during lunch that the EU hoped to separate discussion of reconstruction from humanitarian needs.  She was comfortable with the proposed meeting in Egypt in February, but insisted that it should not be called a "donors conference" but an "immediate needs conference."  She said the EU would not be ready to put serious money into reconstructing Gaza until a stable, PA-controlled government would be in place.  She hoped that holding out pledges for reconstruction contingent upon Palestinian reconciliation would help press Hamas to accede to Egyptian reconciliation.  5.  (U)  At the conclusion of the meeting, the Europeans headed to Jerusalem for discussions with the government of Israel, while the Arabs set out for Kuwait for the Arab League Economic Summit. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO1206|09CAIRO2475|09CAIRO98", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/23/2009 15:33", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000118  SIPDIS NOFORN  NSC FOR SHAPIRO AND PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2019 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KPAL, IS, EG SUBJECT: ASSESSMENT OF EGYPT'S REGIONAL ROLE IN THE WAKE OF GAZA  REF: A. CAIRO 98      B. CAIRO 1206 (2008)      C. CAIRO 2475 (2008)  Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey Reasons: 1.4 (B) and (D)  Summary and Introduction -------------------------  1. (S/NF) The serious intra-Arab rifts exposed by the Gaza crisis also highlighted both the extent and limitations of Egypt's role in leading the moderate Arab position.  The Gaza crisis was only the most recent, and significant, event to expose the polarization of Egypt and Saudi Arabia at one end of the Arab political spectrum, and Syria and Qatar at the other.  The impasse has exposed erosion of Egypt's ability to drive a common Arab position, especially in dealing with smaller, affluent Arab states within the consensus-based Arab League system.  The Egyptians and moderate Arab partners have also struggled to manage the searing impact of domestic and regional public criticism.  2. (S/NF) However, Egypt retains a significant comparative advantage as one of the few Arab states with stature in the West and within the Arab world, and the only major player that has communication with both Israel and Hamas.  If the Egyptians can come to fully understand that their role as the "indispensable Arab state" is contingent on being pro-active on key regional issues, including containing Iranian influence, we will continue to have an effective partner to work with, alongside other regional states such as Saudi Arabia and Jordan.  End Summary.  The Egyptian Foreign Policy Approach ------------------------------------  3. (S/NF)  Egypt seeks to be the "go to" Arab ally for Western powers and at the same time be appreciated in the eyes of the Arab public as defending Arab interests against post-colonial foreign domination. This strategic dichotomy is becoming increasingly difficult to maintain as seen in the string of regional crises (e.g. Iraq, Sudan, Lebanon and the intra-Palestinian conflict) and intra-Arab strife.  The U.S., in particular, has not been satisfied that Egypt is doing enough, while the Egyptian and regional public increasingly criticizes the GOE for "abdication" of its role as Arab leader (Reftel a)  4. (S/NF) At the same time, the Egyptians are concerned at the emerging Arab bloc of states that they see as increasingly webbed into Iran's strategic aim of obtaining regional dominance.  Unfortunately, the Egyptian response has often been inadequate or flatfooted.  For example, during the 2007 Lebanese political impasse, the GOE, along with the Saudis, were largely outmaneuvered in the Arab League by a pro-Syria bloc.  Although the Egyptians did not object to the substantive result of the March 2007 Doha conference on Lebanon, our interlocutors laid down a clear marker that neither the Qataris nor anyone else would take away the Egyptian lead on the Palestinian issue (Reftel b).  A subsequent Qatari foray into the Sudan political conflict elicited similar Egyptian disdain, but no counter-approach or strategy (Reftel c).  5. (S/NF) When Egypt came through on the six-month "tahdiya" (calming) in June 2007, it reaffirmed its centrality on Gaza.  But the recent Gaza crisis opened the door for Arab diplomatic competitors, and despite the full attention of EGIS Chief Omar Soliman, the Egyptians and Saudis have barely held the line against those who wish to seat Hamas at an Arab League meeting.  Although Arab League Secretary General Moussa is supportive of Egypt's primacy on the Palestinian question, the Arab League itself appears to have lost the ability to manage intra-Arab dynamics at least for the moment.  Maintenance of Egyptian influence --------------------------------  6. (S/NF)  Egypt is traditionally risk-averse, driven in large part by Mubarak's personality, as well as the desire for stability.  But the Egyptians may be waking up to the need for a more dynamic approach.  In the run-up to Israel's military action in Gaza, Soliman was well aware of Egypt's political vulnerability, including exposure to withering domestic and regional criticism, but told us that the Egyptian strategic interest was tied to increased pressure on Hamas.  Throughout the IDF action, our Egyptian interlocutors privately focused their ire on Syria and Qatar, as opposed to  CAIRO 00000118  002 OF 002   Israel.  The GOE publicized the arrest of terrorist cells connected with Iran in mid-January.  We assess that the Egyptians believe their primary strategic threat is Iran, that the current theater of combat is the intra-Arab struggle for primacy, and the current battle is the intra-Palestinian dispute.  7. (S/NF)  The Egyptians, along with its traditional Arab partners, have the ability to prevail, but the victory of the moderate Arab position is not a foregone conclusion.  If Egypt fails to maintain its influence, the Arab regional consensus may tilt toward Hamas and Iran, and away from support for PA President Abbas and the two-state solution. If Egypt cedes its position as "champion of the Palestinians," it will cement the current domestic opposition charge (Reftel a) that the GOE has failed to deliver on this account, something that could have lasting negative consequences.  For these reasons, we should assist Egypt and its partners in the current intra-Arab power struggle however we can.  8. (S/NF) In the short term, the Egyptians will need to establish control of the Arab debate over the intra-Palestinian dispute heading into the Arab League annual summit, which is scheduled for late March in Doha.  The Egyptian donors conference for Gaza, expected to be held in February, is a good way to maintain the initiative following the Sharm el Sheikh Summit of January 18, but more will be needed.  9. (S/NF) Within our bilateral relationship, we need to increase Egyptian confidence that we will support a more assertive GOE approach to blunting Iranian momentum, which extends beyond the current intra-Arab Hamas standoff.  The Gaza crisis has demonstrated that Egypt appreciates U.S. support but prefers it more often than not to be quiet and helpful, not public and prescriptive.   The Egyptians have requested we consult with them first prior to any new USG regional policy initiative, especially if it involves Syria. We should honor this request, and seek to involve the Egyptians (as well as other regional partners such as Saudi Arabia) in implementation of any new policy approach.  For their part, the Egyptians should be pressed to move forward with naming an ambassador for Iraq and reopening the embassy in Baghdad, and we should urge them to work with the Saudis on supporting the Lebanese Government as parliamentary elections approach.  10. (S/NF) The disarray within Arab ranks provides Iran a strategic opening to back extremist groups and move the centrist position away from negotiations and a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian.  Ultimately it is Egypt, and more specifically President Mubarak's leadership, that will be critical if we are to support the moderate Arab position.  The recent crisis over Gaza brought into focus some of the  vulnerabilities in Egypt,s leadership role, but also highlighted the fact only Egypt was willing and able to step forward with an aggressive diplomatic, propaganda, and political counter-attack against Iran and its proxies. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO118", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/23/2009 19:54", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T CAIRO 000119   NOFORN  FOR SENATOR MITCHELL FROM THE AMBASSADOR ALSO PASS TO NSC FOR SHAPIRO AND PASCUAL; NEA FOR FO  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2019 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KPAL, IS, EG  SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SPECIAL ENVOY MITCHELL'S JANUARY 26 VISIT TO CAIRO  REF: CAIRO 118 (ASSESSMENT POST-GAZA)  Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey Reasons: 1.4 (B) and (D)  1.  (S/NF) Summary and Introduction: Senator Mitchell, welcome to Egypt. Your visit will be, we hope, the first in a regular process of dialogue and consultation with senior Egyptians on what they consider to be the primary regional political issue -- the Arab-Israeli conflict, particularly the Palestinian track that has generated violence and tension that threatens Egypt's national security interests.  2.  (S/NF) We have requested meetings with President Mubarak, EGIS Chief General Omar Soliman, Foreign Minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit and Arab League Secretary General Amre Moussa.  The Egyptian leadership will hope to see in your visit signs that the U.S. will give urgency to addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and a hope that the U.S. approach will be seen as balanced.  Healing the Palestinian rift is critical, but may hinge on re-establishing a Syrian track in the peace process.  Egyptian-Syrian relations, never good, are particularly hostile at this juncture with Mubarak seeing Syria acting aggressively as Tehran's proxy in undermining Egyptian Arab leadership.  It will be important for us to consult closely with the GOE on our approach to Syria and Lebanon because of Egypt's overriding strategic view of the Iranian threat.  GOE anger over what they perceived as U.S. intervention in Iraq that did not heed the advice and interests of regional partners like Egypt has abated somewhat, but President Mubarak believes that the post-Saddam vacuum has unleashed Iranian regional ambitions, including now in Gaza via Hamas.  End summary.  --------------------------------------------- ------------ The Egyptian Approach on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict --------------------------------------------- ------------  3.  (S/NF) Resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the primary strategic political goal for the Egyptians.  Over the years, the Egyptians have functioned well as an intermediary (e.g. between Arafat and the Israelis), a role that effectively balanced Egypt's moderate stance alongside its regional image as standard-bearer for the Palestinian cause.  With the emergence of direct Israeli-Palestinian Authority communication, followed by the Hamas coup of Gaza in June, 2007, the Egyptian role shifted to a focus on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and establishment of the Hamas-Israel ceasefire. Egyptians have welcomed signs from the Obama Administration that the U.S. intends to engage early; Foreign Minister Abul Ghayt warned a few days ago that "others" (Turkey, the French, Qatar to name a few) are actively jockeying to expand their role in brokering peace during a period of perceived U.S. inattention.  The Egyptians have fretted, however,about the possibility that renewed U.S. engagement would devolve into endless "process."  They support direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations but want to see the U.S. using its influence with the parties more effectively.   4.  (S/NF) EGIS Chief Omar Soliman, 72 years old and in his position since 1993, is the de facto national security advisor, and holds responsibility for the Israeli-Palestinian account, including Egyptian efforts to negotiate the release of IDF Corporal Gilad Shalit.  Soliman, a retired general and veteran of the 1973 war, is a pragmatist with an extremely sharp analytical mind.  He currently is hosting a series of meetings with Israeli MOD Official Amos Gilad and Hamas representatives (from both Gaza and Damascus), with the goal of cementing the new ceasefire and advancing intra-Palestinian reconciliation.  Soliman believes that Palestinian reconciliation is a prerequisite to any major next step in Gaza, as neither the Egyptians nor the international community can work with Hamas as a partner on security, political or economic reconstruction issues.  That said, he has stuggled to find incentives for Hamas to cede Gaza back to the PA, especially given Hamas' increasingly stout backing from some Arab states (e.g. Syria and Qatar) as well as Iran.  Soliman will tell you he understands that Hamas needs to be "squeezed" and that limiting movement in and out of Gaza supports this end, but will urge that you impress upon the Israelis the need to maintain adequate humanitarian inflows to Gaza.  The Egyptians will stress the point that that keeping borders open for legitimate trade and forging effective measures against smuggling go hand in hand.  5. (S/NF) Following his most recent round of discussions with Gilad, Soliman told us that he and Gilad generally agreed that they were "back where they started" in the fall -- only perhaps Hamas has gotten meaner.  Together they inted to work to extend the calm and promote Palestiian reconciliation.  As long as the calm lasts, srael will proceed, as before, with limited bordr openings for legitimate goods.  On counter-smugling, Soliman said he told Gilad that Egypt has ade new "arrangements for border security" that ill involve EGIS, State Security and DMI.  He pldged to Gilad that Egypt would exert maximum effor to control borders including areas of the Gulfs of Suez and Aqaba.  The Egyptian Prime Minister will address compensation for Sinai Bedouin to alleviate the impact of cutting off smuggling.  He said Egypt would accept technology from the U.S., Germany and Italy and that Egypt would arrest owners of the tunnels.  Gilad and Soliman reportedly agreed that Hamas knows its resupply challenges will grow but that their efforts to succeed will also increase.  6. (S/NF) The Egyptians are also in the midst of a serious intra-Arab rift, exposed by the recent Gaza crisis (for a full analysis see reftel).  The Israeli military operation, and enormous regional public outcry, appears to have buoyed Hamas' popularity for the moment.  Egypt, with support primarily from Saudi Arabia, has pushed back against Arab and other states that wish to give greater political recognition to Hamas, but the fight will likely intensify in the run-up to the Arab League Annual Summit set for late March in Doha. FM Aboul Gheit, a career diplomat who has held his position since 2004, recently announced Egypt's intent to hold a ministerial level meeting on Gaza humanitarian assistance as soon as mid-February, something that he hopes will marginalize efforts from other Arab states to channel assistance to Gaza via contributions to Hamas.  He will likely ask for full USG support of this initiative.  Arab League Secretary General Amre Moussa (in office since 2001) is generally supportive of Egyptian primacy on the Palestinian issue and of PA President Abbas.  He has struggled to regain control of intra-Arab dynamics following the Gaza crisis).  Your tentatively scheduled visit will give him a needed boost.  7.  (S/NF)  Your key meeting however will be with President Mubarak who retains a firm grip on national security and strategic issues.  EGIS Director Soliman and FM Aboul Gheit take their marching orders from Mubarak and are effective to the extent that Mubarak and Egypt are still seen both in the region and on the international stage as indispensible partners in seeking Arab-Israeli peace.  With Iran making inroads into the Arab world via Syria, Hezbollah, Qatar, and now Hamas, Mubarak will be most open to a USG approach that puts our efforts on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in that broader regional context.  Reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas may be the critical piece to reestablishing a meaningful path towards the objective of a two-state solution, but in our view that is unlikely to take place without broader reconciliation within Arab ranks.  Mubarak's feelings towards Syria and Bashar al-Assad are scathing, but at the same time we believe he will understand that prying Syria away from Iran and establishing a Syrian-Israeli track may be a strategic necessity.  You will want to seek his views on this issue and assure him that the U.S. will consult closely with Egypt as we consider any overtures towards Syria.  --------------- Regional Issues ---------------  8.  (S/NF) On Iraq, although President Mubarak remains deeply suspicious that Nuri Al Maliki answers to Tehran, other GOE officials have expressed increasing confidence that Maliki, and Iraq generally, has turned a corner and may avoid civil war.  Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit recently completed a successful trip to Baghdad in October and is moving forward to reopen the Embassy in Baghdad.  On Iran, Egypt is concerned by rising Iranian influence in the region, has supported UN sanctions, and is increasingly active on countering Iran, e.g. in Gaza and to some extent in Lebanon, working with Saudi Arabia and other Arab states to support Lebanese political and territorial sovereignty.  9. (S/NF) Egypt is a steadfast ally in counter-terrorism efforts, and we maintain close cooperation on a broad range of security and law enforcement issues.  We have a long-standing and productive relationship with EGIS and SSIS, the two Egyptian agencies that cover internal and regional terrorism issues.  Through the Department of State's Anti-Terrorism Assistance program, we are working with SSIS to establish an anti-terror investigative unit, and also are in the beginning stages of a USG-funded community policing program that will include needed human rights training.  ------------------------------- Internal Politics and Economics -------------------------------  10.  (C) Our fundamental political reform goal in Egypt remains democratic transformation, including the expansion of political freedom and pluralism, respect for human rights, and a stable and legitimate transition to the post-Mubarak era.  Egyptian democracy and human rights efforts, however, are being suffocated, and Mubarak remains skeptical of our role in democracy promotion, lecturing us that any efforts to open up will result in empowering the Muslim Brotherhood (which currently holds 86 seats in Egypt's parliament). Mubarak now makes scant public pretense of advancing a vision for democratic change. An ongoing challenge remains balancing our security interests with our democracy promotion efforts.  11. (S/NF) Mubarak, who is now 80, is in solid health, notwithstanding a hearing deficit in his left ear. The next presidential elections are scheduled for 2011, and if Mubarak is still alive it is likely he will run again, and, inevitably, win. Despite incessant whispered discussions, no one in Egypt has any certainty about who will eventually succeed Mubarak, nor how the succession will happen.  Mubarak himself seems to be trusting to God and the inertia of the military and civilian security services to ensure an orderly transition.  The most likely contenders for next president are presidential son Gamal Mubarak (whose profile is ever-increasing at the ruling party), EGIS chief Omar Soliman, dark horse Arab League Secretary-General Amre Moussa, another old-guard regime insider, or an as-yet unknown military officer.  12.  (C) Economic reform has been a success story, although Egypt still suffers from widespread and so far irremediable poverty affecting upwards of 35-40% of the population. Reforms in trade and tax policy, financial reform, privatization and increased transparency have led to 7% economic growth in the last fiscal year.  Foreign investment increased from around $3 billion in 2005 to $11 billion in the last year, mostly in the petroleum sector.  Despite this success, significant problems remain, including 20% inflation, high levels of poverty and unemployment, and endemic corruption. The effects of the global financial crisis on Egypt may not be as severe as elsewhere, as Egyptian banks operate very conservatively and have been spared involvement in risky financial products.  The informal economy also provides a certain degree of resiliency to the economic picture. Nevertheless, as the economic crisis worsens, Egypt remains vulnerable as exports, Suez canal revenues, tourism, and remittances will reflect global trends. SCOBEY   NNNN  End Cable Text " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/25/2009 11:06", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000123   SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, MASS, MARR, EG  SUBJECT: EGYPT:  COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF TWENTY-FOUR (24) F-16 BLOCK 50/52 AIRCRAFT TO SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT OF EGYPT NATIONAL DEFENSE MISSION  REF: EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF DEFENSE LETTER OF REQUEST      (08-171) FOR LETTER OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE      (LOA) DATED 25 SEPT 08.   1. (SBU) Description.  REF A is the GOE request to procure twenty-four (24) F-16 Block 50/52 aircraft to support their national defense mission.  The GOE long-term plan is to procure a total of forty-five (45) F-16 Block 50/52 aircraft with twenty-four (24) of those being procured at this time and twenty-one (21) additional aircraft being requested in the future when funding permits.  Although the aircraft procured will be Block 50 or Block 52 depending upon the engine that the EAF decides to procure, the aircraft will have the software set to comply with Egypt,s non-CISMOA status.  This limits the full capability of the aircraft until the EAF is authorized any increased capability in accordance with a signed CISMOA.  At that point, the software can be reset to provide the appropriate CISMOA-compliant capability.  The F-16 Fighting Falcon is a compact, multi-role fighter aircraft.  It is highly maneuverable and has proven itself in air-to-air combat and air-to-surface attack.  The F-16 Block 50/52 aircraft provides a high-performance weapon system for the United States and allied nations.  The Egyptian Air Force currently operates a fleet of 195 F-16 Block 15/32/40 aircraft.  The F-16 Block 50/52 is the latest mass-produced common configuration F-16 aircraft available for procurement and is currently in use by the United States Air Force.  2. (SBU) Reason the purchaser desires the articles or services.  The procurement of these aircraft is desired by Egypt for three main reasons:  A.  These aircraft will help modernize the EAF fighter aircraft fleet. B.  These new F-16s will potentially replace an estimated 180 non-flyable MiG-21 airframes and an unspecified number of non-flyable F-7 airframes according to sources within the EAF.  C.  The procurement will replace 24 EAF F-16s that have been destroyed in mishaps since Egypt began operating the F-16.  3.  (SBU) How the articles or services would affect the recipient,s force structure.  The EAF originally procured 220 F-16s over the past 26 years, but has lost 25 through attrition.  The 24 requested F-16s would backfill 24 of those lost aircraft.  The EAF MiG-21 and F-7 fleets require replacement due to their age and diminishing operational readiness.  This new aircraft will replace a minimum estimated total of 180 of those aircraft.  There will be no change to the existing mission and primary roles of the F-16.   4.  (SBU) How the articles or services would contribute to both the U.S. and the recipient,s defense/security goals. The F-16 Block 50/52 will enable the EAF to defend its people, borders, the Suez Canal and the resource of the Nile River from enemy attack.  It will offer US-Egyptian interoperability opportunities that are not available in the MiG-21 or F-7.  The procurement would revitalize the EAF fighter fleet so that the EAF may focus on moving forward as a US ally through US-based training, joint exercises and toward joint operations with the US and its other allies. The current state of the EAF fighter fleet causes the Egyptian government to pour precious manpower, money, and resources into the constant struggle of keeping their aging fleet of MiG-21s and F-7s flying.  The new procurement would enable the EAF to shift personnel, funding and resources from a rapidly diminishing fleet of obsolescence-prone aircraft to a weapon system with a great capability that will be operational when needed.  5. (SBU) Justification for the type and quantity of articles or services requested.  The F-16 Block 50/52 is the only logical, cost-effective choice for modernizing the EAF fighter aircraft fleet.  The EAF currently operates 195 F-16s and has operated the F-16 with support from the United States for 26 years.  The EAF has developed wide-scale in-country F-16-specific maintenance/logistics support and has an in-country F-16 Flying Training Unit where new pilots are trained to fly the F-16.  The EAF has a corps of pilots, technicians and engineers who are already familiar with the F-16 at the operational and intermediate levels.  The F-16 Block 50/52 aircraft are currently in the U.S. Air Force inventory and long-term sustainability through the U.S. logistics system is a distinct advantage.  The EAF has in-country depot capability to repair over 300 different F-16 parts.  Most of these parts are compatible with the EAF version F-16 Block 50/52.  The EAF has in-country depot-level aircraft modification capability through the F-16 Falcon-UP modification program.  This program and capability enables the EAF to significantly increase the service-life of their current F-16 fleet and any subsequent F-16 procurements.  The EAF has established in-country partial depot capability to overhaul certain F-16 engine sections and this capability is upgradeable to support the F-16 Block 50/52.  Egypt continually upgrades its avionics testing and repair capability to keep pace with the advancing technology in the F-16 aircraft.  Egypt uses the US logistics/supply system to complement its in-country F-16 support efforts.  Egypt participates in all USAF Technical Coordination Groups so that they receive the latest information available on technical issues and advances related to the F-16.  6. (SBU) Combatant Commander's concurrence to the introduction of a new war-fighting capability to the nation or region.  Combatant Commander's concurrence will be provided separately.  7. (SBU) Anticipated reactions of the neighboring nations. The procurement of these additional F-16 aircraft is not expected to influence the regional balance of power or cause negative reactions from any of Egypt's neighbors.  The EAF wishes to procure a unique version of the F-16 Block 50/52 that will be capable of firing the medium-range AIM-7 Sparrow radar-guided missiles that are currently in the EAF inventory.  The EAF version of the F-16 Block 50/52 will definitely be able to fire the short-range AIM-9 Sidewinder heat-seeking missile and will have a 20mm cannon.  The potential exists for the aircraft to be configured with the AIM-120 Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile (AMRAAM) should the US Government decide to release those munitions to Egypt in the future.  This new F-16 procurement introduces a limited increase of technology to Egypt, but does not introduce new technology to the region.  Several regional allies have recently purchased similar airframes through the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program.  These assets will enhance Egypt,s ability to participate in combined regional training exercises.  This procurement would not impact Israel's qualitative military edge.  8. (SBU) Assessment of the nation's ability to account for, safeguard, operate, maintain, and support the articles. The GOE has demonstrated the intent and ability to protect sensitive, classified military technology over an extended period.  Egypt signed a General Security of Information Agreement with the US and, as a customer, has purchased and protected the sensitive technology of other U.S. weapon systems.  The EAF has an in-country F-16 pilot training school and they develop their corps of F-16 pilots through that school.  The EAF has significant depot-level capability that enables them to repair over 300 F-16 parts, modify F-16 aircraft to extend the service life of the aircraft, and overhaul or repair F-16 engine subassemblies within the country of Egypt.  The EAF works closely with the US Government for complementary logistics support of their F-16 fleet.  Although the EAF has an F-16 engine management program that is lacking as compared the USAF engine management program, the EAF is making good progress with the US engine program offices to improve their overall engine management capability.  Egypt has met all previous F-16 security and End Use Monitoring (EUM) requirements.  9. (SBU) Training required either in-country or in the United States and anticipated reactions resulting from the presence of U.S. trainers in country.  Specialized training on the F-16 Block 50/52 under this new procurement would be performed in-part by an in-country US military Extended Training Services Support (ETSS) team.  Each of the previous 4 EAF F-16 procurement increments was supported by an ETSS team of 10 or more personnel.  There is currently an ETSS team assigned to one of the EAF F-16 bases as part of the procurement of the most recent increment of EAF F-16s.  ETSS teams have been a part of the Egyptian community for 26 years with only positive impact to the country and region.  Also, a team of trainers from the prime contractor and subcontractors would likely be sent to Egypt to augment the ETSS until initial training of the EAF is complete.  The ETSS would remain and provide the remaining longer-term support.  No required training outside of Egypt related to this procurement is anticipated at this time.  10. (SBU) Possible impact of any in-country U.S. presence that might be required as a result of providing the article. U.S. Government civilian personnel and U.S. contractors are permanently assigned to Egypt to support the current EAF F-16 program.  Those US positions have been filled for 26 years. There is an anticipated plus-up of US personnel in-country that would be necessary to support the arrival, bed-down and support of the increased number of F-16s resulting from this procurement.  A majority of the plus-up personnel will be on temporary duty status and a small minority of the plus-up personnel will likely be required to remain in Egypt permanently.  There is no expected negative impact that would result from these additional Americans being in Egypt. Additionally, US Government teams and US contractor teams routinely travel to Egypt to support the various US-provided weapon systems of the Egyptian military including the current F-16 fleet.  There is no expected negative impact that would result from the continued presence of these Americans in Egypt.  11. (SBU) Source of financing and the economic impact of the proposed acquisition.  Egypt plans to procure these 24 F-16 Block 50/52 aircraft and all related training, support and infrastructure improvements as a total package utilizing Foreign Military Financing.  The Egyptians will only accept the offer for the procurement if the amortization of financing meets their established budgeted payment schedule. In order for the new aircraft to fire AIM-7 Sparrow as requested, a modification of the avionics package is required.  This will affect the long range funding of this program and other large procurement programs currently in work.  In addition, this system engineering would have to be reversed if the AIM-120 AMRAAM is purchased in the future. Egypt is not planning to use national funds to pay for any portion of this procurement.  The economic impact of the proposed acquisition on the US is expected to infuse $2 billion into the US economy over the acquisition period.  12. (SBU) Human rights considerations relevant to the proposed acquisition.  None.  13. (SBU) A plan for end-use monitoring for sensitive and advanced warfighting technology and the SAO,s plan for compliance verification.  The Office of Military Cooperation (OMC) Egypt has a robust Golden Sentry Program.  The Golden Sentry Program representative and Security Assistance Officer (SAO) responsible for the program will coordinate for the review and maintenance of required documentation.  All parties will maintain serial number lists of all components within the inventory or transferred and will conduct the mandated inspections as required.  This coordination will ensure that historical copies of all EUM inspection results and customer,s physical security and accountability control plans remain on file.  The Egyptian military currently has 195 F-16s in country.  Egypt has maintained accountability and security of these aircraft without unauthorized loss, theft, or access to date.  The GOE has expressed the willingness to meet U.S. guidelines for accountability and security of these new aircraft, and the Office of Military Cooperation will conduct End Use Monitoring of all required components if this request is approved.  14. (SBU) Recommendation whether the USG should approve transfer of the article and justification.  The country team supports USG approval of the GOE procurement of twenty-four (24) F-16 Block 50/52 aircraft.  This procurement will replace aircraft lost to attrition and will replace fighter aircraft that are beyond their useful life.  It would also encourage the demilitarization of older aircraft.  This procurement will dissuade Egypt from using national funds to buy fighters from another country.  It will also increase the percentage of US-built equipment in the Egyptian inventory. The procurement may be seen as encouragement for Egypt to sign a CISMOA as well.  Although release of the AIM-120 AMRAAM to Egypt was by no means offered, promised or guaranteed to the GOE, MOD or EAF with this procurement, this procurement would create the possibility for Egypt to seek the AIM-120 should they sign a CISMOA in the future.  The AIM-7 Sparrow capability currently requested is an option for this purchase; however AIM-120 capability is far superior and could be added with engineering modifications assuming a CISMOA is in place.  We support the sale to the degree that MOD can afford the new equipment and still fund the follow-on support of all current Egyptian military programs.  We support this sale if the cost does not jeopardize other important future procurements.  The US Government is in a position to build a stronger relationship with the Government of Egypt by enabling the GOE to modernize its fighter aircraft fleet with the US-built and US-supported F-16 Block 50/52 aircraft.  This is a coordinated mission position. SCOBEY   NNNN  End Cable Text " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/25/2009 11:16", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000124   SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, MASS, MARR, EG  SUBJECT: EGYPT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF SIX (6) REDUCED PRICE CH-47D HELICOPTERS TO SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT OF EGYPT,S (GOE) SECURITY AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE MISSIONS.  REF: A. EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF DEFENSE LETTER OF REQUEST         (LOR) 08-134 FOR LETTER OF OFFER AND         ACCEPTANCE (LOA) DATED 13 JUL 08.      B. ATTACHMENT 1 TO LOR 08-134 TOTAL PACKAGE         REQUIREMENTS FOR CASE DEVELOPMENT DATED         15 OCT 08.  1. (SBU) Description.  In REF A, The GOE submitted a request to procure six (6) reduced price CH-47D Helicopters utilizing the U.S. Army Cargo Helicopter Alternative Procurement Strategy (CHAPS).  These aircraft will perform a myriad of Security and Humanitarian Assistance missions for the EAF, as well as support several of the Ministry of Defense (MOD) Services.  These aircraft will perform tasks associated with the Airborne Landing of Forces, Medical Evacuation (MEDEVAC) and Disaster Relief missions.  All missions will be in compliance with the standards and regulations outlined within current international and regional agreements.  Additional information is available at www.mmc.gov.eg.  2. (SBU) Reason the purchaser desires the articles or services.  Recent events throughout Egypt and the region with regard to disaster relief, humanitarian assistance and medical evacuation support the GOE initiative to increase its rotary-wing capability to perform critical tasks associated with these missions.  The CH-47D (Chinook) helicopter with additional search and rescue mission equipment was identified by the U.S. Army and Chinook Program Manager more than a year ago, as a suitable rotary-wing platform to support the GOE specific Mission Requirements.  This action will greatly increase the overall capability of the EAF to support cargo helicopter operations across multiple mission profiles.  An increase in aircraft availability will enhance the overall readiness of the fleet and individual aviator proficiency.  3. (SBU) How the articles or services would affect the recipient,s force structure.  The EAF originally procured 19 CH-47 Helicopters (15 x C, 4 x D Models) in 1981 and has had one incident since then that resulted in the total loss of the aircraft.  The EAF completed the upgrade of the 15 C Model aircraft in 2007 and currently operate and maintain 18 CH-47D aircraft.  There will be no change to the existing mission and primary roles of the CH-47D.  The addition of six (6) aircraft would substantially assist the MOD and EAF with allocating additional resources to the various missions.  4. (SBU) How the articles or services would contribute to both the U.S. and the recipient,s defense/security goals. Aircraft sales are consistent with DOD's Security Cooperation Guidance as it enhances the territorial security and crisis response capabilities of regional states.  It assists the U.S. in enabling allies and partners, while also protecting U.S. and partner interests.  It supports the modernization and transformation of allies or partners to reduce their vulnerability to external military sales.  Finally, it improves their ability to operate independently without significant reliance on U.S. or coalition Forces.  These additional aircraft will significantly increase the amount of US-based training, joint training exercises and possibly impact the frequency of coalition operations with the US and its other allies.  5. (SBU) Justification for the type and quantity of articles or services requested.  A detailed analysis and review of several suitable airframes was completed by EAF with input from the Utility Cargo Helicopter Office (UPHO) and Cargo Helicopter Program Manager.  Their findings revealed that the CH-47D Chinook Helicopter with optional medical and search and rescue equipment would be an excellent airframe to support the various GOE missions.  The procurement of these aircraft is a natural progression to modernize assets and significantly improve an existing capability.  6. (SBU) Combatant Commander's concurrence to the introduction of a new warfighting capability to the nation or region.  Combatant Commander's concurrence will be provided separately.  7. (SBU) Anticipated reactions of the neighboring nations. The procurement of these additional cargo helicopters should not influence the regional balance of power or cause negative reactions from any of Egypt's neighbors.  This procurement introduces an increase in capability for Egypt, but does not introduce new technology to the country or region.  Several regional allies have recently purchased similar airframes through the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) or Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) programs, with U.S. concurrence.  These assets will greatly enhance Egypt,s ability to participate in combined regional training exercises, as well as disaster relief missions.  This procurement will not impact Israel's qualitative military edge.  8. (SBU) Assessment of the nation's ability to account for, safeguard, operate, maintain, and support the articles.  The GOE has demonstrated the intent and ability to protect sensitive, classified military technology over an extended period.  Egypt signed a General Security of Information Agreement with the U.S. and as a customer, has purchased and protected the sensitive technology of other U.S. weapons systems.  Egypt has procured similar rotary-wing aircraft in the past to include eighteen (18) CH-47 Chinook Helicopters that currently provide support to the EAF, MOD services and the Search and Rescue Operations Center at Al Maza Air Base. The EAF has met all previous security and End Use monitoring (EUM) requirements.  9. (SBU) Training required either in-country or in the United States and anticipated reactions resulting from the presence of U.S. trainers in country.  The EAF already maintains a squadron of eighteen (18) CH-47D Helicopters.  The EAF pilots and maintenance personnel currently complete all CH-47 Chinook Aviator Qualification Courses (AQC), Instructor Pilot Courses (IPC), Maintenance Test Pilot (MTP) Courses, Flight Engineer and maintenance related courses in the U.S.  The addition of six (6) aircraft will increase the EAF,s stateside training requirements by a minimum of twelve (12) AQCs, two (2) IPCs, two (2) MTP courses and eight (8) flight engineer courses.  There is no requirement for an additional Mobile Training Team (MTT).  The continued presence of the Chinook Technical Assistance and Fielding Team (TAFT) is required to support the fleet throughout the duration of aircraft delivery.  The presence of U.S. trainers in country will have little anticipated reaction because of the long-term existence of Security Assistance Teams (SATs) already assigned in country.  10. (SBU) Possible impact of any in-country U.S. presence that might be required as a result of providing the article. U.S. Government civilian personnel and U.S. contractors are permanently assigned to Egypt to support the current EAF CH-47D program.  Those US positions have been filled for over six years.  There is an expected increase of US personnel in-country that would be necessary to support the arrival, bed-down and sustainment of the additional aircraft resulting from this procurement.  A majority of the personnel will be on temporary duty status and very few positions will require additional personnel to remain in Egypt for more than one year.  Additionally, U.S. Government teams and U.S. contractor teams routinely travel to Egypt to support the various weapon systems procured through the U.S. FMS programs.  There is no anticipated negative impact that would result from the continued presence of these Americans in Egypt.  11. (SBU) Source of financing and the economic impact of the proposed acquisition.  Egypt plans to procure these six (6) aircraft utilizing Foreign Military Financing and has already allocated sufficient funds within their FY09-FY13 budget. This acquisition is essential for the GOE to conduct airborne landing of forces, humanitarian assistance and search and rescue missions.  This requirement is on both the FY09 JAVITS Report and the Egyptian Armament Authority (EAA) Priority List.  Egypt is not planning to use national funds to pay for any portion of this procurement.  The economic impact of the proposed acquisition will generate more than $200 million dollars for the U.S. Army,s Cargo Helicopter Program and the U.S. economy.  The sale of these reduced price aircraft is critical to offset the costs of the U.S. Army,s CH-47D, total fleet conversion to F Model aircraft over the next six years.  12. (SBU) Human rights considerations relevant to the proposed acquisition. None.  13. (SBU) A plan for end-use monitoring for sensitive and advanced warfighting technology and the SAO,s plan for compliance verification.  The Office of Military Cooperation (OMC) Egypt has a robust Golden Sentry Program.  The Golden Sentry Program representative and Security Assistance Officer (SAO) responsible for the program, will coordinate for the review and maintenance of required documentation.  All parties will maintain serial number lists of all components within the inventory or transferred, and will conduct the mandated inspections as required.  This coordination will ensure that historical copies of all EUM Inspection results and customer,s physical security and accountability control plans remain on file.  The Egyptian military currently has over 100 helicopters (FMS) of various configurations in country.  Egypt has maintained accountability and security of these aircraft without unauthorized loss, theft, or access to date.  The GOE has indicated a willingness to meet U.S. guidelines for accountability and security of these advanced aircraft, and the Office of Military Cooperation will conduct End Use Monitoring (EUM) of all required components if this request is approved.  14. (SBU) Recommendation whether the USG should approve transfer of the article and justification.  The country team supports USG approval of the GOE procurement of up to six (6) Reduced Price CH-47D helicopters for the airborne transport of troops, humanitarian assistance, medical evacuation and search and rescue missions.  The purchase of additional airframes should in no way diminish the amount of follow-on support for the current fleet.  Also, there will be funding lines in the Letter of Acceptance for training, to include pilot and English language and infrastructure for overall base improvements.  Particulars for the infrastructure and training are contained as an attachment to the Letter of Request.  This is a coordinated mission position. SCOBEY   NNNN  End Cable Text " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/25/2009 11:17", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000125   SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, MASS, MARR, EG  SUBJECT: EGYPT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF TWELVE (12) AH-64D APACHE HELICOPTER (BLOCK II) WITH MTADS TO SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT OF EGYPT,S (GOE) RECONNAISSANCE AND BORDER SECURITY MISSIONS.  REF: A. A. GOE MINISTRY OF DEFENSE LETTER OF REQUEST         (LOR) 08-135 FOR LETTER OF OFFER AND         ACCEPTANCE (LOA) DATED 15 JUL 08.      B. ATTACHMENT 1 TO LOR 08-135 TOTAL PACKAGE         REQUIREMENTS FOR CASE DEVELOPMENT DATED         15 OCT 08.      C. USASAC LETTER FOR BLOCK II APACHE PROCUREMENT         TIMELINE DATED 16 JUL 08.  1. (SBU) Description.  In REF A, The GOE submitted a request to procure twelve (12) AH-64D Helicopters (BLK II) with the Modernized Target Acquisition and Designation System (MTADS), the required infrastructure/facility upgrades, logistical and technical support requirements.  This case will include an additional (36) MTADS kits to modernize current fleet of aircraft with spares and software upgrade for Longbow Crew Trainer (LCT).  These aircraft will perform Reconnaissance and Security missions for the EAF, as well as support the Ministry of Defense (MOD).  These aircraft will perform tasks associated with Airborne Reconnaissance, Border Security and Defense, as well as night Search and Rescue missions with the MTADS.  All missions will be in compliance with the standards and regulations outlined within current international and regional agreements.  Additional information is available at www.mmc.gov.eg.  2. (SBU) Reason the purchaser desires the articles or services.  Recent events throughout Egypt and the region with regard to border security, as well as the Egyptian Air Force,s efforts to modernize their existing Apache Helicopter fleet support the GOE initiative.  These additional aircraft will replace combat capability due to the loss or retiring of older airframes.  This procurement is in concert with the GOE 2025 Plan to increase the Apache force structure to a preplanned level to perform all required missions.  The AH-64D (Apache) helicopter with MTADS and improved mission equipment was identified by the U.S. Army and Apache Program Manager more than a year ago, as a suitable rotary-wing platform to support the GOE specific mission requirements.  The procurement of additional Block II Apaches is the next logical step to ensure the continued modernization of the EAF fleet, long-terQsustainability with the U.S. Army and interoperability with other GOE allies. This action will greatly increase the overall capability of the EAF to support attack helicopter operations across multiple mission profiles.  In addition, this new case will incorporate the total package requirements to address much needed program improvements in the areas of training, infrastructure and airfield operations.  An increase in aircraft availability will enhance the overall readiness of the fleet and individual aviator proficiency.  3. (SBU) How the articles or services would affect the recipient,s force structure.  The EAF originally procured 36 AH-64A Helicopters in 1994 and contracted the remanufacturing of 35 aircraft from A to D model for $440 million from 2001-2006.  Since the inception of the program, the EAF have had two incidents that resulted in the total loss of both aircraft.  The EAF completed the D Model aircraft upgrade in 2006 and currently operate and maintain 34 AH-64D aircraft at Abu Hammad and Katamaya Air Bases.  There will be no change to the existing mission and primary roles of the AH-64D. These additional aircraft would substantially assist the MOD and EAF with allocating additional resources to the various missions.  4. (SBU) How the articles or services would contribute to both the U.S. and the recipient,s defense/security goals. Aircraft sales are consistent with DOD's Security Cooperation Guidance as it enhances the territorial security and crisis response capabilities of regional states.  It assists the U.S. in enabling allies and partners, while also protecting U.S. and partner interests.  It supports the modernization and transformation of allies or partners to reduce their vulnerability to external military sales.  Finally, it improves their ability to operate independently without significant reliance on U.S. or coalition Forces.  These additional aircraft will significantly increase the amount of OCONUS-US based training; joint training exercises and may possibly influence the frequency of coalition operations with the US and its other allies.  5. (SBU) Justification for the type and quantity of articles or services requested.  The EAF completed a detailed analysis and review of several suitable airframes with input from the Apache Program Management Office and the Apache Program Manager at the Security Assistance Management Directorate (SAMD).  Their findings revealed that the AH-64D with MTADS is an excellent airframe to support the various GOE missions.  The procurement of these aircraft is a natural progression to modernize assets and significantly improve an existing capability while closely mirroring the U.S. force structure.  6. (SBU) Combatant Commander's concurrence to the introduction of a new warfighting capability to the nation or region.  Combatant Commander's concurrence will be provided separately.  7. (SBU) Anticipated reactions of the neighboring nations. The procurement of these additional attack helicopters should not influence the regional balance of power or cause negative reactions from any of Egypt's neighbors.  This procurement introduces an increase in capability for Egypt, but does not introduce new technology region or international customers. Several international customers have recently purchased similar airframes through the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) or Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) programs, with U.S. concurrence.  These assets will greatly enhance Egypt,s ability to participate in combined regional training exercises, as well night search and rescue missions.  This procurement will not impact Israel's qualitative military edge.  8. (SBU) Assessment of the nation's ability to account for, safeguard, operate, maintain, and support the articles.  The GOE has demonstrated the intent and ability to protect sensitive, classified military technology over an extended period.  Egypt signed a General Security of Information Agreement with the U.S. and as a customer, has purchased and protected the sensitive technology of other U.S. weapons systems.  Egypt has procured similar rotary-wing aircraft in the past to include thirty four (34) AH-64D Helicopters that currently provide support to the EAF and MOD.  The preponderance of Apache helicopters are located at Abu Hammad Air Base, with approximately a third of the fleet located at Katamaya Air Base for training.  The EAF has met all previous security and End Use monitoring (EUM) requirements.  9. (SBU) Training required either in-country or in the United States and anticipated reactions resulting from the presence of U.S. trainers in country.  The EAF already maintains a Wing of thirty-four (34) AH-64D Helicopters.  The majority of EAF pilots and maintenance personnel currently complete all AH-64D Apache Aviator Qualification Courses (AQC), Instructor Pilot Courses (IPC), Maintenance Test Pilot (MTP) Courses, Flight Engineer and maintenance related courses in the U.S. The addition of twelve (12) aircraft will increase the EAF, stateside training requirements by more then twnty-six (26) AQCs, three (3) IPCs, three (3) MTPcourses and fourteen (14) aircraft maintenance rlated courses.  There is no requirement for an aditional Mobile Training Team (MTT). The continue presence of the Apache Technical Assistance and Fielding Team (TAFT) is required to support the flet throughout the duration of aircraft delivery. The presence of U.S. trainers in country will hae little anticipated reaction because of the long-term existence of Security Assistance Teams (SATs) already assigned in country.  10. (SBU) Possible impact of any in-country U.S. presence that might be required as a result of providing the article. U.S. Government civilian personnel and U.S. contractors are permanently assigned to Egypt to support the current EAF AH-64D program.  Those US positions have been filled for over ten years.  There is an expected increase of US personnel in country that would be necessary to support the arrival, bed-down and sustainment of the additional aircraft maintained at two locations resulting from this procurement. A majority of the personnel will be on temporary duty status and very few positions will require additional personnel to remain in Egypt for more than one year.  Additionally, U.S. Government teams and U.S. contractor teams routinely travel to Egypt to support the various weapon systems procured through the U.S. FMS programs.  There is no anticipated negative impact that would result from the continued presence of these Americans in Egypt.  11. (SBU) Source of financing and the economic impact of the proposed acquisition.  Egypt plans to procure these twelve (12) aircraft utilizing Foreign Military Financing and has already allocated sufficient funds within their FY09-FY15 budget.  This acquisition is essential for the GOE to conduct Airborne Reconnaissance, Border Security and Defense, as well as night Search and Rescue missions.  This requirement is on both the FY09 JAVITS Report and the Egyptian Armament Authority (EAA) Priority List.  Egypt is not planning to use national funds to pay for any portion of this procurement. The economic impact of the proposed acquisition will generate more than $650 million dollars for the U.S. Army,s Program and the U.S. economy.  The immediate sale of these Block II aircraft is critical as the Apache manufacturing line converts to Block III aircraft in 2011 to support the total U.S. Army fleet conversion over the next seven years.  The International Apache Program office and U.S. Army Security Assistance Command (USASAC) have advised the EAF in formal correspondence (REF C) that in order for Egypt to secure its position in the aircraft build line and delivery schedule, an LOR must be submitted to USASAC NLT DEC 08, with LOA implementation NLT 30 JUL 09.  12. (SBU) Human rights considerations relevant to the proposed acquisition. None.  13. (SBU) A plan for end-use monitoring for sensitive and advanced war fighting technology and the SAO,s plan for compliance verification.  The Office of Military Cooperation (OMC) Egypt has a robust Golden Sentry Program.  The Golden Sentry Program representative and Security Assistance Officer (SAO) responsible for the program, will coordinate for the review and maintenance of required documentation.  All parties will maintain serial number lists of all components within the inventory or transferred, and will conduct the mandated inspections as required.  This coordination will ensure that historical copies of all EUM Inspection results and customer,s physical security and accountability control plans remain on file.  The Egyptian military currently has over 100 helicopters (FMS) of various configurations in country.  Egypt has maintained accountability and security of these aircraft without unauthorized loss, theft, or access to date.  The GOE has indicated a willingness to meet U.S. guidelines for accountability and security of these advanced aircraft, and the Office of Military Cooperation will conduct End Use Monitoring (EUM) of all required components if this request is approved.  14. (SBU) Recommendation whether the USG should approve transfer of the article and justification.  The country team supports the USG approval of the GOE procurement of up to twelve (12) additional AH-64D helicopters.  This purchase will increase combat capability, replace aging/obsolete aircraft and address major shortfalls in the current AH-64D program.  It will give the USG an opportunity to promote better interoperability by encouraging increased joint and/or combined operations.  Funds from this case will be utilized to address current shortfalls in operational/maintenance formal training, base support infrastructure and English language training.  However, this request is the lowest priority of the EAF,s four current aircraft procurement requests (C-130J, CH-47D, F-16 and AH-64D).  The EAF under utilizes their current AH-64Ds and does not face an immediate threat.  The purchase of additional airframes should in no way diminish the amount of follow-on support for the current fleet.  Also, there will be funding lines in the Letter of Acceptance for training, to include pilot and English language and infrastructure for overall base improvements. Particulars for the infrastructure and training are contained as an attachment to the Letter of Request.  This is a coordinated mission position. SCOBEY   NNNN  End Cable Text " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO977|09CAIRO69|09KHARTOUM48", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/25/2009 15:08", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000129  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA, AF/SPG, AF/E, NAIROBI FOR TRIMBLE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2019 TAGS: PREL, KCRM, SU, SO, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT PROMOTING PEACE AND STABILITY IN SUDAN, SOMALIA  REF: A. KHARTOUM 48      B. 08 CAIRO 977      C. CAIRO 69  Classified By: Minister Counselor for Economic and Political Affairs William R. Stewart for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  ----------------- Concern for Sudan -----------------  1. (C) Ahmed Abu Zeid, MFA Cabinet Advisor on African Affairs, told us on January 22 that the Government of Egypt (GOE) is focused on the upcoming ICC decision of whether to issue a warrant for the arrest of Sudanese President Bashir. Egypt expects that the ICC decision will come in mid-February.  Abu Zeid stated that it is important for the UNSC to hold a meeting after the ICC announcement to address "wider perspectives" and "manage the consequences" of the decision. He said the UNSC needs to discuss "how an ICC arrest warrant will affect Sudan's stability, security and the implementation of the CPA."  Abu Zeid stated that the UNSC could decide to implement Article 16 of the Rome Statute, after the announcement, to delay further action on the Bashir case for a year.  He said that such action would show the various Sudanese people and parties that the international community is concerned with maintaining the country's stability.  2. (C) Abu Zeid told us that the GOE is also concerned about the Justice and Equality Movement's (JEM) recent JEM attacks on other rebel groups (reftel A).  The GOE believes that these attacks are a move by the JEM to convince the international community that it is the only Darfuri opposition group that needs to participate in negotiations with the Government of Sudan (GOS).  Abu Zeid stated that Egypt wants to avoid "recreating the same problem as in Abuja" where only one group signed the peace accord with the GOS. The GOE is afraid that "direct contact" with USG officials in Washington (NFI) in early January emboldened the JEM to take its recent military action.  Abu Zeid asked if the meetings with JEM representatives signaled a policy shift in Washington, and he asked if we could provide some clarity on our policy toward Sudan, Darfur, and engaging with rebel groups such as the JEM.  (Note: Egypt expelled JEM officials from Cairo after the group attacked the city of Omdurman in May 2008 (reftel B). End Note.)  -------------------------- Closely Monitoring Somalia --------------------------  3. (C) After what Egypt considered "productive" meetings with Shaykh Sharif in Cairo on January 13 (reftel C), Abu Zeid was set to travel to Djibouti on January 23 to monitor efforts to create a national unity government in Somalia.  He said the GOE is interested in the election of the new Somali President, and if parliament will be enlarged. He asked if the U.S. preferred the election of the president to be held before or after the enlargement of the Somali parliament. Abu Zeid said that Egypt is keen to begin working on a coordinated effort that will bring peace and stability to Somalia and address the piracy phenomenon. He felt the initial meeting of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia (CGPCS) in New York was "fruitful."  Abu Zeid said Egypt is working on convening Working Group 4, which focuses on improving diplomatic and public information.  Although the meeting will be held in Cairo, he said the GOE has not yet selected a date for the meeting.  4. (C) Comment:  Egypt's policy priority in the Horn of Africa is stability.  Instability, especially in Sudan, can affect the flow of Nile Water into Egypt and could increase the flow of refugees into Egypt.  As such, Egypt is wary of the both the upcoming ICC announcement and the JEM because it feels that both have the potential to destabilize Sudan. Egypt therefore strongly advocates invoking Article 16 to suspend action against Bashir after the issuance of an ICC arrest warrant in order to preserve Sudan's stability.  Egypt is hopeful that its involvement in supporting the Djibouti process will lead to peace and stability in Somalia.  The GOE did not invite Shaykh Aweys' Alliance to Re-Liberate Somalia (ARS) wing to recent talks in Cairo because, like the JEM,  CAIRO 00000129  002 OF 002   Cairo sees ARS in Asmara as a threat to the Djibouti accord and stability in Somalia.  Egypt continues to be keen to coordinate with the U.S. on policies in Somalia. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "09CAIRO1855", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/26/2009 14:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000134  SIPDIS  DRL/NESA FOR BERGLAND; NSC STAFF FOR PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2029 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, KIRF, KISL, EG SUBJECT: IMPRISONED QURANIST BLOGGER RELEASED  REF: A. 1/22/2009 BERGLAND/WHITE EMAIL      B. CAIRO 1855  Classified By: Minister-Counselor for Economic and Political Affairs William R. Stewart for Reasons 1.4(b) and (d).  1.(C)  Summary:  Quranist blogger Reda Abdelrahman was released from an Egyptian prison on January 22 after nearly three months in detention.  Because Abdelrahman is no longer in prison and the GoE apparently does not intend to prosecute him, we do not believe it appropriate to provide legal defense funds to Abdelrahman through the DRL-managed Global Human Rights Defenders Fund.  Moreover, the Egyptian human rights NGO that has heretofore provided Abdelrahman's legal defense has publicly stated that it does not accept USG funding and would undoubtedly be embarrassed and angered by any disclosure that it had, even unwittingly, accepted such funds.  End Summary.  --------------------- Abdelrahman's Release ---------------------  2.(C)  On January 22, Egypt's Ministry of Interior released Reda Abdelrahman, an Egyptian blogger and member of the heterodox Islamic Quranist movement, who was arrested on October 27, 2008, reportedly for "insulting Islam."  The Supreme State Security Court, which acts under authority of Egypt's decades old Emergency Law, ordered Abdelrahman's release on January 6.  Lawyer Adel Ramadan of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR), a well-respected human rights NGO involved in Abdelrahman's defense, told us on January 25 that he believes the MoI will not pursue the case and he anticipates no further legal proceedings.  He added, however, that the MoI will probably keep the case open to maintain pressure on Abdelrahman.  (Note:  The Quranist movement is a small heterodox Islamic group that looks to the Quran as the sole source for Islamic law and rejects reliance on the Hadith.  The leader of the Quranist movement, Ahmed Sobhy Mansour, is an Egyptian national based in Washington and is reportedly Abdelrahman's uncle. Egyptian security forces arrested five Quranists in 2007, held them for several months and then released them without formal charges (ref B).  The group is not well-known by most Egyptians.  End note.)  ----------------------------- Global Defenders Fund Support -----------------------------   3.(C)  Because of these developments, Post does not support the recent nomination of Abdelrahman to receive $3500 from the Global Human Rights Defenders Fund to finance his legal defense (ref A).  As requested, we have reviewed local records and are aware of no information that would disqualify Abdelrahman from receiving such support.  However, Abdelrahman was recently released, and, because his lawyer does not foresee additional legal proceedings, it does not appear that Abdelrahman is in need of such support.  4.(C)  Moreover, EIPR, which has been providing Abdelrahman's legal representation, refuses, as a matter of principle, to accept USG funding.  While Post understands the Department's arrangements with NGO partners in the Global Defenders Fund not to reveal the USG source of any funds disbursed, we believe it likely that Egypt's security services will ultimately discover the USG's involvement.  This would be a source of great embarrassment to the EIPR, and could jeopardize the Mission's relationship and future cooperation with the organization, which is involved in a wide-range of religious freedom and human rights issues, including representing members of Egypt's Baha'i minority in their quest for full citizenship rights. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/27/2009 9:03", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CAIRO 000138  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  NEA/ELA FOR SCHALL, ISN/CTR FOR KCHITTENDEN AND LHICKOCK, ENERGY FOR RSALERNO  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: TBIO, PARM, PGOV, ECON, KFLU, KSTH, KSCA, EAGR, EG SUBJECT: EGYPT ENTERS THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF HIGH CONTAINMENT LABS  1. (SBU) Summary and comment: Five Egyptian research organizations are planning to build Biosafety Level Three (BSL-3) laboratories in which they can work with indigenous or exotic agents like Rift Valley Fever and strains of highly pathogenic avian influenza (AI).  Three of the groups, VSVRI, the state-subsidized animal vaccine monopoly, VACSERA, the state-owned human vaccine monopoly, and CLEVB, the GOE's animal vaccine regulator, have the financial wherewithal to build the labs.  The other two groups-- the Ministries of Health and Population (MOHP) and Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR)-- have strong support from ministers who view BSL-3 labs as prestigious "must have" projects.  None of the groups, however, are likely to be able to construct, let alone operate, a safe BSL-3 facility without U.S. technical assistance. All the organizations have received assistance from the U.S. Department of State's Biosecurity Engagement Program (BEP) and the U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit No. 3 (NAMRU-3). End summary and comment.  --------------------------------------------- ---- BIOSAFETY LEVEL 3 LABS CRITICAL LINK IN BIOSAFETY --------------------------------------------- ----  2. (SBU) The U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) have published safety guidelines for labs that handle infectious microorganisms. These guidelines cover practices, equipment, and facilities (everything from access to drinking fountains), and they vary depending on the work to be done and the threat posed by the virus or bacteria involved. The guidelines speak in terms of biosafety levels 1, 2, 3, and 4-- the higher the number, the greater the risk, and the more demanding the precautions required to protect lab workers, the environment and the community. A BSL-3 lab is designed to safely handle agents which, when inhaled, may cause serious injury or death. NAMRU-3 currently operates the only BSL-3 lab in Egypt, although has the ability to upgrade to BSL-4 in less than 24 hours, if necessary.  ------------------------ THE EGYPTIAN BSL PLAYERS ------------------------  3. (SBU) VSVRI, VACSERA and CLEVB may need BSL-3 facilities to do the work they plan to do, and they have the cash or the financing in place to proceed with the projects. The Ministry of Health and Population and Ministry of Agriculture and Lab Reclamation labs need BSL-3 facilities, but they do not have the financial wherewithal to proceed with construction at this time. VSVRI has broken ground and is expected to complete the first Egyptian-owned BSL-3 lab.  At least two Egyptian universities also have BSL-3 aspirations: Ain Shams and Beni Sueif.  Ain Shams has begun the process; sources indicate it is probably 6 months to a year away from opening a BSL-3 lab.  Beni Sueif has just begun the process, and its prospects for success are uncertain.  -------------------------------- USG TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO DATE --------------------------------  4. (SBU) Biosecurity and counter-terrorism experts agree that bioterrorism is a critical threat to US security, and insecure labs around the world are a major part of the problem. Three separate groups, the National Intelligence Council, Britain's IPPR Commission on National Security in the 21st Century, and the Graham Commission, published reports in late 2008 echoing these concerns. Against this backdrop, the USG has rendered considerable technical assistance to each of the five Egyptian organizations seeking to build BSL-3 labs.   5. (SBU) In late July 2008, representatives of all five Egyptian groups traveled to Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, New Mexico, to participate in a BEP-sponsored training program, entitled "Controlling Laboratory Biorisks," at Sandia. The training, which ended August 4, 2008, included a trip to Colorado State University's new BSL-3 facility in Ft. Collins.  6. (SBU) In mid-November 2008, representatives from six USG Agencies (DOS, USDA, HHS-CDC, DOE-Sandia, DOD-NAMRU-3 and the FBI) met with the Egyptian organizations pursuing BSL-3 labs in al-Ain al-Sokhna, Egypt for a BEP-sponsored BSL-3  CAIRO 00000138  002 OF 003   Planning, Programming and Operations Workshop. The participants discussed their BSL plans and agreed on the importance of a culture of biosecurity, risk assessments tailored to Egypt's particular situation, international support, a national strategy, training, and national standards. Participants agreed MOHP and MALR needed BSL-3 capabilities to deal with emerging infectious diseases and needed US technical assistance to build and operate high containment labs. Some participants, while grateful for NAMRU-3's support, stressed the need for Egyptian-owned BSL-3 facilities. After the workshop, BEP conducted follow-up visits to MOHP, MALR, VACSERA and VSVRI. A BEP representative also met with the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and briefed the Ministry on BEP's activities in Egypt.  7. (SBU) Sandia, BEP and NAMRU-3 continue to work with the Egyptian organizations on risk assessments, assessments none of the organizations had undertaken prior to the meeting in Sokhna. Additionally, Dr. Mohamed Khalifa of MALR has agreed to spearhead the creation of the Egyptian Biosafety Association. BEP may fund this effort.  --------------------------------------- EGYPT: CROSSROADS FOR PANDEMIC DISEASES ---------------------------------------  8. (SBU) MOHP's Central Health Laboratories are located just a few blocks from the American Embassy in Cairo.  Dr. Hala Esmat, the Director of the laboratories, makes a compelling case for BSL-3 capability. Her laboratories routinely handle AI and Rift Valley Fever viruses and other dangerous pathogens. The labs storage cabinets contain these viruses as well as anthrax bacteria and other "select agents." She and her team are very concerned about AI and Rift Valley Fever, which are endemic here, and the possible entry of these and other diseases from Sudan, Libya and elsewhere.  As Esmat put it, "We live in a dangerous neighborhood." Esmat told us MOHP Minister Hatem El-Gabaly ordered her to build a BSL-3 lab and told her the resources would be available to do so. Dr. Nasr El-Sayid, the Minister's closest advisor, told ESTHOff that BSL-3 capability would further burnish MOHP's reputation as the go-to lab for certain African and the Middle Eastern countries that rely on MOHP's reputation for discretion.  He said he routinely receives requests from neighboring countries to conduct confidential lab tests on samples.  9. (SBU) Comment: MOHP is a long way from being able to construct and run a BSL-3 lab. Despite the Minister's commitment to the project, there is no evidence the money is available. Esmat also lacks a strong supporting team. End Comment.  --------------------------------------------- ----------- MIN. OF AGRICULTURE: "WE ARE THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE." --------------------------------------------- -----------  10. (SBU) MALR, like MOHP, stakes a strong claim for BSL-3 capabilities. In the words of Dr. Mohamed Khalifa Hassan, Technical Manager for the Central Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production (CLQP), Egypt is Europe's backyard, and MALR is the West's first line of defense against pandemic threats including AI and Rift Valley Fever. AI has killed 23 of the 52 Egyptians it has afflicted to date, and Rift Valley Fever killed 200 of the 400 Egyptians it struck during the last outbreak in 2003.  Both these diseases are endemic in Egypt. MALR currently operates two laboratories: the Animal Health Research Institute (AHRI) and CLPQ. According Dr. Mona Ali, the Director of the labs, MALR Minister Amin Abaza is committed to building a BSL-3 lab at its central Cairo facility and, if the financing can be arranged, a separate BSL-3 facility at the Agricultural Research Center outside of Cairo that will be able to handle large animals.  --------------------------- STATUS OF ONGOING PROJECTS ---------------------------  11. (SBU) The Veterinary Serum and Vaccine Research Institute (VSVRI), the GOE-backed animal vaccine monopoly located in Abbasia near NAMRU-3, has the ready cash ($8 million) to build a Foot and Mouth (F&M)vaccine production facility incorporating BSL-3 capabilities and the additional resources  CAIRO 00000138  003 OF 003   ($4.5 million) needed to refurbish an existing AI facility to include a BSL-3 area. VSVRI has contracted with Atlas Construction Company to build the F&M plant and construction is underway.  VSVRI's Deputy Director, Dr. Adel Azab, is determined to incorporate BSL-3 capabilities into VSVRI's facilities.  12. (SBU) VSVRI's next-door-neighbor, the Central Laboratory for Evaluation of Veterinary Biologics (CLEVB), has also taken a few steps toward establishing a BSL-3 facility. CLEVB is the GOE's gatekeeper for all would-be animal vaccines. It tests all imported and locally-produced animal vaccines for safety and efficacy. No animal vaccine is used in this country without CLEVB's seal of approval.  CLEVB has begun to renovate space in its Abbasia facility, which is located adjacent to VSVRI. Dr. Elham El-Ebiary, CLEVB's Director, told ESTHOff CLEVB has secured a credit line of 8 million Egyptian pounds (LE) from the Islamic Development Bank.  13. (SBU) In a visit to CLEVB late last year, ESTHOff was allowed to inspect CLEVB's poultry vaccine challenge test area, which is located in the building's basement. Several trials were underway involving chickens and ducks in several different rooms. There was little effort to comply with biosafety standards. The rooms were not sealed. The stench in the hallway was overpowering. The facility appeared to be unsuitable for a BSL-3 lab.  14. (SBU) The Holding Company for Biological Products and Vaccines (VACSERA) in Agouza, Giza, the Ministry of Finance's human vaccine monopoly, is taking a more cautious approach to BSL-3. Of all the entities pursuing the BSL-3 Holy Grail, VACSERA, with its 4,200 employees, $100 million in annual sales, state-of-the-art production facilities, Ministry of Finance backing, and strong management, seems to be the best positioned to build a BSL-3 lab.  MOHP Minister El-Gabaly recently announced that the GOE was increasing its efforts to produce an AI vaccine effective against a pandemic virus before any outbreak, a so-called "pre-pandemic" vaccine. Dr. Abdul Rahman Shahin, MOHP's spokesperson, has confirmed that VACSERA is tasked to work on a human H5N1 vaccine project. VACSERA welcomes USG help with BSL efforts.  ----------------------------- NEXT STEPS: A BRAVE NEW WORLD -----------------------------  15. (SBU) Comment: The USG's efforts in support of BSL-3 projects in Egypt have generated an enormous amount of goodwill with the groups who want to build the labs, and the ministries involved. Representatives of the five Egyptian groups have repeatedly expressed their appreciation for this support, and the groups have granted BEP unfettered access to their plans and their facilities. Embassy Cairo, including NAMRU-3, strongly supports the BEP initiatives here. In the interest of biosafety and enhancing our cooperation with key governmental and academic entities,  the USG should continue to make every effort to insure that the BSL-3 labs are built and run safely and securely. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/27/2009 10:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000142  SIPDIS  NSC FOR PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2019 TAGS: PREL, PHUM, KDEM, EG SUBJECT: AYMAN NOUR LETTER TO PRESIDENT OBAMA  Classified By: Minister-Counselor for Political and Economic Affairs William R. Stewart for reason 1.4 (b).  (C) The wife of imprisoned Al Ghad Party leader Ayman Nour passed to us a handwritten letter from Nour to President Obama.  An unofficial Embassy translation of the letter follows:  Dr. Ayman Nour From Torah Al Mazra'ah Prison South Cairo January 22, 2009  Dear Mr. President Barack Obama,  With my appreciation and friendship, I am honored to join, from my prison, the millions of those congratulating you for your inauguration in this worldwide wedding of Freedom, of which I breathed some of its breezes, through these historic moments, as my imprisonment did not prevent me from following the event that impacts this world which is restless from longing for change.  In my second message to you, I would like to thank you for your kind gesture of pointing out my first message on your electoral website on the worldwide web.  And also, to referencing my case on that same website, in the document titled, "Strengthening Our Common Security By Investing In Our Common Humanity."  Mr. President, your election was, and still is, a source of great inspiration for nations that believe in their sacred right to justice, equality, freedom and deliverance from oppression, desperation, poverty and colonialism, in all its forms.  Your Excellency, at a time when the world still suffers from massacres and prisons, detention camps and torture, all of which inject peoples with desperation and extremism, due to these problems remaining unresolved, your voice has brought hope to the hearts of many around the world, in a fresh start for new relations among peace and freedom-loving peoples and nations.  Your Excellency, we have every confidence that a new spirit of trust, openness and communication will allow you to surpass all the difficult hopes and surmount chronic obstacles for a new world that your Excellency represents the first sign of its coming and much-awaited dawn.  Therefore, we wish you and your small family and free nation success and God's blessings to tread the right path.  We also pray for you as a young man who dared to dream and dared to fulfill his dream, which has opened the closed doors of dreams in all parts of the earth.  My prayers, Faithfully,  Dr. Ayman Nour SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/27/2009 14:56", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS CAIRO 000145  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  NSC FOR PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EG SUBJECT: SENIOR EGYPTIAN OFFICIAL WELCOMES RECENT POTUS COMMENTS  Sensitive but unclassified. Not for Internet distribution.  1. (SBU) The Egyptian leadership is taking notice of, and welcoming, President Obama's recent outreach to Egypt, and focus on the Middle East peace process.  Safwat El Sherif, the powerful secretary-general of the ruling National Democratic Party and speaker of the Shura Council (Egypt's upper house of parliament), has long been chilly to the U.S., disdaining contact with USG officials and often making negative public remarks about the USG.  In an uncharacteristic move, Sherif, arguably the most influential politician in Egypt after Hosni Mubarak, made comments to journalists on January 24 that were relatively warm towards President Obama.  In a statement that was highlighted in the premier government newspaper "Al Ahram" and subsequently on the ruling party's website, Sherif said that the President's January 21 call to Hosni Mubarak "is an initiative that reflects a change (in U.S. policy). demonstrating that the new U.S. administration is keen to listen to the views of the most important country in the Middle East (Egypt)."  Sherif also flagged President Obama's January 22 comments at the State Department on U.S. policy in the Middle East, noting that they were "positive."  2. (SBU) Sherif underscored "the importance of the U.S. approach in the coming phase, as it works to regain its credibility as a neutral partner in the peace process," and stressed his hope that the USG would stop using "double standards" when dealing with Israel and Arab countries. While Sherif's comments may seem unremarkable, the relatively positive tone towards the U.S. is quite unusual in the current Egyptian context, and significant coming from someone  normally so critical of the USG.  Sherif's commentary, and the subsequent orchestrated highlighting of his remarks in GOE mouthpieces, is a clear signal of the Egyptian leadership's appreciation of administration moves to date. SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "07CAIRO1855|07CAIRO3455|08CAIRO1675|08CAIRO913", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/29/2009 13:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000155  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA AND DRL/NESCA NSC FOR PASCUAL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2029 TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PGOV, KDEM, EAID, EG SUBJECT: PROSECUTION ACTS ON CRIMINAL CASE AGAINST SAAD EDDIN IBRAHIM  REF: A. 08 CAIRO 1675      B. 08 CAIRO 913      C. 07 CAIRO 3455      D. 07 CAIRO 1855  Classified By: ECPO Mincouns William R. Stewart for reason 1.4 (d).  1. (C) On January 28, Ahmed Rizk, Executive Director of the Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies (IKC), confirmed for us press reports that on January 27 the Public Prosecutor (Egypt's Attorney-General equivalent) referred a criminal case against Egyptian-American democracy activist Saad Eddin Ibrahim to the State Security Prosecutor's Office for investigation.  Ibrahim is the IKC's founding chairman, and one of the most prominent Egyptian advocates for political reform.  Rizk told us that in November 2008 Hossam Mustafa, the leader of the miniscule "Free Republican" political party, filed the criminal case against Ibrahim for allegedly committing "espionage" through his statements published in newspaper articles in Egypt and abroad, asserting that he had convinced President Bush during a June 2007 meeting in Prague to withhold U.S. economic assistance to Egypt because of a lack of progress on democratic reform.  2. (C) Rizk said that he is unsure whether the State Security Prosecutor's Office is legally able to refer the criminal case for investigation without Ibrahim being present in Egypt.  Therefore, Rizk continued, the IKC will ask its legal counsel whether it may be possible to prevent the prosecutor's office from referring the case onward.  3. (C) Ibrahim has not returned to Egypt since a complaint was filed against him in June 2007 for allegedly committing "espionage" by meeting with President Bush in Prague earlier that month and urging conditionality on U.S. aid to Egypt (ref D).  IKC Executive Director Rizk told us that a misdemeanor court dismissed those charges, claiming the case was outside of its jurisdiction.  Rizk said that Hossam Mustafa subsequently filed the criminal case on similar grounds in November 2008.  In August 2008, a court ruled against Ibrahim in a civil lawsuit accusing him of "tarnishing Egypt's image abroad," and imposed a two-year prison sentence and a LE 10,000 (1,886 USD) fine (ref A).  4. (C) Comment:  The Public Prosecutor's January 27 action on the "espionage" case is significant because it advances the only criminal case currently pending against Ibrahim.  We will continue to follow developments in this case, as well as the five or six civil cases still pending against Ibrahim (refs A and B). SCOBEY " }
{ "_id" : "08CAIRO2260|09CAIRO79", "origin" : "Embassy Cairo", "date_time" : "1/29/2009 15:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000159  SIPDIS  FOR NEA/ELA, DRL/NESCA AND INL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2029 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KDEM, EG SUBJECT: JUDGE RELEASES POLICE OFFICER CHARGED WITH SAMALUT KILLING  REF: A. CAIRO 79      B. 08 CAIRO 2260  Classified By: ECPO Mincouns William R. Stewart for reason 1.4 (d).  1. (C) Summary and comment:  On January 19, a judge in Minya (150 miles south of Cairo) released police officer Mohammed Anwar, who had been detained on January 13 on charges of killing a 32-year old pregnant woman, Mervat Abdel Sattar, in October 2008 when she tried to prevent police from entering her home in the village of Samalut (reftels).  The police had entered Abdel Sattar's home in order to arrest her brother-in-law for theft.  The judge released Anwar after the key witness in the case, the victim's sister-in-law, retracted her testimony identifying Anwar as the culprit. Human rights lawyers have accused the police of intimidating the witness into changing her testimony.  Contacts criticized the judge for not throwing out the changed testimony as invalid.  The release will only reinforce public perceptions that the police operate with impunity and are able to manipulate the judicial system.  End summary and comment.  2. (C) According to press reports January 20, the Hisham Mubarak Law Center, a reputable legal aid organization, accused the police of intimidating the key witness into changing her testimony by threatening not to release from prison family members who were detained following the October riots that broke out in response to the killing.  (Note: There were no reports of demonstrations or violence in Samalut following the January 19 release.  End note.) Attorney Ahmed Seif Al-Islam Hamad of the Hisham Mubarak Law Center told us privately January 27 it was "certain" the police had influenced the witness to change her testimony, but he was unable to provide supporting details.  3. (C) Human rights lawyer Shady Amin of the Al Haq Center for Democracy and Human Rights criticized the judge for releasing the police officer on the basis of this retracted testimony.  Amin told us that because the judge understood the witness would be subject to pressure, he should have thrown out the new testimony as invalid.  Amin opined that the judge did not have the "political weight" necessary to stand up to the police.  He commented that the prosecution still has the legal right to continue with the case, as the police officer still stands accused of the crime.  However, Amin continued, most prosecutors do not continue with such cases in the face of police opposition.  4. (C) Human Rights lawyer Negad Al-Borai of the USAID-funded NGO "The United Group" speculated that the police may have concluded a private arrangement with the family, whereby the sister-in-law agreed to retract her testimony in exchange for a payment of "blood money" to the family.  Al-Borai assessed that such arrangements between the police and the families of victims are common, especially in cases such as this when the family is poor.  Bahey El-Din Hassan, Director of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, told us he believes it is plausible that the police intimidated the witness in the case, and noted that in the past State Security has silenced the families of victims through threats.  He praised the Hisham Mubarak Center for the usual quality of its work, and said that the center's accusations could very well be credible.  5. (C) Comment:  The officer's release will only reinforce public perceptions that the police operate with impunity and are able to manipulate the judicial system.  Courts convicted and sentenced police officers to prison terms in two fall 2008 cases that involved the use of gratuitous violence outside the direct scope of their police work: beating and drowning a fisherman, and hooking a man to their car and then running him over (ref A).  Because the Samalut killing occurred while the officer was in pursuit of a suspected criminal, it is possible that these different circumstances could have influenced the police to prevent the case from making its way through the criminal justice system. SCOBEY " }
Albuquerque::1
Philadelphi::1
Amin Abaza::1
Tamiflu::1
Bordignon::1
Shaykh Sharif Shaykh Ahmed::1
Behira::1
Chinook Technical Assistance::1
Contact Group::1
EU Parliament::1
Chinook::1
Bechtel::1
U.S.-Egyptian::1
SENIOR::1
Brown::1
ETSS::1
AMRAAM::1
FIRST LINE OF::1
Interior SOLIMAN::1
Amos Gilad::1
Katamaya Air Base::1
Paris::1
Belgians::1
Haile::1
Sharm Al Shaykh::1
Apache::1
Sandia National Laboratories::1
IKC Executive::1
Training::1
International Apache::1
Eritrean Government::1
PEACE::1
Sokhna::1
Opposition MP::1
Abbasia::1
Eritrean Embassy::1
Egyptian Cabinet::1
Natural Gas Loss::1
Freedom::1
ECWR::1
SHAYKH::1
CHILDREN::1
Field Operations Officer::1
UNICEF::1
WAKE OF::1
Global::1
END NOTE::1
Marzouk::1
PARODI::1
VISIT TO::1
Ismail::1
Arab League Annual Summit::1
EU Quartet::1
Europeans::1
Boutros Ghali::1
HUMANITARIAN::1
Political Reform::1
Suez Canal Authority::1
Minya::1
APACHE::1
CSI::1
BEP::1
East::1
Arab League Economic Summit::1
USDA::1
North Sinai Red::1
Patient::1
Gharbiya::1
SCORN FOR::1
Economic Affairs William::1
CARROLL::1
Child Law Amendments::1
HAMAS::1
Assault::1
Rafah Quiet::1
Congressional::1
BIOSAFETY LEVEL::1
Biological Products::1
Iranians::1
Child Protection Law::1
Sheikh Youssef::1
EVACUEES::1
Economics::1
Senator Dorgan::1
North Sinai Populace::1
Finland::1
Tourism Garannah::1
NFI::1
Senait Haile::1
Zapatero::1
Ahmed Samy::1
Hisham Talaat Mustafa::1
CLQP::1
Haggag::1
Egyptian People::1
Ahmed Aboul Gheit::1
IDF Corporal Gilad Shalit::1
Joint Commission::1
Phase II::1
Wael Hany::1
Intelligence::1
Sweden::1
MEDEVAC::1
ICC::1
MP::1
SOCIAL::1
Biosafety Level Three::1
Deputy Assistant::1
Arabic::1
Egyptian Parliament::1
Canal::1
Sharqiya::1
SYG Amre Moussa::1
Doctor::1
Justice::1
Assistance::1
Lower Administrative Court::1
Enough::1
ESTHOff::1
Saad Eddin Ibrahim::1
Labor Party::1
CODEL::1
Reconnaissance::1
Troops::1
Interior Habib El Adly::1
Assembly Committee::1
NEXT::1
MB Supreme Guide Mehdi Akef::1
International Registration::1
BSL::1
Suzanne Tamim::1
EMBASSY::1
SCHALL::1
Russian::1
CHIEF ON EGYPT::1
VSVRI::1
Madrid Protocol::1
WOMEN::1
AUC::1
PARLIAMENT::1
Gaza8::1
Forty Egyptian Muslim::1
Minimum Age::1
Aman Goitom::1
FMF::1
SPIN::1
Mohamed Anwar::1
Eritrean War::1
JEM::1
ASSERT::1
International Bureau::1
EGYPT TO::1
Chinook Program::1
German::1
Moussa::1
WIFE::1
Faithfully::1
Dakahlia::1
CALLS FOR::1
Human Rights Boutros::1
Forced Migration::1
Amr Moussa::1
ORA::1
Mansoura::1
Gas Affairs::1
Abd::1
Central Security Forces::1
UNSC::1
Media::1
Disease Control::1
Somali::1
USAF::1
DAVID::1
Sorry Gaza::1
Komsan::1
DRAFT::1
KCRM::1
APCs::1
YOUR::1
Manshia Al Bakry::1
Itallem::1
Parliament::1
Hisham Mubarak Center::1
Pilgrimage Site::1
Family Law::1
Torah Prison::1
Shehab::1
USASAC::1
Israeli Jews::1
Al Jazeerah::1
Central Health Laboratories::1
Nuclear Research::1
Ghad Party::1
Marsah Matrouh::1
Foreign::1
Support Gaza::1
BRAVE::1
Berlusconi::1
Zarea::1
Palestinian Red::1
LIBEL::1
Salafist::1
Agouza::1
Sadat::1
UNSYG Moon::1
COMPREHENSIVE::1
TFG::1
Shia::1
Japanese::1
Community::1
NCW::1
Osman Mohammed Osman::1
DEFENSE::1
Abu Simbel::1
Ambassador Shoukry Fouad::1
Ihab Youssef::1
HELAL::1
Economic Costs Are High::1
Al-Borai::1
Al Ghad Party::1
Future Without Child Labor::1
Egypt Position::1
Reconciliation::1
NSC::1
MIN::1
ETTC::1
MIC::1
Economic Development::1
EWWT::1
SYMPATHY FOR::1
Beltone Financial::1
Apache Technical Assistance::1
ECPO Min Couns::1
Military::1
Maliki::1
National Intelligence Council::1
WITH::1
Hossam Mustafa::1
Tartus::1
Jerusalem::1
Mustafa Mahmoud::1
Assiyut::1
Suleiman::1
UN Gaza::1
Nile Valley::1
Commercial Registry Administration::1
EU Political Counselor::1
FGM::1
Border Protection::1
Abdelrahman::1
Tagammu::1
OREP::1
RENUMBERED::1
Solidarity With Gaza::1
Rome Statute::1
RATIFY::1
Miami::1
EOHR::1
Congressman David Obey::1
Sheikh::1
Nuweiba::1
Rift Valley Fever::1
Sheldon Whitehouse::1
Port Suez::1
Ban::1
Ain Shams::1
Thad Cochran::1
NDP Assistant::1
National Center::1
Bedouin::1
Israeli Mission::1
Bedouins::1
Sandia::1
UNDP Human Rights Capacity Building Project::1
India::1
Participants::1
Authority::1
Fourth Geneva Convention::1
LANGE AND::1
Foreign Assistance Act::1
Global Defenders Fund::1
Palestinian Rafah::1
OIC::1
Legal::1
Palestiian::1
Shousha::1
IMPLEMENTATION AND::1
Civil Aviation::1
Parliamentary Affairs::1
Hossam Bahgat::1
U.S. Centers::1
Mahmoud Abbas::1
CAIRO1307::1
Egyptian Sheikh Yousef Qaradawi::1
Wheat::1
Central Laboratory::1
Historic Court Rulings::1
ORDEAL::1
Al Assar::1
Karem Shalom::1
Norwegian::1
Eritrean::1
Bassim::1
CAIRO2373::1
LABOR::1
Egyptian Central::1
Please::1
Mohamed Awad::1
Egyptian Border Guards::1
Ahmed Saleh::1
Egyptian Trade Union Federation::1
MEDIA::1
Work::1
REQUESTING U.S.::1
EB::1
Bakri::1
Latakia::1
Access::1
Quranist::1
ET::1
Manpower::1
Block::1
ER::1
CAIRO574::1
Disaster Relief::1
Apache Aviator Qualification Courses::1
Fayez Abu Harb::1
Madrid::1
ETUF::1
Persian Gulf::1
More Female::1
Khaled Khairy::1
SOMALI::1
Sameh El Sayed::1
Mervat Abdel Sattar::1
Airborne Reconnaissance::1
IBRAHIM::1
Port Said::1
AIRCRAFT TO::1
REGIONAL::1
activity8::1
SYGs::1
Asia::1
ENERGY FOR::1
BALIN AND::1
AYMAN::1
Scant::1
Supreme Administrative Court::1
Assar::1
Norwegian DCM::1
Abu Hammad::1
Qena::1
GOE Awareness::1
KWMN::1
Qaranshu::1
H5N1::1
Egyptian Constitution::1
Cargo Helicopter Program Manager::1
Damanhour::1
Tanta::1
Data::1
Chinook Helicopters::1
Search::1
Rushdie::1
HANDLE::1
THWARTED::1
Bashir::1
XF::1
North Sinai Governorate::1
Border Security::1
International Shipping Agency::1
Economic Development Osman Mohammed Osman::1
Fadel::1
Pharaonic::1
CANEDO AND::1
WFP::1
Source::1
Suez Canal University::1
Ismail Karara::1
Mahalla::1
NORTH::1
Unskilled::1
SHARIF::1
Senate::1
Faisal::1
New York::1
DANG::1
Arab Penal Reform Organization::1
Humanitarian Assistance::1
Engineer::1
Container::1
Hadith::1
God::1
Zionist::1
Urgent Cases::1
ECWR Chair Nehad Aboul Komsan::1
Instability::1
Foreign Military Funds::1
Egypt Not Final::1
NDP MP::1
PASS TO::1
Darfuri::1
Coptic Church::1
Egyptian Authorities::1
COESPU::1
Khaled Sayed Ahmed::1
Camp David Accords::1
United Nations Children::1
Egyptian State Security::1
Shaykh Zuwayd::1
Teklay::1
Aqaba::1
Security Assistance::1
Half::1
Shady Amin::1
Egyptian Biosafety Association::1
Higher Administrative Court::1
State Council::1
International Relations Department::1
Central Sinai::1
Central Bank::1
Lawyer Adel Ramadan::1
IMPRISONED::1
Samalut::1
Liaison Committee::1
Foreign Military Financing::1
GOS::1
State Department::1
Al Yom Al Sabaa::1
Younes::1
Land Reclamation::1
USAF Technical Coordination Groups::1
ABU SEADA::1
PRM FOR::1
Israeli Attacks::1
Garannah::1
Islam::1
SOMALIA::1
Allahu Akbar::1
Life Under Hamas Rule::1
Poultry Production::1
U.S. Army Cargo Helicopter Alternative::1
Shura::1
Abu Hizara::1
ZFR::1
Egyptian State Lawyers::1
Weldeab::1
SYG Ban Ki Moon::1
Ethiopia::1
MoI::1
Reuters::1
Eritrean State::1
PRM FOR LANGE::1
Marks::1
Palestine::1
Gamal Mubarak::1
Abuja::1
Public::1
Independence::1
DCM::1
Worse::1
Kadry::1
Muslim::1
Egyptian Arab::1
Nile Water::1
Abu Hasirah::1
DEPT::1
Salamut::1
Atlas Construction Company::1
Mubarak Armed Forces::1
Arab Affairs::1
DMI::1
Sinai Bedouin::1
Ambassador Bassim::1
Bir::1
Solidarity::1
Arab Organization::1
Sidewinder::1
SEPTEL::1
International Cooperation Fayza Aboul Naga::1
RESENT::1
Leave::1
Tehran::1
CAIRO419::1
AHRI::1
Islamic Quranist::1
Gaza Conflict::1
OBAMA Classified By::1
Technical Manager::1
THE::1
Omar Suleiman::1
UNHCR::1
Commercial Office::1
SYG::1
Abu Mazen::1
Tourism Mohamed Zoheir Garanah::1
CLEVB::1
Al Sunna Al Mohamadeya::1
UNMIS::1
Czech::1
Mogamma::1
Omdurman::1
Anger::1
Kassem::1
Education::1
ILO::1
Leahy Amendment::1
Israeli FM Livni::1
Syndicate::1
Mohamed Ahmed::1
Special Envoy::1
Noha Rushdie::1
Operations Workshop::1
France::1
USN::1
Hafez Abu Seada::1
Ibn Khaldun Center::1
Imbaba Fever Hospital::1
Colorado State University::1
Rizk::1
DENNIS::1
AMAY::1
PORT::1
Rescue::1
MALR::1
U.S. Abdel Raouf::1
James Rawley::1
Pharaohs::1
Bahrain::1
Abul Ghayt::1
Islamic Group::1
NPPA::1
Independent::1
Arab World::1
MUBARAK::1
FOOD::1
MOHAMADEN::1
Ahmed Moataz::1
AL SYG::1
Esmat::1
Dar Al Fouad::1
Lab Reclamation::1
United States Air Force::1
Apache Helicopter::1
REDUCED::1
Arab League Headquarters::1
Arafat::1
Madrid Agreement::1
Arab Center::1
Arab Doctors::1
MOP::1
IDSC::1
Security Division::1
Graham Commission::1
EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF::1
Katamaya Air Bases::1
Energy Law::1
MINISTRY OF::1
Tarek Mohamed Nabil::1
Gaza Relief Committee::1
Longbow Crew Trainer::1
Turkish::1
Electricity::1
MADRID::1
Petroleum::1
Goitom::1
Vaccines::1
Naval Medical Research Unit No::1
Dar Al Fouad Hospital::1
George Bush::1
Sarkozy::1
Karara::1
Beni Sueif::1
REFORM::1
U.S. Air Force::1
IZ::1
AGRICULTURE::1
Islamic Development Bank::1
Afifi::1
Egyptian Center::1
LETTER OF::1
Abu Harb::1
Caro::1
Animal Health Research Institute::1
African Affairs::1
Development Studies::1
Blogger Nora Younis::1
Women::1
Ahmed Abd::1
Egyptian Trademark::1
UNSYG::1
ECWR Chair Komsan::1
Security International Airport Cairo AMIN::1
Nuri Al Maliki::1
EIPR::1
Sharm::1
Saudi::1
PARAGRAPHS::1
Tel Aviv::1
VACSERA::1
Essam Salama Mohamed::1
Gameela::1
Airborne Landing::1
Hegazy::1
PANDEMIC::1
Middle Egypt::1
Manshia Al Bakry Hospital::1
symbolic8::1
Culture::1
Khaled Mohamed::1
Amcits::1
DESPITE::1
Worst Forms::1
Cairo Opera House::1
CISMOA::1
Concern::1
Special Operations Force::1
Arab Peace Initiative::1
LOA::1
BURKART AND::1
Camp David::1
Supreme State::1
Vicenza::1
Egyptian Border Guard Forces::1
Interior Ministry::1
MOI::1
UNDP::1
Addis Ababa::1
MACDERMOTT::1
North Carolina::1
Internal Politics::1
Fuel::1
Medical Evacuation::1
Asmara::1
DOHA827::1
Sexual Assault::1
Child Labor::1
SCHIZOPHRENIA::1
Cargo Helicopter Program::1
ELAB::1
Egyptian State::1
ASSESSMENT::1
Gameela Ismail::1
UNHCR Cairo::1
IR::1
ESLA::1
Central Security Forces SALEM::1
CPA::1
Reda Abdelrahman::1
Cassation::1
Chinook Aviator Qualification Courses::1
Taba::1
Houston::1
ARS::1
USS San Antonio::1
Mohammed Adel::1
International Cooperation::1
TREASURY FOR::1
Al Maza Air Base::1
Orabi::1
Food::1
Cairene::1
Southern Sudan::1
South Cairo::1
Barack Obama::1
HUMPHREY::1
TOWARD::1
Social Affairs::1
Wafd::1
Nuclear Power Plants Authority::1
Heba Kassem::1
CONT::1
AYMAN NOUR::1
Oslo::1
Nebi Daniel::1
Immigrant Visa::1
Hisham Kassem::1
SUBSIDY::1
Change Are Even::1
Mahmoud Salah::1
DRL::1
Middle East News Agency::1
Labor::1
Dakhaleya::1
Kerdasa::1
ROBINSON AND::1
Philadelphi Corridor::1
YouTube::1
Hajj::1
Social Solidarity::1
U.N.::1
Moatasim Mohamed::1
CAIRO2257::1
Mouth::1
Support::1
Kafr Sheikh::1
Global Human Rights Defenders Fund::1
SAMALUT::1
Salah::1
Justice Ministries::1
Ghad::1
Middle Eastern::1
Eritrean Army::1
Red Card Against Child Labor::1
Upper Egyptian::1
MOMM::1
International Organization Affairs Naela Gabr::1
PARTY::1
Yemen::1
European Union::1
Ministry Of Defense::1
PM Ahmed::1
TWELVE::1
Ambassador Jackie Wolcott::1
Senator Whitehouse::1
Rafah Border::1
National Security::1
Chinook Helicopter::1
End Comment::1
Migration::1
South Sinai::1
New Mexico::1
SCREAM::1
MTADS::1
United States Division::1
Islamists::1
Democracy::1
STATUS OF ONGOING::1
Djibouti Peace Accord::1
Moratinos::1
Abdel Sattar::1
Awqaf::1
Arab League Summit::1
Grand Mufti::1
EMAIL B.::1
Egyptian Ambassador Ibrahim Yousri::1
Kent Conrad::1
BERGLAND::1
Operations Center::1
Quran::1
CIVILIAN::1
SCA::1
Assiut::1
Shadia Farrag::1
Meleika::1
Sharkia::1
American University::1
Safwat Sherif::1
Amin Meleika::1
Vaccine Research Institute::1
Refugee::1
AHLC::1
Sudanese National Congress Party::1
IPPR Commission::1
MFA Cabinet Advisor::1
Sheikh Summit::1
Khattab::1
TELEGRAM::1
Middle East Refugee Assistance::1
GHANEMA::1
LABS::1
Cairo Administrative Court::1
Byron Dorgan::1
Reftel::1
AMERA::1
Egyptian Approach::1
BECHTEL::1
Sharm El Sheikh::1
Embassy Tel Aviv::1
Revenue::1
Mekki::1
Equality Movement::1
Mohammed Anwar::1
Septel::1
Explosively Formed Projectiles::1
UN::1
Apache Program::1
QURANIST::1
Petroleum Sameh Fahmy::1
Judicial Affairs Mufeed Shahab::1
Amcit::1
Utility Cargo Helicopter Office::1
Contacts::1
Marc Otte::1
Special Operations Troops IBRAHIM::1
Abdullah::1
Maintenance::1
Bashar::1
Country Director::1
Nuclear Nonproliferation::1
ISSUES::1
Somali Transitional Federal::1
Abu Zeid::1
EGIS Director Soliman::1
Defense Major::1
LUNCH::1
Mohammed Ali Ibrahim::1
American Embassy::1
Hotel::1
Upon::1
Arima::1
COMMUNITY::1
KNNP::1
Egyptian Pound::1
German Chancellor Merkel::1
BLK II::1
Bashar Al Assad::1
Senior Ministry::1
MITCHELL::1
Youssef::1
Bread::1
Nasser Amin::1
DORGAN::1
U.S. Embassy::1
Wafaa Bassim::1
Brutality::1
Holy Grail::1
El Arish::1
Eritreans::1
NOFORN FOR::1
Global Financial::1
End Use Monitoring::1
EFPs::1
BLOCK II::1
BORDER::1
Central Security Forces YOUSSF::1
USAID Gaza::1
Egyptian Red::1
Century::1
Assist::1
House::1
Sparrow::1
KIPR::1
South Africa::1
Gazans::1
Britain::1
Ahmed Sobhy Mansour::1
FBI::1
Modernized Target Acquisition::1
IKC::1
CLPQ::1
Ethiopian Government::1
GOE Efforts::1
EIND::1
Cairo Embassy::1
WIPO::1
Ahmed Rizk::1
Veterinary Biologics::1
Egyptian Border Guard Force Major Yasser Issawi::1
NEA FOR FO::1
Imad::1
CGPCS::1
MEPP::1
Phase::1
ROLE::1
Emergency Law::1
Abu Hammad Air Base::1
effective8::1
UPHO::1
Activism Against::1
Special Operations Forces Cairo AMER::1
MUSLIM::1
ERITREAN::1
MOSS::1
SAMD::1
SHARM AL::1
Senator Cochran::1
Adel::1
Saddam Hussein::1
FRANCISCO::1
Riyadh::1
Mohammed Zarea::1
Qaradawi::1
Mission::1
NOTE::1
Apache Program Manager::1
INL AND::1
HASSAN::1
Hisham Mubarak Law Center::1
Rescue Operations Center::1
Marshall Plan::1
Foreign Military::2
Department::2
North American Affairs::2
Western::2
Tourism::2
Military Intelligence::2
Sherif::2
EAGR::2
Arabs::2
Mufeed Shehab::2
Population::2
Lebanon::2
Darfur::2
Libya::2
U.S. Army::2
Livni::2
Energy::2
Rafah Terminal::2
Khan Younis::2
DOD::2
French::2
Child Protection::2
Europe::2
Djibouti::2
FMS::2
Egyptian Air Force::2
Morocco::2
American::2
Aden::2
PLEASE::2
SU::2
FY09::2
UNRWA::2
Eritrea::2
Human::2
Al Arish::2
Security Cooperation Guidance::2
Ayman Nour::2
Egyptian Armament Authority::2
TOTAL::2
Social Development::2
Oman::2
Kefaya::2
USAID::2
Agriculture::2
English::2
MoD::2
Damascus::2
United Group::2
Request::2
State Security::2
Aircraft::2
Post::2
Nour::2
Maintenance Test Pilot::2
Tahrir Square::2
SOCI::2
Security Assistance Teams::2
EUM::2
Saudis::2
Executive Director::2
United Arab Emirates::2
Egyptian Rafah::2
NCCM::2
Flight Engineer::2
AMBASSADOR::2
Foreign Affairs::2
TBIO::2
Childhood::2
CAIRO1359::2
ERICKSON::2
Prague::2
COMMENT::2
Suzanne Mubarak::2
Amin::2
KSTH::2
Italian::2
Direct Commercial Sales::2
End Note::2
Motherhood::2
African::2
Ethiopian::2
Syrian::2
Egyptian Organization::2
Hatem::2
ISRAEL::2
Gaza City::2
Ibrahim::2
Baghdad::2
Doctors::2
KFLU::2
Egyptian Facebook::2
Shaykh Sharif::2
Hassan::2
Negad::2
Deputy::2
PREF::2
Fathi Surour::2
End Use::2
ETRD::2
Safwat El Sherif::2
EUM Inspection::2
Scobey::2
Israeli Embassy::2
Shaykh Aweys::2
ANGER::2
AND::2
Instructor Pilot Courses::2
TAFT::2
New Year::2
AI::2
Facebook::2
KSCA::2
Child Law::2
NAIROBI FOR::2
Gilad::2
Russia::2
ENRG::2
IDF::2
MOHP::2
Finance::2
Assistant::2
Moataz::2
GDP::2
Somalia::2
First Lady Suzanne Mubarak::2
Acceptance::2
DAO::2
Obama Administration::2
Giza::2
Bar Syndicate::2
Luxor::2
Egyptian Ministry::2
Sudanese::2
Qatari::3
Turkey::3
State::3
Security Assistance Officer::3
MARR::3
Humanitarian::3
SO::3
Golden Sentry Program::3
Personal Rights::3
Diplomacy::3
REQUEST FOR::3
North Sinai::3
Interior::3
SAO::3
Lebanese::3
PTER::3
Cairo Institute::3
EU::3
Security::3
Local::3
NOFORN::3
Iraq::3
Golden Sentry::3
Germany::3
Omar Soliman::3
KIRF::3
Ismailia::3
European::3
Soliman::3
PARM::3
Fatah::3
Washington::3
Fayoum::3
Egyptian Initiative::3
Upper Egypt::3
Italy::3
Bush::3
MOPS::3
SSIS::3
REQUEST::3
Combatant Commander::3
SHAPIRO AND::3
Shura Council::3
West Bank::3
COUNTRY::3
Damietta::3
Human Rights Studies::3
REF::3
EFIN::3
MOD::3
Hosni Mubarak::3
Africa::3
Public Prosecutor::3
EINV::3
ECPO Mincouns William::3
United Nations::3
EAF::3
Red Sea::3
Qataris::3
Kerem Shalom::3
PASCUAL::3
Spanish::3
Abbas::4
NDP::4
Ambassador::4
None::4
Kafr::4
Saudi Arabia::4
Hezbollah::4
Palestinian Authority::4
National Council::4
Defense::4
Obama::4
NGOs::4
Islamist::4
MFA::4
FM Aboul Gheit::4
Suez::4
Kuwait::4
Military Cooperation::4
Iranian::5
Suez Canal::5
Health::5
Jordan::5
ECON::5
Middle East::5
Iran::5
MASS::5
Palestinians::5
CASC::5
EGYPTIAN::5
Red Crescent::5
KISL::5
Alexandria::5
Human Rights::5
West::5
Islamic::5
Doha::5
Political Affairs William::6
United States::6
People::6
Embassy::6
Aboul Gheit::6
Delta::6
GoE::6
EGIS::6
PA::6
Aswan::6
Qatar::6
Sudan::6
END SUMMARY::6
CAIRO::6
Arab League::6
NGO::7
Sinai::7
End Summary::7
Egyptians::7
Assembly::7
KDEM::7
EAID::7
Economic::7
MB::8
Syria::8
US::8
SUBJECT::8
USE::8
Israelis::8
EGYPT::9
Arab::9
National Democratic Party::9
Mubarak::10
GAZA::11
USG::11
Hamas::12
SIPDIS FOR::12
Muslim Brotherhood::13
End::14
Rafah::14
UNCLAS::16
Ministry::16
KPAL::16
Palestinian::16
Israeli::19
PREL::19
Israel::20
Gaza::20
U.S.::22
PHUM::22
SBU::23
SIPDIS::24
Cairo::25
PGOV::28
GOE::30
Egyptian::37
Egypt::38
SCOBEY::40
EG::46
Embassy Cairo::46
