C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000002  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2018 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: COR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER ON BUDGET, INVESTMENT COMMISSION NOMINATION  Classified By: Economic Minister Charles P. Ries for reasons 1.4 (b/d)  1. (C) Begin Summary: On December 31, one day following the conclusion of the Council of Representatives (CoR) holiday recess, First Deputy Speaker Khalid Attiyah told EMIN he expects the 2008 federal budget to pass within the next two weeks. Claiming that the CoR had yet to receive from the Council of Ministers (CoM) the nomination for the head of the National Investment Commission, Attiyah indicated he would support an expedited vote in the plenary. On the reallocation of unspent funds allocated to the Ministry of Interior for current expenditures, Attiyah said that he anticipated the measure would be approved, but could not provide details on the exact mechanism. End Summary  2. (C) First Deputy Speaker Khalid Attiyah opened his meeting with EMIN by citing the continued absence of Kurdish members. Until January 3, the date of their anticipated return, the CoR most likely would be unable to muster a quorum, he explained. Attiyah said that he believes the Kurdish objections to the 2008 federal budget bill had been resolved, and accordingly predicted the CoR would pass the legislation within two weeks. He could not, however, rule out the emergence of unanticipated obstacles that might jeopardize his prediction. Attiyah clarified that should the budget bill pass prior to the end of the month, the CoR would still remain in session through the end of January, thus providing additional time for consideration of other important legislation, including the de-Baathification reform (Accountability and Justice) legislation.  3. (C) EMIN turned to the nomination of Ahmed Ridha for Head of the National Investment Commission and explained the necessity of National Investment Law implementing regulations to attract foreign investment and spur economic growth in Iraq. Attiyah confessed that the CoR had not yet received the nomination from the CoM. He added that the CoR's standard operating procedure for considering nominations to important posts was to hold off voting until a handful were ready to ensure a "balanced composition." Because of the importance of the position, however, Attiyah indicated that he would grant an exception to this policy for Dr. Ridha and have the CoR consider his nomination without undue delay upon receipt from the CoM. If Ahmed Ridha did not have strong party affiliations, his nomination would likely pass smoothly, he concluded.  4. (C) Attiyah claimed that the CoR was in general agreement to permit the reallocation of unspent current expenditures for the Ministry of Interior to be reprogrammed to capital expenditure for purchase of equipment under the auspices of the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program. While he could not provide details concerning the mechanism by which the reprogramming would occur, he seemed confident the measure would pass. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000003  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2017 TAGS: PREL, MARR, ENRG, PHUM, MOPS, NBTS, IZ SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND FM ZEBARI DISCUSS URGENT TOPICS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) Summary.  In a December 30 meeting, the Ambassador reviewed with Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA), suggesting that the GOI establish a negotiating team parallel to the U.S. delegation.  On the Tuwaitha shipment, FM Zebari agreed to send a letter to the International Atomic Energy Agency to allow the US packing team to break the seals on the radioactive material in Tuwaitha.  Zebari also clarified the status and restrictions upon Iraqi funds for refugee assistance in Jordan, but he was evasive in finding cooperative solutions to the problem with PKK on the Turkish border.  End Summary.  SOFA is the First Part of the SFA ---------------------------------  2. (S) Ambassador Crocker met with FM Zebari on December 30, accompanied by EMIN and POLMIL MinCouns.  Ambassador explained that the U.S. approach is to negotiate the security portion of the SFA first, then move to the economic portion. The security portion would be concluded as a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).  The Ambassador passed to Zebari a copy of the preliminary outline of the SOFA.  The Ambassador noted that the U.S. is still assembling its team, with State Department lead, supported by Defense and other agencies.  He suggested that Iraq should have a parallel structure.  FM Zebari agreed that the Foreign Ministry should have the Iraqi lead, but he acknowledged that the Prime Minister's and President's advisors would seek involvement.  The Ambassador added that it is National Security Advisor Mowaffak al Rubaie's stated position that the Foreign Ministry should lead because it has expertise in negotiations.  The Ambassador advised FM Zebari that technical assistance from outside consultants (e.g. UNAMI experts) would be acceptable, but only the two governments should have a place at the negotiation table.  Tuwaitha Radioactive Materials Shipment ---------------------------------------  3. (S) The Ambassador and EMIN explained the urgent time constraints for the following events:  requesting IAEA permission to break seals, packing of radioactive material, and granting of sale authority.  A letter from the Foreign Ministry to the IAEA, requesting permission to break the seals, was most urgent because it was the first event in the sequence for preparation and movement.  FM Zebari agreed to send a letter.  Refugee Assistance ------------------  4. (C) FM Zebari clarified that refugee assistance funds have been transferred to the Iraqi account in Jordan.  He stated that from the GOI point of view, those funds were satisfactorily obligated in the 2007 fiscal year.  The GOI intends to give the funds to Jordan.  Zebari stated that Jordan has asked to give the Iraqi funds to an NGO, like UNHCR or IRC.  He said that Iraq would permit Jordan to give the funds to an NGO, but Iraq could not give the funds directly to an NGO.  Turkey and PKK --------------  5. (S) The Ambassador emphasized that all parties must stay focused on the end of PKK presence on Iraqi territory.  He further emphasized that purely kinetic operations will cause collateral damage and will not solve the problem.  FM Zebari concurred with both points.  The FM worried about the potential for "mistakes" to inflame the situation.  However, Zebari did not acknowledge any recent bilateral contacts with Turkey.  POLMIL MinCouns noted several proposals for meetings between Iraq and Turkey, but FM Zebari evaded the idea, describing instead a long list of pending diplomatic actions and activities.  Upcoming Diplomatic Initiatives -------------------------------  6. (C) FM Zebari was planning to go to Cairo on January 6 to talk about a "long term relationship" with Egypt.  He stated that Egypt was keen to look at a joint resolution and to revive old agreements.  He added that he was also planning a trip to Kuwait.  Zebari said that he wanted to propose the names of potential Iraqi ambassadors to those two countries. He claimed that Russia was pursuing a "framework for a future relationship" with the GOI, but the Iraqi delegation to Moscow was postponed and would not travel until February.  7. (S) FM Zebari stated that diplomacy between Iraq and Iran was currently focused on the schedule for trilateral talks  BAGHDAD 00000003  002 OF 002   (Note: a date is still pending.  End Note.)  He added that the Algiers Agreement was under discussion and that the demarcation of the border needed to be redone due to the shifting of the channel in multiple areas within the Shatt al Arab.  CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000008  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2018 TAGS: PREL, IZ SUBJECT: PRT-WASIT: IRAN PAYS FOR WASIT SHEIKHS' TOUR  REF: A. DIIR-TFM-81-819-08-116      B. BAGHDAD 4146      C. IIR-TFM-81-819-08-114  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (U) This is a PRT Wasit reporting cable.  2. (S//REL TO ACGU) Summary: According to numerous tribal and government contacts, from 21 November to 6 December approximately 60 sheikhs and family members visited Iran for fifteen days to tour Tehran, Qom and Mashad.  An Iraqi tour company named "Sons of Ruhullah," reportedly sponsored by a partnership between the Da'wa party and Iran, organized the trip.  The tour included visits to Shi'a holy sites, shrines to Iranian political/religious leaders, government buildings and the closed US Embassy in Tehran, combined with lectures (ref A).  The invitations were made to the sheikhs by Mohammad Reza al Numani, a part-time religious lecturer in Iran, long time member of Da'wa and close associate of both Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and former Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jafari.  According to the Wasit IP Chief, Iran will likely sponsor additional trips in order to influence tribal opinion before the next Provincial elections.  He said that CF's most effective counter is successful PRT operations, noting that agricultural, business, and other reconstruction assistance will influence the tribal population more than trips to Iran. End summary.  The Tours --------- 3. (S//REL TO ACGU) On 18 and 26 December, CDR 214th FB, Team Leader 819th HUMINT Collection Team and PRT-Wasit met separately with two sheikhs who had made the trip to Iran. Both sheikhs have close ties to 214th FB and PRT and had no problem discussing the details of the trip.  In the first meeting, Sheikh Mohammad Jorani described a steady flow of lectures urging the sheikhs to join fellow Muslims to fight the Americans in Iraq, encouraging them to send their sons to Iran for education, and emphasizing the need to support Iraqi "federalism" (ref B).  4. (S//REL TO ACGU) In the second meeting on 26 December, Sheikh Abd al-Hussein said the tour group of 60 ("20 or so" sheikhs plus their families) moved across the border at the Zurbatiyah Point of Entry, spent a few hours in Mehran, and continued to Tehran for five days, Qom for three days, and Mashad for two days (Note: He reported a three-day train trip from Qom to Mashad. End note).  He said a significant amount of the time was spent with Iraqi expatriates, including one, Sheikh Fadl al Maliki, who told them that "Iran is a danger that supports the militias."  5. (S//REL TO ACGU) Although Sheikh Abd al-Hussein did not directly answer questions about the messages during the trip, he alluded to other reporting of anti-CF themes by noting that he "was not affected by the trip sponsors' messages, as we know the truth." He said he thought the purpose of the trip was to demonstrate to the Iraqis that "Iran is the center of Islam" and he claimed he was unimpressed (ref C).   Iran and Da'wa -------------- 6. (S//REL TO ACGU) The two sheikhs that made the trip and the eleven sheikhs who didn't attend said they received their invitations by telephone from Mohammed Reza al-Numani.  Al Numani was described as the "representative of the Prime Minister in Wasit" by Wasit Police Chief MG Haninn. Al-Numani was a student of Mohammed Baqr al-Sadr when Da'wa was founded in 1957.  He spent most of the Saddam era in Iran, has an Iranian wife and is reportedly well-known for a biography he wrote of Mohammed Baqr al-Sadr.  He reportedly led a delegation of Wasit sheikhs to visit the Prime Minister in June 2007, and is perceived by the tribal community as Maliki's spokesman. (Note:  Numani has met with PRT representatives before but PRT-Wasit was unable to reach him; according to IP Police Chief MG Haninn, he is in Iran. End note.)  Provincial Police Chief ----------------------- 7. (S//REL TO ACGU) On 29 December, MG Haninn confirmed to CDR 214th FB and PRT that Mohammad Reza al-Numani was the primary organizer of the trip.  When asked if the visit was intended to benefit the Da'wa party or Iran, Haninn said Iran is increasing its efforts with the tribes due to CF's tribal efforts and the presence of the PRT.  When asked what he thought the most effective CF response to the Iranian tribal campaign would be, he recommended continuing the PRT's work, noting that the sheikhs are farmers and are especially interested in agricultural and business development assistance.  BAGHDAD 00000008  002 OF 002    Comment -------  8. (S//REL TO ACGU) The reaction from our fifteen contacts was generally defensive if they went on the trip and accusatory if they did not. The sheikhs who declined the invitation didn,t hesitate to take shots at their "disloyal" colleagues for accepting favors from the "Persians." Since beginning our tribal engagements, every sheikh we've had contact with has prided himself on his pure Arab bloodline and his Iraqi nationalism, as demonstrated by a healthy dose of vitriol for Iran.  We take at face value the explanation that most went only to see the holy shrines and visit the country, and we think it unlikely Iran successfully influenced a large number of Wasit sheikhs, a notoriously fickle and self-interested community.  Our contacts noted that there have been similar trips in the past and there would undoubtedly be future trips.  Regardless of how the sheikhs respond, these efforts illustrate the extent to which Iran deems Wasit Province to be under its sphere of influence.  9.  (S//REL TO ACGU) While there is no evidence that PM Maliki had any personal involvement in this trip, the unanimous perception among the sample of tribal and government leaders we talked with is that the trip had his blessing. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000009  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2017 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: HAKIM OPTIMISTIC ABOUT 2008 IN MEETING WITH AMB  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Summary: In a December 31 meeting with the Ambassador, ISCI leader Abdul Aziz al-Hakim agreed that significant security, economic, and political progress had been made in 2007.  He expressed hope that provincial elections would be held in 2008 but was noncommittal over the possibility of using an open-list system.  Hakim agreed that the Council of Representatives (COR) needed to take its responsibilities seriously, and expressed satisfaction with the improving capability of the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF). He discussed the improving relations between Iraq and its neighbors and emphasized the important role of the U.S. in supporting these relationships.  End Summary.  2.  (C) Hakim agreed with the Ambassador's assessment that the year 2007 ended on a more positive note than it began and cited progress on a range of issues.  In terms of security, he mentioned the increasing ability of the ISF to stand on its own and its success in maintaining stability in Najaf and Karbala.  Hakim noted that the provincial governorates are more active than the central ministries in terms of reconstruction and development and that overall the situation in the provinces is good.  Politically, he said he spoke on December 30 with VP Hashimi and saw a good chance for the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) to return to government.  Finally, Hakim said relations between Iraq and its neighbors had improved.  3.  (C) Hakim expressed hope that provincial elections would be held in 2008. The Ambassador said he considered 2008 elections 'necessary' and asked whether the Provincial Powers law needed to be passed before elections were held. He mentioned a recent meeting in Babil in which four south-central governors all emphasized the importance of the legislation.  Hakim explained that the only required legislation was the Election Law, and said the parties were currently negotiating on the text.  The Ambassador emphasized that, from an outsider,s perspective, the law should sanction open rather than closed lists, adding that the closed-list system was the source of many of Iraq's current problems, but it is up to Iraqis to decide how they select their leaders.  Hakim was noncommittal, repeating only that the electoral system was one of several points under negotiation.  4.  (C) Turning to the Council of Representatives (COR), the Ambassador mentioned the importance of passing the De-Ba'athification Law and the 2008 Federal Budget.  He added that, in meetings with Speaker Mashhadani and Deputy Speaker Attiya, he had stressed that the COR should not take a winter recess after adjourning for several weeks for the hajj. Hakim agreed, and mentioned several sermons recently given by the marja'iyya urging the MPs to take their responsibilities seriously.  5.  (C) The Ambassador said he agreed with Hakim's positive outlook on the ISF.  He noted that although commentators focused on the impact of the U.S. 'surge' of 30,000 additional troops, during the same period the ISF increased its numbers by 100,000.  Hakim cautioned that the ISF still needed more training and equipment but expressed optimism over the ISF's overall capability.  6.  (C) On neighboring countries, Hakim emphasized the positive effects of Vice President Mehdi's visit to Syria and President Talabani's visit to Egypt.  The Ambassador agreed on the positive effect of VP Mehdi's regional travel and Ammar al-Hakim's visit to Kuwait but noted the absence of any Arab ambassadors in Iraq, saying he hoped for reciprocal visits from Arab governments to Iraq in 2008.  Hakim asked whether the U.S. was involved in Talabani's invitation to Iranian President Ahmadinejad to visit Iraq on January 15. The Ambassador replied that he had not "heard a word" about the visit.  Hakim said the U.S. had a very important role in fostering good relations between Iraq and neighboring countries, and the Ambassador emphasized his readiness to assist in these efforts. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000010  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAGR, ECON, ETRD, EAID, EFIN, IZ SUBJECT: PRT Civil Society Outreach in Diyala's Farm Sector  1. (U) This is a PRT Diyala reporting cable.  2. (SBU) SUMMARY: PRT Diyala has conducted outreach and support activities with the Agricultural Chamber of Commerce and the Diyala Beekeepers Association.  Allegations of violence within the Diyala Farmers' Union has required the PRT to step back from supporting what at first appeared to be a promising civil society organization.  END SUMMARY.  3. (SBU) The inaugural meeting of the Diyala Farmer's Union was held at their new building in Baqubah in September.  In addition to more than 300 Diyala farmers, the National Farmers Union Representative for Diyala Province, the Assistant Governor for Administrative Affairs, a representative of the Iraqi Police, and a representative of the Provincial Council Agriculture Committee Chairman, were all present at the inaugural meeting.  4. (SBU) A vote was held for the membership of the Governing Board after a meal and speeches.  In addition to the President, Vice President, and General Secretary, seven delegates were elected to represent the provincial farmers. The chosen delegates were representative of all religious groups and thus represented a potential vehicle for reconciliation using agricultural interests in Diyala.  5. (SBU) Although this fine beginning seemed to augur well for the Union, the PRT has had to step back from its support for the organization due to conflict within the leadership in October.  6. (SBU) The PRT is also supporting the Agricultural Chamber of Commerce which will enable better services to be provided to provincial agriculturalists, and increase the opportunity that they have to influence government operation. Funding has been provided to renovate an administrative and meeting building, and to support their first year of operation.  7. (SBU) PRT continues to collaborate with the Diyala Beekeepers Association as well, particularly on importing honey processing equipment which will greatly benefit members of the association and enable commercial sales to commence.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000011  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2017 TAGS: PREL, EPET, ECON, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: KIRKUK: ATMOSPHERICS FROM PRT MARKET WALKS IN LATE 2007  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ,d).  This is a Kirkuk Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1.  (SBU) Summary: The catastrophic summer 2007 explosions in Kirkuk dampened market activity as residents stayed home and merchants limited their hours.  While violence continued through September and October, it focused more on GOI officials than residential and market areas and market activity increased slightly.   Merchants and residents appeared more confident during a PRT late-November market walk, and hoped security restrictions would loosen to promote commerce.  Attacks Limit Commerce in Summer and Early Fall --------------------------------------------- --  2.  (SBU) The VBIED and IED attacks in July and August 2007 restricted provincial economic activity.  Anecdotal evidence collected by PRT suggested a 50 percent drop in business following the catastrophic VBIED attack of 16 July 2007 which targeted a market and killed over one hundred Kirkukis.  The CF-supported Al-Aman Microfinance Institute, which gives loans to businessmen from a satellite office in a marketplace, reported the same drop during this timeframe. An unknown group in August distributed Arabic leaflets with Koranic phrases warning that market attacks would continue, causing customers to stay away and vendors to curb their hours, usually closing in the early afternoon.  To avoid going to large markets, many Kirkuk city residents increased their purchases from neighborhood stores, which tend to be more expensive.  4.  (SBU) Merchants complain that the security restrictions imposed following this summer,s attacks were hampering business.  Starting in September, merchants said the vehicle permits the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) requires restrict trade with and through the Kurdish region, a major source of wholesale goods sold in Kirkuk.  A new system of inspections and permits for large vehicles following the July mass-casualty VBIED attack also slowed the shipment of goods into the city.  Merchants similarly protested that the T-walls and Hesco barriers emplaced following the summer explosions caused inhibited customer flow.  5.  (SBU) During a series of PRT visits to local markets in September, PRT officers engaged Kirkukis of varying ages, ethnicities, and degrees of political engagement.  All interviewees voiced support for co-existence among ethnic groups and said the politicians were fighting, not the common people.  Many expressed pride that Kirkuk is a multi-ethnic city with close family ties between Kurds and Turcomen.  Even with the VBIED of July 16 still fresh in residents' minds, economic conditions were their leading concern.  The most common complaint across all ethnic groups, including the Kurds, was the unemployment rate and the inability of educated individuals to get jobs.  PRT found unanimous agreement that business was worse than a year before, that food sales were down 25-30 percent over the same period, and that sales of non-food items were down an average of 50%, although activity increased during Ramadan.  Rebound Evident Since October -----------------------------  6.  (SBU) Business improved in October as families stockpiled food for Ramadan and oil and kerosene for the winter months.  Though most residents expected terrorist activity to escalate in connection with Ramadan, the limited IED and VBIED activity in October targeted mainly GoI officials.  On 8 November the city experienced three IEDs on one day, but these again targeted GOI officials, especially security force members, and did not reduce market activity.  7.  (SBU) During a late November walk through the same market PRT visited in September, conditions had markedly improved.  Neither merchants nor customers listed security as a concern, although all found the barriers restrictive to trade.  While residents still expressed concern regarding employment, they also articulated unwonted optimism about Kirkuk,s future.  The Governor of Kirkuk accompanied PRT officials during this market walk and residents of all ethnicities expressed elation at meeting both PRT members and the Governor.  BAGHDAD 00000011  002 OF 002    Comment -------  8.  (C) Market activity varies directly with the level of violence in the city.  Even after the catastrophic explosions, merchants, complaints over vehicle restrictions and security barriers indicate a desire to move forward with commerce in spite of the risks.  PRT plans to expand its market walks outside the city and to conduct more walks in the company of provincial officials, which the population seems to welcome. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000014  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958 : N/A TAGS: EAID EFIN EINV ECON ELAB OFDP PREL SOCI IZ XF XU XB AU ZP ZR SUBJECT:  AUSTRALIA CONSIDERS NEW ASSISTANCE INITIATIVES FOR IRAQ  REF:  BAGHDAD 4163  1.  (SBU) Summary:  Australian Ambassador Innes Brown called on EMIN December 28 to discuss possible areas where Australia could increase its economic assistance to Iraq.  The Government of Australia (GoA) has been tasked by PM Rudd to develop new initiatives by the end of January.  Innes Brown said that Australia is not interested in further contributions to the UN-World Bank led IRFFI.  Australia may be willing to support projects - including co-financing with us or other bilateral donors -- in the fields of health and agriculture (particularly dry land agriculture), as well as training in third countries.  End summary.  2.  (U) EMIN met December 28 with Australian Ambassador to Iraq Mark Innes Brown to discuss economic and assistance opportunities in Iraq.  Ambassador Innes Brown said that following his visit to Baghdad (reftel), Australian PM Rudd had asked the Cabinet to examine ways for Australia to do more in economic assistance in Iraq as it withdraws forces.  The enhanced assistance plan is to be completed by the end of January.  3.   (SBU) Innes Brown said the GoA had an unhappy experience with its contributions to IRFFI.  Much of the money was chewed up in high UN system overhead charges and there was little transparency or recognition of the contributions.  Thus a presumption behind the review is that if Australia does something new for Iraq it will be either of a bilateral character or co-financed with another donor.   4.  (U) Innes Brown suggested that the GoA is most interested in projects in the fields of health and agriculture, and perhaps some offshore capacity development training, perhaps focused on the Council of Representatives (CoR).  He said he anticipated that the GoA would be happy to contribute to "good projects that someone else manages" as long as there is recognition for Australia.  5.  (U) On health, Ambassador Innes Brown was interested in the possibility of supporting training for basic health care professionals who would work in primary health centers (the U.S. is completing a network of 140 PHC's built with IRRF funds).   EMIN noted the U.S. is starting such a project and would arrange for HHS Attache Himmler to provide more details.  Ambassador Innes Brown seemed most interested in finding a discrete aspect of this program the Australians could cite as their own, even if managed Qhe U.S. implementing partner.  Specialized training delivered off-shore might be such a possibility, since the U.S. intends to deliver basic training in-country.  6.  (U) The agriculture sector seemed to offer another possibility. Australia provides assistance to the International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) in Aleppo, Syria. Ambassador Innes Brown said that ICARDA is piloting some drought resistant strains of wheat and barley in Ninewa and Tamim this year.  The GoA may want to support more of this work.  Ambassador Innes Brown said there were no IPR restrictions on the seedlines developed by ICARDA, as it is Qember of the ConsuQtive Group on International Agricultural Research.   He added that the GoA had already decided to support 100 one-year long research fellowships for agricultural scientists in Australia.  As Australia also has dry land agricultural challenges, they think this is a good fit for Iraq, and similar to other long-term training funded by Australia in the past.  7.  (SBU) Finally, Ambassador Innes Brown said the GoA may be interested in doing something additional in the field of ministerial capacity, probably also involving offshore training.  The Australian Embassy has already agreed with CoR Speaker Mashadani to send a CoR delegation to Canberra in the summer, focused on issues of federal/state financing.  The logic is that since Australia has a parliamentary system in a federal structure, they have something to offer here.  8.  (U) EMIN tried to interest Ambassador Innes Brown in cooperating on other ongoing U.S. assistance programs, including small and medium sized enterprise credit programs,  but found little immediate take-up for those ideas.  CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000016  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR AL SADOON   1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME: Maher Riyadh Hamood AL SADOON POSITION:  LTC, Iraqi Army DOB:  March 16, 1970 TYPE OF TRAINING:  Executive Seminar TRAINING LOCATION: NESA, Washington, DC DATES OF TRAINING: January 23 to February 14, 2008  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000019  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: A HARD COR BATTLE OVER PROVINCIAL POWERS?  REF: A. BAGHDAD 3949      B. BAGHDAD 3730  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Robert Waller for reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary: Of all the legislation that Iraq's Council of Representatives (CoR) will grapple with in 2008, none will do more to shape the future of Iraq politically than the Provincial Powers law.  Because Iraq's Constitution is deliberately ambiguous about the balance of power between Iraq's central government and its provinces, the debate over the Provincial Powers law is forcing legislators to define and codify the meaning of Iraqi federalism as never before. At the center of those efforts, ISCI Deputy Bloc leader Hummam Hammoudi is leading an effort to reconcile two competing draft bills.  The first, or "CoR Draft," received a first and second reading in early 2007 and generally favors decentralization.  The second, or "PMO Draft," was written at PM Maliki's behest and favors stronger central government control.  CoR members have yet to resolve three points of contention between the two bills: the appointment and dismissal of governors; the appointment and dismissal of district officials; and control over Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) in times of emergency.  These are questions that the Iraqis must resolve among themselves -- trying to impose a USG solution would likely be counterproductive in the short run (suggesting additional changes at this point is likely to only delay the law's adoption) and could well prove disastrous in the long run (if the resultant political structure never achieves popular legitimacy).  Rather than advocating specific provisions, Post is therefore encouraging all party blocs to work toward a consensus.  If a consensus is not reached and a controversial law is passed by a slim majority, there is a risk that, once the regions law goes into effect in April 2008, provinces may elect to form themselves into regions in order to avoid being subject to the provisions of an unpopular Provincial Powers law.  End summary.  A Guide for the Perplexed -------------------------  2. (C) Of all the legislation that Iraq's Council of Representatives (CoR) will grapple with in 2008, none will do more to shape the future of the Iraqi polity than the Provincial Powers law.  Because Iraq's Constitution is deliberately ambiguous about the balance of power between Iraq's central government and its provinces, the debate over the Provincial Powers law is forcing legislators to define and codify the meaning of Iraqi federalism as never before.  3. (C) Even Maimonides might find himself confused by the multiple iterations of the Provincial Powers law floating around the CoR.  Fortunately, there are only three versions worth knowing about, and of those, only two that really count:  -- The CoR Draft.  Drafted by the CoR's Committee of Regions and Governorate Affairs, this is the version of the law that received a first and second reading in early 2007, was updated in the spring to reflect some 600 suggestions encapsulated in a report produced by that same committee, and in mid-summer was unceremoniously shunted off to the Shura Council.  It has languished there ever since, due to active opposition from Prime Minister Maliki and his staff and a surprising degree of political acumen from the supposedly apolitical Shura Council (which is apparently loathe to bite the hand that feeds it electricity and other perks).  -- The Prime Minister's Office (PMO) Draft.  Unhappy with the CoR draft's emphasis on decentralization, the Prime Minister tapped his Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, Dr. Safa al-Safi, to form a committee and produce an alternative bill favoring a strong central government.  Dr. Safa enlisted the aid of the Acting Minister of Provincial Affairs, Hasan al-Sari, as well as legal advisors from the PMO and the Shura Council.  This draft is reportedly with the Shura Council as well, and has neither been approved by the Council of Ministers nor formally transmitted to the CoR.  -- The Leaders' Draft.  In their August 26 communiqu, the GOI's political leaders claimed to have reached an agreement on the Provincial Powers law.  It quickly became apparent that they had done little more than to agree that, in principle, they should agree to something on Provincial Powers sometime.  Fortunately, their deputies continued to meet for a short time afterwards and managed to produce an incomplete version of the law based on the earlier CoR draft.  For reasons that remain unhappily vague, this draft was neither completed nor transmitted to the CoR, and now appears to be dead in the water (for more details on the content of the Leaders' draft, see para 13).   BAGHDAD 00000019  002 OF 003   Where the Action Is -------------------  4. (C) Based on the above, one might reasonably assume that the Shura Council is the current locus of all activity on Provincial Powers.  In reality, the Shura Council is merely acting as a repository -- the legislative equivalent of a parking garage.  All of the real action on the Provincial Powers law is taking place among the CoR's various political blocs, with ISCI Deputy bloc leader Hummam Hammoudi (who also chairs the CoR's Constitutional Review Committee) leading an effort to resolve six points of contention between the CoR Draft and the PMO Draft.  Of those six points, Hammoudi claims to have successfully brokered compromises on four, leaving (in a mathematically rational universe) two unresolved.  Iraq apparently being unfettered by mathematical convention, Hammoudi then enumerated three unresolved issues:  --  Who has the power to hire and fire governors? --  Who has the authority to appoint and dismiss district officials? --  Who controls Iraqi Security Forces in the event of a provincial emergency?  In a December 27 meeting (reported septel), Hammoudi said that he would have already ironed out compromises on these final points as well if not for the hajj break that began on December 6.  Assuming that an agreement is forthcoming, Post will urge that the resultant compromises be incorporated into the CoR Draft prior to its third and final reading (rather than be enshrined in a brand new draft, which would necessitate three full readings in the CoR).  One PM to Rule Them All . . . -----------------------------  5. (C) The first of Hammoudi's unresolved points, the question of who can hire/fire governors, is an example of artful murkiness by the authors of the Iraqi Constitution. The CoR Draft takes an expansive view of the powers of the Provincial Council (PC), allowing the PC to elect the Governor from inside or outside its members.  The PM, in contrast, is limited to issuing a pro forma decree appointing the Governor to office within fifteen days of the Governor assuming office.  The CoR draft includes two options for dismissing a governor.  The first requires one-third of the PC's members to request the Governor be fired; this motion must then pass the PC by an absolute majority.  The second option allows the CoR to fire a Governor upon the recommendation of the PM and provided that an absolute majority of CoR members agree.  6. (C) In contrast, the PMO Draft endows the PM with much stronger authority.  Like the CoR Draft, it stipulates that a Governor be elected by the PC and that the PM then issue a decree appointing the Governor to office (Articles 10 and 33).  Likewise, the PMO Draft parallels the CoR Draft by allowing the PC to dismiss a governor with an absolute majority of its members.  The critical difference between the two is that the PMO Draft allows the PM to remove a governor if asked to do so by as little as one-fourth of the PC members, potentially enabling the PM to exert disproportionate influence in provinces where he enjoys little support on the Provincial Council.  (Maliki's failed attempt to oust Basrah Governor Wa'eli (Fadhila) may well have been the inspiration for this particular provision.)  In the wrong hands, such power could do much sectarian harm.  7. (C)  Similarly, at the local council (Qada) or sub-district council level (Nahiya), the CoR Draft gives more authority to the councils in electing or dismissing Chairmen, Deputies, and District/Sub-district Directors.  The PMO's version allows for the majority of members of a relevant local council to appoint/elect a District Director or Sub-district Director, but the PM must then make these appointments valid.  This level of influence is of considerable concern to certain parties, such as ISCI, which are pushing for more decentralization.  A Bi-opoly on the Use of Force? -------------------------------  8. (C) The CoR Draft enables the PCs to approve security plans submitted to them by provincial security institutions in the provinces through the Governor, and to approve the assignment of directors of security-related "apparatus" (sic) based on recommendations by the Governor.  It allows for these same security officials to be terminated based on a majority vote of the PC following a request by one-fourth of the PC members, or by the Governor (who must show cause).  It also provides the Governor with control over provincial security forces (e.g., the police), with the exception of the Iraqi Army.  However, in situations where the Governor  BAGHDAD 00000019  003 OF 003   decides that the provincial security forces under his command are insufficient, he may refer the matter to the PM, laying out his need for additional forces to perform these activities.  In emergencies when there is no time to consult the PM, the Governor can temporarily take control as Commander of the ISF in the province.  9. (C) The PMO Draft does not permit the Governor to assume control of ISF forces during an emergency in which there is not time to consult the PM.  It does, however, give the PM extraordinary oversight in issuing statements/orders to administrative units, which are required for maintenance of security.  VP Hashimi is unusually aligned with PM Maliki over this issue of maintaining national control of ISF forces during emergencies, and has mentioned in meetings that this area of the law needs further clarification (ref B).  Other Differences -----------------  10. (C) Other areas of significant difference between the two drafts include dissolving PCs, legislative authority, control over financial resources, and approving administrative decisions on provincial boundaries.  In the CoR Draft, a PC can decide to dissolve itself by an absolute majority of its members, based on a request of one-third of the members. However, the CoR also has the right to dissolve a PC by an absolute majority vote in the CoR, based on a request by the Governor or one-third of the PC members.  In the PMO version, the CoR (based on a request by one-fourth of the PC membership), the PM, or the Governor all have the right to dissolve a PC with an absolute majority vote.  (Note:  The language is unclear whether it is referring to an absolute majority of the CoR or PC.  End note).  The PM version, as a result, opens up the opportunity for the CoR and PM to exercise their influence at the provincial level.  11. (C) In the area of legislative authority, the CoR Draft allows the PC to issue domestic legislation, regulations, by-laws and systems for regulating financial and administrative affairs, as long as they do not contradict the Constitution or national law.  In stark contrast, the PMO Draft allows PCs to propose laws but requires that the proposals be submitted to the Council of Ministers (CoM) for study and -- if the CoM concurs -- action.  (Note:  The PMO Draft is ambiguous about whether these draft laws would need to be submitted to the CoR or not after the CoM.  End note). The net effect is to give the PMO pocket veto authority over any and all provincial legislation.  12. (C)  In regards to financial resources/budget, the CoR version provides a province with a financial budget from the GOI that is prepared by the Ministry of Finance and approved by the CoR.  However, the PMO version only requires that the budget be granted by the GOI, with no mention of CoR approval.  Regarding the approval of administrative changes to districts (or sub-districts), and provinces, the CoR version gives this authority to the PCs, based on a recommendation by the Governor.  The PMO Draft of the law, however, requires the PC to propose to the CoM any administrative changes to boundaries.  This gives the national government (and thus the PM) considerably more authority than the CoR's version, particularly over potentially sensitive boundary issues between provinces, districts, and sub-districts.  Leaders' Draft --------------  13. (C) The Leaders' Draft favors decentralization.  It provides for Governors to be elected by the PC and to be fired by two-thirds of the PC.  In addition, members of the PC (with an absolute majority) and members of the CoM (by simple majority) and one-third of the CoR and Presidency Council have the right to file a case before the Federal Court to remove the Governor for justified reasons.  This version gives considerable authority to the PCs in appointing directors of security agencies, but requires that the nominations be submitted to the relevant GOI minister. Control over security forces is not addressed clearly.  As for dissolving the Provincial Councils themselves, the Leaders' Draft stipulates that a simple majority of the CoM, the Presidency Council, and one-third of the members of the CoR can submit a lawsuit to the Federal Court in order to dissolve a PC. (Note:  The draft law does not specify whether the filing of a lawsuit in federal court will itself be enough to dissolve a PC, or whether a legal finding must be made.  End note). CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000020  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KPAO, ECON, IZ SUBJECT: A GREAT BARGAIN IN BAGHDAD: DOURA MARKET REVIVES DUE TO SECURITY GAINS  Classified By: Political Counselor Ellen Germain, for reasons 1.4 (b,d) .  1.  (U) The Doura Market in Baghdad's Rashid district -- formerly one of the city's most dangerous areas -- has experienced a rebirth over the course of the past six months due to significant gains in security for residents of the Doura neighborhood.  The improvements are visible and measurable.  Since June, the number of open shops has increased from 15 to 451, half of the market's capacity of approximately 900 shops.  Though it was a thriving center of commerce before the war, in 2006 and early 2007 Doura Market became a major target for improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and mass casualty attacks carried out by insurgents and terrorists.  Primarily due to efforts by Coalition Forces, aided by the increasingly effective Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and the installation of hardened T-walls, the market and its surrounding areas have experienced a notable revitalization.  The local Battalion reported that another major factor in the market's renewal was the enrollment of many local unemployed and under-employed males in the Concerned Local Citizens (CLC) group, through which they have helped to provide security to the Doura neighborhood.  The Battalion has also worked with Iraqi Security Forces to keep black market activities, such as illicit fuel sales, off the highways and main roads that pass through Doura.  2.  (U) Representatives of the Baghdad PRT and the EPRT covering Rashid district observed the renewed vibrancy during a December 22 tour of Doura Market.  Hundreds of customers -) apparently Sunni, Shia, and Christian, according to locals and the Battalion -) were present along the several blocks of the market area.  The customers crowded into the stalls and shops.  Women in hijabs and head-to-toe abayas shopped alongside women in western dress.  The stores were full of merchandise.  Garbage trucks were visible on the streets, clearing trash and debris.  Locals reported that the schools were in session and that some IDPs, including Christians, have begun returning to their homes in Doura.  3.  (C) Larger issues continue to plague Doura, however, including mounting tension between province- and city-wide institutions, on the one hand, and the Rashid District Council and Doura Neighborhood Council, on the other.  (NOTE: This tension plagues inter-governmental relations in many other Baghdad districts and neighborhoods.  END NOTE.)  The Provincial Council, the Governor, and the Amanat -- all dominated by Shia political parties -- question the legitimacy of the Rashid district and neighborhood councils, in part, locals claim, because the councils include Sunni representatives.  Also, locals report that the Amanat has not provided adequate resources to its Rashid district office (or "Beladiya"), thereby hampering provision of essential services to the entire Rashid district.  Moreover, Coalition Forces continue to pay for CLC salaries and for trash pick-up in the Doura neighborhood.  (NOTE: The USG currently funds the garbage collection program from which Doura and other Baghdad neighborhoods benefit.  This program will end in 2008, potentially releasing into the ranks of the unemployed approximately 20,000 workers in Baghdad, unless the GoI or the Amanat begins to pay their salaries.  END NOTE.)  To help the GoI to address these issues, and other upcoming challenges, the Baghdad PRT, EPRT, and 4/1 Brigade Combat Team continue to facilitate constructive dialogue among the leaders of local, provincial and national institutions. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000021  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 TAGS: ECON, ETRD, EFIN, PREL, MARR, ENRG, MOPS, NBTS, IZ SUBJECT: DPM TO AMBASSADOR: "THERE IS NO POLITICAL WILL"  REF: BAGHDAD 00003  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) Summary.  Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih spiced a 30 December meeting with Ambassador and CG Petraeus with complaints that his colleagues in government lacked the political will needed to steer the country away from civil war in 2008.  He avoided being drawn into any constructive discussion of trying to launch the New Year with an ambitious legislative agenda.  However, he did commit to make personal efforts necessary to address pressing problems of the removal of radioactive materials from Tuwaitha, conduct his own anti-corruption conference, and resolve problems of Turkish electricity supplies to Dohuk province.  End Summary.  "Making Government Work" ------------------------  2. (S) Ambassador Crocker met with DPM -- and Acting Prime Minister -- Barham Salih on December 30, accompanied by CG Petraeus, EMIN, and DCG LtGen Rollo.  Ambassador and CG sought to encourage the DPM to embrace a wide-ranging effort to start 2008 as the Year of Making Government Work.  He hoped that, upon the return of President Talabani to Baghdad from holiday in Sulaymaniyah (2 or 3 January, per DPM), and the PM from medical tests in London (date unknown), a quorum could quickly be achieved in Councils of Ministers and Representatives (CoM and CoR, respecitvely).  Ambassador stressed that that it would be imperative for the GoI to prove itself able of conducting the business of the country, in drafting and passing urgent legislation, pushing services out to the people, taking control of the country's security, re-energizing the Legislative Preparatory Committee -- A Year for Iraqi Institutions.  3. (S) DPM responded that 2008 would either be the Year of Success, or the Year of Disaster, if Iraq squanders the gains made in security.  "If there is no political will, the Legislative Preparatory Committee is a waste of time -- and there is no political will."  Ambassador asked him what he saw as the alternative.  DPM responded, "The issue is political will.  We can go through the motions, put check marks in boxes, but that will all be window-dressing." Ambassador expressed the hope that smart people in positions of influence do recognize what's at stake, and that the DPM was not throwing up his hands in surrender, to which the DPM replied only "I've made clear my opinion ..."  The CG suggested that passage of legislation on accountability, the justice system, and budget would be needed within days, not weeks.  The DPM offered that the amnesty law is in draft, and the budget well along, but expressed little enthusiasm for "the other stuff, like the oil law."  SOFA and Other Priority Issues ----------------  4. (S) Ambassador brought up the subject of the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) security portion of the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA).  He noted that Iraq has only one more year in special status under the UNSCR and encouraged the DPM to find a way to get down to serious business on the SFA, stressing that getting the right people in the room from the beginning would be critical.  The DPM agreed, emphasizing that those involved must have to have full authority to negotiate.  Ambassador pointed to the problems of services, of unemployment, and of the situation in Basra, and suggested that the DPM search for ways to drain some of the animosity out of the political climate.  Ambassador said he would push hard, as leaders returned, for the different parties to return to the project of governing, and stressed the importance of the first meeting of political leaders not "imploding."  DPM responded that he hoped it would be possible to bring up the SFA in the first week in which the President, PM, and CoR are all in Baghdad.  He then stated, "We could have a real civil war if we don't get the politics right.  This won't be a conflict with Al Qaeda -- this will be civil war."  National Investment Law and Commission ------------------------  5. (S) Ambassador noted that the new nominee for head of the National Investment Commission appeared to be on track for eventual confirmation.  DPM said he was not acquainted with the nominee, having met him only once, but had heard both good and indifferent things about him.  "Some say, he's worked only for government his whole professional life -- how can he promote private investment?" he wondered.  He stated that, even without formal CoR confirmation, the Investment Commission Head nominee could begin work.  Ambassador urged  BAGHDAD 00000021  002 OF 002   that the CoR move quickly to confirm, nonetheless.  Anti-Corruption Conference ----------------  6. (S) DPM confirmed that, despite the absence of the PM, he intended to keep to the scheduled January 3, 2008 date for the GoI's anti-corruption conference, which he intended to use to establish unambiguous procedures through which to confront the problem in Iraq.  Dohuk Electricity Cut-Off Threat ------------------  7. (S) DPM stated that the CoM had approved the same day (30 December) renewal of the electricity delivery contract with Turkey, under same terms, for the next six months.  He said payment of the existing $20 mn float charge (referred to as "arrears") will be made, and that this should resolve for the immediate term the crisis in Dohuk.  Tuwaitha Radioactive Materials Shipment ----------------------------------------  8. (S) Ambassador thanked the DPM for efforts to push removal of irradiators and yellow cake uranium materials from Iraq within the next days.  DPM sought verification that of actions immediately required: Ministry of Foreign Affairs notification to IAEA of intention to break seals; GoI instructions to the Iraqi Facilities Protection Force to allow the 90-plus member technical team access to specific buildings on the Tuwaitha site to pack the materials for shipment; and formal GoI authorization for all pertinent materials to be removed from the site and the country.  He promised to push the process forward.  COMMENT --------  9. (S) DPM Barham Salih seemed particularly glum in the meeting, countering most suggestions for the need for energetic efforts to bring true governance to Iraq with dire predictions of civil war generated by rivalries and the absence of political will to do right by the country.  This may have been connected to his expressed lack of joy at being Acting Prime Minister while the PM addressed his medical concerns -- an event that interrupted his plans to pass the New Year in Sulaymaniyah with his immediate family, forcing him to decamp to Baghdad.  END COMMENT. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000023  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 TAGS: IR, IZ, PGOV SUBJECT: PRT MAYSAN: IA OFFICIALS SHARE SECURITY CONCERNS  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1.  (U) This is a PRT Maysan reporting cable.  2.  (C) Summary:  In private and official discussions the Iraqi Army 10th Division Commander and his Maysan Brigade Commander expressed concern over the security situation in al-Amarah since the December 12 bombing.  They advised that an ongoing series of successful raids on insurgents and criminals made the population nervous, and that it would not be prudent for PRT staff to conduct project visits at the present time.  However, they said they would be able to provide full security for future visits when the situation was calmer.  The officers added that provincial officials were complying with the ongoing operations.  End Summary.  3. (C) While arranging a meeting for PRT staff on December 30, PRT Bilingual Bicultural Advisor (BBA) briefly chatted with the Iraqi Army (IA) 10th Division Commander Major General Habib Talib Abbas al-Husayn and his Maysan Brigade Commander, Brigadier General Nabil Yasin Ibrahim.  The following day, PRT Deputy Team Leader (DTL) paid a courtesy call on General Habib to discuss the security situation in Maysan.  The (In)Security Situation --------------------------  4. (C) Asked about Maysan,s security situation and the status of the Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM), Habib answered with three points: 1) JAM provides the linkage for &other countries8, 2) JAM receives training from &other countries8, and 3) there are different kinds of JAM in the province.  Although he initially used 'other countries' to mean Iran, Syria and Saudi Arabia he later only mentioned Iran.  He mentioned a new group forming in Maysan called the &Ashab al-Qadiyya8 (Friends of the Cause), made up of disaffected or rejected JAM members.  He added that this new group was receiving considerable outside support.  He noted that while Muthanna and Nasiriyah were quiet, there was &no stability8 in Maysan at the present time.  Asked about the prospects of the PRT traveling to the province to visiting ongoing and planned projects, he sought to reassure us, saying, &We have control.  We have strength.  We had a request from Baghdad to take control of the security situation.8  Warning to Provincial Officials -------------------------------  5. (C) Habib indicated that during his last visit to Amarah in the wake of the December 12, 2007 bombing, he spoke with members of the Provincial Council and representatives of the Governor.  He told them that he had to fix the security situation and warned them not to get in his way.  Habib added that he met with the Chief of Police (COP), giving him a &strong message8 and saying that he needed to make sure that he had their full cooperation.  He said &that,s why we changed the chief of police8.  Habib confirmed IA was conducting regular, house-by-house raids, successfully catching both insurgents and criminals, and that provincial officials had not resisted these operations.  No JAM-Badr Reconciliation --------------------------  6. (C) Asked about the possibility of renewed JAM-Badr Corps fighting in Maysan, Habib answered, &they will never reconcile8 adding, &Badr supports the Coalition.  We (IA) support the Coalition.  JAM blames Badr for the problems.8 Regarding Moqtada al-Sadr,s (MAS) recent renewal of the six-month &freeze8, Habib observed, &Sadr changed his mind because of the bad reputation of the Sadrists.  He wants to give JAM a nice image; many people are criticizing him.8  Full support for PRT visits ---------------------------  8. (C) Understanding our strong interest in visiting project sites and provincial officials in Maysan, Habib repeatedly assured us of his readiness to control the situation and provide security.  He made clear that he would spare no resource to ensure we had full protective cover while traveling and were able to visit project sites.  Asked when we might be able to go, he said &It will be no problem.  We will take you, but at the appropriate time.  We will get you there and back safely, but we need a little time.8  In a personal visit with the BBA the day before, Habib said, &Right now, don,t go.  If you want my advice, stay here.  I can provide IA security when you do go, and your team will have no problem.8  Nabil: We need more time  BAGHDAD 00000023  002 OF 002   ------------------------  9. (C) During the BBA,s brief hallway encounter, Nabil confided that since the bombing the security situation in Maysan was very bad.  He said authorities had indeed caught the perpetrators who confessed under interrogation to being JAM members receiving support from Iran.  Nabil told the BBA that Iran-sponsored JAM had &taken over the city (Amarah)8.  He clarified that they weren,t Farsi-speaking Persians but JAM members being paid by Iran.  Asked about the purpose of the bombing, he opined that the Iranians needed violence to keep things unstable and that they did not want any safety or success in the south.  Nabil insisted that he still needed time to clean out the insurgents.  He added that they often did raids at night, and that the people were feeling insecure.  He also noted that the confessions of the bombers provided useful intelligence that led to some successful raids.  Nabil said they were arresting both criminals and insurgents, and that he would let us know when it was safe to visit. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000026  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE PASS TO CAPT. BILL JENSEN, NEA/I POLMIL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 TAGS: IZ, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PINS, PNAT, PTER SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR IRAQI MINISTER OF DEFENSE ABDEL QADR JASIM AL-MIFRIJI  Classified By: Classified by Ambassador Ryan Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1. (S) Iraqi Minister of Defense Abdel Qadr arrives in Washington against a backdrop of encouraging news about security in Iraq, still tentative legislative progress, and just as the USG SOFA negotiating team begins its preliminary work prior to its initial meeting with the GOI later this month.  The timing of this visit is advantageous because it affords an opportunity to encourage the minister to actively engage in the formation of an Iraqi negotiating team that is knowledgeable and inclusive and for his remaining actively engaged throughout the talks. It would also be useful to discuss the Turkey-PKK crisis, gain his perspective on the development of the Iraqi military, reassure him we are doing all we can to speed up equipment deliveries in the USG Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program, and to reiterate the message the Secretary delivered during her visit on the need for progress on the political agenda. He will be candid in discussing the strengths and weaknesses of Iraqi military forces and the requirement for a long-term relationship with the United States, which he has publicly endorsed.  Turkey/PKK ----------  2. (S) Abdel Qadr quickly grasped the negative domestic and international optics of a GOI "slow to take charge" following the October 7 PKK cross border ambush of Turkish soldiers, and he pressed for immediate action to avoid military escalation.  In this vein, Abdel Qadr led a GOI delegation (including KRG reps) to Ankara October 26 to detail steps the GOI would take to rein in the PKK and was with General Petraeus to transfer the eight Turkish Army hostages back to Turkish control. He also indicated a willingness to have a Turkish counter-terrorism expert work with the GOI in Iraq. In GOI cabinet-level meetings, however, he has been highly critical of Turkish cross-border incursions. We should commend Abdel Qadr for his pro-active approach to the border situation and underscore the need to maintain the security measures taken by the GOI and KRG such as increased surveillance at airports, increased checkpoints, closure of PKK offices, and denial of supplies and materiel to PKK encampments.  3. (S) Abdel Qadr should be a part of our longer term strategy of encouraging a political solution to the problem through diplomatic engagements between GOI and GOT officials. If Turkish Deputy Chief of Defense Saygun makes his promised trip to Iraq to meet with MNF-I Commanding General Petraeus, he should also meet with Abdel Qadr.  Abdel Qadr has demonstrated that he is a serious interlocutor on this matter and should reinforce the GOI message publicly and privately that the PKK is a terrorist organization and has no place in Iraq.  Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) ---------------------------------  4. (S) During negotiations on UNSCR renewal and Declaration of Principles, the GOI used a small, select staff from the Prime Minister's office for most discussions. A Sunni, Abdel Qadr will likely agree that this small circle should expanded into a more inclusive body before beginning negotiations on the Long Term Security Relationship (LTSR). Abdel Qadr's trip is a welcome opportunity to convey the message that Iraq's team must include appropriate technical experts from MOD and enjoy the support of all political groups. During discussions in Washington, we should emphasize to Abdel Qadr the scale of negotiations and requirement for lawyers and specialists who understand military, security, and technical issues. Moreover, we strongly suggest the Iraqi delegation include working-level representatives from government organs such as the Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Health, Customs, Transportation, Communications, Finance, Labor and Environment. As background, the full-time USG negotiating team will have 11 members with about 30 technical experts on-hand as necessary to discuss individual issues.  Force Development -----------------  5. (C) Abdel Qadr has presided over a major transformation of  BAGHDAD 00000026  002 OF 003   the Iraqi Army--there are already over 160,000 "trained and equipped" Iraqi soldiers deployed throughout Iraq. In 2007 alone, the Iraqi Army added 42,800 soldiers while simultaneously prosecuting the war. By 2010, the Iraqi armed forces is expected to include an army of over 260,000 soldiers, an air force of 8,000 airmen, and a navy of 2,500 sailors. Abdel Qadr has said he intends it to be equal to other armed forces in the region. He described his greatest challenge as establishing a strong logistics and training system to sustain the planned force.  Along these lines, he has told us that this year would see an emphasis on building infrastructure to support the forces and providing proper maintenance facilities at each operating base. Abdel Qadr has since followed up with funding allocations and contractual obligations to secure this effort. Since infrastructure remains the Achilles Heel in the Iraqi force structure, we should commend his efforts and encourage his continued emphasis in this critical area.  FMS vs. Other Weapons Purchases -------------------------------  6. (C) In discussions with the Ambassador, Abdel Qadr said he is pleased with the USG Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program and applauded the support of the Multi-National Security Transition Command-Iraq (MNSTC-I) during the past year. He has described the training component included in FMS packages as especially valuable. He understands well that FMS eliminates the risk of corruption and ensures quality equipment but has also been very frustrated with the pace of deliveries. Recently Abdel Qadr has sought alternate sources of equipment from Romania, Serbia, Ukraine, and China. Last month, Qadr signed agreements worth $230 million with Serbia's state arms dealer Yugoimport for personal protection equipment, machine guns, mortars, and sniper rifles. This visit will be an opportunity to explain in detail what we are doing to address Iraqi concerns to speed up the FMS process. Last week, Abdel Qadr signed Letters of Request to the USG for pricing and availability on major long term purchases of M1 tanks, LAV-25, 120mm mortars, and the OH-58 helicopters.  ACSA ----  7. (S) On 13 December, the Deputy Commanding General of MNSTC-I briefed the MinDef regarding the need to move ahead with negotiations on an Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA). MNSTC-I estimates that an ACSA would greatly accelerate almost one-third of recurring logistics cases now covered by FMS.  The MinDef agreed to develop an ACSA but several follow-on meetings with his staff have been cancelled. We should encourage Abdel Qadr to continue the process as a means of relieving stress on the FMS system and speeding up delivery of critical logistics services.  Biographical ------------  8. (S) Although MinDef Abdel Qadr has now donned a business suit, he still carries the unmistakable air of a soldier. He is proud of his combat experience, as well as his survival in Saddam's prisons during the nineties for his opposition to the war with Kuwait. This toughness has served him well as an independent Sunni minister, and from our perspective, he has been a very effective apolitical and non-sectarian minister. He sees the ministry very much as his own. As a former general officer, however, he does not believe that he needs the advice of his senior military leadership, an approach that has caused strains between him and the Chief of the Defense Forces, GEN Babakyr Shawkt.  9. (S) With significant Coalition assistance, the Ministry of Defense is considered the best-run, most efficient relative to other Iraqi ministries and the MinDef has taken a strong stance against corruption and appearances of it within the MOD. Prime Minister Maliki continues to follow Abdel Qadr's advice on important security issues like the timing of Basrah's return to Provincial Iraqi Control, as well as the filling of highly sensitive military leadership positions. Although he is comfortable with some small-talk in English, he will use a translator for any substantive discussions.  10. (C) In our experience, Abdel Qadr has been willing to  BAGHDAD 00000026  003 OF 003   talk to Congress about the Iraqi security strategy and plans to rebuild the Iraqi military. We should take advantage of any opportunity to include members of Congress in his scheduled events or encourage the Iraqis to arrange additional private meetings with them if the schedule permits. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000035  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/03/2017 TAGS: ECON, EPET, ENRG, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: BETTER SUPPLY AND MANAGEMENT REDUCE SOME BLACK MARKET FUEL PRICES  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ,d).  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Summary: Black market benzene and diesel prices in Mosul have fallen since August but still remain above the government price for each fuel.  Increases in benzene supply, a slight seasonal reduction in benzene demand, and improved Iraqi discipline and management of fuel distribution are some of the factors contributing to the lower prices.  Winter demand kept the kerosene black market price consistently high through December.  The long-term solutions to meeting local demand and reducing black market profitability and corruption include increased fuel supply through imports and parity between official and world fuel prices.  Benzene and Diesel Prices Fall, Kerosene Remains High --------------------------------------------- --------  2.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) The average black market price for regular benzene in Mosul fell from Iraqi Dinar (ID) 925/liter (USD 0.74) in mid-August 2007 to about ID 700/liter (USD 0.56) in mid-December 2007, according to Coalition Force surveys and Oil Products Distribution Company-Northern Branch (OPDC) statistics.  Mosul residents reported that over the same period the quoted government price for a liter of benzene rose from ID 350/liter (USD 0.28) to ID 500 (approx. USD 0.40).  Benzene delivery from the Baiji Oil Refinery (BOR) increased at least 35 percent during the same time period.  3.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) The average black market diesel price in Mosul fell from ID 700/liter (USD 0.56) in mid-August to ID 633/liter (USD 0.51) in mid-December, while the quoted government price stayed constant at ID 400/liter (USD 0.32).  Diesel delivery decreased 18 percent during the time period.  4.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Kerosene prices in Mosul began in August at ID 769/liter (USD 0.62), moved up to about ID 825/liter (USD 0.66) in September and October and dropped back to only ID 700/liter in December, compared to a quoted government price increase over the same period from ID 150/liter (USD 0.12) to ID 200/liter (USD 0.16).  Kerosene delivery from the BOR tripled between August and December.  5.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Businessmen, farmers and government officials from Mosul and outlying areas of western, southern and eastern Ninewa corroborated the statistical picture of falling benzene and diesel black market prices.  These PRT contacts reported that queues were shorter and black market prices were down for benzene and diesel.  However, kerosene prices and shortages remained high or increased over the same period.  Improved Iraqi Administration Stretches Meager Supply --------------------------------------------- --------  6.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) OPDC-Northern Branch General Manager Mohamed al Zibari, who oversees fuel distribution for northern Iraq, has worked closely since September with the Mayor of Mosul, where two-thirds of Ninewa's three million people live, to enforce discipline in the fuel distribution system.  Working from an OPDC-Northern Branch schedule of deliveries, provincial officials followed up to check stations' supplies on hand and hours of operation.  In November alone, 25 gas stations were closed or fined for pulling fuel out of the official system and selling it at inflated prices on the black market, al Zibari said.  Al Zibari and the Mosul Mayor said they would like to replicate their enforcement system in the rest of the province.  7.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Al Zibari attributed some of this year's drop in the black market benzene price to increased consumer confidence as they recognized better accountability in the fuel distribution system.  This increased predictability, coupled with the increased benzene supply, reduced the need for consumers to grab any available benzene at exorbitant black market prices.  Alternatively, the kerosene market saw continued high prices because the increased supply from the BOR was overshadowed by Ninewa residents' increased demand for their perceived winter needs.  Ninewa residents told the PRT in the fall of 2007 that they planned to stockpile kerosene at up to three times the government price, contributing to a bidding war that reinforced black market profitability.  BAGHDAD 00000035  002 OF 002    Businessmen Would Trade Higher Prices for More Supply --------------------------------------------- --------  8.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Operating at full capacity, without restricted credit or security fears, Ninewa's economy would require 3 million liters/day of benzene, al Zibari said, based on estimates of personal and vehicle fuel usage.  In the current restrictive security and economic environment, he said the province only needed slightly more than the 1.1 million liters/day of benzene that it received.  As security and economic conditions improve, though, Iraqi officials would need much more benzene, diesel and kerosene, a demand Al Zibari said imports at the world price for each would have to meet.  9.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Business owners and investors across Ninewa told the PRT in fall 2007 that they understood how the disparity between the official and black market fuel prices encouraged corruption.  They endorsed an increase in the official fuel price, with the understanding that the higher official price would attract increased private imports and reduce the black market's profitability.  They acknowledged that about one-quarter of Ninewa residents relied on the current officially priced fuel, for which they might wait in line seven days.  Few businesses or farmers could afford to wait so long for fuel, no matter how cheap, the Ninewa entrepreneurs said.  Comment: Increased Imports and Price Parity -------------------------------------------  10.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) While administrative improvements at the OPDC-Northern Branch are a good sign for GOI capacity, they will not solve the underlying problems in Iraqi fuel distribution: lack of sufficient supply and disparity between black market and government prices.  Iraqi refineries are unlikely in the short term to triple domestic supply, indicating that government or private imports must meet Iraqis' needs both during this winter's kerosene crunch and as the country's improving security demands more benzene for a growing economy.  If the government markets imports at the world price, it would meet the terms of the International Monetary Fund agreement with Iraq.  11.  (SBU) Simultaneously, official Iraqi fuel prices should be allowed to match the world price, incentivizing private importers and eliminating black marketers' windfall gain. Such a policy would help eliminate black market-driven corruption and provide a more steady supply of fuel to the businesses that need it to power Ninewa's economy.  However, increased official fuel prices would be politically untenable unless a system, such as the Social Safety Net, continued to provide for the poorest 25 percent of society that relies on cheap fuel. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000036  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  NEA/I:RSCHMIERER NEA/I-PM:TBETTS ISN/RA:KKESSLER S/I:KNUTT L/NPV:THISCH DOE:JSELLEN JS:SNORWOOD OSD:TBENNET  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2017 TAGS: ECON, PARM, PREL, IAEA, IZ SUBJECT: TUWAITHA UPDATE: MEETING AT MOST -- GOI LETTER TO IAEA SIGNED  REF: A. A. STATE 163968      B. B. BAGHDAD 4126      C. C. STATE 169324      D. D. BAGHDAD 2454      E. E. BAGHDAD 1787      F. F. BAGHDAD 734      G. G BAGHDAD 004227  Classified By: Charles Ries, Economic Minister, for Reasons 1.4 (B), (D ) and (H)   1.(S) Summary: Energy Attach and staff met at the Ministry of Science and Technology with Deputy Ministers Dr. Samir (RAOUF) and Dr. Fauad (Al-Musawi) and Director General of National Monitoring Mohammed Jawad "AL SHARA".  The purpose of the meeting was for NNSA to provide an overview of the activities the US Team at Tuwaitha to repackage and remove four irradiation sources and 550 metric tons of uranium yellow cake located on-site. In addition, Shara provided a copy of the GOI notification letter to the IAEA signed by him and stated that it had already been forwarded to the MFA for transmission to Vienna. MOST requested US assistance in purchasing a replacement irradiation capability. The US requested a written summary of the activities for which the replacement capability would be used in order to help determine the best option. MOST agreed to provide that information. While discussing next steps such as the MFA forwarding the GOI letter to the IAEA and appointment of an Iraqi to negotiate the sale of the yellow cake, MOST officials indicated that Surood (NAJIB) no longer held his post in the MFA.   IAEA Letter Provided  2.(S) Parks opened the meeting by thanking MOST for the excellent cooperation and support on-site for the US Team at Tuwaitha, citing specifically the access granted yesterday and today to remove the irradiation sources from Buildings 4 and 4A.  Al-Musawi and Shara noted that they understood from the MOST representatives on-site that the work  was going well.  Boudreau presented the overview briefing and answered questions. Shara asked if the yellow cake was going to be stored at Area C or moved. When told it would be moved from C to B for storage awaiting shipment, he asked that the US provide a letter stating its intention to move the material from C to B and out of the Country.  He also asked that we confirm that the repackaging would meet IAEA standards because "that is what our letter says."  Boudreau agreed to provide a letter and asked about the status of he GOI letter to the IAEA notifying the Agency that the seals on the bunker housing the yellow cake would be broken. Since the US had briefed Mr. Shara as requested and the briefing to MOST technical experts was ongoing at the site, could MOST send the letter.  Shara replied that the letter to the IAEA was already completed, signed by MOST and sent to the MFA for transmission to Vienna. He then handed over a copy of the letter, signed by him (see para. 7). The US thanked him for his prompt action on the notification letter.   Replacing the Irradiation Sources with Substitute Non-nuclear Devices   3.(S) MOST would like US assistance to procure a replacement for the irradiation sources that are being removed. Deputy Director Raouf made the key points regarding the importance to Iraq to have such a capability in order to support agricultural programs.  He stressed that Iraq wanted to replace the sources with something "safe."  Raouf further stated that Mrs. Nawal (Director General for the MOST Directorate of Agricultural Research and Food Science) is preparing a letter for the MOST Minister to sign formally requesting US assistance for a replacement irradiation capability. Parks stated that the US would work with Iraq on this issue and requested that MOST provide a list of expected uses for the alternate sources (Comment: The US has requested this information several times before. End Comment) Al-Musawi and Shara agreed to provide the information.  Sell it All/Value of the Uranium  4.(S) All three Iraqi officials stressed that Iraq wants the yellow cake sale to include all of the items inventoried. After some clarifying discussion, it seemed that they meant all of the items containing uranium, not just the large quantity of relatively pure uranium.  Recognizing that the details would be in the contract between Iraq and the international buyer, DOE has previously understood that the material inventory provided to potential buyers included various materials that would require significant investment to convert to a useable form. It is important to inform potential buyers that Iraq's goal is to have all of the material removed.  5.(SBU) Shara then noted that the price for the yellow cake was "easy" to estimate given the market price. Boudreau responded that while the spot price seemed to have stabilized, it could change significantly over time. In addition, he reminded Shara that none of the Tuwaitha material was in the form normally marketed (U3O8) as yellow cake.  All of the material would require additional processing.  The cost of that reprocessing would reduce the sale price. He stated that NNSA offers to act as technical advisor to Iraq regarding the uranium. Echoing the meeting held on 30 December with MOST Minister Fahmi (See Ref G BAGHDAD 004227), the US will work with Iraq to get the best value for the uranium, recognizing there must be some cost-sharing for the US repackaging and transporting the material.  Next Steps/Role of Najib in question  6.(S) In a discussion of next steps, DOE highlighted the need for the GOI to approve removal of the irradiation sources from Iraq and to designate an Iraqi representative to negotiate the commercial contract for the sale of the yellow cake.  Raouf noted that "all interested parties" in the Iraqi Government will be properly informed to ensure the sale and transfer go smoothly and professionally. When DOE raised Surood Najib's name in the context of selecting a GOI representative to negotiate a sales contract and the MFA role in the transmitting the IAEA letter, Al-Musawi responded that Najib had different responsibilities; Najib's former office would still transmit the notification letter to the IAEA.  7.(SBU) Text of GOI Letter to the IAEA:  Ministry of Science and Technology Iraqi National Monitoring Directorate Baghdad-IRAQ  Mr. Neville Whiting                       Confidential Date: 2 Jan. 2008 Acting Director, Operation B Dept. of Safeguards IAEA-Vienna  Sir:  Please be informed that the United States will begin repacking 550 MT of yellow cake at (IQY) location (C) Tuwaitha site in the near future.  We request the IAEA grant approval to break the seals needed to access the material to start the repacking process.  The United States will return the seals as instructed by the IAEA. We are very pleased with the level of support and cooperation by the IAEA in the ensuring this effort is consistent wtih all safeguards requirements.  Accept, Sir my highest consideration.  Cc: Mr. Herman Nackaerats, Director Operation B     Mr. Laure Pedraza, Operation B     Mr. Walter Veia-Espirnboza, Operation B                                             Mohammed Al Sharaa                                           D.G. INMD                                           Baghdad-Iraq   8. (U) Attendees  GOI   Dr. Samir (RAOUF), Deputy Minister  Dr. Fauad (Al-Musawi), Deputy Minister  Mohammed Jawad "AL SHARA", Director General of National Monitoring  Sundus Ahmed "MOUSA", Head of Computer & Administration  US  Edgar Parks, Energy Attach  Robert Boudreau, Senior NNSA Representative  Albert Walgreen, DOE Staff            CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000039  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/03/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: ANBAR POLITICAL LEADERS DISCUSS POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS WITH THE AMBASSADOR  REF: BAGHDAD 4224  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C)  Summary: Four Anbari leaders met with the Ambassador December 31, to highlight the newly formed Anbar Higher Committee (AHC) as a conflict-resolution mechanism in the province.  Anbar is eager to pursue an economic zone (EZ), perhaps in the city of al-Qaim.  The Anbaris noted the lack of support from the central GOI regarding service-delivery improvements in the area of oil/fuel products, electricity, water and sewage, Public Distribution System (PDS) rations, and security.  The Mayor of Nukhayb district in the Anbar Province also shared concerns over the GOI/MOI transferring security coverage to Karbala, and deep-seated fears the GOI will attempt to redraw or expand the Karbala provincial border into Nukhayb.  The Anbar leaders thanked the Ambassador and Coalition Forces (CF) for USG support during the past year in fighting against al-Qaeda, and asked for on-going support to resolve problems with the central GOI. End summary.  ANBAR HIGHER COMMITTEE ----------------------  2. (C) Former State Minister for Foreign Affairs, Rafe Al-Essawi informed the Ambassador of the formation of the "Anbar Higher Committee" (AHC) (ref A) on behalf of the four Anbar leaders present -- Governor of Anbar Ma'amoun Sami al-Alwani; Chairman of the Provincial Council Dr. Abdulsalam; Mayor of Nukhayb Sheikh Lawrence; and Sheikh Hameed Turki al-Shooka, Chairman of the Anbar Sheikhs Council.  He emphasized this new committee "will work as one team for Anbar."  He mentioned that the Anbar Higher Council (AHC) is working to develop a Sunni-Shi'a tribal delegation for the International Visitors Program (IVP) to be scheduled in February 2008. (Note:  This is a follow-up to the visit of the Anbar delegation from November 2007. End note). Provincial Council (PC) Chairman Abdulsalam also promoted the new AHC as a mechanism to promote inclusion of the tribes, to resolve conflicts in Anbar, and to continue fighting al-Qaeda.  ECONOMIC ZONE -------------  3. (C) PC Chairman Abdulsalam informed the Ambassador of Anbar's intent to pursue an economic zone in the upcoming year.  He added that the PC has a great relationship with DPM Saleh and that Anbari leaders would discuss this idea with him in the new year.  Anbar is in the process of identifying a location for the economic zone.  PC Chair Abdulsalam and Governor Ma'amoun asked for the Ambassador's support of this effort.  The Ambassador assured them he would engage DPM Saleh on this issue in the near future.  PROBLEMS WITH THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT ------------------------------------  4. (C) Governor Ma'amoun highlighted numerous problems with the central government, and highlighted service-delivery to the province as a particular problem.  "The electricity crisis," he said, "is getting much worse."  He lamented that Anbar does not see any help from the Ministry of Electricity on this problem.  Obtaining oil/fuel products is also very difficult.  He complained that the central GOI was extending offers for development to Syrian and Iranian companies.  The Governor expressed, however, that the Anbaris wanted American oil companies to develop any hydrocarbon resources in the province.  Similarly, on the project for the refinery in Haditha, the MoO was not adequately supporting the restart. He claimed that the GOI is not consulting with the Anbar PC or provincial government.  He asked for the Ambassador's support in trying to resolve these problems with the central GOI ministries.  5. (C) Service delivery of the Public Distribution System (PDS) rations is another area in which the Anbaris claimed that the central GOI is failing them.  The Ministry of Municipalities is not providing Anbar sufficient water and sewer services.  The Anbar leaders also fear that provincial funds from the Ministry of Finance are being stolen because they are transported by an Iraqi private company instead of Coalition Forces.  The lack of sufficient equipment and pay for guards at the border posts in Anbar between Syria and Jordan is another area of concern.  Rafe Essawi blamed the Ministry of Interior (MOI) for some of these security issues.  The Ambassador encouraged the Anbar political leaders to engage the central GOI, particularly the Minister of Electricity Kareem Wahid and Minister of Oil Hussein Shahristani regarding these concerns during one of their visits.  BAGHDAD 00000039  002 OF 002    NUKHAYB DISTRICT AND FEARS OF KARBALA EXPANSION --------------------------------------------- --  6. (C) Sheikh Lawrence, the Mayor of Nukhayb, shared with the Ambassador problems that Nukhayb has had with the central government.  Of particular concern, he discussed, was a GOI decision (through MoI) to transfer responsibility for security coverage of the Nukhayb district to Karbala.  He added, "Nukhayb has been part of Anbar province for forty-seven years and not a conflict zone.  Security in the province should be ours."  He highlighted the interference in security for the Hajj and the GOI's/MOI's ill-advised attempt to insert security posts from neighboring provinces in Anbar police stations.  Anbaris also fear that the GOI will attempt to redraw the Anbar/Karbala provincial border to restore it to the pre-1990s jurisdiction (Note: Saddam changed the border after the 1991 Shi'a revolt to punish the Shi'ites. End Note).  Anbar leaders are now nervous about the border being re-adjusted under Article 140 of the Constitution.  UNITING TRIBES IN ANBAR -----------------------  7. (C)  Sheikh Hameed Turki, Chairman of the Anbar Sheikhs Council, highlighted security improvements in Anbar since the tribes stood up with Coalition Forces to fight against al-Qaeda.  "Through this tribal committee," he said, "eighteen sheikhs have united from the big tribes in Anbar to support security, reconstruction efforts, and to rebuild trust in Anbar province."  He complained that the tribes in Southern Iraq are being heavily influenced by the Iranians and asked for USG support on this issue. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000042  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  DEPT for NEA/RA  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KBCT, ABLD, PHUM, AL, ECON, AMGT, ASUP, AFIN, IZ SUBJECT: WAIVER REQUESTED -- Section 565 Waiver of Prohibition against Contracting with Firms that comply with the Arab League Boycott or Discriminate in the Basis of Religion  REF: STATE 166398  1. (SBU) Section 565 of Title V, Part C of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (PL 103-236, 22 USC 2679c) prohibits the Department of State from entering into any contract, except real estate leases and contracts below the small purchase threshold (currently $100,000), that expends funds appropriated to the Department of State with a foreign person that complies with the Arab League boycott of Israel, or with any foreign or United States person that discriminates in the award of subcontracts on the basis of religion.  2. (SBU) Reftel requested that Posts that will not be able to carry on diplomatic functions while meeting either or both of the requirements of Section 565 send a cable requesting a waiver of the relevant requirement(s) and justifying the request.  3. (SBU) Post's request for waiver for 2007 stated, "Iraq does not maintain diplomatic relations with Israel.  The U.S. Embassy in Baghdad has reported instances in which Iraqi agencies have sought to enforce compliance with boycott requirements.  The current requirements of Iraqi law in this regard are not clear, and this has been the subject of ongoing discussions between the USG and the GOI.  The Embassy believes that local firms would generally be unable to provide the certification necessary under Section 565.  Therefore, without a waiver, the Embassy would potentially be unable to obtain essential supplies and services in-country."  4. (SBU) Post's experience over the contracting year has indicated that, despite previous presumptions to the contrary, local firms contracting with Post's GSO Contracting Officer have in all cases been able to provide the certification necessary under Section 565. The Embassy's ability to obtain essential supplies and services, to the extent that these are procured in-country, has not been hampered.  Nonetheless, not all agencies at Post have been able to obtain the necessary certification.  5. (SBU) Iraq does not maintain diplomatic relations with Israel. While, the Department of State has included the boycott noncompliance clause outlined under Section 565 in all GSO-originated contracts in 2007, the current requirements of Iraqi law remain unclear.  Post therefore must request a waiver because of ambiguities under Iraqi law and potential compliance with the boycott by subcontracting entities.  6. (SBU) For the reasons stated in para 5 above, Post requests a waiver of the relevant requirement(s) of Section 565.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000044  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: ALI AL-ADEEB CONFIRMS THAT DA'WA WILL SUPPORT DE-BAATH LAW  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Ellen Germain for reasons 1.4  (b) and (d).  1. (C) Ali al-Adeeb, the Da'wa party bloc leader at the CoR, told us January 2 that Da'wa would support the Accountability and Justice Law (i.e., the de-Ba'athification Law) when it comes to a vote, adding that Da'wa would like to see the law amended -- not for substantive reasons, but to persuade the Sadrists that their participation in the parliamentary debate had been worthwhile.  He said any amendments would be previewed by Vice President (VP) Tariq al-Hashimi before the law is brought to a vote, so as to ensure that the VP will not veto the law on the grounds that it deviates from what Iraqi leaders agreed to on August 26.  Al-Adeeb revealed that Tawafuq CoR member Ayyad Sammaraie vigorously opposed the December 24 agreement between Hashimi and the Kurdish Alliance, thereby furthering the competition between the two Sunni leaders.  2. (C) Asked whether the Awakening Movement (aka, Sahwa) would likely evolve as a rival to Tawafuq or be assimilated into the Sunni coalition, al-Adeeb confidently predicted that Sahwa would emerge as an alternative to Tawafuq.  However, he argued that the current balance of power between Sahwa and the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) in Anbar Province is unsustainable.  "Without new provincial elections, Sahwa will not be able to consolidate the power it has gained," said al-Adeeb.  He observed that a provincial election in Anbar would serve both to empower Sahwa at IIP's expense, and to moderate Tawafuq's behavior at the national level (on the grounds that, after being chastened in the provincial election, Tawafuq would take a more cooperative line with respect to the central government in order to avoid being routed by Sahwa at the national level).  3. (C) Al-Adeeb reacted coldly to the message that the CoR should dispense with its scheduled February holiday, having already taken a lengthy break in December for hajj/eid.  He insisted that the time taken off in December should not count, because the CoR had dispensed with its regular 3-day work week in November and had met daily.              CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000048  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON, ELTN, IZ SUBJECT: PASSENGER RAIL'S RETURN HINTS AT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES  REF: 2007 BAGHDAD 2724  1. (U) SUMMARY: On December 16 the Iraqi Republic Railway (IRR) renewed scheduled passenger service between Baghdad and Basrah for the first time since before the 2003 invasion. The first week of service was marred by two attacks--one suicide bomb and one IED--and a train-automobile collision under arguably suspicious circumstances.  Security challenges notwithstanding, the Office of the Transportation Attach (OTA) continues to work closely with the IRR and the Ministry of Transportation (MoT) to help them maximize the railway's commercial potential through infrastructure improvements, training, technical assistance, and capacity development.  In 2008 several USG-funded, OTA-managed projects should enhance the railway's capacity to serve both Iraqi and Coalition customers.  The GOI must, however, invest more in the system and its security to solidify its role as an economic activity enabling transportation infrastructure.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------------- PASSENGER RAIL RETURNS ----------------------  2. (U) On December 16 the IRR renewed scheduled passenger service between Baghdad and Basrah for the first time since before the 2003 invasion.  The IRR now offers two trains per day, seven days per week, on the 552 kilometer (KM) route: a 09:00 Baghdad to Basrah arriving in the evening and a 21:00 Basrah to Baghdad arriving in the morning.  The trains average 40 KMs per hour and, passengers depending, stop at approximately 30 stations.  Each train set consists of a diesel locomotive, a power car, a sleeper, and three coaches; the sleeper holds a maximum of 80 passengers, and each coach holds 70.  Iraqis have shown interest in the service so far, drawn in part by the low fares.  A coach ticket sells for 2400 Iraqi Dinar (ID) or approximately USD 2.  The sleepers have sold out completely, and the coaches have been approximately 60 percent full.  ---------------------------------- EXTREMISTS CHALLENGE RAIL SECURITY ----------------------------------  3. (U) Scheduled passenger rail presents an easier target for extremists than the more irregular cargo service.  Extremists exploited this vulnerability at least twice during the first week of passenger service.  On December 19, a female suicide bomber detonated her charge outside a coach car at a station roughly 50 KMs south of Baghdad.  The explosion killed the attacker and derailed the car.  The IRR reported no other injuries.  On December 21, an IED prematurely detonated north of Latifiyah, killing the bomber and damaging the nearby track.  The explosion temporarily disrupted service, but injured nobody and damaged no other IRR equipment or facilities.  In addition to these attacks, on December 23 the southbound train collided with a minivan at a known rail crossing near Hillah.  The nature of the incident--suspicious or merely unfortunate--is still a matter of debate. (NOTE: The vehicle's driver had the wherewithal to flee the scene before impact, leaving the eleven remaining occupants of the van to die.  END NOTE.)  No injuries were reported on the train.  --------------------------------------------- -------- IRR AND OTA WORKING TO UNLOCK THE NETWORK'S POTENTIAL --------------------------------------------- --------  4. (U) OTA continues to work closely with the IRR and the MoT to maximize the railway's commercial potential through infrastructure improvements, training, technical assistance and capacity development.  OTA's overarching goal is to help the IRR formulate a strategic vision for the network and adopt and implement a business model suited to that vision. Passenger rail is unlikely to be a significant revenue generator for the IRR with fares so inexpensive, but the state-run company's cargo service has greater potential. Presently the IRR runs an average of seven cargo trains per day.  Each cargo train consists of nine container cars, and USD 400 is a common tariff per container.  Current payloads include supplies for Iraqi and Coalition forces, heavy fuel oil for power plants, and bulk commodities from the Port of Umm Qasr.  5. (U) Several USG-funded, OTA-managed projects should help the IRR serve its customers in 2008.  Two related projects--the Communications Based Train Control System (CBTC) and the Digital Microwave Radio Communications Network (DMRCN)--should be operational by mid-year.  The CBTC is a USD 14 million project that will modernize the IRR's antiquated system for directing train traffic, allowing technicians to manage the rail system from the Dispatching  BAGHDAD 00000048  002 OF 002   Department based in the Baghdad station.  The USD 38 million DMRCN is the CBTC's communications medium, comprised of 33 microwave telecommunications towers positioned along the train routes.  The IRR has selected eleven technicians to be trained on the CBTC equipment in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, in the first quarter of 2008.  The technology and its Iraqi operators should improve both efficiency and safety of the railway network.  6. (U) But fundamental challenges remain.  The light-weight track that runs from Basrah to Baghdad to Mosul needs replacing: it is over 60 years old and has been neglected since the Iran-Iraq war.  In addition, the IRR complains that the Rail Police, which formerly reported to the IRR itself but now falls under the Ministry of the Interior, are inexperienced and ineffective.  IRR employees report that militias and criminals associated with trucking cartels continue to threaten them.  7. (U) COMMENT: The December attacks on the passenger rail service highlight the difficulty of securing the railway. OTA will continue to engage the MoT and the IRR to assist them in strategic planning, identifying priorities, developing a sound business model, and executing contracts to achieve their goals.  But greater MoT investment in railway security and new track will be essential to maintain and expand its passenger and cargo services.  Continued neglect of the system will leave underutilized the railway's latent potential to move people and goods into, out of, and through Iraq. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000049  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2018 TAGS: IR, IZ, PGOV SUBJECT: CODEL COLEMAN DISCUSSES 2008 OUTLOOK WITH HAKIM   Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1.  (C) On January 5 CODEL Coleman (Sens. Norm Coleman (R-MN), John Cornyn (R-TX), Johnny Isakson (R-GA)) met with ISCI Leader Abd al-Aziz Al-Hakim.  MPs Hadi al-Amri and Redha Taki also attended the meeting.  Hakim opened by saying 2007 ended on a better note than it began, citing a "20-25%" decrease in terrorist attacks and improvements in construction, employment, and service delivery, and improved relations with neighboring countries.  Coleman responded by saying, "Thank you for your leadership and resolve in bringing together different people and ISCI and Badr support for the cause of Iraqi unity," but noted significant challenges remain.  Asked what was needed from the U.S., Hakim listed: training and equipping Iraqi Security Forces (ISF); Iraq's exit from Chapter VII; support for the political process; and strengthening Iraq's relations with neighboring countries.  Security Update: Blarney Hills of Baghdad -----------------------------------------  2.  (C) Cornyn asked if American troops should leave on an arbitrary date or at a time when the ISF is ready to assume security responsibility.  Hakim agreed this was a "central question," explaining that in 2003, the Iraqi army was not ready to assume responsibility and Hakim and others advocated using militias to provide stability.  He referred to the success of the Anbar Awakening and the ISF in Karbala and said "the greatest result has come from Iraqi security forces."  Coleman said "Americans will be fighting al-Qaeda forever," but noted that Americans cannot stay forever in Iraq.  Hakim maintained they were many positive developments and Amri chimed in that "Iraq is much better off than Ireland."  Coleman grills on legislation -----------------------------  3.  (C) On the subject of de-Ba'athification legislation, Hakim did not predict when the law would pass but noted that "we all want this" and "all Iraqis must learn to live together."  Warming to the topic of reconciliation, Hakim discussed a series of recent conferences in Najaf that focused on freedom and democracy and were attended by Iraqis from all sects.  Isakson mentioned the need for foreign investment, and Hakim explained that the COR investment committee "was busy fighting terrorism" but that it could now focus its attention on drafting investment legislation.  4.  (C) Comment: Hakim's positive comments on the Anbar Awakening echo similar statements made recently to Iraqi press and represent a change from his past public opposition to tribal engagement.  During a January 3 lecture at a religious conference in Najaf, Hakim called for signing an agreement with the U.S. related to the presence of American forces in Iraq.  End Comment.  5.  (U) CODEL Coleman did not have an opportunity to clear this cable before their departure. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000050  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2018 TAGS: EWWT, KU, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PBTS, PINS, PNAT, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: SEEKING KUWAITI CONCURRENCE ON MNF-I SALVAGE OPERATIONS  REF: A. 07BAGHDAD 4136      B. KUWAIT 0015  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (U) This is an action request, please see paragraph 7.  2. (C) Summary. On December 18, 2007, the Kuwaiti Navy ordered two vessels contracted by the Multi-National Force in Iraq (MNF-I) to depart disputed waters in the Khawr Abd Allah (KAA) waterway. These contracted vessels were surveying two submerged shipwrecks for eventual removal. Embassy Kuwait delivered a diplomatic note on December 26 to the GOK requesting concurrence to allow the ships to return to recover lost equipment and complete their mission. Delay costs since December 18 are about $2 million, roughly half of the entire contract allocation for this survey mission. Embassy Baghdad requests the Department bring this issue to the attention of the Kuwaiti Ambassador in Washington in order to get a positive response to the diplomatic note.  End Summary.  Incident Background -------------------  3. (C) On December 18, the Kuwaiti Navy ordered two vessels contracted by the MNF-I to immediately depart from their anchored position in disputed waters in the Khawr Abd Allah (KAA) waterway. The Captain was forced to cut anchors and cables which secured the diving platform to the seabed in order to comply with the Kuwaiti navy request and avoid boarding (Reftel A). The ship was contracted by MNF-I to undertake a detailed survey of two submerged wrecked ships which pose a significant navigation hazard. This is a required step prior to MNF-I planned operations for their eventual removal.  4. (C) Embassy Kuwait subsequently delivered a diplomatic note to the GOK requesting concurrence for the ships to return to the disputed area, retrieve the lost anchors and cables, and complete their survey mission.  On December 31, Embassy Kuwait CDA met with MFA U/S Al-Jarallah for follow-on discussions about this request.  While supportive, the U/S told CDA that the issue had been referred to the MOI (Reftel B).  Not About Disputed Waters -------------------------  5. (C) Although the Captain believed he was in Iraqi waters at the time of the incident, his stated geographical position appears to be in disputed waters between Kuwait and Iraq. For the purpose of this wreckage survey, however, it is not necessary or desirable for the U.S. to be drawn into the territorial dispute.  Delay Costs -----------  6. (C) Estimated delay cost is about $100,000 per day or--to date--about $2 million. For the entire survey operation, MNF-I allocated $4 million from the Commander's Emergency Response Program (CERP), i.e. delay costs alone have now consumed over half of this allocation and further delays threaten to deplete the remaining funds.  Action Request --------------  7. (C) In support of Embassy Kuwait's efforts to resolve this issue, Post requests the Department bring this issue to the attention of the Kuwaiti Ambassador in Washington at the earliest opportunity in order to reiterate to the GOK the importance of obtaining a response to the U.S. diplomatic note delivered on December 26 and the subsequent request made by CDA on December 31 to permit the survey ship to return to the survey site.  The following points are provided for use.  (BEGIN POINTS) --------------  - We want to bring to your attention an important matter regarding a survey ship that was conducting surveying operations in the Khawr Abd Allah (KAA) waterway December 18 but was intercepted by Kuwaiti Naval and Air Forces, which ordered the ship out of the area.  BAGHDAD 00000050  002 OF 002    - The survey ship was contracted by the USG for the purpose of surveying two submerged wrecks in the KAA for subsequent removal.  - These submerged wrecks pose a significant navigational hazard to the ships of all nations--including Kuwait--that traverse the KAA.  - Unimpeded access to Umm Qasr will provide expanded trade opportunities and economic benefits for the entire region.  - The USG requests GOK concurrence to proceed back to this site to retrieve equipment (primarily anchors and cables) left during the departure on December 18 and allow the vessels to complete their survey mission without interference.  - Our survey mission is transparent; we are prepared to remain in close contact with the GOK during the remainder of the mission, including hosting Kuwaiti observers.  - The USG requests GOK support for the overall mission of removing these wrecked ships, which will benefit all maritime vessels.  If raised:  - Although there may have been some initial confusion by the GOK on December 18 about the purpose and identity of the two survey vessels in the KAA, subsequent discussions between U.S. Embassy Kuwait and GOK have made it clear these are USG-contracted vessels. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000053  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/07/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: SALIH AND RUBAIE SAY 2008 THE YEAR OF ECONOMIC, POLITICAL GAINS   Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Ellen Germain for reasons 1.4  (b,d).  1.  (C) Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih and National Security Advisor Muwaffaq al-Rubaie met January 5 with Senators Norm Coleman, John Cornyn, and Johnny Isaksen in Salih,s home.  All agreed that Iraq has made important security strides in the last year, a fact which Salih hoped the Senators would use to persuade their constituencies to engage in Iraq a while longer.  He listed signs of progress on the economic front, including that the Kurdish leadership had agreed to support the draft of the hydrocarbon law that the Council of Ministers passed last February.  Both Salih and Rubaie acknowledged much work remains on the political front, but both expressed optimism that the de-Ba,athification law would pass in the Council of Representatives (COR) on Monday, January 7.  End summary.  Salih: Iraq Can Succeed But Needs U.S. Support --------------------------------------------- -  2.  (C) Senator Coleman opened by marveling at the improvements in Iraq,s security since his last visit, and asked Salih what more remained to be done.  Salih agreed that much had improved, arguing that if Anbar can be won back then so can all of Iraq, and that Iraq was the first Muslim country in which the native population had risen up to expel Al Qa,ida.  New Year,s Eve in Baghdad had been inspiring this year, as nearly every hotel in town held a large celebration that would have been unthinkable only months before.  He also noted Iraqi security forces were taking over more responsibility from the Coalition, and Senator Isaksen cited Basra as a prime example.  Salih said the greatest need on the security front was simply for leaders like the Senator to persuade the U.S. public that Iraq,s progress justifies a continued U.S. commitment.  3.  (C) Salih said whereas 2007 was the year of security, 2008 will be the year of economic regeneration.  He listed signs of economic progress, including that the GOI executed more of its budget in 2007 than 2006, and would soon pass its largest budget ever.  He added that the COR had summoned him to discuss the budget on Monday, January 7.  He called GOI management in the oil sector inadequate, but said a hopeful sign is that Presidents Talabani and Barzani met today in Erbil and agreed to support the draft of the hydrocarbon law that reached the COR in February.  Several other crucial industries have taken important recent steps forward, in Salih,s estimation: a major conference is scheduled this month in Amman to bolster the cement sector, bids for a GOI mobile telephone contract had been much higher than expected, and the GOI is working on a plan to revitalize Iraq,s only major port.  He noted finally that the GOI had recently concluded Iraq,s first-ever public forum on fighting corruption, which Salih had patronized.  4.  (C) Undeterred by the prospect of overusing the construct, Salih said whereas 2007 was the year of security, 2008 will be the year of political settlement.  He expressed hope that the de-Ba,athification law would pass this Monday (January 7).  The GOI, in his view, needs to be more inclusive, with Tawafuq, Fadhila, and the Sadrists outside the government and the Kurds having major difficulties with it.  Salih stressed, however, that the debate should not be personalized and that Maliki is not solely to blame for the stagnation.  The system needs to change, he said, not "Mr. X or Mr. Y;" if it fails to change, the Sahwa councils that have so improved security may devolve into merely another militia.  Rubaie: GOI Better Than You Think ---------------------------------  5.  (C) Rubaie interjected that the GOI has made more progress than many give it credit for, including on the political front.  First, he noted that a year ago there was no 3 1 1 mechanism; he gushed that Maliki is excited about the body and has an unspecified new plan for it.  Second, he said the nationwide tribal awakening was a GOI initiative, although others have attempted to claim credit for it. Third, the GOI had turned around its previously bloody relationship with Iran, in addition to improving relations with Syria and Saudi Arabia.  All these he cited as signs of political progress.  Rubaie acknowledged that much remains to be done, but predicted with confidence that the COR would pass de-Ba,athification on January 7.  (Comment: While we are most likely in the endgame on the de-Ba,athification law, it did not pass today and we understand that proposed amendments to the law are still being finalized by the CoR,s de-Ba,athification Committee.) CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000054  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: CODEL COLEMAN URGES VP HASHIMI TO CONSIDER NATIONAL RECONCILIATION AS TOP GOAL FOR 2008   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary: CODEL Coleman pressed VP Hashimi on national reconciliation on January 5.  VP Hashimi responded he is open to compromise to enable Tawafuq's return to the GOI, but blamed PM Maliki for the lack of progress.  VP Hashimi hopes the IIP-KRG Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be a good step for IIP to build cooperative ties.  During several points in the discussion, VP Hashimi emphasized that he "fears" the Iraq Awakening Councils and their growing popularity.  VP Hashimi was not optimistic that reviving the 3 1 leadership process will work.  Senator Coleman urged the GOI to reach a power-sharing agreement in the near future, stressing USG patience for political reform is not "open ended."  End summary.  NATIONAL RECONCILIATION THE GOAL FOR 2008 -----------------------------------------  2. (C) CODEL Coleman (Senator Norm Coleman, R-Minn; Senator John Cornyn, R-Texas; Senator Johnny Isakson, R-GA) encouraged VP Hashimi to seize upon the current window of opportunity with the improved security situation to focus on national reconciliation with PM Maliki and his administration.  VP Hashimi responded, "We have spent months (working) to bridge differences."  He added the situation has reached the point where compromises can be made.  However, in usual form, VP Hashimi put the onus for resolving the outstanding problems on PM Maliki.  He lauded the IIP-KRG Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) as a good step for IIP in building cooperative ties with the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG).  When Senator Coleman raised the on-going Tawafuq ministerial boycott of the GOI, VP Hashimi responded that professional ministers are needed; he avoided making any commitment on Tawafuq/IIP's return.  VP SCARED OF IRAQI AWAKENING COUNCILS -------------------------------------  3. (C) VP Hashimi emphasized several times during the discussion that he "fears" the Iraq Awakening Movement and "is scared for the future."  He said there should be some hesitancy regarding how long the contracts for the Awakening Councils should continue.  At the same time, he acknowledged the achievements during the past year in pushing back against al-Qaeda.  CAN THE 3 1 WORK OR POWER-SHARING REALLY HAPPEN? --------------------------------------------- ---  4. (C) VP Hashimi stressed during the meeting with CODEL Coleman that there must be a change of course politically. "We did 3 1 twice," he said.  He complained that agreements with PM Maliki were made one day and then implemented differently the next.  Senator Coleman added, "It is not enough just to complain," and urged VP Hashimi to make the 3 1 work.  VP Hashimi only responded, "There needs to be room for acceptable compromise."  Senator Coleman again pressed the need for the GOI to reach a power-sharing arrangement in the near future.  He added that the USG patience for the GOI to bring about political reform is not "open ended," stressing that U.S. elections in November 2008 might be a turning point in USG support for Iraq.  5. (U) CODEL Coleman did not have a chance to clear this cable before departing. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000057  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: KU, MARR, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PREF, PREL, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: MCNS FOCUSES ON IRAQI MINISTRY OF INTERIOR  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker for reason 1.4(b) and 1.4(d)  1. (S) SUMMARY: At the Ministerial Council on National Security (MCNS) on January 6, Prime Minister Maliki and security ministers set aside most of the prepared agenda and focused on two issues raised by MinInt Bolani--apprehension about foreign ownership of Iraqi communications companies and dissatisfaction with  security contracts at the Baghdad International Airport (BIAP). The ministers also discussed problems with MOI budget execution.  Briefers from the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I) concluded with a positive economic assessment of a new scrap metal collection and reprocessing program, and convinced the ministers to press for full funding. END SUMMARY.  Foreign Ownership Issues ------------------------  2. (S) In a lackluster MCNS, Prime Minister Maliki and his security ministers set aside most of the agenda prepared by National Security Advisor (NSA) Rubaie and turned their attention to MinInt Bolani's issues and programs, which he tabled without prior coordination. Bolani lamented recent acquisitions of Iraqi mobile phone companies by foreign investors. He cited as problematic the Kuwaiti government and its investors, who now own 62 percent of Iraq's largest mobile phone provider. He urged Maliki to meet with the new owners and advise them of their security responsibilities to the GOI. When pressed by Salih and Rubaie to be more precise, Bolani described a raid by Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) on a private security contractor hired by one of these newly purchased communications companies.  Bolani pointed out that the detained security guards possessed illegal weapons and cited this as a serious cause for concern. Salih and Rubaie expressed skepticism, with Rubaie adding that the government must guarantee the rights of investors for the economy to grow.  Despite Bolani's disjointed and unconvincing presentation, Maliki asked the ministers to set up a meeting with Atheer Telecom to discuss these security issues. (NOTE: Bolani is presumably concerned either about the loss of governmental control over communications or access to sensitive information from these foreign-owned companies. END NOTE.)  BIAP Security -------------  5. (S) Realizing the foreign ownership issue had no traction, Bolani launched into his second major point about MOI dissatisfaction with the security contract at BIAP. He noted that the Global Security Company had exclusive rights regarding security at the airport but did not yet possess a valid license or permission from the GOI to operate there. He pointed out that their contract was up for renewal and he expressed concern that there was no alternative. Bolani added that it was time for the ISF to gain experience at securing airports.  6. (S) General Petraeus countered that Coalition Forces have worked diligently at cleaning up a very weak security environment at BIAP, freed it from its Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) stranglehold, and subsequently engaged Global to ensure the security environment met international airport standards. He offered to work with the GOI on developing their own security plan but noted that without an internationally recognized security company at BIAP, the airport risked losing its certification for international air traffic. General Petraeus suggested that if the MOI wanted to train its forces on port security, they should consider initiating it somewhere else, like Basrah or Umm Qasr.  7. (S) DPM Salih expressed his strong support for renewal of the contract with Global Security to prevent disruption of international air traffic at BIAP while the GOI studied the issue further.  Both the Prime Minister and IntMin Bolani--albeit reluctantly--concurred.  MOI Budget Execution --------------------  8. (S) Bolani then shifted the discussion to his budget woes, reporting that lack of a quorum in the Council of Representatives (CoR) prevented approval for an end-of-year rollover of MOI funding (NOTE: the MOI had a dismal FY2007 budget execution--among the worst of all ministries--leaving most funding for equipping MOI forces untouched. END NOTE). NSA Rubaie countered that inadequate budget controls and  BAGHDAD 00000057  002 OF 002   execution threatened national security, especially in light of the GOI stated goal of self-sufficiency by FY2009. He announced that both the MOD and MOI would now brief the MCNS each month on their budget execution.  Clearly upset with Rubaie's interference, Bolani shot back that monthly briefings were unnecessary; he countered with an offer to brief quarterly.  Rubaie, saying he "only wanted to help", stood firm on the monthly requirement. Since Maliki had earlier left the MCNS for another appointment, DPM Salih did not press the issue but closed the discussion by offering to meet with CoR members on the ro ll-over proposal. He noted that even though the GOI had better budget execution this year than last, there were a large number of issues and discrepancies to solve. (NOTE: On January 8, MinInt Bolani called embassy POLOFF to report that the CoR had approved the MOI request to roll-over FY2007 allocations into FY2008, END NOTE).  Scrap Metal Initiatives -----------------------  9. (U) In October 2007, the MCNS agreed to devote $75 million to the Minister of Industry and Minerals (MinInd) to begin a scrap collection and smelting program. MNF-I briefers followed up at this meeting with an interim report in which they assessed the economic potential of this effort at over $16 billion.  The ministers--clearly surprised by this large figure--agreed to press for full funding of the program. They also called on the Ministry of Industry to return to the MCNS with a comprehensive plan for the rehabilitation of smelting plants. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000059  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2018 TAGS: EAID, IZ, MARR, PTER SUBJECT: MANAGING CLC ACTIVITIES  REF: A. A. 07 BAGHDAD 3874       B. B. 07 STATE 171256  Classified By: EMIN CHARLES P. RIES FOR REASON 1.4 B   1.  (C) Post has met with MNF-I to discuss REF B cable. This is a joint DOD/DOS/USAID response.  There is no longer a requirement for USAID to execute any pilot program under the Community Stabilization Program (CSP) for former Concerned Local Citizens (CLCs).  Receipt by DOD of the USD 155 million revised Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration (DDR) funding for use under the Joint Technical Education and Reintegration Program (JTERP) and Civil Service Corps (CSC)programs obviates the need for a special program by USAID in conjunction with former CLCs. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000063  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  NEA/I: RSCHMIERER NEA/I:PM:TBETTS ISN/RA:KKESSLER S/I:KNUTT L/NPV:THISCH DOE: JSELLEN JS: SNORWOOD OSD: TBENNET  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: ECON, IZ, PARM, PREL SUBJECT: (S) GOI PROVIDES PAPER ON ALTERNATIVE IRRADIATION SOURCES  REF: A. A. STATE 163968      B. B. BAGHDAD 4126      C. C. STATE 169324      D. D. BAGHDAD 2454      E. E. BAGHDAD 1787      F. F BAGHDAD 734      G. G. BAGHDAD 004227  Classified By: CRies for Reasons 1.4 (B), (D) and (H)   1. (S) In a Jan 8, 2008 meeting held at Iraq's Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Minister Raid Jahid (FAHMI) provided NNSA Representative Boudreau a paper outlining the agricultural purposes for which Iraq used the four irradiation sources the US has prepared for shipment from the Tuwaitha Nuclear Research Center.  The paper also outlines the purposes for a replacement irradiation source (non-nuclear).  Nawal H. (SHAMOON), Director General of the Agricultural Research & Food Directorate in MOST, attended the meeting.  Her Directorate authored the report.  She made several points regarding the importance of using the replacement source to fight disease in Iraq and asked that the US move quickly to help Iraq obtain an alternative source.   2. (SBU) GOI paper on alternative sources:  Background      The Agric. Res. & Food Tech. Directorate concerned with the peaceful application of nuclear technique in agriculture & biology since its establishment in the sixties of the last century within the Nuclear Research Center.  In 1966, when the first Gamma-220 (60 Co source) at about 11000 Ci was imported from Canada with aid of IAEA.  In 1978, an open type gammabeam-650 (60Co source) has been imported for food irradiation (for) mainly dates disinfestations (Alternative quarantine treatment to methyl bromide), sprout inhibition in potato, onion & garlic.  The latter unit was upgraded to about 50000 Ci in 1985 to meet further needs (Sterilization at Medical Supplies).  Because of low intensity of the gammacell-220 a new one with 60Co source at about 24000 Ci was imported in 1984 along with gammacell-40 with 137Cs source of 2530 Ci for low dose purposes which (was) imported in 1981.       The above four mentioned units have been used to perform studies in the following fields: 1) Irradiation Disinfestations of Dates. 2) Irradiation Disinfestations of wheat, barely, rice. 3) Induce Mutation to improve plant breeding, e.g., wheat, barely, rice, corn, sunflower, etc. 4) Increases shelf-life, enhances freshness by reducing spoilage organisms & delay ripening. 5) Induce either sexual sterility or inherited sterility in insect pests, e.g., Date Moth, Pomegranate Moth, Corn Stem Borer, Fruit Flies & Screwworm Fly. 6. Sprout inhibition in potato, onion and garlic. 7. Sterilization of medical supplies. 8. Irradiating biological specimens.       Furthermore, Iraq planned during the eighties of the last century to have a gamma plant to be used for agriculture, industrial & medical purpose at a commercial level but no positive action was taken & this goal has been frozen after 2 August 1990.  Therefore, the scientists at the Directorate of Agric. Res. & Food Tech continue their research using the four gamma ray irradiators till March 2003.  Present and Future Plans      The researchers at Agric. Res. &  Food Tech. Directorate/MoST will continue their research in the above mentioned fields because they believe in the peaceful applications of nuclear technique in the above mentioned fields.  They share the view in different countries that modern technique should replace the conventional technique, e.g., using Sterile Insect Technique (SIT) for eradicating insect pests instead of using chemical insecticide which is dangerous & hazardous to the environment.  Need Gamma Ray Irradiators or other Technology       Because the Agric. Res. & Food Tech. Directorate have well trained staff for using Gamma Ray Irradiators, it is believed that these gamma ray irradiators should be kept at (the) Tuwaitha Site; but, if this is impossible because the Tuwaitha Site is a very hazardous place for Iraqi researchers to work as Mr. Riedy mentioned in his report, (then), electron beam irradiation could replace the most new two gamma ray irradiators.  These electron beam irradiators could be supplied to MoST (by US Embassy (put in parenthesis by Iraqi drafter)) to replace the four gamma ray irradiators. In which case, MoST then needs some of her staff to visit specific site in U.S. as Mr. Edgar Parks & Mr. Albert Walgreen suggested during 3 Dec 2007 meeting with MoST Minister and his colleagues.  Old World Screwworm (OWS) Project      MoST likes to explain to U.S. Embassy why it needs the gamma ray irradiator urgently (Gammacell-200 for Screwworm project.      This pest, Old World Screwworm Fly, is a parasite, notifiable to OIE, that attacks all warm-blooded vertebrate, including humans.  Unfortunately no sustainable success was obtained so far by insecticide/larvicide's based control of this pest.  Therefore, the use of STI is considered and proposed as the only practical approach for sustainable controlling of this pest in Iraq. In this respect we would like to let you know that 23 cases of human myiasis (were) reported between Sept 1996 through Dec. 2004, 2005 & 2006 (occurred in Iraq?).      Researchers in MoST carried (on) all needed studies related to use SIT to control this pest.  Furthermore, researchers from MoST, Ministry of Agriculture (Agricultural Directorate?) with support from experts from AOAD, FAO & IAEA (are) planning to establish Mass Rearing Unit in Iraq to produce millions of sterile OWS, then release them into infested provinces to eradicate this pest.  To achieve this (goal) project, (either) a gamma ray irradiator or electron beam irradiator should be available in the unit urgently.  Thanks for your cooperation. Looking forward to hearing from you.  3. (U) Attendees:  GOI  Raid J. Fahmi, Minister of Science and Technology Dr. Samir S. Al Attar, Senior Deputy Minister, MOST Dr. Fouad K. Al Mousawy, Deputy Minister, MOST Mohammed J. Sharaa, Director General, Monitoring Directorate, MOST Ms Nawal H. Shamoon, Director General, Agriculture Research and Food Technology, MOST Ms.Sundua A. Mousa, Minister's Office Dr. Jamal Wahaib, Project Manager, Aeronautics and Space Technology Directorate, MOST Mr. Salam Ahmed, Engineer, Aeronautics and Space Technology Directorate, MOST  US  Ms. Cheryl Dukelow, Commercial Attach Robert Boudreau, Senior Representative DOE/NNSA Dr. Paul Savello, ITAO Senior Consultant Mustafa AL Qassab, Advisor, Department of Commerce  Note: Commerce Delegation had separate agenda. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000065  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2017 TAGS: ECON, PGOV, EAIR, EAID, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: SUCCESSFUL HAJJ FLIGHTS CREATE HOPES FOR COMMERCIAL AIR TRAFFIC  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Ellen Germain for reasons 1.4  (b,d).  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1.  (C) Sumamry: Mosul Airport in December successfully processed thousands of Hajj pilgrims, arousing a sense of local pride and hope that commercial flights will continue for the betterment of the Ninewa economy.  While there are many logistical hurdles to dividing Ninewa,s airport and airspace between commercial and military use, PRT is convening a working group and talking to local business contacts to determine means of moving forward.  The economic boon and popular enthusiasm that a commercially functional airport is likely to generate make this initiative well worth the effort.  Mosul Airport Commercial  Air Service Is a Reality ---------------------------------------------  2.  (SBU) The Iraq Civil Aviation Authority and Iraqi Airways successfully enplaned 2,629 Hajj pilgrims through Mosul Airport on 22 commercial domestic and international flights from December 2 to December 9.  Those operations utilized approved Civil Aviation Security (AVSEC) procedures, which provide four redundant screening processes, without incident.  Apart from an initial return flight to the Erbil Airport, all Mosul passengers are returning to Mosul Airport.  The successful operation of Hajj flights is a tribute to the dedication of Iraqi officials in Baghdad and Mosul, and the multi-agency team of the PRT, 1st Armored Division, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment, the Embassy Baghdad Economic Section, the Office of the Transportation Attache and the Office of Provincial Affairs.  Ninewa's Energy Unleashed -------------------------  3.  (SBU) With the feasibility of commercial air service through Mosul Airport now established, local and national Iraqi officials have told the PRT they hope to see regular commercial flights from Mosul continue after Hajj operations.  The possibility of air service to the political, cultural and tourism centers of Baghdad, Aleppo, Damascus, Istanbul, Ankara, Cairo and Dubai has generated excitement and unleashed energy among Mosul's traditionally active political and business communities.  Surmountable Issues Remain on Way to Regular Flights --------------------------------------------- -------  4.  (SBU) Several key issues must be resolved before long-term air service commitments to air carriers outside of Iraq can occur:  - Planned, phased and staged transition of Mosul airspace and airport from total military control to controlled, shared and joint use civilian airspace and airport operations.  - Mosul Airport designated as a landing rights airport for international operation to and from other countries.  This step will require international coordination and route approval.  Domestic service to intra-Iraq destinations, however, could occur much faster without requiring international coordination.  - The new, USG-funded, $10.3 million Air Traffic Control Tower is located in the middle of a Coalition Force base. CF, PRT and Iraqi authorities have to negotiate control of, access to, and equipment needs for shared use of the tower.  - Proper airport planning to locate short-term capital development for fuel storage, cargo facilities, vehicle maintenance and other similar development must take place. Usage of current temporary facilities on the CF base will continue until sound land-use planning is completed.  - Instrument Landing System commissioning, approach and departure procedures and charts, and Navigational Aids need calibration, testing and commissioning.  Possibilities for Future Airport-Linked Investment --------------------------------------------- -----  5.  (SBU) Looking to the future, Iraqis could leverage increased Mosul Airport passenger and cargo air service to build economic activity in the province.  The Iraqi investor who holds the airport duty-free concession has already said  BAGHDAD 00000065  002 OF 002   he is interested in renovating and reopening his facility. The airport could also host conferences, with the possibility of meeting spaces and accommodations constructed under Iraqi auspices on land adjoining the airport outside the CF base. Commercial air cargo operations will create jobs and facilitate the movement of high value goods to and from the region.  Short Term: PRT Convening Working Groups ----------------------------------------  6.  (SBU) To address the short-term logistical issues, the PRT is working with CF to convene a working group to identify and plan solutions to technical, logistical and tactical issues.  We will forward these solutions for review and approval by CF and Embassy Baghdad.  In addition, the PRT is canvassing local business contacts to assess the possibility of Iraqis investing in facilities that may be co-located with the airport.  Lastly, the PRT is facilitating contacts among Iraqis and international aviation industries interested in using Mosul Airport.  Long Term: Combined Support for Full Airport Capacity --------------------------------------------- --------  7.  (SBU) In addition to planning and resolving technical aspects of a joint-use airport, the current Iraqi management and staff at Mosul Airport would have to be expanded, trained and improved to drive the facility's long-term development, operation and management.  Building sustainable capacity for the facility and the local economy, the PRT is working with local and national Iraqi and USG officials to develop a comprehensive strategic plan to develop this capacity with a combination of GOI funds, Quick Response Funds, Economic Support Funds and other USG money.  8.  (SBU) COMMENT: Ninewa residents and officials happy to see national attention and economic progress return to their province have greeted the reopening of civilian commercial passenger traffic through Mosul Airport with pride and enthusiasm.  The PRT will continue to work with Iraqi and USG partners to facilitate continued commercial operations. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000066  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: KURDS STILL SEEKING CHANCE TO REPLACE MALIKI  REF: A. BAGHDAD 04090      B. BAGHDAD 03913  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Summary: Kurdish leaders have agreed not to remove Prime Minister Maliki in the short term, but have little faith in him and probably would move to replace him if not for the Secretary,s strong message that Iraqi leaders must focus on issues instead of personalities.  While that message registered, subsequent statements by Kurdish leaders have not demonstrated much appetite for rapprochement with the Prime Minister.  The Kurds continue to criticize Maliki,s perceived failure to break the political stalemate in Baghdad, and disparage his leadership after clashing with the PM on core Kurdish issues - the Kurdistan Regional Government,s (KRG) unilateral oil production and development contracts, Iraq,s long-term security relationship with Washington, federal funding for the Peshmerga, and the delayed Article 140 process.  Maliki,s governing coalition depends on Kurdish support and the Kurds probably would have little trouble removing Maliki through the Council of Representatives (COR), but there is no guarantee they could muster a majority behind any replacement, including their preferred candidate, Vice President Adil Abd al-Mahdi.  The Kurds will likely continue maneuvering behind the scenes to broker a new governing coalition in the hope of jettisoning Maliki after the anticipated congressional testimony in March.  End summary.  Can Maliki win the Kurds back? ------------------------------  2.  (C) The Kurdish leadership reluctantly accepted the message from the Secretary, the Ambassador, and others that now is not the time to replace the PM, and instead have offered Maliki a window to break the national political stalemate before they attempt to replace him.  Kurdish leaders on 24 December signed an agreement with the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP), the purpose of which both the Kurds and IIP head Tariq al-Hashemi have said is to show Maliki they have other political options if he fails to change his ways. Two days later, Kurdish leaders sent Maliki a letter - to which Hashemi told the Ambassador he contributed - demanding steps Maliki must take on national (rather than Kurd-specific) issues.  These included implementing the 26 August leaders, agreement, empowering the cabinet at the expense of Maliki,s inner circle, and strengthening relationships with provincial governments and neighboring countries.  Barham Salih told the Ambassador the Kurds would form a committee to work with Maliki on these objectives and monitor his progress; senior Kurdish MP Mahmud Uthman said it already has been established but did not know its membership.  The letter offers no timelines or specific benchmarks that would keep Kurdish leaders in Maliki,s coalition.  More importantly, several top Kurdish leaders say they have no expectation Maliki will meet these objectives.  Why are the Kurds so frustrated? -------------------------------  4.  (C) While months of political stagnation in Baghdad have created a crescendo of Kurdish frustration with Maliki, that frustration peaked because of the confluence of four key disputes: KRG oil contracts, Iraq,s long-term relationship with the US, funding for the Peshmerga, and Article 140.  The most serious is the oil dispute - not only has Maliki challenged contracts Erbil considers vital to its future economic viability, but the Baghdad government,s perceived unwillingness to compromise on the issue has left Kurdish interlocutors feeling negotiations are futile.  Some of the feud derives from the personal animosity between Oil Minister Shahristani and KRG Oil Minister Hawrami, but the dispute has a substantive basis going beyond a ministerial rivalry.  As KRG PM Nechirvan Barzani told Maliki in December, if Shahristani spoke for Maliki when he called the recent KRG oil contracts "illegal," then the Kurds could no longer be part of his government. (Reftel A)  5.  (C) The Kurds had a generally peripheral role in the arduous negotiations over the SPD and UNSCR renewal, but the intransigence of Maliki and his advisors threatened another core Kurdish priority: the long-term role of the US in Iraq. Kurdish politicians still tell us regularly they want a permanent US presence in Iraq, specifically in Kurdistan, and Barzani in late December told the Ambassador he could not leave the future of this relationship in the hands of an unpredictable team like Maliki,s inner circle (reftel B). Talabani told Ambassador Satterfield in November that he had threatened to pull the Kurdish ministers out of the cabinet if Maliki continued to obstruct the SPD (reftel B).  6.  (C) The Kurdish bloc in the COR in has clashed with  BAGHDAD 00000066  002 OF 003   Maliki over funding for the Peshmerga, a seemingly simple budget issue that has also festered because of Maliki,s perceived unwillingness to compromise.  The root conflict is over who will pay for the Peshmerga: the Kurds define them as a national security force which the GOI should fund separately from the 17% of the budget allocated to the KRG, while Maliki defines them as a regional security force that the Kurds must fund with their 17% allotment.  This was one of Nechirvan Barzani,s primary discussion topics on his mid-December Baghdad trip, and while several Kurdish interlocutors anticipated it would be the least contentious issue, the two governments made no breakthrough.  7.  (C) Finally, while even the Kurds do not blame this issue only on the GOI, the Article 140 deadline expired on December 31.  The major Kurdish parties had long since realized the referendum on disputed territories would not occur on time. Nevertheless, the arrival of the deadline and the complaints it unleashed among Kurdish politicians, journalists, and citizens shone a brighter spotlight on the national government,s paralysis, and the deleterious effect this paralysis has had on the Kurdistan region,s efforts to consolidate all it has gained since 2003.  8.  (C) We have seen symbolic steps forward on some of these issues in the last month, but they probably are insufficient to temper Kurdish anger.  Maliki and the younger Barzani agreed on the last day of his visit to establish a committee to examine the oil issue, consisting of two constitutional experts, the COR Energy Committee, Hawrami, and former GOI Oil Minister Thamir Ghadban (a mild concession to the Kurds, who refuse to work with Shahristani).  This agreement resolves nothing of the substantive dispute, however, and may serve only to formalize the unproductive discussions already underway.  On Article 140, SRSG De Mistura brokered an encouraging agreement to postpone the referendum and allow for a helpful UN role, but the Kurds remain suspicious that Article 140 is being shunted off on the UN in order to slow or prevent progress.  Separately, Maliki condemned Kurdish civilian deaths during a mid-December Turkish bombing.  The statement fell far short of condemning the Turkish campaign itself, however, and did little either to placate Masud Barzani,s rage or to counter the appearance of GOI fecklessness when Kurdish territory comes under attack.  Trouble Ahead? --------------  9.  (C) The question is whether the Kurds will become angry enough with Maliki to disregard the advice of their key allies, both in and outside Iraq.  Kurdish officials probably hope U.S. officials will be more amenable to leadership change if several more months pass without significant political progress.  One risk is that the Kurds might try to slow-roll progress on reconciliation so as to undermine Maliki in the run up to the anticipated congressional testimony in mid-March, although we have seen no indication they are doing this so far.  Another possibility is that the Kurds will not only assemble the votes to oust Maliki (which they could easily do with the cooperation of Tawafuq, Fadhila, Iraqiyya, and the Sadrists), but will also build a consensus on Maliki,s successor - which might persuade otherwise lukewarm Maliki backers to finally pull the plug on his premiership.  Who would come next? --------------------  10.  (C) All indications are that the Kurds prefer Vice President Adil Abd al-Mahdi as the next Prime Minister.  Abd al-Mahdi enjoys close relations and similar politics with President Talabani, and in recent weeks both KRG representative to Baghdad Dilshad Miran and Mahmud Uthman have identified Abd al-Mahdi as the Kurds, consensus favorite.  Miran added that while the Kurds have reservations about former Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari, they would accept him, the implication being that Maliki,s removal is valuable enough in itself to tolerate a potentially mediocre successor.  Indeed, the mere process of elevating a new head of government could benefit the Kurds - as a likely "swing vote" for any candidate attempting to accumulate a majority in the COR, they are in a position to extract concessions on oil, 140, or any other issue, regardless of the candidate. Miran also added, however, that former Prime Minister Iyad Allawi would not be an acceptable candidate.  Comment -------  11.  (C) While the Kurds may hope engineering Maliki,s departure will advance their interests, there is no guarantee that a new Prime Minister - even one as seemingly sympathetic as Adil Abd al-Mahdi - would achieve breakthroughs on  BAGHDAD 00000066  003 OF 003   unilateral oil contracts, Article 140, a permanent U.S. presence in Kurdistan, legislation in Baghdad, or stability in Iraq,s many conflict zones.  Maliki,s perceived unhelpfulness to the Kurds on these issues reflects deep and ongoing disagreements along Iraq,s ethnic and communal divides that transcend any one leader.  Regardless of who holds the office of Prime Minister, the Kurds must prepare for difficult negotiations on the very issues on which they have assailed Maliki,s performance. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000067  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: TIME FOR TALKS BETWEEN KRG AND TURKEY  REF: BAGHDAD 4199  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Summary: Despite their strong reaction to Turkish airstrikes, including Massoud Barzani,s refusal to meet Secretary Rice (reftel), Iraqi Kurdish leaders are continuing  SIPDIS to implement the anti-PKK measures they had previously imposed.  Iraqi President Jalal Talabani, Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Massoud Barzani, and KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani condemned the January 4 Diyarbakir bombing, which appears to be an indication that they are still committed to playing a constructive role in addressing the PKK problem.  We should move quickly to get political contacts moving either bilaterally or trilaterally before inevitable additional strikes by the Turks in retaliation for PKK terror attacks in Turkey make it much more difficult for the Kurds to participate.  End Summary.  2.  (C) Iraqi Kurds remain angry at recent Turkish airstrikes, but are not at this time retaliating through the Iraqi political process.  The Kurdistan Alliance like other blocs straggled back last week from a long COR vacation, but well over half their deputies attended the session on January 3rd, and we expect nearly all to return within the coming week.  There remains a possibility the Kurds will slow-roll key legislation to discredit Prime Minister Maliki, with whom they are engaged in a high-stakes struggle over political and economic issues (reftel), but we have no indication they have done this and expect them to vote for the de-Ba,athification law as planned.  KRG Carries On With Anti-PKK Measures -------------------------------------  3.  (C) KRG leaders, while protesting the airstrikes publicly, appear privately to be sticking to the measures against the PKK they previously imposed.  Talabani and Massoud Barzani in late December assured the Ambassador the KRG would continue roadblocks, financial interdictions, and heightened airport security.  Anecdotal evidence and reporting in other channels confirms the restrictions remain in place and have made normal operation more difficult for the PKK, but even the most diligent application of these promises probably will not prevent the PKK,s ability to conduct attacks as they are thought to have many alternate supply routes through mountain passes and a good stockpile of weapons.  4.  (C) After the terrorist bombing in Diyarbakir, both Talabani and Nechirvan Barzani made strong statements condemning the attack and offering condolences to the victims.  We take this as a signal (as was Talabani,s statement to the Ambassador that he is still willing to travel to Ankara) that the KRG leaders are still willing to engage with Turkey on a solution to the PKK problem, despite their suspicions of Turkish motives vis-a-vis the KRG.  5.  (C) With Turkish attacks in Northern Iraq all but inevitable in the wake of the recent terrorist bombings, it is all the more urgent that we get the Turks and Iraqis talking about their joint problem while KRG leaders still have some political space to participate.  Under the circumstances, a return trip by Foreign Minister Zebari to Anakra might be a relatively non-controversial way to begin. This would complement the constructive value we think will come from planned Jan 15 visit to Baghdad by TGS Deputy Saygun, who has been invited by General Petraeus.  Talabani should be taken at his word as soon as the Turks are willing to have him. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000068  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, MOPS, ECON, KCOR, IZ SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S JANUARY 7 MEETING WITH IRAQI AMBASSADOR TO THE US  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 3818      B. 07 BAGHDAD 3830  Classified By: AMBASSADOR RYAN C. CROCKER FOR REASONS 1.4 (b) AND (d).  1. (S) During a January 7 meeting with Ambassador Crocker, Samir Sumaidaie, the Iraqi Ambassador to the U.S., sought to establish shared U.S.-GOI priorities in the lead up to the Ambassador's upcoming testimony to Congress.  The Ambassador told Sumaidaie the most significant bilateral issue at hand was negotiating the nature of the U.S.-GOI strategic relationship in the long run and that the U.S.'s original intention was to have this done by July.  Sumaidaie noted that he is a supporter of a status of forces (SOFA) arrangement and has long urged his "masters" to embrace SOFA.   2. (S) Sumaidaie said he had perceived that the U.S. wanted the U.S.-Iraqi Strategic Partnership Dialogue "Declaration of Principles for Friendship and Cooperation" document (released on November 26, 2007) "at any cost" (reftels).  Noting that negotiations leading up to the declaration were tense, Sumaidaie complained that "neither side should be in that position if we're trying to put together something sustainable."   The Ambassador responded that for these reasons, correct preparation for future talks on the long-term U.S.-GOI strategic relationship -- especially getting the right people at the table from the start to form a broad-based team (i.e. through the 3 1 Presidency Council plus PM framework) -- was crucial.  3. (S) Acknowledging the Ambassador would again testify before Congress in the spring, Sumaidaie stated, "I can promise we can produce something worthwhile before that to show the American people it is worth the cost and effort to succeed."  The Ambassador told Sumaidaie that besides observing political progress, people need to see that life is getting better tangibly in terms of improved services and employment, and that the GOI is taking steps to take over capacity that the Coalition is building in Iraqi institutions.  Sumaidaie noted that the Concerned Local Citizens (CLC) program, along with a reversal of the social climate that had supported the insurgents, has had a positive, locally-based impact on security.  Sumaidaie also noted the tribal awakening movements' contributions to improved security, and said he had urged Islamic Supreme Council of Iraqi (ISCI) Chair Abdul-Aziz al-Hakim to support sending a joint delegation of Shi'a and Sunni sheikhs to the US.  (Note: A delegation of eight Sunni Anbari sheikhs participated in a two-week visit to the US as part of a State Department-sponsored International Visitor Leadership Program (IVLP) from late October to early November 2007. End note.) He cautioned that despite security progress, "...we're still in a danger zone," and "...the question of corruption is huge and equivalent to the insurgency."  Sumaidaie offered to provide the Ambassador with reliable contacts who could provide accounts of corruption in which multiple parties split the proceeds.  He said that he had discussed the corruption problem with PM Maliki during a two-hour meeting that same day (January 7).  4. (C) Sumaidaie also told the Ambassador there was a tendency for Iraqi delegations visiting the U.S. to bypass the Iraqi Embassy and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), and that often the MFA is unaware of the visits.  The Ambassador assured Sumaidaie that official delegations must present a diplomatic note from the MFA in order to receive U.S. visas, and pledged that the USG will coordinate official visits to Washington in a more transparent manner. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000070  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: TROUBLES ABOUND FOR TAWAFUQ LEADER ADNAN DULEIMI  REF: BAGHDAD 3955  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S/NF) In a January 7 meeting with the Ambassador, a grieving and somewhat incoherent Adnan Duleimi ranted about his troubles.  Earlier in the day, Duleimi had lost his son-in-law, Thia al-Hadithi (the husband of Duleimi's daughter, CoR member Asma Duleimi) in an attack on the Sunni Endowment Office.  That loss, combined with the stress that Duleimi has been under since the November 29 arrests of his guards and son, Makki, were clearly taking a toll on the Iraqi People's Conference leader.  Duleimi implored the Ambassador to get his son and bodyguards out of jail, occasionally pounding the table for emphasis.  He claimed his guards were being tortured and protested his innocence of all knowledge of terrorist activities, despite the incriminating evidence found during a November 29 joint Iraqi-MNF/I raid on his Baghdad offices.  He implored the Ambassador to intercede on his behalf with the Prime Minister, who refuses to see him.  The Ambassador coolly encouraged Adnan to submit a written request to PM Maliki.  2. (S/NF) Trying to focus the septuagenarian Duleimi on the future, the Ambassador urged him to play a more positive role in the Council of Representatives.  Yet Duleimi, who struggled to maintain focus and composure, showed few signs that his behavior would improve: at one moment he insisted that he was on "good terms" with the Shi'ites, and in the next breath he denounced the Shi'a community as "the enemies of national reconciliation."  He claimed that the Shi'ites say "all Sunnis have a tail (like a dog)."  He then accused the USG of conspiring against him and Makki by accusing them of "fictitious crimes."  Later in the conversation, Duleimi rambled in evident confusion: "I do not understand, what do you want from me.  You never submitted me one dollar."  3. (S/NF) Comment: Though Duleimi's grief was genuine, his troubles are largely of his own manufacture.  His ardent sectarianism and ill-concealed sympathy for the Sunni insurgency, to say nothing of the car bombs conveniently parked outside his office, epitomize the worst aspects of Sunni political leadership in the post-Saddam era. CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000079  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: VENICE COMMUNIQUE TEXT ON ARTICLE 140  1.  During a January 9 meeting with Ambassador Crocker, Italian Ambassador to Iraq Maurizio Melani mentioned a December 18-22 conference in Venice focused on Article 140. He noted that the conference included participation by members of the Iraqi Council of Representatives and Kurdish National Assembly, and passed the conference's final communique to the Ambassador.  Text of the communique is below.  2.  Begin text:  Venice Final Communique adopted  Upon the invitation of the International Alliance for Justice, Mr. Bakhtiar Amin and No Peace Without Justice, in cooperation with the Iraqi National Assembly, the Kurdistan National Assembly-Iraq, and with the support of the Italian Ministry for Foreign Affairs, an International Conference on Diverse Cities and Dispute Areas was convened on 18-22 December 2007 in the historic and auspicious surroundings of the city of Venice.  The Conference gathered Deputy Speakers and Members of both the Iraqi Parliament and the Kurdistan Parliament, representatives of their various political groupings, Governors, and representatives of Provincial and City administrators in Iraq, together with the experts and scholars from diverse and disputed areas around the world.  The Conference built on the solid foundations of the outcomes of the previous discussions on Practical Federalism in Iraq held in Venice on 18-26 July 2006, in Erbil, Kurdistan-Iraq on 10-16 July 2007 and in Rome on 26-27 September 2007, also convened by the International Alliance for Justice and No Peace Without Justice.  Discussions were conducted in a spirit of mutual respect, objective analysis, dialogue and friendliness, and were underpinned by a shared commitment to the best interests of Iraq as a whole, with a view to discussing and resolving complex issues by taking into account the widest variety of positions and interests.  Within this constructive atmosphere, participants discussed many of the problems associated with settling the political status of disputed areas, and considered how the foundations for long-term stability and prosperity might be built through the careful and committed management of local diversity.  With reference to these discussions, and to the opinions submitted and presented, participants agreed upon the following recommendations:  1.  The existence of ethnic, religious, sectarian and cultural diversities creates the necessity to believe in it and respect it.  2.  Acknowledge that the problem in Kirkuk is its self determination.  It,s a real problem that requires a solution based on democracy principle, respect of human rights and loyalty to Iraq within a new democratic, federal and unified system.  3.  The problem must be divided, and a solution must be found at the satisfaction of all parties.  4.  Adopt dialogue, commit to national peace, reject violence and threats in all its forms, and adopt peaceful methods to solve problems which should be the basis for any solution. No deviation should be allowed, under any circumstances.  5.  Request the Iraqi political forces and groups to take their historical responsibilities to achieve a real political agreement that guarantees rights for all components of the Iraqi people with its different sects and ethnicities.  6.  The Kirkuk administration should be jointly administered between the different ethnicities of the city: Arabs, Kurds, Turkmen, and Chaldo-Assyrians.  7.  Awareness should be expanded in the fields of tolerance, federalism, by raising the facts of the present, while past injustice should only remembered as lessons to avoid repeating such injustice, reject disagreements, and promote peaceful coexistence.  8.  Find suitable methods to strengthen friendship and relations of love between different ethnicities in disputed areas, and disseminate the spirit of tolerance and coexistence in those areas.  9.  The comprehensive aspect of article 140 of the Iraqi  BAGHDAD 00000079  002 OF 002   Constitution must be stressed in its two paragraphs, one and two.  10.  The need for more transparency in solving article 140 of the constitution should be stressed.  11.  Article 140 is the basis to deal with the problem. Providing the appropriate atmosphere is the method to achieve the solution as per this article.  12.  Release all detainees who have not been convicted on any charge, by any party detaining the, and exhort all efforts to orient those released to carrying messages of love, peace and tolerance amongst their communities.  13.  Continue the normalization process and do not use issues related to the process of normalization for political purposes.  14.  Activate the Property Claims Commission and provide it with necessary financial resources, judges and establish a special Cassation Commission.  15.  Ban demographic changes that could lead to new realities and proceed with just treatment of previous changes.  16.  Address (abolish) all abuses that have taken place after 9 April 2003 all over Iraq, and submit these to the legal rules.  17.  Take into consideration the situation in areas included in Article 140, and not attempt to change power balances in these areas by arming civilians.  18.  Economic factors should be stressed and the living standards of the citizens of diverse areas improved by eliminating unemployment and creating job opportunities on an equal basis for all society,s components.  19.  Allocate an extraordinary budget and give priority to regions with diversity.  20.  Increase the percentage of Cheldo-Assyrian members in the Governorate Councils and the Parliament, so as to compensate for events of the previous elections.  21.  Recommend the donor countries, United Nations and other international humanitarian organizations to contribute to the reconstruction of the city of Kirkuk and other areas covered by article 140, and bring back life in them.  22.  An Iraqi solution achieved according to the Constitution and taking into account the complexity of the matter, with the technical support of UNAMI, should be politically supported and guaranteed by the international community, if it is so wished by the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi parties concerned.  End Text CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000087  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/11/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: TALABANI ON RESTARTING THE 3+1 AND MODERATING KURDISH PUBLIC STATEMENTS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary: Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih on January 9 met with the Ambassador on the occasion of Talabani,s return to Baghdad from the Kurdistan region.  Talabani said he is ready to move forward on the 3 1 mechanism now that all the principals are back in Baghdad.  He said he and Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Massoud Barzani had agreed the previous week in Erbil that Iraqi Kurdish leaders would keep their public statements strictly in line with U.S. policy, and to drop their suggested changes to the hydrocarbon law in order to restart movement on the draft that passed the Council of Ministers last February.  End summary.  2. (C) Talabani declared readiness to move forward on the 3 1.  Visible political progress in his view is necessary by the end of January, and Barzani is prepared to fly to Baghdad whenever necessary to join the meetings.  Talabani sought the Ambassador,s guidance on what the group should discuss.  The Ambassador conveyed Prime Minister Maliki,s suggestion that the 3 1 should discuss the negotiating team for the long-term security agreement with the U.S., and also suggested that the group discuss how to institutionalize the 3 1 meetings. Barham Salih said National Security Advisor Muwaffaq al-Rubaie had suggested a secretariat for the 3 1, which would include Rubaie, Salih, and Presidency Council chief of staff Naseer al-Ani and would prepare issues for discussion to lend structure to the 3 1.  3. (C) The President said during his visit to Erbil he and Barzani had agreed no Kurdish official, especially Barzani, would make any statement contradicting Washington,s Iraq policy.  Barzani allegedly promised to refrain from public comment on foreign affairs -- including with regard to Turkey -- and to leave these issues to Baghdad.  The Iraqi Kurdish leadership would cooperate with Turkey against the PKK, according to Talabani, and to this end an unspecified KRG representative continued to meet weekly with TNIO chief Emre Taner.  4. (C) Talabani discussed the prospects for legislative progress, acknowledging this would be necessary to shore up support in Washington for continued engagement in Iraq.  He and Barzani had also agreed to abandon their two outstanding quibbles with the hydrocarbon draft that passed the Council of Ministers in February, and endorse the agreed-upon draft in its entirety.  Barham Salih noted the mood in the COR is positive at the moment, and that he had received a standing ovation the day before following his presentation on the proposed 2008 budget.  Minister of Trade Abd al-Falah al-Sudani, on the other hand, had been "torn to pieces" during the same session, a reflection in both Salih,s and Talabani,s opinions of the fact that Sudani is a good man but a failure in his job.  Finally, Talabani was optimistic about the imminent passage of de-Ba,thification reform, dismissing Sadrist opposition by saying "the Sadrists object to everything."  5. (C) Talabani addressed his recent comments on the 1975 Algiers Accord between Iraq and Iran.  He said his intent was not unilaterally to abrogate the treaty, but rather to scrap the many dated agreements on the Iraq-Iran border in favor of a new understanding.  He noted that former Iranian President Khatami wishes to visit Iraq to meet with Talabani, and that the split between the camps of President Ahmadi-Nejad and former President Rafsanjani is widening. CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000088  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EIND, ECON, EFIN, IZ SUBJECT: THREE STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES FIND STRATEGIC PARTNERS  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Three cement plants in Iraq have found joint venture partners in consortia built in each case from different European firms joining with separate Iraqi partner companies.  The deals are not final -- negotiations may take several more months -- and are to be developed around production-sharing contracts and equity investments, thus are not privatizations, in that the Ministry of Industry and Minerals retains ownership.  But the consortia will be responsible for management, purchase of inputs and payment of employee salaries in exchange for a specified share of the physical output over a 10- to 15-year term.  To make the deals work, each of the consortia must make substantial (multi-million dollar) investments in plant and equipment modernization.  The production sharing model should allow the companies to recover that investment in 3-4 years.  END SUMMARY  2. (SBU) Minister of Industry and Minerals (MoIM) Fawzi Hariri told EMIN on January 9 that the Ministry was finalizing a short list of joint venture projects to be announced imminently. The Ministry had begun in May 2005 with basket of 13 state-owned companies thought to be able to generate operating profits if they could attract a strategic partner for a joint venture.  The basket was culled after several meetings with prospective partners to four state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the cement sector.  Hariri reported to EMIN that a meeting in Jordan to finalize preliminary partnership agreements, to finish January 10, would likely settle on two, possibly three handshakes that would then proceed to negotiations for the final terms of the joint venture agreements.  THE COMPANIES --------------  3. (SBU) Per the Minister's information, it appears that cement plants in Al Anbar, Kirkuk (At Tamim), and Al Muthanna provinces are a step further toward productive joint ventures.  Three consortiums are the "selectees".  the first is a partnership between an Iraqi firm, Al Jawhara Al Khalijiyah, and a Romanian partner Uzen.  They are to partner with the MoIM to restart the cement plant at Al Qa'im, at the Syrian border in Al Anbar.  In Kirkuk it is a partnership among the Iraqi company Al Sharq Al Awsat and an unidentified German company.  Last, in Al Muthanna, the partnership is between the German firm KHD and an Iraqi company called the Economic Group.  While the Minister had briefed that different consortia seemed headed toward getting the nod in Al Muthanna -- he had pointed to a Swiss-led consortium -- and had expected a French firm to partner in Karbala, in the event Karbala seems to be left in the cold, and Al Qa'im -- initially thought to have been the hardest to move -- has found a suitor.  THE DEAL ---------  4. (SBU) Minister Hariri set out the essential terms of the joint ventures as follows:  The strategic partner would enter into an agreement in which the financial benefit comes from a contract for a share of production -- these will NOT / NOT be deals in which the partner takes an equity position.  The strategic partner could take up to 65% share of the production -- subject to negotiation -- with the Ministry retaining the balance.  The life of the production sharing contract would be 10 to 15 years.  5. (SBU) The strategic partner for its part would invest on the order of $100 million in the SOE, the Minister said.  The partner would also be responsible for employee salaries and -- critically -- company management.  These terms as described are the framework for the deals.  Once the announcement of the selectees is made, a negotiation process would begin, with the agreements to be finalized over the next several months.  Minister Hariri said that the consulting firm of Grant-Thornton, part of DOD Deputy Under Secretary Brinkley's Task Force to Improve Business and Stability  SIPDIS Operations in Iraq (TFBSO), is to provide legal technical assistance in the negotiations toward final contracts.  THE ANNOUNCEMENT -----------------  6. (SBU) The Minister said he expected the two, possibly three selectees to be determined at the end of the January 9-10 meeting in Jordan.  He would present the joint venture concept to the Council of Ministers (CoM) on Monday, January 14, and make a formal announcement at a press conference the following Tuesday.  WHAT'S NEXT ------------  7. (SBU) Minister Hariri said the next phase of his efforts to restructure the SOE sector would be to build another basket of target companies -- this time as many as 30 -- that may become attractive targets if they first were to receive an infusion of investment from the capital budget.  He provided EMIN with a list of some 21 companies that were his priority recipients for up to $300 mn in total capital investment in 2008 (emailed to NEA/I-ECON).  He explained that, in deciding between whether to divide the $300 mn  BAGHDAD 00000088  002 OF 002   evenly among provinces, or to focus funds on SOEs with greatest turn-around potential, his list reflects the latter option.  8. (SBU) Hariri said he was ready to issue 16 tenders just as soon as the CoR has approved the national budget.  He has made it his goal to have all $300 mn committed by August 31, in order to be well placed to request a budget supplemental for the SOE sector.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000090  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  TREASURY FOR CMORAVEC, SBLEIWEIS COMMERCE FOR AKLEINER, SHAMROCK  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2018 TAGS: ECON, ETRD, EFIN, IZ SUBJECT: DE FACTO NON-IMPLEMENTATION OF ARAB LEAGUE BOYCOTT IN IRAQ  REF: A. BAGHDAD 0042      B. 07 BAGHDAD 1944      C. 07 BAGHDAD 1308      D. 06 BAGHDAD 4690  Classified By: Charles P. Ries, Economic Minister, for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Embassy's quiet diplomacy on the issue of Iraq's implementation of the Arab League Boycott (ALB) has borne fruit.  The Council of Ministers (CoM) has agreed to allow trademark applications submitted by PepsiCo to be registered, and the first five were officially registered on January 8, 2008.  The Minister of Industry and Minerals, who championed the decision in the CoM on the grounds that ALB provisions hinder economic development, states that this decision to not implement ALB provisions should apply to other areas affected by ALB provisions handled under different ministries.  2. (C) From another angle, it has become apparent that Iraqi firms are free to sign contracts with Embassy that contain clauses certifying that the firm will not comply with ALB provisions, without fear that they will be prosecuted under current Iraqi law.  Although current Iraqi law continues to contain ALB provisions, the GoI has taken a clear step in the trademark case in the direction of non-implementation, as have other League of Arab States members.  This should have a positive impact on Iraq's ability to attract foreign direct investment.  We suggest that the accumulation of de facto non-implementation practices warrants consideration of removal of Iraq from the Department of Treasury's anti-boycott list as a "country under review".  END SUMMARY.  Trademarks, Patents, Copyrights, Company Registration --------------------  3. (C) PepsiCo's VP for International Government Affairs notified Embassy and USG agencies that the company's five most important trademark applications in Iraq were officially registered on January 8, 2008.  NOTE: PepsiCo has suggested, and we agree, that publicity of this fact is not appropriate, in part to allow the company space within which to prepare future action against product counterfeiters.  END NOTE.  She said that other applications, presented through a different agent, would soon be registered as well.  This is the end of a process by which the applications are submitted, and if found to be in proper form, are gazetted and subject to a 60-day notification and objection period.  In the absence of objections, the official date of registration was the end of the 60-day period for the first five applications.  4. (C) This is the culmination of nearly three years of quiet diplomacy on behalf of U.S. businesses seeking trademark protection in Iraq.  It is the result of the decision of the Minister of Industry and Minerals, Fawzi Hariri, to champion a practice of non-implementation of the ALB provisions that exist in Iraqi law.  As in many League of Arab States member countries, it would be politically difficult for the GoI to publicly renounce the ALB, but it appears that the GoI is ready to establish a practice of non-implementation.  In a meeting with EMIN on January 9, Hariri stressed that his winning argument was that ALB implementation acts as an unacceptable break to foreign investment in Iraq, and unnecessarily hampered the country's economic recovery and development.  He noted that while the PepsiCo trademark applications are handled by the Trademark office within his ministry, he had obtained the cooperation of the entire Council of Ministers on the question.  He said that this would affect other areas where  ALB provisions impact on investors and businesses.  We presume this means that applications for copyright protection in the Ministry of Culture, patent protection in the Ministry of Planning, and company registration applications in the Ministry of Trade, should now all receive the same treatment.  Firms Free To Do Business with the USG ----------------------  5. (C) Reftel A reported that, although Embassy felt it wise to request a waiver of the provisions Section 565 of Title V, Part C of the Foreign Relations Authorization Ace, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (PL 103-236, 22 CFR 2679c) to ensure our ability to carry on diplomatic functions, in practice over  BAGHDAD 00000090  002 OF 002   the previous year it had become apparent that Iraqi firms with which we had contracted did not seem constrained by ALB provision in Iraqi law.  In all cases, firms had willingly signed contracts containing clauses certifying that the firm would not comply with ALB provisions.  We believe this to be anecdotal evidence of another area in which the GoI has determined that implementation of ALB provisions is not in the country's national interest.  COMMENT --------  6. (C) Post believes PepsiCo's news warrants quiet celebration of significant progress made.  The anecdotal evidence of non-implementation against Iraqi firms should also be taken as evidence of progress.  This pattern of non-implementation, and the CoM's response to Minister Hariri's economically-based arguments, seems to show that the GoI "gets it".  7. (C) As we have urged in the past, we believe that generating public attention to these decisions for non-implementation is likely to undercut the CoM, and may push individual ministers to make public statements in support of the ALB.  We will seek opportunities to applaud the CoM's decision in private; determine whether our experience in contracting indicates another instance of implicit non-implementation; and encourage an explicit if private statement from instances of authority that the GoI has determined to make this a de facto, if not de jure, policy.  Given the positive evidence, we suggest that it is time to consider removing Iraq from the Department of Treasury's anti-boycott list as a country "under review". END COMMENT. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000091  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: VP ADEL ABDEL MEHDI: KEEP PRESSURE ON MALIKI  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (S) Summary:  Vice President Adel Abdel Mehdi told S/I Satterfield January 12 that ISCI fully supports the USG position that the Maliki government must reform in order to operate in a more inclusive and effective manner.  However, Adel opined that Prime Minister Maliki is misreading USG attitudes toward his government and believes that if he can stave off pressure to reform, by June his position will be secure till 2009.  The VP said the message from Secretary re changing the way the GOI worked - not/not changing the PM - was very clear, but that the USG did not always speak with one voice to ISCI on this point.  Adel said he detected an overall softening of views across the Iraqi political spectrum, and that the moment was ripe for Maliki to become more serious about power-sharing and inclusion.  Maliki and Iraq's top leaders have discussed empowering a "secretariat" to oversee implementation of decisions taken by the "Three Plus One" and "Five Leaders" mechanisms.  Adel provided us a copy of a paper sent by the Kurds to Maliki that outlines a multi-step program to "solve Iraq's crisis" through increased reliance on "Three Plus One."  The Kurds and ISCI continue to support Maliki, Adel claimed, but their patience is limited. He expressed guarded optimism that the CoR would pass the De-Baathification Law and the 2008 Budget in the coming weeks, but warned the Provincial Powers bill would take more time.  He said his recent trip to Tehran had helped improve Iranian understanding of the GOI-USG Strategic Partnership Declaration of Principles.  End Summary.  We'll Try to Make it Work with Maliki, But Send a Single USG Message --------------------------------------------- -----------  2. (S) In stark contrast to the upbeat assessment that he routinely serves up to visiting dignitaries, Adel appeared glum as he used terms such as "total stagnation" and "fragmentation" to describe GOI failure to improve Iraq's economic, political, and social situations.  He said the GOI can claim only partial credit for progress in the security field.  Satterfield explained the USG shares this assessment and has sent Maliki a strong message that he cannot succeed as a national leader unless he works much more cooperatively with all major Iraqi political leaders.  Adel said that while he understands the USG message of support for a change in the operating nature of the Iraqi Government and not a change of the government itself, he claimed some ISCI leaders have received "conflicting signals from Washington".  He stressed the importance of a clear USG message on the need for the GOI to act as an effective national government.  3. (S) Adel opined that Maliki continued to misread USG attitudes (for example, he interpreted a critical Kurdish letter in December as Kurdish capitulation to USG pressure) and divulged that Maliki appears to believe that if he can hang on until June, his job will be safe until 2009 because the USG will become increasingly distracted by November elections.  Adel said the Kurds and ISCI are ready to make another strong effort to work with Maliki ("we will do this with our minds but not with our hearts") but warned that such efforts must produce results because patience is limited.  He shared a copy of a January 11 Kurdish letter to Maliki (President Talabani - septel - told Satterfield that ISCI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim endorsed the text) that outlines a multi-step program to "solve the crisis" (translation will be sent to NEA/I).  He remarked that Sistani's view of the Maliki government is similar to that of the USG, noting that Sistani and the other Marja'iyyah are angry that Maliki's failure has contributed to national disunity but believe that a change of PM at the present time will only worsen the situation.  4. (C) Adel noted that he has detected a general softening of views and increased flexibility across the Iraqi political spectrum, beginning with an apparent new-found willingness by Maliki to respond to entreaties that he govern in a more inclusive manner.  To this end, Maliki and Iraq's top leaders have discussed a "secretariat" of empowered representatives of Iraq's top leaders to oversee and enforce implementation of decisions taken by the "Three Plus One" and "Five Leaders" mechanisms.  Nothing will happen in the next 4-5 days, Adel said, as Maliki's doctors have advised the ailing PM to rest and not attend meetings.  5. (C) Adel maintained that the overall softening of approach extends also to the Sunnis, including fellow Vice President Tariq al-Hashemi.  He attributed growing Sunni flexibility to the challenge of intra-Sunni political competition posed by the Anbar Awakening, desire to improve relations with the Kurds, and discontent within Tawafuq.  He surmised that Hashemi's rigid stances may have been influenced by non-Iraqi Muslim Brotherhood sources.  As evidence of a shift in the  BAGHDAD 00000091  002 OF 002   Sunni approach, Adel said that Sunnis are now talking in positive terms about federalism and the constitution, and he noted with approval that Hashemi included Shia representatives in his delegation during a recent trip to Kuwait in which he a pushed a nationalist, non-sectarian vision for Iraq.  Adel said he thinks the Kurds have also modified their stance on the PKK-Turkey issue, and Satterfield remarked that the Turks are beginning to re-examine their approach as well.  6. (C) Adel expressed guarded optimism that the CoR would pass the De-Baathification Law and the 2008 Budget in the coming weeks (the former bill was passed a few hours after the meeting) but warned the Provincial Powers bill would take more time.  In reply to Satterfield's request that he encourage the CoR to stay in session and forego a scheduled February recess, Adel said it was extremely difficult to make effective such encouragement of the CoR.  He noted that CoR members had even ignored a call by the Marja'iyyah to stay in session during the December 2007 Eid al-Adha holiday.  Selling SPD in Tehran ---------------------  7. (C) Adel briefed on his recent visit to Tehran, a trip taken at Iranian behest to "explain and clarify" the GOI-USG Declaration of Principles (see septel for additional readout provided in a January 9 Adel-Ambassador Crocker meeting). Adel said that he met with the top-tier of Iranian security officials (but not with Supreme Leader Khamenei or FM Mottaki due to their unavailability) and believes that Tehran has a better understanding of the GOI-USG security relationship as a result of his efforts.  He said he told the Iranians that the GOI wants good relations with the USG and Iran.  Adel said he detected strong Iranian interest in resuming a dialogue with the USG: he appeared surprised to learn that Tehran had not replied to our proposal of discussion dates, noting the Iranians had not told him of any conditions for participation in talks.  Alluding to upcoming bilateral negotiations over a long-term strategic security relationship, Satterfield urged the GOI to send forth a broadly-representative negotiating team in order to produce an agreement that the Iraqi Parliament can support.  The VP affirmed that this was the intent of the Presidency Council and reaching agreement on an empowered and effective negotiating team would top the agenda of the Three Plus One meeting due to take place within days. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000092  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2018 TAGS: MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: PROVINCIAL OPERATIONS CENTERS CHANGING THE PREMISE OF PIC  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 3318  BAGHDAD 00000092  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Political Military Minister Counselor Marcie Ries for re asons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) On December 16th, Basrah become the second province to transfer to Provincial Iraqi Control (PIC) with a federally-mandated provincial operations command in charge of the province,s security forces.  Established in several volatile provinces by Prime Minister Maliki, these operations commands are intended to provide the necessary security forces within the province until the provincial police are sufficiently trained and equipped.  Additionally, they provide an increased level of security and rapid emergency response capabilities for the provinces in the event of a security situation which exceeds provincial capacity. Provincial operations commands also supersede operational control of local authorities over ISF and  provide to Prime Minister Maliki and the OCINC the means for direct involvement in local security issues.  --------------------------------------------- ------ Operations Commands Establishing Federal Control of Provinces --------------------------------------------- ------  2. (C) Operations commands are meant to serve as the coordinating body for all security operations within a province where the local police force cannot independently maintain security.  Iraqi Army and National Police assistance to fledgling local police forces (IP) is not new in Iraq; many IPs still lack equipment, training, and are too physically distant from local disturbances to be able to adequately maintain local security. Normally, the Provincial Director of Police (PDOP) maintains operational control over his IPs while coordinating operations with the Governor and Provincial Council through the Provincial Joint Coordination Center (PJCC). The federally-mandated operations centers, alternatively, are commanded by an Army Commander who reports up the Ministry of Defense chain of command up to the Office of the Prime Minister, retaining provincial security in the hands of the central government.  In more accurate terms, Karbala transfers to "Federal Iraqi Control."  3. (C) With the presence of an operations command, the governor retains civil administrative control of the province as the chief executive officer and can continue to monitor the security situation through the PJCC (where it is up and running).  The PDOP remains the direct commander of the IPs, which maintain responsibility for law enforcement, but the operations command commander has ultimate authority over all ISF activities in the province.  Additionally, Coalition Forces conducting counter-terrorism operations coordinate their activities through the operations command commander where one exists.  -------------------- The KOC and the BsOC --------------------  4. (C) Prime Minister Maliki established the Karbala Operations Center (KOC) by Prime Ministerial Directive (#34) on June 6, 2007 to respond to local instability from intra-Shia fighting and the absence of sufficient numbers of capable, reliable police to protect the population.  In addition to Karbala locals, there are religious pilgrims who visit the Shia holy shrines on religious holidays, whose numbers can reach a million.  Also of note are the criminal elements crossing into Karbala from al-Anbar and Babil provinces. In late August, the Karbala police, largely made up of Badr Organization members and affiliates, clashed violently with Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) members when the latter group attempted to overrun a shrine. Over the ensuing hours, the KOC played a role in mobilizing Iraqi Army reinforcements which helped to effectively bring the conflict to an end and eventually coordinated arrest operations against many of the culprits.  While this outburst delayed PIC and cost KOC Commander Salem al Maliki his job, it also proved that the operations center concept had an important role to play in managing crisis situations.  5. (C) Prime Ministrial Directive #167 established the Basrah Operations Center (BsOC) on June 15, 2007 because the local IPs were unable (or unwilling) to combat militia infighting  BAGHDAD 00000092  002.2 OF 003   and rampant criminality.  Shia militias and criminal gangs, struggle for power in Iraq,s most prosperous province has led to significant violence, corruption, and mistrust within the population and provincial political and security structures.  Basrah Operations Center Commander MG Mohan has worked closely with Basrah PDOP to cleanse local security forces and integrate forces from outside the province.  6. (C) Similar to operations centers in other provinces, the KOC and the BsOC have operational control over the Iraqi Police (IP), the Facilities Protection Service (FPS), the Iraqi Army (IA) units and Department of Border Enforcement (DBE) deployed to the province, and the provincial intelligence and security centers.  --------------------------------------------- ------------- Operations Centers: The Standard Rather Than the Exception --------------------------------------------- -------------  7. (C) Operations centers currently function in Baghdad, Diyala, Karbala, and Basrah provinces, and Samarra city in Salah Ad Din province, suggesting that they will soon become the norm rather than the exception.  At the September 16 Ministerial Council for National Security (MCNS) meeting, PM Maliki stressed the importance of creating additional operations centers in Ninewa and al-Anbar province. During a press interview last month with a regional newspaper, General Nassir Abadi, MOD Deputy Commander of the Joint Forces, proclaimed operations centers a new requisite for a province's transfer to PIC.  --------------------------------------------- ------------ From "Provincial Iraqi Control" to Simply "Iraqi Control" --------------------------------------------- ------------  8. (C) Initially, the Joint Committee for the Transfer of Security Responsibility (JCTSR)(reftel), which makes decisions regarding PIC and which consist of representatives from the Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Defense, Iraqi National Security Council, MNF-I, and the U.S. and UK Embassies, considered operations centers obstacles to PIC for a number of reasons:  - The need for national security assets indicates the province is far from the "low" threat level required for PIC.   - Operations Centers become the lead security body in the province, removing operational control from provincial authorities who have traditionally been the GOI-designated security lead after PIC.  - All provinces should already have a PJCC to coordinate all security-related activities.  9. (C) In late summer 2007, the JCTSR reevaluated the PIC process. It concluded that a province is ready for PIC when the Iraqi Security Forces are capable of maintaining local day-to-day security without direct Coalition involvement. The presence of an operations center was seen as an enabler, rather than a shortcoming. Thus, the JCTSR re-evaluated the PIC Implementation Authorization to take the following into account:  - The GOI has the authority to provide federal assistance to a troubled province that faced a potential crisis situation. A province may utilize the ISF (Iraqi Army and National Police) to achieve or maintain a 'low' threat level.  - Security responsibility can be transferred from the MNF-I to the GOI.  At the same time, the GOI can then appoint operational security responsibility to the operations command commander while civil administrative authority remains with the governor.  - PJCCs are coordination and reporting bodies, but operations centers provide needed operational control when provincial security assets are not fully capable of sustaining the appropriate level of security.  ------------------------------------------ Legal Authority for the Operations Centers ------------------------------------------  BAGHDAD 00000092  003.2 OF 003    10. (C) PM Maliki has been able to stand up ISF command centers owing to his position as  Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.  However, there are limits to the IA,s authorities in the provinces.  The IA can exercise domestic law enforcement functions in accordance with Iraqi law in order to augment local IPs.  However, the lapsing of the &State of Emergency8 prevents them from exercising powers beyond existing and usual Iraqi law.  (Note: Theoretically, the IA cannot exercise emergency powers because the State of Emergency has lapsed.  The law requires the Council of Representatives renew the State of Emergency every 30 days; the renewal has not occurred since April 2007. End Note.) This means that the IA lacks the powers accorded to the Coalition Forces by the UNSCR, e.g., to detain individuals for security reasons.  11. (C) Additionally, the PIC Implementing Agreement, the MOU that outlines the terms and conditions under which PIC occurs, states a province can PIC while in a &state of crisis.8  The Agreement allows the Prime Minister to assign to one entity the lead responsibility for resolving the security crisis; however, this condition is temporary and control returns to provincial authorities once the crisis is resolved.  The Prime Minister has not specifically declared Karbala or Basrah provinces &in crisis,8 however, the prime ministerial directives establishing the separate operations centers could be interpreted as doing so.  12. (C) COMMENT:  Operations commands provide a pragmatic solution to security needs but also have the effect of importing central government control over local police in the provinces.  Once the security situation normalizes some consideration will have to be given to whether this change should be permanent.  For now,  operations centers provide the centralized command and control that is necessary for the PIC process to continue in provinces with security challenges local police cannot handle alone.  END COMMENT. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 05 BAGHDAD 000094  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2018 TAGS: ECON, IR, IZ SUBJECT: RECENT IRANIAN ECONOMIC INVOLVEMENT IN IRAQ  REF: A. 2007 BAGHDAD 3817      B. 2007 BASRAH 109      C. 2007 LONDON 4680      D. 2007 BAGHDAD 4184      E. 2007 BAGHDAD 3903      F. 2006 IRPO DUBAI 6      G. JAN 4 NEA/I CLASS O-I      H. 2007 BASRAH 115      I. 2007 HILLAH 158      J. 2007 HILLAH 153      K. 2007 BAGHDAD 3976  Classified By: Political Military Counselor Marcie Ries for reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.(S//NF) SUMMARY:  Iran,s economic policy in Iraq, designed in part to win the &hearts and minds8 of Iraqis according to many analysts, has increased in level and scope in recent months, resulting in Iran steadily gaining more economic and political influence in Iraq.  Recent reports have indicated Iranian economic activity is broadening to encompass more service provision investment, greater entry into markets outside of border provinces, and greater cooperation on many other levels.  Many sources have reported that most Iranian investment and business deals are headed or influenced by the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Corps-Quds Force (IRGC-QF). Ordinary Iranian businessmen have thus far expressed little eagerness for investing in or dealing with Iraq, preferring to focus their business on more lucrative and less risky markets.  Official Iranian government numbers on non-oil exports to Iraq are only 7.5% of total Iranian non-oil exports, indicating that Iraq is not a priority private sector market destination for Iranian goods.  However, Iran has recently announced that Iraq is its number two trading partner.  Mixed in with trade is Iran,s declared $1 billion in aid to Iraq, which can confuse the picture between trade and assistance.  Iranian subsidies to reconstruction projects and cheap Iranian imports hinder Iraqi production and local agricultural output as they are lowering Iraq,s competitive advantage in many industries.  This economic campaign is believed to have underlying political motives of building relations and ties with various Iraqi groups and sectors in several areas, in addition to benefiting politically influential Iranians, many of whom have intelligence or security connections. END SUMMARY  INCREASED IRANIAN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IN IRAQ  2.(S//NF) Recent cables and open-source reporting indicate that Iran is enlarging its economic footprint in Iraq by increasing its trade links (primarily imports to Iraq, especially in the south), deepening cooperation in the oil sector, raising its investment levels in service provision, and trying to increase and strengthen ties with Iraq,s holy areas.  Iraqi and U.S. sources in Iraq, particularly in the south, have suggested that this deepening of economic ties and increased investment is connected in part to an overall strategy to gain political influence in Iraq.  BILATERAL TRADE FAVORS IRANIAN IMPORTS  3.(U) While Iran has released data on trade with Iraq, accurate numbers cannot be determined due to the reportedly vast smuggling along the long border.  In October 2007, Iranian Deputy Commerce Minister Mehdi Ghazanfari was quoted in Iranian press as saying that Iraq had become Iran,s second highest trading partner due to a 17.5% increase in non-oil exports from March to July 2007.  Total official Iranian numbers on trade with Iraq were $1.216 billion in 2006, of which only $16 million were imports from Iraq. Percentages of Iraqi exports to Iran out of total bilateral trade have ranged from only one to three percent in public announcements.  Other released Iranian numbers claim that trade solely with the Kurdish region reached $1 billion in 2006.  (Note: When Iran closed the Kurdish border after PJAK attacks in September 2007, traders loudly protested. End Note)  In November, Iranian FM Mottaki valued the current level of mutual trade at $2.2 billion.  In January, head of the Iran-Iraq Joint Chamber of Commerce, Industries, and Mines Hassan Tizmaghz said the value of Iran,s exports to Iraq would reach $2 billion by the end of the current Iranian year (March 19).  According to Ghazanfari, Iranian exports to Iraq only counted for 7.5% of Iranian total non-oil exports, so it can be inferred that the bulk of the trade is oil-related, and that Iraq is not a private-sector, primary market for Iranian goods.  However, the Deputy Commerce Minister claimed that Iran supplies Iraq with 56% of its general market needs such as food, books, and clothing.  Mixed in with trade is Iran,s declared $1 billion for aid to Iraq, which may account for differences in statistics.   BAGHDAD 00000094  002 OF 005   FOCUS ON THE SOUTH  4.(C) In addition to the Kurdish region, much of the Iranian exports to Iraq go to southern Iraqi markets, particularly to Basrah.  According to Basrah Governor Wa,eli in a March 2007 press interview, imports from Iran total $45 million per year and encompass a range of goods such as carpets, construction materials, and food.  Wa,eli said in 2006 100-150 commercial trucks entered Iraq from Iran daily near the Shalamcha border crossing.  (C) These trade numbers will likely rise upon completion of a transborder railway project.  On January 4, Iraqi transportation ministry officials announced their support of an Iraq-Iran railway from Basrah to Iran via Shalamcheh in Southwest Iran.  Part of the Iranian portion of the railway has been completed.  The rest of the $110 million railway is supposed to be constructed by Iranian companies, according to Iranian press.  Iran announced that part of its $1 billion assistance package for Iraqi reconstruction is allotted to railway construction.  OIL  5.(C) Oil trade accounts for the majority of legitimate and illegitimate Iran-Iraq trade.  Recent events such as the oil, gas, and petrochemical conference on January 3 in Tehran suggest that both sides want to increase the volume of oil trade.  At this event, Iran announced it would build 250 oil wells in Iraq, each costing more than $60 million, in the next several years.  In November, Iraq,s South Oil Company announced a deal to build a pipeline between Basrah and Iranian ports at Abadan to increase Iraqi oil exports and diversify its export routes.  According to open source reports, Basrah,s total current oil exports are 200,000 barrels of crude oil per day.  After two years of inaction on the pipeline project, PM Maliki and Oil Minister Shahristani went to Tehran in August 2007 to sign an agreement to begin the project, according to the Iraqi head of the project, Director General of the State Company Oil Projects, Falah al-Khawaja.  The agreement is to build two pipelines, one for exporting Iraqi crude to Iran and the other for importing Iranian derivatives, or refined fuels.  The exporting pipeline is a 32-inch pipeline, while the derivative pipeline is half of that size.  According to Iranian press sources, the pipeline will deliver between 100,000 to 200,000 bpd of Iraqi crude (ref A). (Note: Specifics of the deal, including the crude export price have not been reported. End Note)  6.(C) Basrah governor Wa,eli (Fadhila) in a November 19 meeting with REO Basrah criticized the pipeline project, saying it would allow for greater Iraqi crude exports and would not guarantee derivative imports from Iran.  He also said the pipeline would not create more jobs for Iraqis since Iranians are given most of the work.  The head of the project, Falah, claimed he insisted that Iraqis build the Iraqi part before he would sign the agreement (refs A, B).  7.(C) According to Falah, as well as Governor Wa,eli and Asri Mousa, the planning manager for the South Oil Company, this pipeline deal is a political project that will not provide Iraq with any economic benefits, including derivative imports from Iran.  Governor Wa,eli said this pipeline plan was a part of Maliki,s policy to assist Iran, which includes allowing Iran to unfairly benefit from oil extraction in the shared Majoon oil field, according to Basrah reporting (ref B).  The southern oil field is situated on the border, and although Wa,eli says the Iraq side has the capacity to extract 500,000 bpd, only 50 to 70,000 bpd are extracted. Wa,eli accused Maliki of trying to quietly benefit Iran by allowing it to extract at much higher rates, in effect giving them Iraqi oil.  He further claimed that oil flows only go from Iraq to Iran; no oil or derivatives from Iran enter southern Iraq, including very little black market imports. He attributed this to adequate local supply and high Iranian demand for energy.  (Note: While some derivative imports may come through Iran to Iraq, they tend to originate in other countries. End Note)(ref A, B).  8.(C) Wa,eli also claimed that oil smuggling to Iran is rampant from offshore oil terminals and seaports.  Reports of oil smuggling have been seconded by other REO Basrah contacts, who say that oil is siphoned from pipelines and wells and smuggled through the ports in Iraqi and Iranian vessels (ref B).  9.(C) In contrast to above comments, however, the British Embassy in Baghdad reported that its office in Basrah had not picked up on any local resentment or ill-will regarding oil contracts with Iran.  SERVICE PROVIDER  BAGHDAD 00000094  003 OF 005    10.(S//NF) One area in which Iran seems to be investing heavily in Iraq is service provision, especially electricity.  According to a January 1 MNF-I Combined Intelligence Operations Center (CIOC) Assessment, &Iran continues to invest in Iraq,s infrastructure to pursue its Information Operations campaign with Iraqi Shi,a, leveraging the Iraqi government,s need for foreign investment and improved infrastructure.8  At the beginning of 2007, the Iranian government announced that it was ready to assume major responsibility for Iraqi reconstruction.  Iran has continuously increased its investment in Iraqi reconstruction, especially in basic and necessary services. By March 2007, Basrah and Diyala were importing cheap electricity from Iran by connecting to Iran,s electric grids.  In October, Iran,s Deputy Energy Minister announced that Iran,s power grid would be connected to nine locations in Iraq and that Iran would build power plants in Iraq.  Iran is currently building power plants in Karbala and Najaf -- two Shia holy sites -- and in Sadr City, a Shi,a stronghold in Baghdad.  Construction of the shared power plant between Karbala and Najaf began in December.  Different sources provide cost estimates of $75 million or between $200 and $300 million for the plant.  Much of the cost was donated by the Iranian government, according to Iraq,s Minister of Electricity, Karim Wahid.  11.(S//NF) On January 3, an Iranian Energy Ministry representative met with Karbala Governor Aqil Al Khazali and said that after the current 180mw power plant is completed, Iran will build two more power stations in Karbala and Najaf.  The Iranian representative also stated Iran will compete with international companies to build a power station in Khairat.  Khazali also called for the Iranian government to carry out various other service projects in Iraq.  The Sadr City 160mw power plant was reported in open sources in October to cost $150 million.  The plant will be under Iranian control, not under control of the Iraqi Ministry of Electricity, according to an Iraqi government source from MNF-I reporting.  Iranian company Sunir won this contract by offering an affordable loan repayment plan that will only begin in 2017.  These plants are intended not only to provide Iraqis with electricity but also with jobs, seemingly part of the campaign to win hearts and minds.  The Sadr City plant began hiring Iraqis in mid-December.  12.(U) In the last several months, Iran has gained greater entry into the banking and financial sector in Iraq.  The Iraqi Central Bank gave permission to Iran,s Bank Sepah to open a Baghdad branch in May 2007. In June, Bank Melli Iran opened its first Iraqi branch in Baghdad.  Also in the summer, the first joint Iraq-Iran bank, established by Iran,s Eqtesad Novin Bank and Bank Keshavarzi and an Iraqi bank, opened in Baghdad.  In December, the consortium opened a Karbala branch designed to provide services for Iranian pilgrims, and a third branch in Najaf is estimated to open soon.  Other branches in Basrah, Irbil, and Sulaymaniyah are scheduled to open within the year.  13.(U) In December, Iran,s Housing Minister expressed a desire to enter the Iraqi housing market and build new developments around the country.  The Iraqi Housing Minister said the GOI will approve a law in 2008 to attract foreign investment, especially in the housing markets, since the government wants Iran to build 2.5 million housing units in Iraq by 2010.  14.(U) Iran is also exploring offering education services. In October, the president of Iran,s Islamic Azad University and the Iraqi Ambassador to Iran discussed steps to open an Iraqi branch of IAU. (Note: IAU has other overseas branches. End Note)  IRANIAN INVESTMENT HIGH IN SHIA HOLY AREAS  15.(U) Recent open source reporting has shown that the Iranian government and officials of Iraqi holy areas have been working on deals to increase the numbers of Iranian pilgrims visiting Iraq.  In December, Najaf officials said publicly that they made deals with Iranian tour companies to bring several more million pilgrims to the city every year. Recent estimates of Iranian pilgrims entering Iraq are 2,500 per day according to Iraqi Ambassador to Iran, Mohammed Majid al-Sheikh.  In March 2007, provincial tourism officials estimated that 22,000 Iranian pilgrims visit Najaf and 10,000 visit Karbala monthly.  These numbers can be expected to increase dramatically as Iran forms new tour companies to shuttle pilgrims to Iraq.  The current numbers of pilgrims visiting are unverified, but Iran in November called for increasing six-fold the number of pilgrims allowed into Iraq to three million per year from the current level of 500,000. Iranian Ambassador to Iraq Kazemi-Qomi said that this  BAGHDAD 00000094  004 OF 005   increase could deepen ties between the two countries.  16.(S//NF) In December, Mohammed Ali Khatami, claiming to be a past member of IRGC, told London PolOff that Iranian NGOs supporting Iranian pilgrimages to Iraq are headed by IRGC-QF commander Soleimani and his deputy Firouzandeh.  He claimed that they run several companies operating in Basrah, Amara, Karbala, Najaf, Al Nasariya, Diyala, Wasit, and other areas (ref C). (Note: Khatami,s credibility has not been established.  End Note)  17.(U) Iran is investing heavily in construction and improvement efforts to help these areas accommodate the growing number of pilgrims.  Money from Iran is financing shrine expansion projects in Najaf, tourist facilities such as rest houses, wells, and restrooms near the shrines, and other development projects to improve and expand the holy cities.  In March 2007, Governor of Najaf Asaad Abu Galal said publicly that the Iranian government gave the Najaf government $20 million a year and the Karbala government $3 million a year to build and improve tourist facilities for pilgrims.  RECENT COOPERATION  18.(U) In a January 3 bilateral economic and trade cooperation conference in Iran, Iranian Minister of Economy Jafari announced that expanding economic cooperation with Iraq was on Iran,s agenda.  The conference was specifically focused on oil, gas, and petrochemical industries and how the two countries can increase their cooperation in these fields.  At the end of the year, Iraqi officials were also reportedly in discussions with the director of the Iranian Kish Free Trade Zone about how to further business cooperation and trade between the countries.  The Iraqi Ambassador to Iran said that the two sides are looking to hold bilateral trade exhibitions, use the island for athletic training for Iraqi athletes, and have education facilities for Iraqi students.  IRAN GAINING INFLUENCE: ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL  19.(S//NF) Reports of Iran gaining political influence in Iraq, especially in the south, continue.  In December, Colonel Ali al-Khawam, the leader of Muthanna,s Criminal Intelligence Unit, said that Basrah province is almost completely under Iranian control, which he claimed is part of Iran,s overall strategy to control and indirectly govern southern Iraq.  One U.S. Iraqi source, Saad Ouda al-Mussawi, confirmed Iranian interference in Maysan province and said economic reconstruction offices in the major cities of the south are staffed by Iraqi Arabs operating under Iranian control and direction.  He added that Iran has repeatedly engaged with tribal leaders throughout the south (ref D).  20.(S//NF) According to the UK Ambassador to Iran, the Iranian business sector expresses little interest in the Iraqi market, indicating the possibility that much trade is controlled by entities with links to the Iranian government. British officials believed that most of the large black and gray market with Iraq is likely mostly controlled by the IRGC (ref E).  (Note: Iranian sources claimed to IRPO Dubai that only former IRGC officials have the courage and the connections to operate in the insecure climate in Iraq (ref F). End Note)  IRANIAN INVESTMENT AND TRADE UNDERCUTTING IRAQI INDUSTRY  21.(C) Several reports and Iraqi contacts have noted the negative effects that Iranian investment (including subsidies) and cheap imports have on Iraqi production and investment.  Akeel Razzak, CEO of Iraqi Al Bilal Group, said on January 3 to NEA officials that Iranian and Turkish subsidies for companies building power plants and investing in the private sector undercut Iraqi firms, competitiveness.  With the Iranian government funding an increasing number of projects related to construction, investment, and reconstruction of Iraq, Iraqi companies do not have a competitive advantage in taking the lead on many deals (ref G).  Likewise, cheap Iranian imports in the Iraqi markets have a detrimental effect on supporting domestic industry and production.  According to Iraqi sources in Basrah, Hillah, and Diyala and PRT Karbala, cheap Iranian products in the local economy have effectively driven out Iraqi agricultural products since Iranian goods are half the price of domestic produce.  A once thriving agricultural industry is having difficulties competing against Iranian imports, and there are no local Iraqi goods in the bustling revived markets.  In a province that relies heavily on agricultural jobs, as does much of the country, farmers cannot compete with cheap Iranian imports, and to a lesser extent imports from Syria and other neighboring countries.  Although Iraqi consumers are benefiting from cheaper consumer goods, the Iraqi dinar  BAGHDAD 00000094  005 OF 005   is flowing out of the country rather than being reinvested in Iraq production and capital. (Ref H-K)  22.(S//NF) COMMENT: These factors, considered in conjunction with Iran,s ties to segments of the Iraqi political scene, seem to indicate that Iran is trying to expand its political influence in Iran through trade and assistance, although given geographic proximity and longstanding cultural ties, some Iran-Iraq trade is normal and beneficial.  Just as we did not try to sever Afghan-Iran trade ties in our efforts to normalize the situation there and reconstruct the country, we are not overtly discouraging Iraqi trade with Iran.  However, trade relations bear close scrutiny, as it seems from many sources that much of the investment and trade is controlled and directed by the IRGC-QF, which indicates that Iranian economic interests have political underpinnings.  Reporting indicates that many Iranian front companies operate in the south and funnel money back to Iran in order to pay for Iraqi militia support and training.  We can expect Iranian economic and political influence to rise as Iran invests more heavily throughout Iraq, not just in the south, increases the numbers of Iranian pilgrims visiting Iraq, and continues to dominate Iraqi local markets with Iranian goods.  END COMMENT  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000095  SIPDIS  STATE FOR USDA  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/12/2018 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EAGR, IZ, PGOV SUBJECT: TRADE MINISTER PLANS LIMITED PDS REFORM IN 2008  REF: 2007 BAGHDAD 4062  Classified By: Economic Minister Charles P. Ries for reasons 1.4 (b) an d (d).   1. (C) SUMMARY: Minister of Trade Abdul Falah al-Sudani met with EMIN and Econoff January 11 to discuss his plans for the Public Distribution System (PDS) in 2008.  Notwithstanding recent calls in the Council of Representatives (CoR) for greater PDS funding, the Trade Minister expects to receive only the USD 3.27 billion included in the budget as approved by the Council of Ministers (CoM) and pending in the CoR. The PDS program may also receive USD 500 million supplemental later in the year.  The Ministry will not be able to fund the PDS with commodity quantities at 2007 levels with forecasted 2008 prices for goods and shipping.  He said he will try to stretch the 2008 PDS budget by cleaning up the beneficiary rolls and reducing ration quantities, as opposed to eliminating some items altogether.  In succeeding years he expressed enthusiasm for means-testing and monetizing benefits while encouraging the private sector to meet the basic food needs of all but the poorest Iraqis.  Al-Sudani spoke candidly about some of the PDS's inefficiencies but claimed that politics, bureaucratic regulations, and security challenges constrained his efforts to address them. Al-Sudani's interest in reforming the PDS should be welcomed, but such reforms will be politically sensitive and could complicate Iraq's already difficult path toward national reconciliation.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------------------ CUTTING BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES IN 2008 ------------------------------------------  2. (C) Trade Minister al-Sudani plans to receive the USD 3.27 billion the CoM approved for PDS in the draft 2008 budget still pending before the CoR.  He said that Finance Minister Bayan Jabr indicated that he might authorize a USD 500 million supplemental allotment for the PDS later in the year, depending upon Iraq's 2008 oil revenues.  (NOTE: On January 08, CoR First Deputy Speaker Khaled al-Attiyya told us that CoR members wanted the PDS benefits basket to remain untouched, noting its importance to poor Iraqis.  Al-Attiyya said the CoR had agreed with Finance Minister Jabr to fund the PDS in its current form.  END NOTE.)  3. (C) Al-Sudani told EMIN that he will not be able to fund PDS in its current form with the draft budget approved by the CoM.  He cited increases in both commodities and shipping prices.  (NOTE: In December 2006, the Grain Board of Iraq paid roughly USD 222 per metric ton (MT) of wheat and USD 70-90 to ship the same from the United States to the Port of Umm Qasr; by December 2007, the analogous figures had increased to USD 400 and USD 175-205.  Purchase and shipping prices for rice, powdered milk, and other PDS commodities have risen similarly.  END NOTE.)  4. (C) Al-Sudani intends to make the most of his 2008 budget by trimming the rations of certain commodities in the benefits basket and cleaning up the beneficiary rolls.  He claimed to have estimated the costs at USD 3.6 billion to provide beneficiaries the following reduced monthly rations:  ITEM          2008 RATION     2007 RATION Wheat               6 KG            9 KG Rice                2 KG            3 KG Vegetable Oil       1 KG         1.25 KG Dried Milk        125 G           250 G Tea               100 G           200 G  Al-Sudani said that rations of sugar, infant formula, and other PDS items would remain untouched.  He noted that CoR members have expressed they do not want items eliminated from the basket.  Al-Sudani said he hoped the Ministry could procure 1.5 million MT of wheat as well as roughly two months of the PDS rice needs from Iraq's 2008 domestic crops. (NOTE: USDA forecasts a weak Iraqi wheat crop in 2008 because of poor rainfall in northern Iraq.  END NOTE.)  5. (C) Al-Sudani claimed that he favors means-testing beneficiaries in the future but that doing so would be impossible in 2008 because insecurity has prevented the Ministry from conducting a census to ascertain recipients' incomes.  Instead, during the first six months of 2008, the Minister intends to reduce the rolls by requiring all beneficiaries to re-register and provide a declaration of their wealth and income.  Al-Sudani hopes that the re-registration process will help the Ministry identify the dead, duplicated, emigrated, and least needy.  (NOTE: In separate conversations with the USDA Agriculture Counselor, al-Sudani suggested that wealthy Iraqis who do not need PDS  BAGHDAD 00000095  002 OF 003   rations would be reluctant to reveal their finances and thus select themselves out of the program.  END NOTE.)  He said the Trade Ministry has also contacted the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA), the Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Displacement and Migration for data about Social Safety Net beneficiaries, deaths, and migrs, respectively. EMIN noted that reducing the rolls would likely expose the Minister to charges of sectarian bias.  Al-Sudani agreed and argued that he tries hard to respond to the needs of all Iraqis to deflect such criticism.  -------------------------------------- THE MOT'S LONG TERM FOOD SECURITY ROLE --------------------------------------  6. (C) Al-Sudani said these near term measures would be the first steps toward the long term goal of significantly reforming the PDS.  He stated that in the years ahead he hoped to monetize benefits, providing transfer payments that beneficiaries could use to purchase goods from PDS food agents.  At the same time he said he wanted to encourage the private sector to assume a greater role in the importation of commodities; he said presently the private sector could not import the seven to eight million MTs of goods that the PDS requires.  The end state of this long-term transition would be for the Ministry to supervise the storage of strategic food reserves--to help manage price shocks, droughts, shortages, and the like--and to provide a monetized, social welfare benefit for the poorest Iraqis.  He said he hoped to integrate this latter function with MOLSA's Social Safety Net.  He noted, however, that monetizing PDS benefits would itself be politically sensitive.  Many beneficiaries report that they prefer the security of receiving benefits in kind instead of cash.  --------------------------------- CANDID TALK ABOUT INEFFICIENCIES? ---------------------------------  7. (C) Al-Sudani admitted that delayed payments to shippers and suppliers, as well as adverse legal judgments arising from collection actions, had tarnished the MoT's reputation as a customer and was slowing the arrival of wheat and rice shipments for which the Ministry had already contracted. EMIN encouraged Al-Sudani to settle any existing legal disputes expeditiously to help restore the Ministry's reputation.  8. (C) Al-Sudani claimed that the PDS suffered most of its losses (he estimated 10 to 20 percent by volume) when goods traveled between distribution centers and food agents.  He complained that criminal gangs and militias would steal such retail level shipments and, conspiring with food agents, sell PDS commodities in shops at market rates.  He recounted that--once confronted and asked why the Trade Ministry supplies such poor quality wheat when high quality wheat was available in the shops--he protested in his defense "the high quality wheat in the shops is ours!"  (NOTE: Critics of the Minister allege that he knows more about such criminal activities than he lets on; the head of the CoR's Integrity Committee has publicly called for al-Sudani to be investigated for corruption at the Ministry under his watch. END NOTE.)  9. (C) Al-Sudani also admitted that still comparatively volatile areas, such as Diyala, continue to complain that the truck drivers refuse to deliver PDS goods.  EMIN asked why the Ministry did not pay truckers a premium to go to less stable areas, especially those where security circumstances had already improved, such as Anbar and parts of Baghdad. Al-Sudani complained that Ministry of Transportation regulations set the per-ton-per-kilometer rate at which the Trade Ministry can contract for trucking services, limiting his ability to offer such incentives.  10. (C) COMMENT: Al-Sudani presents himself as genuinely interested in reforming the PDS.  He appears to recognize that the system is not sustainable in its current form.  The CoR's discussion of the 2008 budget has attracted much attention to the PDS, the Ministry of Trade, and the Minister himself.  A politician, he will likely ensure that, at the very least, he is seen to be doing something.  His capacity to push reforms and address the system's deficiencies is, however, limited by legitimate and illegitimate interests. Even the modest reforms contemplated for 2008 will be politically sensitive and require a good deal of institutional capacity to implement effectively.  Al-Sudani will also need to consider the risk of blowback any such reforms might provoke from criminals and militias that exploit the PDS's current inefficiencies.  Reforming the PDS is unquestionably in Iraq's long-term fiscal and economic  BAGHDAD 00000095  003 OF 003   interests, but doing so may in the near term complicate the country's already difficult path toward national reconciliation.  END COMMENT. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000097  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, TU, IZ SUBJECT: ERBIL: KRG PRESIDENT AND PM CRITICIZE GOI INEFFECTIVENESS  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 4193      B. 07 BAGHDAD 4199      C. BAGHDAD 66  Classified By: Classified By Jess Baily, Regional Coordinator for reaso ns 1.4 (b) and (d).  This is an Erbil Regional Reconstruction Team message.  SUMMARY -------  1. (C) During their meetings on January 6 in Erbil with U.S. Senators Norm Coleman (R-MN), John Cornyn (R-TX) and Johnny Isakson (R-GA),the Kurdistan Regional Government's (KRG) President and Prime Minister expressed their continued strong support for national reconciliation and passage of a national hydrocarbons law.  The KRG's top two leaders strongly criticized the GOI as making insufficient political progress toward national goals.  They reiterated the criticisms of the GOI contained in their December 27 letter to PM Al-Maliki (ref a).  They claimed the dominant Sunni and Shi'a political parties in Baghdad were increasingly under the control of Islamic extremists, and that PM Al-Maliki was moving toward a "semi-dictatorship."  PM Barzani expressed his view that Iran's overall influence in Iraq was declining, due to continued pressure by Coalition Forces on Iranian-supported groups and to growing frustration with Iran's actions by key Shi'a leaders, including al-Sistani. With regard to the PKK, the KRG President and PM concurred with the visiting senators that a political (rather than a military) solution must ultimately be found.  End Summary.  KRG President Supports National Reconciliation --------------------------------------------- -  2. (C) United States Senators Coleman, Cornyn and Isakson visited Erbil, Iraq on January 6 to hold discussions with Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Massoud Barzani and Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani.  The KRG President and PM expressed their thanks and appreciation for the sacrifices made by the USG since the end of the first Iraq war in 1991. President Barzani mentioned that 57 members of his family, 8,000 members of the Barzani clan, and 175,000 Kurds were killed by Saddam Hussein's regime.  Despite the temptation, the Kurds had chosen not to retaliate against the Arab perpetrators of past atrocities and must "never become part of the sectarian Sunni/Shi'a conflict." President Barzani stated that the KRG will continue to pursue national reconciliation and invest in the Kurds' relationship with Sunni and Shi'a factions in Baghdad.  He also said the KRG will continue close cooperation with the USG on counterterrorism.  President Barzani Cites Flaws in GOI Performance --------------------------------------------- ---  3. (C) KRG President Barzani discussed his views regarding the government of PM Al-Maliki.  He said, "We don't think there will be political progress with the current government.  We want a reshuffle of the cabinet and reconfirmation of the cabinet's commitment to the constitution.  We see a tendency to bring back a semi-dictatorship into this country."  In mentioning the political power of the Kurdish Alliance in Iraqi politics, President Barzani said, "If the Kurds leave the cabinet, we don't think the government could stand for more than 10 days."  Senator Coleman encouraged President Barzani to continue to be a voice in favor of reconciliation, and to work within the GOI to ensure rapid enactment of national hydrocarbon legislation.  Senators Coleman, Cornyn and Isakson stressed the importance of tangible progress in key areas of national reconciliation, such as the national oil law, in order to maintain American support for the USG's efforts in Iraq.  The senators highlighted the critical role to be played by the Kurds in these processes.  4. (C) KRG President Barzani said continued political failure in Iraq could be "catastrophic" for the Kurds, other Iraqis, the United States and the world.  He resented any implication that the Kurds are to blame for current political impasses in Baghdad.  He expressed frustration that agreements made among the leaders last August have not been turned into legislation.  He said, "Both the Sunni and Shi'a political parties in Baghdad are controlled by Islamic extremists. (The Kurds) didn't make all these collective sacrifices to have our future determined by Sunni and Shi'a clerics."  He continued, "I have one request: Please do not burn us with other people's fire.  Why should our people suffer, when other groups in Iraq don't play fairly?"  PM Barzani Strongly Criticizes GOI ----------------------------------  BAGHDAD 00000097  002 OF 002    5. (C) During the CODEL's meeting with KRG PM Barzani, Barzani praised the USG for facilitating many of the Kurdistan Region's achievements since 1991.  Regarding the GOI, he complained that PM Al-Maliki "has surrounded himself with very narrow-minded advisors."  He said major changes in the cabinet would be required to make political and economic progress in Iraq.  PM Barzani criticized the lack of decisiveness, transparency, and accountability in the GOI's various ministries.  He stressed the KRG's support for the Iraqi constitution and the KRG's continued need to be "under the Iraqi umbrella."  He said the KRG "will continue to play a constructive role in Baghdad," but he stressed the importance of decentralized power as the key to Iraq's future.  PM Barzani also told RRT Deputy Team Leader that he plans another trip to Baghdad "in the coming weeks" to continue discussions on hydrocarbons and other issues of national political reconciliation.  Iran Exerts Negative Influence on Iraq --------------------------------------  6. (C) In response to a question from Senator Cornyn about Iranian actions in Iraq, PM Barzani said, "The Iranians don't want stability and progress in Iraq, but their influence is declining."  He attributed the decline to sustained pressure by Coalition forces on Iranian-supported groups and to growing frustration among Iraq Shi'ite leaders with their neighbors to the East.  PM Barzani noted that in their mid-December meeting in Najaf, Ali al-Sistani complained about "Iran wanting to destroy this country."  The PM thought the Government of Iran was "holding back the Sadr-ists for now" from attacking other groups in Iraq, but he was pessimistic about the prospects for avoiding intra-sectarian conflict between Sadrists and ISCI.  Political Solution Sought for PKK ---------------------------------  7. (C) With regard to the PKK, the KRG President and PM stressed the importance of a diplomatic rather than military solution.  Senator Coleman agreed with that sentiment and expressed his appreciation for the KRG's efforts to interdict the flow of men, materials and money to the PKK.  8  (C) Comment:  Both Barzanis repeated now-familiar criticisms of PM Maliki's performance and voiced their doubts about its ability to make adjustments the Kurdish Alliance outlined in their December letter.  Nonetheless, when CODEL underscored the need for tangible and rapid progress in political reconciliation, both KRG leaders reaffirmed their commitment to stay engaged in the process.  9. (U) The CODEL was not able to clear this message prior to departure. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000101  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2023 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: AMAR AL-HAKIM ON MALIKI, BILATERAL SECURITY AGREEMENT, AND ELECTIONS  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 3799 (ISCI AND FEDERALISM)  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (C) Summary:  ISCI Heir Apparent Amar al-Hakim told S/I Satterfield January 13 that ISCI agrees with the USG position that the Maliki government must operate in a more inclusive manner and should start by reactivating the "Three Plus One" leadership mechanism.  Amar, who delivered a well-publicized January 11 mosque sermon that called for Maliki to reach out to Sunnis and disaffected Shia parties in order to promote national unity, said he detected new flexibility throughout Iraq's political leadership.  Hakim said ISCI fully supports the U.S. wish to negotiate a long-term bilateral security agreement with a broadly-representative GOI team, adding that he and his father, ISCI Chairman Abdel Aziz al-Hakim, are already preparing the Iraqi public for such an agreement through public meetings and speeches.  He maintained that ISCI shares the USG view that expeditious CoR passage of pending provincial powers and elections laws is needed, but complained that Sadrist tampering within the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) threatens to undermine the legitimacy of future provincial elections.  End Summary.  Helpful Public Statements from Father and Son Hakim --------------------------------------------- ------  2. (C) Satterfield expressed USG appreciation and gratitude for a recent public statement by the elder Hakim that expressed general support for Awakening movements ("people's committees" in the ISCI parlance) and for Amar's well-publicized Friday January 11 sermon at Baghdad's Baratha Mosque in which he called for Maliki to reach out to Sunnis and the Shia Fadhila Party and the Sadrist Trend and bring them back into the government fold in order to promote national unity.  Amar replied that he and his father understand the importance of explaining political developments to Iraq's masses because "when leaders step forward, the others will follow."  He added that such public statements also motivate the CoR to show courage in dealing with difficult but vitally important national issues.  Amar said ISCI agrees with the USG stance that the Maliki government must operate in a more inclusive manner, remarking that Maliki should start by reactivating the "Three Plus One" leadership mechanism and implementing the leaders' decisions.  Satterfield underscored that the USG wants to see the present, dysfunctional, Iraqi government work - and is not seeking a new government - points on which Hakim said his father and Ayatollah Sistani concur exactly.  3. (C) Relaxed and jovial, the black-turbaned Amar praised passage of the De-Baathification law and maintained that no one benefits from "the current political vacuum" that can be dealt with only if Iraq's leaders demonstrate real will to overcome national problems.  He said he detected new-found flexibility among Iraq's leaders, particularly the Sunnis, as evidenced by VP al-Hashemi's inclusion of an ISCI member in the delegation he took recently to Kuwaiti where he delivered a positive, nationalist message.  Such increased flexibility will reduce tension, Amar stated, which in turn allows Iraq's leaders to work through "personal differences" and focus on issues of vital national importance.  4. (C)  With regard to upcoming negotiations over a long-term bilateral security agreement, Amar said he shares our view that the GOI negotiating team should be comprised of members who represent all of Iraq's political leaders and competent GOI ministries.  Stating that the agreement will serve the interests of the Iraqi people, he indicated that he and his father have already begun to shape public receptivity to the agreement by talking about it in public meetings and speeches.  The Hakims may have occasion to make such points during the important upcoming Shia religious celebration of Ashura: Shia groups from throughout Iraq have already begun to gather in Hakim's housing compound, and we passed throngs of women draped head to toe in black cloth and young boys sporting ski caps embroidered with "Ya Ali" who were milling about pilgrim tents and open-air kitchens as we departed the ISCI compound.  Supportive of Elections but Wary of IHEC ----------------------------------------  5. (C) Amar said ISCI shares the USG view that expeditious CoR passage of pending provincial powers and elections laws is needed, opining that Fadhila and the Sadrists have a positive view of the CoR's draft provincial powers bill (Maysan's Governor, a Sadrist, personally told Amar of his support for the draft).  Repeating a warning that he has sounded during previous meetings with USG officials (reftel), he complained at some length that Sadrist shenanigans within  BAGHDAD 00000101  002 OF 002   the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) threatens to undermine the legitimacy of future provincial elections. Amar said he had emphasized this point to UN officials who have yet to take corrective measures to ensure that coming elections, like the elections of 2005, are accepted by winners and losers alike.  He asked the USG to weigh in with the UN on this important topic.  Amar confided that ISCI is still mulling over the relative merits of an "open" or "closed" election list system, maintaining that each approach has good and bad points.  Satterfield interjected that experience has shown us that a democracy functions best when there is a direct link between electors and those to whom they give their votes. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000102  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2018 TAGS: PHUM, ECON, KDEM, KJUS, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI PARLIAMENTARIAN ALLEGES TERRIBLE PRISON CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH  REF: A. 2006 BASRAH 77      B. 2007 BAGHDAD 3971  Classified By: Classified by PolCouns Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)   1.(C) SUMMARY:  A delegation from the CoR Human Rights Committee spent five days examining prison conditions in the southern cities of Basrah, Nasiriyah, and Diwaniyah. Committee Deputy Harith Al-Ubaidy had an overall negative outlook of the prison system in the south.  He said he heard allegations of widespread torture at all levels of the prison and detainment system in Basrah and Diwaniyah, and commented that most of the prisoners at the Diwaniyah and Nasiriyah prisons are JAM-affiliated, noting that ISCI controls those provinces.  Out of the three provinces, Nasiriyah prison in Dhi Qar was the only one to show some progress in prison conditions.  We cannot vouch for the accuracy of any of the HR Committee,s allegations of widespread torture in these prisons, which have been under sole GOI control since late 2004.  We are working with MNF-I on the best way to independently verify these allegations. END SUMMARY.  2.(C) CoR Human Rights Committee Deputy Chair Harith al-Ubaidy (Tawafuq) described to PolOffs on January 7 his assessment of the state of prisons in Basrah, Diwaniyah, and Nasiriyah gained from a recent HR Committee investigative trip.  The trip, which took place December 29 to January 3, included other members of the HR Committee and one member from the Ministry of Human Rights (MoHR).  The group made announced visits to four prisons:  Al Maqel and Al Minah, which are Ministry of Justice (MoJ) prisons in Basrah; MoJ-run Nasiriyah prison in Dhi Qar; and Diwaniyah detention facility, a Ministry of Interior (MoI) facility in Diwaniyah.  The delegation presented their findings to the CoR on January 8 and is planning to hold a press conference to disseminate them further.  BASRAH: TRAGIC CONDITIONS  3.(C) The delegation first visited Al-Maqel prison in Basrah, which al-Ubaidy described as a &tragedy.8  According to him, there were 303 detainees, including 12 women and 47 juveniles. (Note: This is approximately the number of inmates the prison can hold, as reported previously (ref A).  End Note.)  In Al Minah prison, the 600 detainees include 18 juveniles and 15 foreigners from Iran and Bangladesh who were detained for border trespassing and drug possession. Al-Ubaidy noted that there were only 16 rooms in Al Minah for all the detainees, and all were imprisoned in &animal-like cages.8 (Note: Al Minah is built for 400 detainees (ref A). DOJ/ICITAP notes that while there are indeed cages in the prison, they in fact do meet international standards. End Note)  4.(C) Al-Ubaidy said both prisons were in terrible condition overall.  There were not enough employees, supplies, and medicines, with many reports of disease outbreaks.  There were no social workers to rehabilitate the prisoners, which al-Ubaidy warned will leave them angry and vengeful.  He discussed structural problems with the system of detentions and trials, noting particularly that many cases had not been referred to the courts. (Note: ICITAP is building a new prison, Basrah Central, in the area, which is currently in the contract phase. End Note)  DIWANIYAH: EQUALLY BAD PRISON CONDITIONS  5.(C) In Diwaniyah, al-Ubaidy said that many of the prisoners had been charged with terrorist activities and were affiliated with JAM.  The MoI detention facility housed 555 inmates including 8 women and 223 terrorists. (Note: Detention facilities, which are designed for pre-trial detainees, differ from prisons that are meant for post-trial prisoners. End Note) Of the total number of inmates, 193 had been prosecuted, but many had been there for a year without formal accusations being made.  The police commander told al-Ubaidy that the prison was in bad condition, was over its capacity of 250, and has no social workers assigned to it. He complained that some prisoners had been sentenced to execution and transferred to Baghdad, but had been sent there on a dangerous route that allowed them to escape.  NASIRIYAH: PROGRESS MADE IN PRISON SYSTEM  6.(C) Overall, al-Ubaidy said, the MoJ prison in Nasiriyah was better than what they saw in the other provinces.  It held 543 prisoners (many JAM-affiliated) including 9 women, although it is only built to hold 450 prisoners (ref A).  He said that a reform and rehabilitation prison was under construction. (Note: Completion of this U.S.-funded prison is due in March and will be activated soon after, according to  BAGHDAD 00000102  002 OF 002   ICITAP.  Phase one in March will provide 800 new beds, and two additional phases to be completed in late 2008 will provide 800 new beds total. End Note) He mentioned several positive points such as the presence of social workers.  The prison warden has a degree in social work and has initiated programs to teach illiterate prisoners to read, and to participate in sports programs and other social activities. (Note: This warden has received training from ICITAP and participated in a 20-person training visit to U.S. prisons in February 2007.  ICITAP notes he is a more progressive warden and has been picked to be the warden of the new prison upon completion. End Note)  ALLEGATIONS OF TORTURE IN BASRAH AND DIWANIYAH  7.(C) Al-Ubaidy said the delegation heard allegations of widespread torture, reportedly mainly committed during the investigative stage in police stations or by militias who often arrested people at will.  Al-Ubaidy said men showed him cigarette and electric burn marks, and many men said they were either threatened with rape or sodomized with steel rods.  Some prisoners in Diwaniyah reported they were tied up by their hands and feet, put on a steel rod and beaten while they rotated around the rod, like chickens roasting on a spit.  Al-Ubaidy noted that many of the prisoners were afraid to talk in front of the guards, and said that when the guards were not there the prisoners were still afraid to talk, claiming that prison officials place spies in the cells to see who talks.  At Al Minah, prisoners told the delegation that they were frequently beaten by guards, allegations that guards accompanying the delegation actually affirmed at one point. (Note: Similar torture methods have been used elsewhere in the country, including Baghdad, and have been confirmed by ICITAP reporting. End Note)  8.(C) COMMENT:  We cannot vouch for the accuracy of any of the HR Committee,s allegations of widespread torture in these prisons, which have been under sole GOI control since late 2004.  We are working with MNF-I on the best way to independently verify these allegations.  The HR Committee,s report, if accurate, seems to contradict some anecdotal reports of progress in the south, especially in Basrah, where chaos in the prisons was reportedly widespread.   There has been a lack of ICITAP presence in southern prisons, but ICITAP is scheduled to establish a prison monitoring presence in Nasiriyah this month.  As reported in 2006, new prisons were supposed to be built in these provinces, but the HR Committee,s report from this visit suggests that instead, more inmates are being crowded into old prisons.  According to ICITAP however, the USG is funding two new prisons in the south. END COMMENT. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000103  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2023 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: SADRIST SEEKS USG HELP IN "CLIPPING SATAN'S TOENAILS"  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 3375 (BADR-SADR ACCORD)      B. 07 BAGHDAD 3821 (IRAN IS EVERYWHERE)      C. 07 BAGHDAD 4048 (GOD AND SADR)  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (C) Summary: Jawad al-Hasnawi, a senior Sadrist Trend official and Deputy Governor of Karbala province, told us January 10 that he and a growing number of other Sadrists have come to the conclusion that Iran, not the United States, is Iraq's greatest nemesis, and he proposed that the USG work together with him and like-minded colleagues to "clip the toenails of Satan" by ridding Iraq of what he characterized as rampant Iranian penetration at all levels.  Relating a convoluted tale of his violent expulsion from Karbala by alleged Iranian confederates within the GOI and ISF, he complained that Sadrist arch-enemy ISCI/Badr and the Hakim family "manage" Iraq on behalf of their Iranian masters while duplicitously passing themselves off as democratic friends to an all-too-gullible USG.  The intense and bearded 30-something Hasnawi readily acknowledged that Iran has also infiltrated the Sadrist Trend, particularly the Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM), and said Moqtada al-Sadr's six-month "freeze" order is an attempt by the fiercely nationalistic and virulently anti-Iranian Sadr to flush out elements who are paid by Iran - often through ISCI/Badr - to discredit the movement and attack Coalition Forces.  He claimed Sadr has already decided to extend the freeze beyond its scheduled late-February expiration, and is keen to change the movement's focus from "legitimate resistance" to delivery of public services.  Hasnawi grew visibly tense and replied in the negative when asked whether Sadr was aware of our meeting, but claimed that, as a member of Sadr's Political Committee and a future senior leader of the movement, he is in a position to establish an indirect line for us to Sadr by introducing views to Moqtada that are often compatible with USG perspectives and thus gradually change Sadr's fiery worldview.  We intend to arrange future meetings with Hasnawi in order to glean further insight into the Sadrist movement. End Summary.  America is Bad But the Persians are Worse -----------------------------------------  2. (C) Hasnawi, an intense and bearded man in his mid-30s who introduced himself as the Deputy Governor of Karbala and a member of the Political Committee of the Office of the Martyr Sadr (OMS), was accompanied by the even more intense and dour Ghalib al-Dami, who introduced himself as a Sadrist member of the Karbala Provincial Council.  They were joined halfway through the meeting by Ibrahim al-Sumaydaei, a chain-smoking Sunni lawyer who is often interviewed on Arab satellite television news programs for his glib "Baghdad ground truth" commentary.  Sumaydaei, who confided that he once worked in Saddam's intelligence service, brokered the meeting out of a claimed nationalistic desire to foster understanding between "moderate" Sadrists and the USG (we thought it imprudent to ask the Sadrist interlocutors whether Sumaydaei had divulged to them his shadowy Baathist past).  3. (C) Hasnawi's dominant and recurring message during the 90-minute meeting was that Iran - not the United States - is the real occupying power in Iraq, and the Iranians and their Iraqi confederates are well on their way to controlling Iraq's political, economic, and Shia religious life at the national level and throughout the southern and central Shia-majority provinces.  Acting on age-old ambitions to dominate Iraq, he claimed, Iran is using Iranian citizens, Iraqi sympathizers (some with family ties to Iran), and paid agents to penetrate the Iraqi government, intelligence, and security forces at all levels and do Tehran's bidding.  In addition, he claimed that Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani (an Iranian national) and the rest of the senior Shia religious establishment are beholden to Iran.  Characterizing Karbala as the center of gravity for Iran's comprehensive and concerted infiltration campaign, he claimed the town is awash with long-term Iranian residents (not merely religious pilgrims) and that Persian is heard more often than Arabic on Karbala streets.  4. (C) Hasnawi said he naively attempted several months ago to alert Karbala government officials such as the provincial governor (a member of the Dawa party) and police chief (a Badr official) of the extent and scope of Iranian activity. Rather than acting on his tip, however, Hasnawi claimed the officials alerted their fellow Iranian confederates of his discovery and orchestrated acts of harassment against him that included the assassination of Hasnawi's bodyguards, an arson attack on his house, the arrest of his brother, and the issuance of a warrant for his arrest that was rescinded only after Moqtada al-Sadr's top lieutenants weighed in with  BAGHDAD 00000103  002 OF 003   "Arab" GOI senior officials.  He claimed the harassment happened to coincide with a larger anti-Sadrist offensive launched by the ISF in the wake of the late-August 2007 Shabbaniyah violence at Karbala's holy shrines: Hasnawi insisted that the violence was a staged set-up by Sistani gunsels and ISCI/Badr intent on killing Sadrists, but he conceded with evident sorrow that Sadr's enemies have succeeded in convincing the Shia street that Sadr and JAM bear full responsibility for the "desecration" and that the Sadrist public image has plunged as a result.  Hasnawi and Dami said they are unable to return to Karbala for fear of violence and are thus unable to fulfill their duties as provincial government officials.  5. (C) While Hasnawi rattled off a list of senior GOI officials alleged to be Iranian moles (he listed, for example, former PM al-Jaffari and Dawa CoR leader Ali al-Adeeb and son), he reserved his strongest invective for the "Persian" Hakim family and their ISCI/Badr organization. He insisted that the Hakims and ISCI/Badr "manage" Iraq on behalf of their Iranian masters while duplicitously fobbing themselves off as democratic friends to the USG which, to Hasnawi's claimed "amazement," appears "blind" to the Hakims' pro-Iran allegiance.  For example, Hasnawi intoned, ISCI/Badr routinely teams with Iranian intelligence to run the following scam on the USG using JAM members as bait: Iranian agents recruit JAM elements to attack Coalition Forces or the ISF and then give the "case files" to ISCI/Badr, which passes such information to the Coalition.  As a result, Hasnawi continued with clear bitterness, JAM members are killed or arrested, "innocent" JAM are attacked in the process, the Sadrist image is further tarnished in USG eyes, and ISCI/Badr and the Hakims appear as "white doves of peace" to the Americans.  He claimed ISCI/Badr sought a non-aggression truce with Sadr in late 2007 (ref A) out of weakness and desperation, but then quickly abrogated the agreement.  He said the agreement is "dead" and has no practical effect. "When anything bad happens in Iraq," Hasnawi maintained, "Sadrists will always think the Hakims are behind it."   6. (C) Hasnawi claimed that anti-Iran sentiments have long been held throughout the Sadrist movement (ref B and C), and he paraphrased what he characterized as a favorite saying by Moqtada's late father Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr that, but for the Sadr family, "Iran would crush Iraq with an iron foot." In keeping with foot imagery, Hasnawi employed what we understand to be an earthy Iraqi peasant proverb by inviting the USG to work together with him and like-minded Sadrist colleagues to "clip the toenails of Satan" and rid Iraq of Iranian domination.  He said that he was in a position to provide significant and detailed information of Iranian agents to the USG and he made no quid pro quo request.  We note that Hasnawi's anti-Iran rhetoric and proffered intelligence regarding the identity of alleged Iranian agents are similar in tone and scope to the rumblings of a group claiming to be Sadrists from the Karbala, Najaf, and Diwaniyah areas that calls itself the "Mid-Euphrates Awakening" with whom MNF-I has had several engagements (ref C).  Insights Into the Sadrist Trend -------------------------------  7. (C) Hasnawi denied press reports that Moqtada spends much of his time in Iran, insisting that in the past year Moqtada has visited Iran only twice - once on an "official visit" and once when he believed his life to be in danger - and both times he stayed only a short time.  He stated with apparent conviction that Moqtada "hates and distrusts" Iran, but Hasnawi readily acknowledged that Iran has successfully penetrated the Sadrist Trend, particularly JAM.  For this reason, he claimed that Moqtada ordered a six-month "freeze" on JAM military activity in order to expose pro-Iranian elements within the ranks.  Hasnawi said that loyal Sadrists will report such elements to trusted "Arab" GOI authorities for arrest and prosecution, but he appeared flustered when we asked how the Sadrists could trust a government they claim to be under the complete sway of Tehran.  He said that top Sadr lieutenant Salah al-Obaydi had already announced Moqtada's decision to extend the freeze order beyond its scheduled late-February expiration.  Hasnawi said past Sadrist opposition to the USG presence in Iraq was thoroughly justified, claiming that international law permits the people of any nation to engage in "legitimate resistance" against armed foreign troops on their soil, but noted that attitudes toward the USG are beginning to soften to a limited degree as an increasing number of Sadrists start to believe that American troops will depart Iraq on their own accord but that Iranian agents will never depart unless driven out by force.  8. (C) He said Moqtada wants to transition the focus of his  BAGHDAD 00000103  003 OF 003   movement away from "legitimate resistance" to delivery of public services, and that this consumes much of the efforts of the OMS Political Committee on which Hasnawi sits.  He claimed the Sadrists can operate within a democracy and desire to work with any group, party, or individual (Sunnis and Kurds included) that supports Iraqi nationalism and unity.  Hasnawi further claimed that the Sadrists welcome a civilian - not military - USG presence in Iraq and can have cordial relations with official American civilians.  Hasnawi grew visibly tense and replied in the negative when asked whether Moqtada was aware of our meeting, but claimed that, as a member of the Political Committee and a future senior leader of the movement, he is in a position to establish an indirect line for us to Sadr by introducing views to Moqtada that are often compatible with USG perspectives and thus gradually change Sadr's thinking. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000105  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: REACTION TO THE ACCOUNTABILITY AND JUSTICE LAW AND ASSESSING THE IMPACT  REF: BAGHDAD 85  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) Summary: Sunni reaction to the January 12 passage of the Accountability and Justice Law, an early indicator of the ultimate political impact, has been somewhat tepid.  The Sunni Tawafuq Front issued a statement January 13 calling the law "mediocre" but acknowledging it contains some positive elements.  This lukewarm reception stems in part from Vice President Hashimi's belief that CoR Speaker Mashadani violated a promise not to bring the law to a vote until Monday, January 14.  As a result, Sunni leaders feel they were deprived of an opportunity to push back against several amendments that they found problematic, but which were endorsed in the January 12 voting.  In a January 13 meeting with Hashimi, S/I Satterfield addressed Hashimi's concerns and strongly urged him not to veto the law.  IIP bloc leader Dr. Ayyad al-Sammaraie told us on January 14 day that he would advise Hashimi not to veto the law unless he could convince President Talabani and Vice President Abdel Mehdi to join him in doing so; Dr. Ayyad suggested that Mashadani might be able to effect one improvement to the text by deleting a reference to the Iraqi intelligence service before transmitting the law to the Presidency Council.  Our assessment of the law's impact on reconciliation is that if implemented in a non-sectarian, non-partisan spirit, Sunni distrust of the Maliki government will be eased and the Iraqi people and neighbors will come to see this as a significant step along the path to national reconciliation.  End summary.  Tawafuq: Law is "Mediocre" --------------------------  2. (C) Sunni reaction to the January 12 passage of the Accountability and Justice Law (i.e., the "de-Ba'ath Law") has been somewhat tepid.  On January 13, the Tawafuq Front issued a statement calling the bill a "mediocre" law that contains "lots of holes."  Nonetheless, Tawafuq acknowledged that the law contained positive elements and would "alleviate the injustice and inequality of a large segment of Iraqi citizens who were discriminated against without any justification."  In conclusion, Tawafuq vowed to try to revisit and remedy the law in order to make it consistent with its original purpose.  From the statement, it is not clear whether Sunni efforts to address perceived flaws would include a veto by Vice President Hashimi.  Hashimi Undecided -----------------  3. (S) As reported septel, Vice President (and leader of the Iraqi Islamic Party) Tariq al-Hashimi told S/I Satterfield on January 13 that IIP had been caught off guard by the previous day's vote, because CoR Speaker Mashadani had pledged not to bring the law to a vote until Monday, January 14.  (Asked why Mashadani held the vote earlier than expected, one IIP leader assessed that Mashadani probably acted without thinking). Consequently, IIP found itself unexpectedly deprived of the opportunity to push back against several of the amendments introduced by the CoR's Sadrist-led de-Ba'athification Committee.  (In point of fact, IIP delivered a non-paper in Arabic to the Embassy outlining its specific concerns about the amendments only an hour before the voting got underway in the CoR.)  Hashimi said he was particularly concerned by an amendment to Section 4, Article 12 of the law that deprives the Presidency Council of the right to approve exemptions to the de-Ba'athification law, and instead requires that any exemptions be approved by the CoR, inevitably raising the barrier to waivers.  In addition, Hashimi worried that some Sunnis formerly granted exemptions and now serving in Iraq's security and intelligence services would be removed from their posts.  S/I Satterfield assured Hashimi that the USG would use all of its influence to prevent sectarian abuse during the law's implementation and to ensure protection of shared interests in safeguarding a continued role for loyal Iraqis in the security and intelligence services.  He stressed, however, that the Sunnis had won significant concessions and that while the law might not be perfect from a Sunni perspective, vetoing the finished legislation would be a grave strategic error.  Hashimi, however, remained non-committal as to whether he would sign the bill into law once it reaches the Presidency Council.  Sammaraie: No Individual Veto -----------------------------  4. (S) In a meeting the next morning (January 14) with IIP party bloc leader Dr. Ayyad al-Sammaraie, Dr. Ayyad said that IIP had still not reached a decision on whether to call for a Presidency Council veto of the law.  However, he emphasized that his personal recommendation to Hashimi would be that he  BAGHDAD 00000105  002 OF 003   must not veto the bill alone (and thus bear the blame alone); he should only veto if he gets the concurrence of President Talabani and Vice President Adil Abdel Mehdi, in which case the Presidency Council could jointly reject the amended law on the grounds that it violates the spirit of the August 26th leaders' agreement.  Poloffs pushed back, stressing the need to avoid a veto and pointing out that there was no guarantee that the Shi'a and Kurdish blocs would agree to "fix" the law in the event of a veto.  5. (S) Sammaraie, who was joined by Rashid al-Azzawi (a Sunni CoR member who sits on the De-Ba'athification Committee) expressed concern that unless revised, the law would lead to the collapse of the Iraqi National Intelligence Service (INIS).  According to Sammaraie, most Sunnis employed by INIS were never granted formal exemptions to de-Ba'athification policy, and so would still be vulnerable even if the GOI interpreted the new law as not revoking any formal exemptions previously granted.  These employees have been panicking over the past 48 hours, convinced that this is a deliberate Shi'a effort to purge the INIS of Sunnis.  Sammaraie emphasized that pursuing formal exemptions for these employees was problematic, since such exemptions would have to be approved by the CoR and the names of those involved would inevitably leak to the public -- thereby putting the Sunni employees and their families at risk.  Clever Solution? ----------------  6. (S) Sammaraie and al-Azzawi proposed a potentially clever fix: they suggested that Speaker Mashadani exercise his right (under the CoR's bylaws) to make minor tweaks to laws and delete the words "Intelligence Agency" from the definition of security agencies found in Section 1, Article 1, point ten of the law.  Mashadani could then transmit the law to the Presidency Council for signature, thereby avoiding the need to re-open the law on the floor of the CoR.  Ayyad did not specifically promise that Hashimi would sign the law into effect if this change were made, but seemed confident that this would suffice to address Hashimi's concerns (and the concerns of the Sunni employees at the INIS).  Additional Sunni Reaction -------------------------  7. (C) Sammaraie then summed up his opinion of the law, saying: "It represents a midpoint between those who are still seeking revenge against the former regime, and those who are seeking amnesty."  That balanced assessment tracks with the Tawafuq statement noted above, and with most other statements by Sunni leaders.  In Salah al-Din, for example, Governor Hamood Shekti told the PRT that dissent to the law would eventually subside and, overall, the law would make his job easier.  Even firebrand CoR Member Adnan Dulaymi conceded that the legislation included points (such as allowing former Ba'athists to collect pensions) that were "good and acceptable" and represented an improvement over the current system.  On the other hand, Salih Mutlaq, who led a walkout during the January 12 voting to hold a press conference absolving himself of any responsibility for the law's passage, blasted the bill as a "law of accountability without justice."  Assessing the Impact --------------------  8. (C) On the surface, the reform law will extend eligibility for most government positions for up to 36,000 former Ba'ath party members at the "firqa" level.  Essentially, only those at the top three ranks of the former Ba'ath heirarchy will be subject to the fullest restrictions of the law.  Those at the four lower ranks, with some exceptions, are not subject to de-Ba'athification.  The law affirms the legislators' specific intent, already expressed in the recent pension law, to restore pension rights to former civil servants without regard to party affiliation.  There are areas of legal ambiguity, for example with respect to continuity of previously granted exemptions, but on the plus side the reform law provides for a process of legal appeal denied to those subjected to de-Ba'athification in the past.  9. (C) In terms of the core USG objective of using this legislative step to foster conditions for broad political reconciliation, the spirit whereby the law is implemented will have a greater impact than the form and letter of the law.  We must continue to press the Maliki government to change the manner in which it has chosen to govern.  Sunnis fear that even with achievement of this benchmark on the path to reconciliation, a sectarian government can and will still use de-Ba'athification as a devastating partisan tool. Distrust of the Maliki government will not diminish as a  BAGHDAD 00000105  003 OF 003   result of passage of the de-Ba'ath reform law unless implementation is seen as taking place in accordance with the spirit of the law. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000106  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: TALABANI ON KURDISH EFFORTS TO IMPROVE RELATIONS WITH USG, GOI  REF: BAGHDAD 00087  1.  (S) Summary: Iraqi President Talabani on January 12 told S/I Satterfield he and Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Barzani had agreed on a list of measures to improve relations with the U.S. and restart political progress under the Maliki government.  These include eliminating Kurdish public statements that contradict U.S. policy, forbidding KRG comment or involvement in central government affairs except through Talabani's office, endorsing in its entirety the draft of the hydrocarbons law that reached the COR last year, and suspending unilateral KRG oil contracts that have caused tension with Baghdad.  The Kurds continue to assess that Maliki,s government is hopeless, but Talabani said they are ready to make a serious effort to work with him and to encourage the 3 1 mechanism. Talabani was optimistic on the PKK problem, citing increased willingness from both Ankara and the PKK to reach a political accommodation, Ankara's agreement to a visit by Talabani and KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani, and the KRG,s readiness to take a harder line against the PKK.  End summary.  3 1 to Meet Soon ----------------  2.     (C) Talabani said the 3 1 is attempting to meet this coming Wednesday, although Prime Minister Maliki,s health is an obstacle.  (Note:  VP Hashimi told us on 1/13 that a meeting may take place on Monday, 1/14.  End Note.) The President praised National Security Advisor Rubaie for agreeing the 3 1 could discuss security matters, which previously he had claimed as his personal bailiwick. Satterfield urged that the 3 1,s first order of business be to agree on a broad-based, representative team for negotiations with the U.S. on the long-term relationship.  He said the GOI team should include representatives from all relevant ministries and political groups, ideally with Hoshyar Zebari and the Foreign Ministry as the focal point. Talabani also noted progress setting up a 3 1 secretariat, separate from the 3 1 1 "preparatory committee," which potentially would include Rubaie, Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih, Islamic Supreme Council of Iraqi (ISCI) deputy Humam Hammudi, and Dawa deputy Ali al-Adib.  (Comment: Talabani this week gave Ambassador Crocker a slightly different cast of characters for this secretariat, reported reftel.)  Kurds Ready For Serious Effort With Maliki ------------------------------------------  3.     (S) Talabani said the Kurds continue to assess Maliki will not improve, but nevertheless are making a serious effort to work with him.  Maliki,s and the Dawa party,s mentality, which Talabani called an Islamic version of the Ba,ath mentality, remains the same, and Maliki,s stated willingness to engage the 3 1 merely reflects greater pressure on his government.  Talabani claimed ISCI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim this week told Maliki he agreed with each point in the harsh letter the Kurds sent Maliki on December 26 and that Maliki must rule in a more collective fashion.  Talabani expressed his belief that Ayatollah Sistani shared this frustration with the performance of the Maliki Government (Note:  A point confirmed in separate conversations with VP Abd al-Mahdi, Deputy Speaker al-Attiyeh and ISCI Heir-Apparent Ammar al-Hakim.  End Note), and announced he would visit Sistani after the end of Muharram (January 18).  Satterfield asked if a (long-heralded) cabinet change could come as a consequence of re-activation of the 3 1 mechanism.  Talabani considered this possible, noting that a more diverse GOI would help improve relations with the Arab states.  4.     (S) Ambassador Satterfield said Washington shares the Kurds, view that Maliki must govern in a less unilateral fashion, noting the Secretary,s main point to Maliki last month was that his government could not succeed without seeking consensus through the 3 1.  In a private aside after the meeting, Talabani said the USG should "take credit for saving Maliki" by telling him "only U.S. intervention had prevented the Kurds from removing him from office."  Healing Kurdish Relations With GOI, USG ---------------------------------------  5.     (C) Talabani restated his assertion to Ambassador Crocker that the Kurds now support the exact text of the hydrocarbon law that reached the COR last year, without their two previous objections.  Talabani added that he and Barzani had agreed not to sign any new unilateral oil contracts--and even to suspend previous contracts--until the central government reaches a viable agreement on hydrocarbons.  He welcomed U/S Jeffrey,s imminent visit to discuss the oil  BAGHDAD 00000106  002 OF 002   law.  (Comment:  We would be surprised if in fact Barzani has gone so far as to agree to suspend contracts already signed. Nonetheless, there is an attitude of greater flexibility on the part of the Kurds that was absent as early as a few weeks ago.  End Comment.)  6.     (C) More broadly, Talabani said he had convinced Barzani that the KRG must not interfere in Baghdad politics, and that any objections to the central government must come through Talabani,s office.  On a related note, the leaders allegedly agreed not to air objections to any U.S. policy publicly, since the Kurds have access at any time to numerous U.S. policymakers.  Talabani was critical of Barzani for his public criticism of the U.S. in wake of Turkish attacks against PKK camps in northern Iraq.  He concluded that he and Barzani had agreed to cooperate fully with the U.S. and U.N. on Article 140.  Reason For Hope On Turkey/PKK -----------------------------  7.     (C) The Erbil meeting with Barzani also produced an agreement to get tougher with the PKK.  Talabani said he and Barzani sent an envoy to the PKK with the message it must cease all attacks or get out of Iraqi Kurdistan, and threatening to mobilize KRG forces unless the PKK complies. Satterfield stressed the ongoing need for aggressive Iraqi Kurdish measures against the PKK, and Talabani affirmed the KRG,s moves to limit its finances and freedom of motion would continue.  Talabani added the PKK had sent a letter to Prime Minister Erdogan through the KRG and TNIO chief Taner, which had yielded Taner,s request to talk to PKK leaders a month later.  The Iraqi Kurds had provided contact information for PKK leaders in Europe, leading to discussions in Brussels which both sides said were productive.  Talabani said some in the Turkish government oppose these talks, and requested that Washington encourage Ankara in this endeavor.  8.     (C) By and large, Talabani described an increasingly encouraging attitude from the Turkish government.  It had agreed to invite him in February to Ankara, and welcomed KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani to join the delegation. Emre Taner,s conciliatory private stance, in Talabani,s view, reflects the view of Prime Minister Erdogan.  Turkish officials had agreed to improve cross-border trade relations and even said they do not oppose "federation" in Northern Iraq, though they avoided the term "Kurdistan" and qualified that the federation should include neither Kirkuk nor a PKK presence.  Talabani still called it a step forward, and Satterfield said the USG has also heard a new and unprecedented tone from the Turkish General Staff suggesting it might/might consider a more broadly based approach to combatting the PKK that incorporated political, economic, and social elements.  Iran Trading PKK Aid for PJAK Ceasefire? ----------------------------------------  9.     (C) Leaning in and speaking softly, Talabani said Iran is helping the PKK.  Unspecified Iranian leaders had held a meeting to work out a new policy toward Kurdish insurgents, and recently had increased contact with the PKK and allowed its fighters greater freedom of movement and treatment in Iranian hospitals.  In return, the PKK allegedly halted PJAK activity against Iran.  Talabani claimed Tehran for the moment has no objection to PJAK remaining in place as long as attacks halt.  The President suggested Turkey should know this, as it demonstrates the consequences of "stalling" on a PKK resolution. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000107  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2023 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: FLEDGLING "NATIONAL PROJECT" SEEKS POLITICAL RELEVANCE  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (C) Summary: Billing their fledgling group as a broad-based CoR coalition that cuts across sectarian lines, organizers of the "National Project" told the media January 13 that they hope to attract as many as 145 CoR members from across Iraq's political spectrum with a common goal of fostering national reconciliation, backing up the Maliki government on Article 140 and oil/gas revenue distribution, and developing the ISF so as to "end all justifications for the continued presence of occupation forces."  Initial indications reveal, however, that "National Project" impresarios may have puffed the actual participation and that the new grouping is more a talking shop of marginal but ambitious political players, mostly Sunnis who feel isolated by the recent pact between the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) and the two leading Kurdish parties, than a juggernaut coalition on which Maliki can rely as he faces Kurdish threats to abandon support for his government.  End Summary.  Hold On, What's Our Name? -------------------------  2. (C) The new grouping was announced with as much fanfare as organizers Osama al-Najaifi of Iraqiyyah, Khalaf al-Alayan of the Sunni Iraqi National Dialogue Conference, and Abdel Karim al-Anazi of the Shia Dawa Tanzim could muster at a January 13 press conference.  The organizers told the media that they seek to build a broad-based movement that cuts across the Sunni-Shia divide to increase political participation and foster national reconciliation.  They said they support further development, training, and supply of the Iraqi Army so that it can quickly assume full security responsibility and "end all justifications for the continued presence of occupation forces."  They also said they wish to work with the GOI to develop a timetable for the departure of foreign forces from Iraq.  Al-Alayan issued a separate statement in which he said group organizers had met PM Maliki two days ago and pledged support for Maliki, now and even in a second PM term, as long as he continued to support the unity of Iraq and the equitable distribution of proceeds from Iraq's oil and gas resources (we read this as code for a stance against Kurdish demands on Article 140, Kirkuk, and gas/oil related issues).  An Embassy FSN who was present at the press conference said that when journalists asked the organizers for the name of this new grouping, they quickly huddled together in whispered conversation before announcing proudly that henceforth the group would be known as "the National Project" (al-Mashrua'al-Watani).  3. (C) Iraqiyyah's al-Najaifi told the media that the "National Project" plans to attract as many as 145 CoR members drawn from the parties of the three organizers, most of non-IIP Tawafuq, the Shia Fadhila Party and the Sadrists, and several small ethnic minority parties such as the Turkomen Front and a Yazidi party, thus making it a truly formidable alliance.  Closer examination reveals that, for now at least, "Project" impresarios may be overly optimistic or, at worst, downright disingenuous about their actual strength.  For example, the Secretary General of Najaifi's own Iraqiyyah party told us January 14 that she was unaware of the new grouping, and the CoR bloc leader of the Shia Fadhila Party told us with some irritation that "Project" organizers had falsely claimed that Fadhila and the Sadrists intended to join the new grouping.  He characterized the "National Project" not as a "coalition" but rather a "dialogue."  In a January 14 conversation, IIP deputy bloc leader Ayad Sammarai spoke in dismissive terms of the new grouping and told us it was not to be taken seriously.  We will monitor ongoing "National Project" formation and report any significant developments. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000111  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE FOR NEA/I, L JUSTICE FOR JOHN EULER  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: UPDATE ON GOI MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE ON RULE OF LAW AND DETENTION   ------- SUMMARY -------  1. (U) Summary.  Since its formal commissioning in mid-2007, the Ministerial Committee on Rule of Law and Detention (MCRLD) has made significant progress in the practical application of its operation.  MCRLD has ensured all relevant ministries are adequately represented, meaningful issues are identified and placed on the agenda, and it has developed a deliberative process for addressing problems associated with detainee processing.  In 2008, the leadership and the membership of the committee need to continue taking steps to ensure the committee becomes a genuine mechanism for accomplishing the goals set forth in Prime Ministerial Order 207 on detention operations. End Summary.  ---------------------- HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT ----------------------  2.  (U) In 2006, the Mission (Rule of Law Office) and MNF-I (Task Force 134) proposed the concept of an inter-ministerial committee to address detention operations.  The leaders of the Higher Juridical Council and the Ministries of Interior and Justice responded in a positive fashion to the concept. In 2007, the President of the Higher Juridical Council commissioned a previous committee to have the responsibility for identifying and addressing critical court related challenges in the management of Iraqi detainee populations. However, the previous group did not adequately represent the necessary ministries, nor did the members (with some exceptions) have sufficient authority to effect real change.  3.  (U) In mid-2007, the Prime Minister issued an order officially directing that this inter-ministerial committee be reorganized and re-commissioned to respond with practical proposals to remedy the numerous issues associated with the increasing size of the detainee population.  After a series of high-level discussions held in August 2007 between the Deputy Prime Minister, the National Security Advisor, and the President of the Higher Juridical Council, the Prime Minister issued Order No. 207 in September 2007.  (Comment: The text of the order is both motivational and directive.  It is motivational in that it articulates broad goals to which the Government of Iraq should aspire in its management of the detainee population.  It is directive in that it commissions particular ministries to engage in specific acts to meet clearly identified needs and interests with respect to detention operations.  End comment.)  ---------------- PRESENT ACTIVITY ----------------  4.  (U).  The MCRLD membership now includes relatively senior-level representatives of the Ministries of Defense, Interior, Health, Human Rights, Justice, and Labor & Social Affairs, as well as officials from the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, the Office of the National Security Advisor, and the Higher Juridical Council.  Chief Prosecutor Ghandanfer al-Jasem of the Higher Juridical Council serves as the chairman.  It also includes representatives of both the Mission and MNF-I who regularly attend the bi-weekly meetings.  5.  (U).  The principal detainee-related topics addressed by MCRLD include: medical issues; juvenile issues; women's issues; investigative issues; judicial issues; human rights issues; and corrections issues.  ------------------ CURRENT CHALLENGES ------------------  6.  (U).  Despite the progress made in the evolution of this committee, MCRLD has not yet pursued some of the key policy-related and strategic problems identified in Prime Ministerial Order No. 207.  With that in mind, the Rule of Law Coordinator sent Chairman Ghandanfar al-Jasem a letter re-identifying the principles in Prime Ministerial Order No. 207 and recommended that they form the basis for committee attention and activity in the first quarter of 2008. (Comment: As a procedural matter, we continue to encourage the Chair to make routine, substantive reports on its progress and on the challenges to the Ministerial Committee on National Security.  Furthermore, a year-end summary of accomplishments to the MCRLD leadership group (i.e. the Deputy Prime Minister, the National Security Advisor, and the President of the Higher Juridical Council) should be  considered.  End comment.)  ------- COMMENT -------  7.  (U).  The MCRLD appears to have overcome its initial organizational and administrative challenges.  It has the potential to become a meaningful forum for resolution of detention-related issues.  However, it must begin to address the critical, policy-related challenges codified in Prime Ministerial Order No. 207.  The Mission and MNF-I will continue to encourage the committee members to fashion the agendas to ensure the committee addresses those pivotal issues in 2008. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000117  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: S/I SATTERFIELD PRESSES IRAQI OFFICIALS ON BENCHMARK LEGISLATION IN JANUARY 2008  REF: A. BAGHDAD 85      B. BAGHDAD 91  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  Summary: In the days leading up to the passage of the Justice and Accountability Law on January 12, S/I Satterfield pressed the CoR leadership and other prominent leaders to reach agreement based upon a consensus that included Tawafuq leader VP Tariq al-Hashimi on the proposed amendments and pass the legislation as a key step towards national reconciliation.  Speaker Mashadani, however, called the vote up earlier than expected, thereby depriving VP Hashimi and the IIP of an opportunity to resolve several points of contention.  Satterfield also pressed for resolving differences on provincial powers legislation, elections, and the amnesty law, which are all moving at a much slower pace. PM Maliki has thus far failed to build broad support for his draft amnesty law, and it will likely be greeted in the CoR by a wave of proposed amendments.  End summary.  JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY LAW (AKA DE-BA'ATHIFICATION LAW) --------------------------------------------- --------------  2. (C) The Justice and Accountability Law (aka de'Ba'athification law) passed the CoR on January 12 (ref A).  Several days earlier, CoR Speaker Mashadani told S/I Satterfield that he suspected VP Hashimi might veto the legislation if the amendments from the De-Ba'athfication Committee were approved.  Others, such as Minister of Parliamentary Affairs Dr. Safa al-Safi and Deputy Speaker Sheikh Khalid Attiyah were more optimistic that VP Hashimi's differences could be resolved.  VP Hashimi told S/I Satterfield on January 13 that Speaker Mashadani promised to hold off the vote until Monday (January 14).  One of Hashimi's main points of contention in the hours leading up to the vote included Article 12 of the law (exemptions) and an amendment shifting the authority to approve exemptions from the Presidency Council to the CoR.   Now that the law has passed, Hashimi worries that Sunni Arabs serving in the Iraqi National Intelligence Service (INIS), most of whom never received formal exemptions under the previous de-Ba'athification system, will lose their jobs.  Satterfield strongly cautioned Hashimi against vetoing the bill.  Hashimi remained non-committal, although IIP bloc leader Ayyad al-Sammaraie subsequently told us that he was advising Hashimi not to veto unless President Talabani and VP Abdel Mehdi were prepared to join him in returning the bill to the CoR.  3. (C) In a meeting of the "three plus one" leaders (President Talabani, PM Maliki, VP Abdel Mehdi and VP Hashimi) January 13, Talabani told us that agreement was reached to send the bill back to the CoR for changes to "two or three points" upon which Hashimi had expressed objections.  (Comment:  Caution is advised as to whether the reported agreement in fact signals that the three plus one actually are committed to directing their CoR blocs to support changes in the law -- and what the likely reception from elements in the CoR opposed to the entire measure, notably the Sadrists, would be.  End comment.)  PROVINCIAL POWERS LEGISLATION -----------------------------  4. (C) The provincial powers legislation remains highly controversial, but was promised in the August 26 leaders' communiqu and is arguably the next most important piece of reconciliation legislation.  Control of the text rests in the hands of PM Maliki and Minister of Parliamentary Affairs Dr. Safa al-Safi, who also heads the PM's Committee on the Provincial Powers law.  In a meeting on January 9 with S/I Satterfield, Dr. Safa said ISCI is blaming him for delaying progress on this legislation, and confirmed that the Shura Council has taken the somewhat provocative step of declaring that the PMO's Draft as the only version of the law in play. (In a separate meeting, Speaker Mashadani said the CoR's Committee on Governorates and Regions had presented him a report protesting the Shura Council's decision to ignore the CoR Draft.)  5. (C) Hummam Hammoudi, Chair of the CoR's Constitutional Review Committee, identified three outstanding points of contention: control of security forces in emergencies, removing governors, and the appointment of district directors.  Hammoudi and Attiyah told Satterfield these differences would soon be resolved.  A meeting with VP Hashimi highlighted that IIP and the Tawafuq bloc have been kept out of the loop completely.  VP Hashimi complained to Satterfield he may propose the Presidency Council submit its own draft.  VP Hashimi favors strong government centralization, particularly in the area of national  BAGHDAD 00000117  002 OF 002   security, while most of the Tawafuq bloc favors decentralization on the legislation.  VP Hashimi and Sheikh Attiyah seem to be in agreement, however, that police and Iraqi security forces should remain at the federal level. Attiyah was not optimistic provincial powers legislation will move very quickly.  ELECTIONS ---------  6. (C) Dr. Safa al-Safi told S/I Satterfield the draft elections law is complete, but has not been presented yet to the Council of Ministers (CoM).  Dr. Safa, Deputy CoR Speaker Attiyah, and Hummam Hammoudi all told S/I Satterfield they support an open list (or at least a hybrid list) for provincial elections.  Safa emphasized, "people need to know who they are electing."  ISCI-heir apparent Amar al-Hakim (septel) was more circumspect, expressing concern to Satterfield that "careful study" was required to see whether changing to an open list would produce "chaos, in which all elements of society including tribal figures could be elected - without the capacity to govern effectively."  Attiyah said he has reservations because he has not seen the PMO's draft or been involved in any of the discussions.  He reviewed different approaches to provincial elections with Satterfield, highlighting some prior Lebanese provincial elections as models.  AMNESTY LAW -----------  7. (C) Dr. Safa said the amnesty law is with the Shura Council, but will be transmitted to the CoR quickly.  In response to a question regarding the PM's objectives on this legislation, he said, "the PM seriously supports amnesty." However, as the head of the PM Committee on this effort, he appears to be one of its only strong supporters.  Hammoudi and Sheikh Attiyah said they had not seen copies of the amnesty law, but Attiyah thought it was only for "show," estimating that it addressed no more than ten percent of detainees.  Hashimi also criticized the law, calling it "humiliating" and saying he would circulate his comments to the CoR regarding this legislation.  PROSPECTS FOR KEEPING THE LEGISLATIVE SESSION GOING --------------------------------------------- ------  8. (C) Speaker Mashadani and Deputy Speaker Attiyah were notably reluctant to push CoR members to work through the legislative recess scheduled for February, and Mashadani said the Kurds would oppose the idea.  Because the Presidency Council can also call for the CoR to work through the legislative recess, S/I Satterfield floated this idea with the three members of that Council: Hashimi was agreeable but not overly enthusiastic; Abdel Mahdi said it would be difficult (ref B); Talabani (like Maliki in a December 10 meeting with the Ambassador, Satterfield, and CG Petraeus) was supportive of the Presidency or three plus one calling for the CoR to remain at work (septel). CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000118  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: READOUT OF THE JANUARY 14 THREE PLUS ONE MEETING   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  (S) President Talabani provided the Ambassador with a readout of today's (January 14) meeting of the 3 1; we also received a readout from Vice President Hashimi's Chief of Staff.  The four leaders agreed to name themselves the Executive Council and to meet every Monday at 1000.  They established a secretariat headed by Naseer al-Ani and including Barham  SIPDIS Salih, Mowaffak Rubaie, and Hummam Hammoudi.  In addition, they adopted a set of principles drawn up by President Talabani and Vice President Abdel Mehdi.  They then agreed to jointly form the SOFA negotiation team and to finalize the members of the team during their next meeting.  The four agreed to reform the cabinet by reducing the number of ministers.  Hashimi presented Tawafuq's conditions for returning to the government, and the leaders agreed to work on the issues that led to Tawafuq's withdrawal with the goal of reaching resolution within a week.  Prime Minister Maliki agreed to rescind his executive order against the AWOL Tawaffuq ministers, allowing them to regain their perks of office.  The four agreed to sort out pending appointments of ambassadors, deputy ministers and senior military officials. Maliki and Hashimi agreed to hold a bilateral meeting later this week. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000126  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2018 TAGS: IZ, MARR, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PREF, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: BUDGET EXECUTION AND PRISON REFORM DOMINATE DISCUSSIONS AT WEEKLY MCNS  REF: BAGHDAD 57  BAGHDAD 00000126  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) SUMMARY: During the January 13 Ministerial Council on National Security (MCNS), National Security Advisor (NSA) Rubaie led a discussion about capital improvement budget execution problems in the Ministries of Defense, Interior, and Justice. Both the IntMin and acting JusMin acknowledged problems but noted improvements over FY2006 execution and briefed planned improvements. The acting JusMin also briefed problem areas within the prison system, noting the need for more prison space, additional guards, militia-free administration, and rehabilitative programs.  He expressed appreciation to the Multi-National Force in Iraq (MNF-I) for building additional prisons and training prison guards. The meeting concluded with a decision to name a MinInt general as the overall operational security force commander during nation-wide Ashura commemorations, honoring Hussein Ali, the Third Imam and sacred Shia martyr. END SUMMARY.  Budget Execution Problems -------------------------  2. (S). In an orderly and relatively productive MCNS, cabinet ministers--urged on relentlessly by National Security Advisor (NSA) Rubaie and FinMin Jabr --focused attention on problems with FY2007 budget execution by the security ministries. Repeatedly Rubaie asked Jabr to detail end-of-year statistics which showed Ministry of Defense (MOD) capital budget execution at just 10 percent, Ministry of Justice (MOJ) at 7 percent, and the Ministry of Interior (MOI) with a "last place" 1 percent. As they reeled through the data, it was obvious that Rubaie and Jabr had orchestrated a well-rehearsed production that seemed to have its intended effect.  Deeper Analysis ---------------  3. (S) Gone were Bolani's sharp retorts to Rubaie during the last MCNS regarding his unwillingness to present a monthly budget briefing (reftel); rather, he sat quietly, listened intently, and then offered several explanations for the poor performance.  He noted the security environment and lack of clear land ownership made building a new police station much more difficult than rebuilding a school, adding that many companies refuse security construction contracts. (Note: the Education Ministry executed about 30 percent of its capital budget authorization, End Note.) Another related problem, he explained, was the difficulty in exercising eminent domain for police stations and traffic control centers. In either case, without proof of MOI property ownership, the Finance Ministry would not release funds for capital improvements. Gaining a bit more traction, he pointed out that planning ministries like Finance--which are based primarily in Baghdad--had relatively simple capital investment issues; but country-wide ministries like Defense, Justice, and Interior had very complex capital improvement challenges.  4. (S) Acting Minister of Justice (JusMin) Safa al Safi concurred with Bolani's assessment and added that improvements to FY2008 performance would go hand-in-hand with development of more capable Iraqi construction companies to execute contracts. He also agreed that the government needed to solve the problem of property ownership--especially by ministries--before significant improvements occurred.  Performance Data Issues -----------------------  5. (S) FinMin Jabr admitted gaps and problems with the statistics. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), for example, did not report some foreign embassy construction in its capital expenditure data. The Education Ministry signed lots of contracts, but had yet to request release of funds from the Ministry of Finance (MOF). Defense and Interior did not include several multi-year projects. Most problematic, he said, was the failure of some ministries to report any fiscal data at all. Jabr proposed formation of a committee from the security ministries to study capital investment problems--including property ownership--and monitor contracting processes. He advocated concentrating his MOF resources on improving budget execution on the security,  BAGHDAD 00000126  002.2 OF 003   service, and key resource (i.e. oil) ministries.  Work to Be Done ---------------  6. (S) Noting that much hard work remained, Ambassador Crocker congratulated the ministers on significantly improving their performance over FY2006. He pointed out that the American people and their representatives would monitor how well the Iraqi government managed and executed its budget; improving GOI performance would consequently help U.S. Embassy and MNF-I programs.  7. (S) General Petraeus also offered congratulations to the ministers for improving their performance and noted their excellent analysis of the overall problem.  But he emphasized that the Iraqi "man-on-the-street" was not interested in why a problem existed, they wanted actions to fix it. General Petraeus agreed this work was hard but he urged them to work diligently to significantly improve their execution of FY2008 capital expenditures.  Prison Reform -------------  8. (S) Acting JusMin Safa al Safi briefed the MCNS on past problems in the MOJ-directed prison system including several successful escapes made with insider assistance. He acknowledged these problems but promised action. He said he will concentrate his efforts in three areas: infrastructure, administration, and rehabilitation.  Regarding infrastructure, he called overcrowding his most immediate problem and thanked MNF-I for building a new prison in Basrah, noting that Coalition Forces have agreed to help with two more in Nasiriyah and Karbala.  He expected to see improvements within the next month.  Administrative issues were more complex, he explained, because of the influence of militias within the guard force and management. Under the MOJ DG for Corrections, he said he would personally appoint a deputy director with high ethical values for each individual prison; he noted he had already begun the process. Additionally, he lamented the dearth of well-trained prison guards but again expressed appreciation to MNF-I for their training of over 50 new guards and their plans to train about 200 more in the next few months. He noted that rehabilitative efforts were not going as quickly as he hoped but noted the recent appointment of special inmate advisors.  He expressed hope that significant changes would occur within the next two or three months.  9. (S) The Acting JusMin gave special attention to Baddush prison near Mosul, where there have been significant problems.  He promised to press the investigation on recent escapes that were facilitated by prison guards and management.  JusMin Safa al Safi said the MOJ already knew most of the collaborators and expected arrests in the very near future. He noted that he was in close contact with the Ninawa (Mosul) Governor to provide additional prison guards who were not under militia influence or control.  10. (S) The Ambassador pulled the minister aside at the end of the meeting to stress that the removal of the Corrections DG Juma was necessary for a long term fix of the system. Safe said he understood this and a quick search is underway for a replacement. Finding some one with the requisite ability, integrity and courage would take time; in the meantime the new deputies would constrain him.  Ashura Commemoration and Security ---------------------------------  11. (S) NSA Rubaie briefed ministers on the general security plan for Ashura which will be observed this year on January 19. (Note: Ashura begins a 40-day holy period commemorating the battlefield death at Karbala of the Third Imam and sacred Shia martyr, Hussein Ali, grandson of Mohammed. End Note.) Rubaie pointed out the need for an overall operational commander since commemorations are spread throughout the Shia areas of Iraq, with Karbala as the destination for around 9 million people during the holy days.  IntMin Bolani suggested his deputy, saying that the MOI had the largest number of forces involved and a fully functional National Operations Center. Suggesting that time was an issue, NSA Rubaie agreed with the nomination of the Deputy IntMin.  General Petraeus  BAGHDAD 00000126  003.2 OF 003   suggested the final decision should have MinDef input, but MNF-I would fully support the MCNS nominee in order to have a single commander in place, responsible for all the security forces tasked against the Ashura mission.  (Note: MinDef Abdel Qadr is on an official visit to the U.S., end note.) CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000127  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/16/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: PRT KIRKUK: PROGRESS ON RECONCILIATION AS NEW ARAB DEPUTY GOVERNOR SWORN IN  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 4208      B. 07 BAGHDAD 4008  Classified By: Kirkuk PRT Leader Howard Keegan for Reasons 1.4 (b,d)   This is a Kirkuk Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1. (U) Summary:  Rakan Al-Jabouri assumed the office of Deputy Governor for Kirkuk Province on January 15.  Twenty out of 26 Provincial Council members voted in favor of Rakan while another six members submitted blank ballots.  The naming of an Arab Deputy Governor in the predominantly Kurdish province of Kirkuk is part of the agreement that in December ended the Arab Bloc's one-year boycott of the Provincial Council (represented by the Iraqi Republican Gathering) and is an important advancement in local reconciliation.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ------ Signs of Reconciliation:   Arab Assumes The Office Of Kirkuk Deputy Governor --------------------------------------------- ------  2. (U) On January 15, Rakan Al-Jabouri assumed the office of Deputy Governor for Kirkuk Province (aka Tameem province). Of 26 Provincial Council members present from the Kirkuk Brotherhood League (KBL) and the Iraqi Republican Gathering (IRG), 20 votes were cast in favor of Rakan while 6 members turned in blank ballots.  The event was widely publicized by local media.  Key speakers repeatedly noted and appreciated the efforts of the PRT in support of this historic moment. More than two hundred Iraqi citizens attended the event, including community and tribal leaders.  3.  (U) Chairman of the Provincial Council Rizgar Ali (KBL) remarked during the opening speech that the nomination of Rakan to the position of Deputy Governor was part of the KBL,s agreement with the IRG to end the year-long IRG boycott of the Provincial Council (reftels).  Rizgar remarked that the occasion symbolized their efforts to obtain a joint administration for Kirkuk Province.  Of note, he also expressed his desire that the reputation of Kirkuk Province "not be based on oil but on the various ethnic groups living in peace."  4. (U) Kirkuk Governor Mustafa also stressed the importance of the occasion. He emphasized the need for the Deputy Governor and all political leaders of the province to work together for the benefit of all the people of Kirkuk, without discrimination based on ethnicity or religion. The Governor joined other leaders calling on the Turkman Bloc to end their boycott and rejoin the political process (Note: The Turkman Bloc has been boycotting the Provincial Council for a year. The PRT is facilitating negotiations with the goal of bringing them back to the PC Chambers. End Note).  The Governor has long complained of the need for a Deputy Governor to assist him with his workload.  -------------------------------- Provincial Council Vote:    A Sign of Democracy In Action --------------------------------  5. (U) A Kirkuk judge was then introduced to supervise the vote of the Provincial Council members.  Chairman Rizgar symbolically appointed a representative from the KBL and the IRG to witness the vote tabulation.  These witnesses, both PC members, watched carefully as each ballot was retrieved from the transparent box and opened by the judge prior to being read aloud for all those present.  Upon completion of the vote tabulation, Rakan was sworn in as Deputy Governor by the presiding judge.  In his acceptance speech, Rakan thanked the Provincial Council for electing him as Deputy Governor, adding that he was honored by their vote.  Rakan echoed the sentiments expressed by Governor Mustafa for the Turkman Bloc to end their boycott and return to the Provincial Council.  6. (U) KBL bloc leader Mohammad Kamal congratulated Deputy Governor Rakan, emphasizing the importance of upholding the Iraqi Constitution, including the implementation of Article 140.  A representative of the Arab Bloc, Abdullah Sami, also congratulated Deputy Governor Rakan and said he prayed that the problems of Kirkuk Province be solved through peaceful means.  Abdullah Sami urged the Deputy Governor to treat everyone fairly, without distinction of ethnicity.  ------- Comment -------  7. (SBU) While an important advancement toward  BAGHDAD 00000127  002 OF 002   reconciliation, especially in light of Article 140 considerations, the new Deputy Governor must walk a fine line in future months.  The naming of an Arab Deputy Governor in Kirkuk Province was a difficult feat that came about only after months of negotiations between the KBL and the IRG and much encouragement and guidance provided by the PRT.  While the PRT considers this an advancement towards reconciliation, Rakan will have to walk a fine line between appeasing the approximately 50 percent Kurdish majority while also addressing the issues of interest to the approximately 30 percent Arab population, namely employment generation and the addressing the shortage of basic services in the rural areas of the province.  8. (SBU) The PRT envisions the Deputy Governor,s portfolio will include security as an important component.  The IRG and other Arab leaders have long sought to address several security issues, including the return of Kirkuk Province Arab detainees to Kirkuk Province as well as speedier trials for those detained.  Given that Deputy Governor Rakan is from the Haweja District (one of the key Arab areas in western Kirkuk), he is expected to use his influence to help stabilize the security in the Arab areas. The next step in local reconciliation is to get the Turkman Bloc back on the Provincial Council.  They have been boycotting it for a year.  During her recent visit the Secretary urged them to end the boycott and the PRT is facilitating negotiations.  In the negotiations, the main outstanding issues involve reconciling Turkman bloc proposals on such issues as making Turkmani an official language in Kirkuk and allocation of key government positions, including 32% of directors general slots in Kirkuk, with what the KBL is willing to concede.  End Comment. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000132  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/17/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI VICE PRESIDENTS HASHIMI AND ABDEL MEHDI ON JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY LAW, GOVERNANCE ISSUES  REF: BAGHDAD 117  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  ------- Summary -------  1.  (S) During a January 16 meeting, the Ambassador urged Vice President Hashimi to support early Presidency Council approval of a Justice and Accountability law (de-Baath), recently approved by the Iraqi Council of Representatives (CoR).  While not committing to a specific course of action, he identified several problematic articles in the law that required amendment by the CoR.  Hashimi sought to assure the Ambassador that the CoR could make these small technical amendments without reopening the bill for further debate and could be signed into law "within two weeks." His concerns, he stated, were also shared by President Talabani and Vice President Abdel Mahdi.  On Tawafuq's possible return to government, Hashimi said the Deputies Preparatory Committee, now doubling as the Secretariat for the 3-plus-1 process, was assigned the task of negotiating a deal to bring the Sunnis back to government -- a decision he interpreted as a stalling tactic by the PM.  In a brief discussion on amnesty legislation, detainees, Chemical Ali, and upcoming talks to frame the long-term U.S.-Iraq relationship, Hashimi noted the imperative of a broad amnesty and queried on U.S. plans for Coalition detainee releases once Chapter VII authority expires.  In a subsequent January 16 meeting, Vice President Adel Abdel Mehdi told the Ambassador that Hashimi's positions were his own, not those of the other Presidency Council members.  Hashimi's views on the de-Baath law, for example, did not reflect the views of President Talabani or Abdel Mehdi.  He said he would urge Hashimi to sign the de-Baath law in its current form, and press Parliament to make changes thereafter.  End summary.  2.  (SBU) The Ambassador was joined in the 90-minute meeting by NSC Senior Director for Iraq and Afghanistan, Brett McGurk, Special Assistant Ali Khedery, and Poloff (note-taker).  Under Secretary for Economic, Energy, and Agriculture Affairs Reuben Jeffery, E staff members, and Econoffs subsequently joined the meeting (septel).  VP Hashimi was joined by his Chief of Staff and by Political Advisor Dr. Khalil al-Issawi.  --------------------------------------- Justice and Accountability Law Hold-up? ---------------------------------------  3.  (S) Responding to the Ambassador's strong call for prompt signature by the Presidency Council of the Justice and Accountability Law (de-Baath), Vice President Hashimi voiced his concerns about several items that he hinted would prevent him from signing the law.  Hashimi confirmed that the law had been forwarded to the Council on January 15 and that the Council had ten days in which to act.  Hashimi referred to his objections raised in an earlier meeting with S/I Satterfield (reftel), particularly the issue of exemptions for Iraqi National Intelligence Service staff, and the question of Presidency Council involvement in such exemptions, per Article 12 of the law.  Hashimi warned that the law, as currently drafted, was insufficient to ensure reconciliation between the major political and religious groups.  The Ambassador assured Hashimi that the U.S. would watch closely to see that the law is implemented in a manner consistent with the spirit of reconciliation, including on the issues raised by the Iraqi Vice President.  Hashimi asserted that he was not alone among the Presidency Council members in his desire to see the law returned to Parliament for amendment; President Talabani, he said, was upset that "his instructions (on Article 12) were not followed." Hashimi said returning the bill was not a "veto," but rather a chance for technical fixes.  These "fixes" could be completed in "less than two weeks," he said, since the CoR would only review three specific items, not the entire bill. In addition to Article 12, Hashimi complained of language vilifying the Baath Party and criminalizing "Baathist thinking," which he believed would be abused and which ran counter to the spirit of reconciliation.  The Vice President appeared unconvinced by arguments that returning the bill to Parliament would be seen as a political set-back and could jeopardize passage of the bill -- a bill many Sunnis voted for and saw as a positive step.  -------------------------------------------- Tawafuq Front -- Deputies to Work Out a Deal --------------------------------------------  4.  (S) On the issue of Tawafuq's possible return to government, Hashimi confirmed reports that the issue was now  BAGHDAD 00000132  002 OF 003   being addressed by the Deputies Preparatory Committee, the same group that will also serve as Secretariat to the recently revitalized 3-plus-1 process.  Hashimi said he wrote to Maliki about this decision, and questioned aloud why the PM would delegate the issue to the Deputies, since the matter could be addressed "in a few hours," if Maliki were genuinely interested in reaching a deal.  Hashimi believed it would take weeks for the Deputies to be brought up to speed on the various talks and understandings reached between Tawafuq and the PM's office since the Sunni walkout from government on August 1, 2007.  The Vice President sought Embassy assistance in pressing Maliki to finalize a deal to bring the Sunnis back to government by the time of next week's 3-plus-1 meeting.  After that deal is done, he said, we will discuss the PM's expected proposals for reducing the size of the Cabinet.  "This is the last chance," he said; "We can't tolerate this stagnation forever -- the PM must make a decision soon."  The Tawafuq Front needs "something tangible" (from Maliki) to convince its constituents that the decision to leave, and later return to government was logical and justifiable.  Hashimi noted that his Deputy, Ayad al-Samaraie, met with Maliki shortly after the 3-plus-1 meeting on January 14, at which Tawafuq's return was discussed, but the PM offered nothing specific on Sunni demands, only promises that Sunni complaints would be addressed once Tawafuq was back in government.  --------------------------------------------- ---- Amnesty Law, Strategic Partnership, and Prisoners --------------------------------------------- ----  5.  (S) Hashimi said he received the government's draft amnesty law two days earlier, and had made comments on the draft.  The text, he complained, had numerous legal restrictions that rendered the proposed amnesty too narrow. The Ambassador rejoined that PM Maliki had described to him several times his intention to make the amnesty a general one.  Hashimi questioned the PM's motives, noting that an amnesty would have to be wide and generous to have a significant political impact.  The VP reminded the Ambassador of the need to consider amnesty for Coalition detainees, and queried how detainees would be dealt with one Chapter VII authority for the Coalition expires at the end of 2008.  The VP's Chief of Staff questioned how the Coalition would transfer detainees, particularly high-value detainees, to Iraqi control if Iraqi prisons remained in the deplorable state they are in.  The Ambassador acknowledged the point, assured USG interest in ensuring basic human rights were protected for detainees, and that the issue would be among those topics discussed in talks to finalize a long-term strategic relationship.  6.  (S) Following up on the topic of high-value detainees, the Ambassador encouraged the Iraqi leadership to negotiate resolution of the case of Chemical Ali and his senior deputies who remain in Coalition custody pending resolution of the dispute over their executions.  The case required an Iraqi solution, he asserted, and the U.S. would not put itself in the position of acting as Iraq's Supreme Court in light of differing legal interpretations on next steps.  The Ambassador pushed back on Hashimi's suggestion that the United Nations act as arbiter on the case, arguing the need for Iraqi leaders to solve the dispute themselves.  --------------------------------------- VP Abdel Mahdi on De-Baath Law, Hashimi ---------------------------------------  7.  (S) In a subsequent January 16 meeting, Vice President Adel Abdel Mehdi told the Ambassador that Hashimi had not shared his views with him and President Talabani at their recent Presidency Council meeting and that Hashimi's position was not that of the Presidency Council.  He expressed dismay that Hashimi had taken the position described to the Ambassador after Tawafuq was given "every opportunity to study and comment on the bill," and after many of Tawafuq's COR members voted to pass the bill.  Abdel Mehdi agreed with the Ambassador that the bill should not be sent back unsigned to the COR for modification, stating that there was no guarantee the COR would ever send back an approved bill and that the Sadrists and others might use the opportunity to dig in their heels on passage.  He proposed instead that Hashimi sign the bill and request the COR to make changes thereafter.  Abdel Mehdi told the Ambassador that he would urge this approach when discussing the matter with Hashimi and Talabani, noting there was still time to iron this out since his office had not yet received the bill from the COR (according to Iraqi law, the Presidency Council must sign an enacted bill within 10 days of date of receipt and not date of COR enactment).  On an unrelated note, Abdel Mehdi said the Sadrists had left the GOI Political Council for National Security.  BAGHDAD 00000132  003 OF 003    8. (S) The Ambassador subsequently spoke with President Talabani, who had already been contacted by Abdel Mehdi. Talabani echoed his comments, saying that any effort to amend the bill would be dangerously counterproductive.  He said he and Abdel Mehdi would meet with Hashimi Jan 18 or 19. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000133  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/16/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: S/I SATTERFIELD AND FM ZEBARI DISCUSS THE UPCOMING DIPLOMATIC AGENDA FOR EARLY 2008  REF: BAGHDAD 118  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d)  1. (C) Summary.  S/I Satterfield, White House Senior Director for Iraq and Afghanistan Brett McGurk, and PolCouns discussed with Hosyhar Zebari on January 16 the recent 3 plus 1 meetings earlier in the week and plans for negotiating the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).  Zebari said the composition of the team is still being decided, but expects it will be comprised of a political/leadership committee, a steering committee, and a technical team.  Zebari also talked about his recent travels to Egypt, commenting that President Mubarak is open to exploring the issue of reopening an embassy in Iraq.  There are tentative plans for an expanded Neighbors Ministerial in Kuwait in April, with working group and preparatory meetings scheduled as early as February. Zebari said the Turks recently sent a dipnote regarding their concerns that wounded PKK members are being treated in Irbil hospitals, and relayed to Satterfield he is investigating the issue.  Zebari said the GOI is ready to transfer $8 million in funding to support Iraqi refugees in Jordan via the GOJ to the United Nations High Commission on Refugees (UNHCR) shortly.  Zebari told Satterfield "ignoring" Iran right now is the best posture given the lack of response from Iran on joint talks.  End summary.  3 PLUS 1 MEETING AND SOFA NEGOTIATIONS --------------------------------------  2. (C) S/I Satterfield asked Hoshyar Zebari in a meeting January 16 the next steps discussed in the 3 plus 1 meeting (ref A) earlier in the week, particularly on moving forward on the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).  Hoshyar responded that this issue was discussed in the 3 plus 1 meeting, commenting the composition of the SOFA delegation will be discussed in the near future.  He commented, however, the plan is to have three tiers.  First there would be a leadership committee or executive team.  Then a steering committee, which includes ministries of Defense, Interior, Foreign Affairs, and others.  A technical team, Zebari added, would be led by one of the GOI's top legal advisors.  Zebari promised to provide the USG with a list as these details are finalized.  Zebari also promised to provide the USG with a single GOI point of contact for the negotiations, which is still under discussion.  Satterfield told Zebari Ambassador Crocker will be the USG main point of contact in country, and that a Washington Coordinator for the SOFA will be named.  3. (C)  Comment:  McGurk notes that Zebari's description of the Iraqi negotiating team is similiar, but different in key respects to outlines discussed by other interlocutors, including Mowaffak Rubaie.  The Rubaie plan, which Rubaie said the Prime Minister supports, will have a top "umbrella" tier of "political leaders" including bloc leaders such as Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim, to ensure the process is building consensus throughout.  Rubaie also said three technical negotiating teams will be formed under a second tier "steering group" -- which sounds similiar to Zebari's outline -- to focus on the economic, diplomatic, and political spheres of a strategic framework agreement.  Rubaie finally recommended that the USG plan to begin negotiations no earlier than the third week in February, and to focus in the early weeks on the broad strategic outlines of the bilateral relationship.  Vice President Adil Abd al-Mahdi told McGurk and Ambassador Crocker on January 16 (septel) that the negotiating structure has been delegated to the secretariat group of the 3 plus 1, which should produce a draft in a week.  All in all, while the Iraqi negotiating structure is still being developed, key interlocutors and leaders have clearly received the message that we will not do business the way the Declaration of Principles and the UNSCR renewal negotiations were handled -- when the Iraqi negotiating team was almost entirely the Prime Minister's advisory corps.  End comment.  4. (C) Zebari said pressure needs to be maintained on PM Maliki going into the SOFA negotiations.  He added, "Maliki should not be left under the impression he is indispensable," commenting that he shot down earlier in the day an idea of PM Maliki seeking $124 million for a Special Forces Brigade to protect the IZ.  Zebari emphasized, "I killed this idea." Zebari also complained about the prior dealings with the Prime Minister's staff on the Declaration of Principles, emphasizing his strong support for the USG's position that it would only negotiate with a broadly-based and representative GOI team, rather than just the PM's Office.  OUTREACH TO ARAB NEIGHBORS, NEIGHBORS CONFERENCE --------------------------------------------- ---   BAGHDAD 00000133  002 OF 002   5. (C) Zebari is actively reaching out to Iraqi's Arab neighbors, and discussed his recent trip to Cairo and meetings with President Hosni Mubarak.  Mubarak told him the situation in Iraq is improving, and encouraged more partnership on reconciliation efforts.  Zebari said Mubarak promised to send a "team" to Baghdad to explore the issue of re-opening an embassy.  Zebari added Mubarak is still cautious, however, given the assassination of former Egyptian envoy to Iraq Ihab al-Sharif in 2005.  He said the GOE had asked for any information related to Sharif's assassination and asked if the USG had any background information.  Zebari also raised the importance of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia opening their embassies.  6. (C) Zebari talked about the GOI's plans for a neighbor's ministerial.  He told Satterfield that he received a positive response from UNAMI to set a date in the last half of February for the working groups, followed by a preparatory group meeting.  This is expected to be followed by an expanded ministerial in Kuwait in April.  Zebari told Satterfield the GOI is pressing to move the time up.  Zebari said Turkey, Syria, Iran, Kuwait, Jordan, and Bahrain were all assured of attending the expanded ministerial in Kuwait, but envisioned problems with Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Satterfield responded it would be better to hold the expanded ministerial in Kuwait earlier than April, but at a minimum the dates for the series of neighbors' meetings should be locked in in advance of March U.S. Congressional hearings.  TURKEY ------  7. (C) Zebari highlighted to Satterfield that Turkey just sent a dipnote regarding accusations by the Turks that wounded PKK members are being treated in hospitals in Irbil. Zebari noted, "I wrote back to the Turks that the issue needs to be investigated."  He added, "We do not know who they are."  Satterfield talked about his meeting with the Turkish Ambassador earlier in the day where this same issue came up, commenting that more information is needed as well before the USG will raise the issue with the KRG.  The second item Satterfield raised was that President Masoud Barzani recently made a statement during the visit of Italian Foreign Minister Giovanni Vernetti that seemed to back away from GOI designation of what qualifies as a terrorist group.  Zebari was unfamiliar with the statement, but said he is encouraging a political solution with Turkey rather than kinetic over the PKK issue.  IRAQI REFUGEES IN JORDAN, DE-BA'ATH LAW, IRAN ---------------------------------------------  8. (C) S/I Satterfield pressed Zebari on the promise of $8 million that the GOI is to provide for Iraqi refugees living in Jordan.  Zebari responded he was prepared to deliver the money to the GOJ which could then, even in the same ceremony, deliver the money to the United Nations High Committee on Refugees (UNHCR).  PolCouns asked Zebari whether the recent passage of the Justice and Accountability Law would impact any of his employees.  Zebari responded, there is no impact on the MFA or concerns.  9. (C) Satterfield also told Zebari the U.S. is waiting to hear from Iran on the joint talks.  Zebari commented that the GOI agreed to a date, but then the Iranians backed down.  He added, "They are not in a hurry."  "The best thing to do with the Iranians right now," Zebari said, "is to ignore them. That is the only thing they understand." CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000134  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2018 TAGS: IP, IR, PGOV SUBJECT: PRT MAYSAN: JAM PREPARING FOR CF STRIKES  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d).  1.  (U) This is a Maysan PRT reporting cable.  2.  (S) Summary: PRT heard claims on January 7 that Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) is making active preparations to counter any possible Coalition Force (CF) operations in Maysan province. A young engineer, who accompanied the Maysan Director General (DG) for Education for a meeting on project proposals, alleged in a side-conversation that JAM was prepositioning weapons, laying IEDs, and setting up helicopter defenses. The engineer commented on a breakdown of rule of law in Maysan, citing the reluctance of traffic police to issue citations on Dijla Street, the location of the 12 December bombings. End Summary.  3.  (S) In a private conversation on the margins of a meeting with the Maysan DG for education, the PRT Bilingual-Bicultural Advisor (BBA) asked about the security situation in Maysan and the prospects of the PRT visiting al-Amarah.  Engineer Dyaa Hameen Abd al-Wahid, who accompanied the DG to meet with the PRT, claimed that it was common knowledge that JAM is preparing for a CF attack in the province.  He said that they were waiting for a CF attack and preparing defenses along roads to defeat entering convoys. He reported that JAM expected that Blackwater elements would be a part of the entering force and noted that the Maysanis are strongly against such "al-Quwat al-Qadhera" or "Dirty Forces".  4.  (S) Wahid indicated that active preparations are ongoing, including the procurement and pre-positioning of rocket propelled grenades (RPGs), mortars, improvised explosive devices (IEDs).  He said that many people have been involved, including women, and that they expect a CF attack imminently.  Wahid added that four-barreled "Doushka" anti-aircraft artillery guns have been brought in from the marshes to defend against helicopter assaults.  5.  (S) On rule of law, Wahid observed that the government and the police do not control the city and are afraid to enforce even traffic infractions.  As an example, he noted that Dijla Street is crowded again in the wake of the December 12 bombing.  Drivers speed with impunity and the traffic police are afraid to blow their whistles and issue citations.  He explained that the police fear retribution by offenders and their tribes, knowing in advance that the government and police will not protect them.  6.  (S) Comment: This was our first meeting with this interlocutor and his statements on JAM preparations may have been intended to impress as much as inform.  Nevertheless, his statements are consistent with other reporting and we believe that JAM is indeed skittish about a possible CF incursion.  We also believe that given heavy media coverage of recent incidents Maysanis are deeply suspicious of private security companies.  End Comment. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000135  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/17/2018 TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, EAID, KIRF, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA CHRISTIANS DISCUSS NINEVEH PLAIN GOALS WITH CODEL WOLF  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 3488  Classified By: DEPUTY POLITICAL COUNSELOR ELLEN GERMAIN FOR REASONS 1.4  (B) AND (D).  1. (C) At the Ninewa PRT, Christian leaders representing parties including the Assyrian Democratic Movement (ADM) and the Assyrian Patriotic Party (APP) expressed general consensus to CODEL Wolf (Rep. Frank Wolf (R-VA) and Rep. Joseph Pitts (R-PA)) January 3 on forming a Christian, self-governed area in the Nineveh Plain -- while acknowledging there were different visions for implementing self-governance.  (Note: The ADM party in June 2007 released a statement calling their right to establish a self-administered unit in the Nineveh Plain a part of "executing and practicing Article 125 of the Constititution." Article 125 of the Iraqi Constitution outlines the guarantee of "the administrative, political, cultural, and educational rights of the various nationalities, such as Turkomen, Chaldeans, Assyrians, and all other constituents." End note.) They told the CODEL there was no consensus among the at least 28 different Christian political parties in Iraq on whether a self-governed area should fall under the Kurdistan Regional Government's (KRG) authority or report to the central government.  One ADM representative complained that Kurdish tribes had appropriated a lot of Christian land within the Kurdistan Region. (Comment: The ADM has envisioned an autonomously administered Christian region reporting to the central government, while the APP has supported the idea of Christian self-governance under KRG authority. End Comment.)  2. (C) The leaders, including Basim Bello, Chairman of the ADM and the Mayor of Tel Kaif District in northern Ninewa, and Ninewa Provincial Council (PC) members Evlin Anwar Oraha (ADM) and Basima Isa Sulayman of the Iraqi Communist Party (ICP), a third ADM representative, and two APP members argued the Ninewa Provincial Council (PC) -- rather than other institutions like churches -- should decide how to spend the 10 million dollars in aid that the U.S. Congress has earmarked for assisting religious minorities in the Nineveh Plain area.  They noted that 4 out of 41 members of the Ninewa PC were Christian, and there were also many Christian representatives in the local District Advisory Councils who had experience with distributing aid.  (Comment:  Iraqi Christian religious leaders have publicly expressed skepticism regarding plans to create an autonomously administered Christian region, arguing that Christians should be able to live amongst Muslims, without being isolated in one area.  Therefore, Christian political leaders sometimes represent a different "Christian" agenda than religious leaders and would likely want to avoid empowering the churches by distributing aid through them. End comment.) Rep. Wolf told the leaders that they should provide their inputs to PRT Ninewa and U.S. officials who would coordinate the assistance.  3. (C) The CODEL solicited the leaders' specific anecdotes about anti-Christian persecution.  The leaders did not provide such anecdotes, but rather focused on communicating their concerns about the rise of nationalism within regions, political disunity amongst Christians, the demographic impact of continued Iraqi Christian emigration, and the Islamic basis for laws and the Constitution.  For example, Mayor Bello complained that minorities living in Ninewa had been deprived of their political rights since Iraq was established and they hope for self rule in both Ninewa and in the Kurdistan Region where there are approximately 120 Christian villages.  Rep. Wolf told the leaders he hoped that U.S. assistance would start building mechanisms for solutions; however, the assistance itself would not resolve the issues they raised.  Rep. Wolf also expressed his support for creating a State Department point-person to monitor the Christians' situation, noting this would be an individual the Christian communities could reach out to in order to ensure their concerns are heard.  4. (U) CODEL Wolf did not have an opportunity to clear this cable. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000141  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE FOR NEA/I, INL/I JUSTICE FOR TERRY BARTLETT  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/18/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQ CORRECTIONS SYSTEM PROBLEMS  Classified By: ROL Coordinator Philip H. Lynch for reasons 1.4 (b)&(d).  ------- SUMMARY ------- 1.(C) Summary.  The historical record of corruption within the Iraqi Corrections Service (ICS) is well documented.  Two primary examples of this corruption are the recurring problems associated with the prisons located at Rusafa and Baddush.  Post has engaged with officials of the Ministry of Justice to discuss remedial actions and set forth proposals designed to accomplish some quantifiable changes within the ICS.  End Summary.  ---------------------- HISTORICAL INFORMATION ----------------------  2.(SBU) The history of corruption within the ICS is evidenced by the recurring escapes, mostly non-violent, from corrections facilities throughout Iraq.  However, two key facilities in Rusafa and Baddush have received the most focus based on the number and recency of events.  To the extent investigations or assessments of the circumstances were conducted, they each indicated strong, if not irrefutable evidence that officers and employees of the ICS were directly or indirectly involved in the actions that were necessary to facilitate the unauthorized releases detailed below.  -------------------------------- RUSAFA PRISON (BAGHDAD PROVINCE) --------------------------------  3.(U) On June 11, 2006, six pretrial detainees were transported to the facility from the Major Crimes Unit.  The group included five members of a so-called Shia death squad and a Sunni kidnap victim (believed to be the intended victim of that squad).  On August 10, 2006, based on a tip from the Major Crimes Task Force, it was confirmed that the five Shia death squad members were no longer in the custody of the ICS.  This incident was never reported by the Ministry of Justice (MOJ).  4.(U) On October 11, 2006, as a group of guards transferred five Sunni inmates to another facility, they came under attack by suspected JAM members.  One the prisoners hid from the attackers, but the other four were captured by the JAM group and were presumably killed.  5.(U) On November 22, 2006, three Shia prisoners on death row at the Isktbarat Prison were picked up by a transportation officer for movement to the Rusafa Prison.  The transportation officer presented what was later determined to be a fraudulent judicial document indicating the three prisoners were going to be retried.  Neither the officer nor the three prisoners ever arrived at the Rusafa facility.  6.(U) On November 12, 2007, four prisoners on death row at the Isktbarat Prison were moved to the Rusafa Prison based upon a fraudulent judicial order indicating that they were to appear in court for resentencing.  Following their arrival at Rusafa, the four inmates were moved by an assistant warden from a high security compound to the medical unit.  The assistant warden then enabled the escape by dismissing the corrections officer in his company and leaving the prison with the inmates.  -------------------------------- BADDUSH PRISON (NINEWA PROVINCE) --------------------------------  7.(U) On December 9, 2006, a supervisor at the prison presented a document directing that Ayman Sabawai Ibrahim al-Nasiry, Saddam Hussein's nephew, be transferred from one unit to another.  Instead, the two proceeded to the main gate, where an unidentified man wearing an Iraqi Police Officer uniform presented a second document that ordered that Ayman be taken to another corrections facility in Tikrit. All three left the prison in a car waiting at the front gate and were not heard from again.  8.(U) On March 6, 2007, some 15 vehicles with as many as 40 armed insurgents attacked and overtook a checkpoint immediately outside of the Baddush Prison.  The insurgents persuaded the guards to give them access through the main gate.  Once inside, the insurgents proceeded to two different compounds, identified and took custody of 12 Iraqi and 56 foreign inmates-all of whom had been convicted of terrorist related crimes.  The entire group of inmates and insurgents escaped and drove northeast towards the Syrian border.  9.(U) In September 2007, an inspection of the prison was conducted based upon continuing concerns that the prisoners-not the guards-were actually in control of the prison.  The inspection of all inmates and their cells uncovered more than 200 deadly weapons, including knives, axes, shanks and picks.  Additionally, more than fifty cellular telephones, a variety of illegal narcotics, and some anti-American literature was discovered.  10.(U) On November 25, 2007, 60 prisoners were scheduled for transfer from the Baddush Prison to Ft. Suse Prison, in a "round robin" movement of inmates among several facilities. While enroute from the Baddush site to the airfield in Mosul, the group's vehicle convoy was attacked by small arms fire and rocket propelled grenades.  During the attack, three prisoners-all unshackled and with their blindfolds removed (presumably by the guards responsible for their custody)-escaped from the convoy.  11.(U) In the wake of the numerous escapes at the Baddush prison, the warden of the facility was taken into and remains in the custody of MNF-I as a security detainee.  His detention is based on the premise that he poses a quantifiable threat to public safety and coalition forces.  ------------------------------------------ ENGAGEMENTS WITH GOI CORRECTIONS OFFICIALS ------------------------------------------  12.(U) During the past 18 months, representatives of the Rule of Law community - including the Senior Advisor to the Ministry of Justice, the Senior Consultant for the International Criminal Investigative Training & Assistance Program (ICITAP), and the Rule of Law Coordinator-have met with MOJ officials to confirm for them the facts related to these escapes and to push for GOI action.  13.(C) The most recent meetings with the Minister of Justice occurred on December 2 and 13, 2007.  The Minister made very strong comments regarding the seriousness and level of corruption within the ICS, and in fact proposed numerous remedial actions that he intends to take in response to these events, including replacing and/or transferring wardens and guards, establishing committees, and appointing new leadership at the highest levels of the ICS.  However, while he acknowledged the existence and prevalence of corruption within the ICS, the Minister does not want "Americans to interfere" in ICS affairs.  (Comment: Only time will tell if the Minister's actions will speak as loudly as his words.  It seems that he understands the ICS needs to change, but whether any change will result from his proposed actions remains to be seen.  End comment.)  14.(SBU) We have recommended several actions to the GOI to address the problems described in this cable including the appointment of a professional technocrat-type Minister of Justice who has experience with corrections issues and will make reform an immediate priority; the appointment of new Director General of Corrections by the new or current Minister of Justice who has the authority to make immediate and broad changes-including the termination of corrupt guards within the ICS; the termination of more than three hundred corrections officers at Baddush prison for their involvement in the escapes at that location over the past 18 months; timely and thorough investigations all prisoner escapes to identify the responsible persons within the ICS; and the establishment of effective and universal training of Iraqi Corrections Officers on fundamental techniques and professional corrections practices-including training on human rights, operational efficiencies, and non-sectarian conduct.  ------- COMMENT -------  15.(C) The widespread corruption within the ICS at locations such as Rusafa and Baddush demonstrate the need for the GOI to take prompt actions to remedy the state of corrections within Iraq.  Without enactment of key reforms, such as those proposed above, it is unlikely the ICS will evolve into a professional and modern system that critical to the future of the nation built upon the rule of law. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000142  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: PRT ANBAR: PROVINCIAL COUNCIL MEMBERS MOVE AGAINST "AWAKENING COUNCIL" POLICE CHIEF  Classified By: PRT Anbar Team Leader James Soriano for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (U) This is a PRT Anbar reporting cable.  2. (C) Summary:  Several key members of the Anbar Provincial Council (PC) have moved to end the tenure of interim Provincial Chief of Police (PCOP) Tariq Yousif within a month, signaling the latest round in the struggle for the highly-contested Anbar top cop position between the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP)-dominated PC and the Iraq Awakening Movement, or Sahawa al Iraq (SAI).  Tariq is described as a professional law enforcement officer, but his association with SAI puts him at odds with the IIP.  Some members accused Tariq of not doing enough to stop terrorist infiltration of the police force, drug use among police and allowing for corruption.  None of the accusations were substantiated. After the meeting, Tariq told us he still wanted to continue in his position but that the PC plans to choose a new PCOP from a list of three other candidates.  The struggle between IIP and SAI over the PCOP slot shows that security is still a core Anbari concern.  End Summary.  POLITICAL BATTLE FOR THE ANBAR POLICE CHIEF -------------------------------------------  3. (U) At a November 14 Provincial Council (PC) meeting in Ramadi, several PC members moved unofficially to terminate the tenure of interim Provincial Chief of Police (PCOP) Major General Tariq Yousif within a month, signaling the latest round in the struggle for the highly-contested Anbar top cop position between the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP), which controls the PC, and Sheikh Ahmad Abu Risha's &Iraq Awakening Movement,8 (SAI), which has sought to wrest more power on provincial administration for itself.  4. (U) The SAI-backed Tariq was named interim PCOP in October 2007, when SAI managed to oust the previous IIP-backed police chief but was unable to garner enough support to give Tariq the job outright.  At the time, the PC voted to approve Tariq on an interim basis.  5. (C) Tariq is described by his supporters as a professional law enforcement officer who fought to rid Ramadi of terrorists.  He previously served as SAI's chief of security and held the title of Deputy Minister of Interior for Police Affairs in Anbar and Salahadin provinces.  But his association with SAI puts him at odds with the IIP.  &Very few of us support giving this position permanently to Tariq,8 PC Chair Abdulsalam Abdullah has told us.  ACCUSATIONS -----------  6. (U) The move to limit Tariq's term did not come to a vote, but several PC members, including PC Chairman Abdulsalam indicated that this was their intention at the January 14 meeting.  7. (U)  Some members accused Tariq ) who was summoned to attend ) of not doing enough to stop alleged drug use and terrorist infiltration of the police force, and for winking at corruption.  Accusers also complained that Anbar's police had become too divided among tribal lines, with some police stations and districts controlled almost exclusively by certain tribes.  Tariq responded that he is working to make the police force less reliant on tribal loyalties.  8. (U) None of the accusations were substantiated, and even PC Chair Abdulsalam came to Tariq's defense, saying the accusations were too vague.  Nevertheless, Abdulsalam and several of Tariq's accusers agreed that his interim tenure should end in a month, at which time the PC would decide who they believe should replace him from a list of three other candidates.  OTHER NOMINEES --------------  9. (C) After the meeting, Tariq told us he still wanted to continue as PCOP, and that he thought he had enough support within SAI and among other PC members to stay on.  He called the accusations politically motivated.  Tariq said he suspected his tenure will be high on the agenda for the next PC meeting, scheduled for January 29.  According to SAI, their movement has nine members on the 49-member body.  Most the rest are IIP.  10. (C)  The PC plans to choose a new PCOP among a list of three other candidates, including Major General Riyadh Abbas Latif al-Jabburi, an IIP candidate, and Brigadier General Hatim Abd al-Karim al-Muajill, an SAI candidate.  Tariq is  BAGHDAD 00000142  002 OF 002   not among those officially nominated, as PC Chair Abdulsalam effectively blocked his name from consideration during the October PC meeting during which the IIP-backed police chief was fired.  There is some question as to whether SAI will back Tariq as permanent PCOP, or whether it will support Hatim.  Nevertheless, Tariq claims he has Ministry of Interior (MOI) backing and enough support within SAI to stay on.  11. (U) The PCOP selection process requires the PC to forward a list of three nominees to the MOI, expressing a preference for one of the candidates.  The MOI then approves either the preferred candidate or names one of the other two ) or an entirely new candidate of the MOI's choosing.  Any candidate approved by the MOI which is not on the PC list of nominees must be ratified by a PC vote.  This requirement would mean Tariq would need the backing of the MOI as well as a majority on the IIP-dominated PC.  COMMENT -------  12. (C)  The political struggle between IIP and SAI for control over the PCOP slot shows that security is still at the core of Anbari concerns.  SAI built its reputation on bringing security to key areas of Anbar Province, and still sees the PCOP position as a key goal in their struggle to gain more political influence in the province.  However, PC Chair Abdulsalam and other IIP members are concerned that SAI control over the PCOP position will lead to further tribalization of the police force, and will dilute IIP influence in the province. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000143  SIPDIS  DEPT OF AGRICULTURE PASS TO USAID  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON, EAGR, SENV, EAID, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: DROUGHT THREATENS ALREADY STRESSED FARM SECTOR  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  Summary -------  1. (SBU) A late start to the rainy season in the northern Iraqi province of Ninewa threatens the province's wheat crop and sheep herds in an agricultural economy already suffering from tight credit, a lack of fuel and security constraints on marketing.  While rains usually begin in late October in this potentially productive grain-farming province, Ninewa has received only one day of significant rainfall since September.  Normal rainfall over this period is on average 4.2 inches, but this year's rainfall since September has been no more than one-quarter that amount.  The PRT is working closely with local partners on a long-term transition to sustainable agriculture, a sector that could provide rural employment and raw materials for a thriving food-processing industry.  For this season, though, nothing short of an immediate infusion of water and forage would reverse the effects of the current drought.  End Summary.  Wheat Planting Reduced, Low Germination Expected --------------------------------------------- ---  2. (SBU) Early estimates from farmers across the province, local and provincial agricultural officials, and Provincial Reconstruction Team agricultural advisors are that the rains' delay has prompted wheat farmers this year to plant 15-30 percent less land than usual.  The lack of rainfall during the crucial post-planting period may reduce germination of this year's already below-average crop by at least 50 percent.  Farmers said they need rain by the middle of March to germinate and sustain any of the seeds they planted this season.  Sheep Herds Lack Forage -----------------------  3. (SBU) A lack of rain is squeezing sheep herders as well. Normal fall and winter forage did not materialize due to the last four months' dry weather.  With the current sub-freezing night-time temperatures across Ninewa, meaningful amounts of forage are now not expected until at least March.  Farmers told the PRT that they expect many sheep could die of malnutrition before adequate forage is available.  PRT Pursuing GOI, Private Farm Solutions ----------------------------------------  4. (SBU) The PRT is pursuing several projects to address the credit, fuel and security constraints on Ninewa's farm sector.  These initiatives include multi-sectarian rural farm associations to share risk on common problems like high input prices, expansion of local veterinary programs, increased access to micro-loans, and business improvement loans for agricultural processors.  Unfortunately, none of these can address the short-term lack of rain.  Comment -------  5. (SBU) The lack of rains in Ninewa harms a local agricultural economy already depressed by tight credit, a lack of fuel and security constraints on marketing.  While some parts of the province could farm wheat and barley with only rain, others depend on the marginally operational Al Jazeera Irrigation System and expensive individual pumps. While rains are the only full solution to a failing wheat crop and starving sheep, stop-gap measures could include increased fuel resources for private irrigation pumps, improved veterinary care to combat malnutrition-related diseases and delivery of forage from overseas markets.  In the long-term, a multi-year transition of marginal cropland to pastureland would provide farmers a profitable way to use their land without relying on rains to grow grain. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000147  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y DELETING INFO ADDEE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2018 TAGS: PHUM, KDEM, KJUS, PGOV, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: MOLSA MINISTER ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT IMPROVING JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM  Classified By: PolCouns Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 1. (C)  SUMMARY:  In a January 13 meeting, the Minister of Labor and Social Affairs expressed his enthusiasm for USG support for alleviating the overcrowded conditions of the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, (MOLSA) juvenile facilities.  He discussed near-term solutions such as removing squatters from a MOLSA building in 7 Nissan, expanding Tobschi juvenile detention facility, and adding beds to another facility; but noted that these solutions were insufficient and welcomed the USD 3.5 million that the USG is offering to build a new juvenile detention facility. However, MOLSA has still not come up with a location on which to build the new facility.  The Minister also welcomed the idea of having a USG advisor attached to the Ministry.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) Minister of Labor and Social Affairs Mahmud Muhammad Jawad al-Radi met with Baghdad PRTOffs and EmbOffs on January 13 to discuss ways to improve the juvenile justice system and areas of cooperation between the USG and the Ministry.  This was al-Radi,s first meeting with Embassy officials since he had refused to meet with Embassy officers after a June 2007 orphanage scandal in which an embedded CBS reporter covered the Iraqi Army and U.S. military's joint rescue of 24 naked and emaciated orphans tied to their beds in a Baghdad facility, which prompted a hostile reaction from MOLSA.  Dr. Rijadh Glassou, Director General of juvenile vocational training; Faris Sami, Director General of juveniles; and Khadum Raov, the director of juvenile education were also present.  3. (C) The Minister acknowledged that there is an overcrowding problem in MOLSA,s juvenile facilities and welcomed any help from the USG is solving this problem. (Note:  The two Baghdad-area MOLSA juvenile facilities are currently about 250 juveniles over capacity.  In addition, there are 70 convicted juveniles who remain in Coalition facilities because there is no space in Iraqi juvenile facilities. End Note.)  Al-Radi said that the Ministry has its own funding and is adding 70-80 beds in an existing facility and has plans to expand Tobschi juvenile facility to include rooms for education and training.  He commented, however, that this is not enough to solve the problem, and the long-term solution requires new buildings.  4. (C) The Provincial Reconstruction Development Committee (PRDC) has approved a $3.5 million proposal from Baghdad PRT to build a new juvenile facility in Baghdad.  (Note: The funds were approved six months ago, before the Embassy and MNF-I decided they were getting out of the prison construction business. End Note.)  However, the facility will require an empty five-acre plot of land, and so far the Ministry has been unable to produce such a plot.  Once land has been designated for the project, it will take 18 months to complete.  When reminded that the money for this project would not be available indefinitely, the Minister said he would send a letter on January 15 that identified an appropriate location.  Other Ministry officials present said they have identified a 13,000 square meter plot in 7 Nissan. (Note:  13,000 square meters is less than five acres.  The Ministry did not present the promised letter on January 15, and has been given a one-week ultimatum.  End Note.)  5. (C) The Minister discussed an existing MOLSA facility in 9 Nissan as one possible near-term solution to the problem of overcrowding in juvenile facilities.  He described this as a large building in good condition, but said there are reportedly 50-52 families squatting in the building.  The Minister was adamant that these families should not be forced out, which would exacerbate internal displacement; but instead argued for negotiations and reparations.  The Ministry has already had unsuccessful negotiations with the families and has offered up to $2,000 per family in compensation for moving, but the families will not negotiate further if the Ministry does not offer them a new place to live.  The Minister has set up a commission to talk to the families and has given his Ministry two weeks to solve the problem.  He noted that it might be politically difficult to move the families because most are affiliated with the Sadrist party, and said he had ended up asking the Office of the Martyr Sadr (OMS) for assistance in pressuring the families to move.  6. (C) PRTOff suggested establishing greater U.S. cooperation with the Ministry by placing a USG advisor in the Ministry. The Minister welcomed this suggestion and said he would write a letter to the Ambassador about it, adding that the cooperation should focus on vocational training since 2008 is the &Year of Vocational Training8 in the Ministry.  He stressed the Ministry would fully cooperate with the U.S. in the future.   7. (C) COMMENT:  Overcrowding is a serious problem in the juvenile facilities and needs to be addressed as soon as possible.  MOLSA,s eagerness to work closely with the USG is a good sign, and the issue of juvenile justice facility overcrowding is a potential point of entry for greater cooperation, which could include appointment of a USG advisor to MOLSA.  While the Minister seems enthusiastic about the USG funding for his new building project, the fact that he has so far been unable to provide a suitable plot of land does not bode well for that project.  However, the Minister seemed genuine in his desire to provide more and better facilities and programs for juveniles in detention, and the USG should work closely with MOLSA in improving the juvenile system.  END COMMENT. CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000148  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA AND NEA/I-ECON STATE PASS USTR  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EINV, EFIN, ETRD, ELAB, KTDB, PGOV, USTR, OPIC, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQ -- 2008 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT  REF: (A) 07 STATE 158802; (B) 07 STATE 163400  1. The following is Post's submission for Iraq's 2008 Investment Climate Statement. BEGIN TEXT 2008 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT - IRAQ Iraq's first post-conflict permanent government passed a National Investment Law in October 2006, which was expected to open up its economy to foreign investment.  While the law is designed to give Iraq a more investor-friendly business environment, much work remains.  Implementation of the law will be a challenge for Iraq in 2008.  The Government of Iraq (GOI) continues to pursue some of the economic reforms necessary to lead the country in a new direction, including pension reform and reductions of the refined oil price subsidy.  Iraq's commitment to rejoin the international community can also be seen in its steady progress towards World Trade Organization (WTO) accession. OPENNESS TO FOREIGN INVESTMENT The Government of Iraq's (GOI's) Council of Representatives (CoR) passed a National Investment Law in October, and the law was published in the Official Gazette as Law No.  13 of 2006 on January 17, 2007.  (Note: This law revokes CPA Order 39 on foreign investment; it does not cover the oil and financial services sectors.)  The National Investment Commission (NIC) has not yet been formed, nor has the CoR confirmed a Chairman of the commission. Implementing regulations remain to be approved, and Provincial Investment Commissions (PICs) have yet to be established in each of the governorates.  While the most recently nominated NIC Chairman is seen as having a great deal of regional experience in attracting foreign investment, he has not yet been confirmed by the appropriate Iraqi authorities as at this writing.  A copy of the National Investment Law can be obtained from the U.S. Department of Commerce Iraq Task Force website - http://www.export.gov/iraq/.  Once it is implemented, the new law's provisions would provide an open investment regime for foreign investors. Regulation of investment is not an exclusive federal power, so the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) and the national government both have the right to regulate investment.  The KRG passed a Kurdish investment law on July 3, 2006.  The most significant difference between the KRG investment law and the national law is that the regional law allows foreigners to own land.  Under the Iraqi Constitution, when there is a contradiction between regional and national legislation, the regional law could become the only applicable law in the Kurdish region.  How this rule of federalism will work in practice is still unknown. CURRENCY CONVERSION AND TRANSFER POLICIES The currency of Iraq is the Dinar (IQD - sometimes referred to as the New Iraqi Dinar).  The Iraqi authorities confirm that in practice there are no restrictions on current and capital transactions involving currency exchange as long as underlying transactions are supported by valid documentation.  However, it is unclear whether currency convertibility is entirely free from exchange restrictions.  The National Investment Law contains provisions that, once implemented, would allow investors to bank and transfer capital inside or outside of Iraq. The Government of Iraq's monetary policy since 2003 has focused on maintaining price stability and exchange rate predictability.  Banks may engage in spot transactions in any currency, but are not allowed to engage in forward transactions in Iraqi Dinar for speculative purposes.  The Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) can intervene, when necessary, in order to maintain stability in the foreign exchange market.  There are no taxes or subsidies on purchases or sales of foreign exchange.  Improved security has allowed for an increased supply of goods and services, which has reduced inflationary pressures as compared to 2006.  The Central Bank has implemented effective monetary and exchange rate policies that continue to help temper inflation. EXPROPRIATION AND COMPENSATION Iraqi law affords foreign investors some protection from expropriation.  Article 23 (Second) of the Iraqi Constitution prohibits expropriation in Iraq, unless it is "for the purpose of public benefit in return for just compensation."  The constitutional provision further stipulates that this standard shall be regulated by law.  Although this standard may offer some protection to foreign investments, the provision is skeletal, and a law has yet to be considered.  Article 12 (Third) of the National Investment Law also guarantees "non-seizure or nationalization of the investment project covered by the provisions of this law in whole or in part, except for a project on which a final judicial judgment was issued," but the absence of implementing regulation makes the application of the law uncertain in practice.  As a result, whether foreign investors will enjoy protection from expropriation that meets international standards will likely depend on domestic implementing legislation and/or future bilateral treaty obligations with the investor states in this area.  The United States does not have a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) with Iraq. DISPUTE SETTLEMENT  BAGHDAD 00000148  002 OF 004   While the law of domestic arbitration is fairly well developed in Iraq, international arbitration is not sufficiently supported by Iraqi law.  Iraq is a signatory to the League of Arab States Convention on Commercial Arbitration (1987) and the Riyadh Convention on Judicial Cooperation (1983), but it has not signed or adopted the two most important legal instruments for international commercial arbitration: The United Nations New York Convention on Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (1958 -- commonly called the New York Convention) and the attendant rules and procedures established by the UN Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). Although dispute resolution is laid out in Article 27 of the National Investment Law, which details the rights of Iraqis and foreigners with respect to Iraqi law, the absence of implementing regulation makes uncertain application of the law in practice. Domestic arbitration is provided for in Articles 251-276 of the Iraqi Civil Procedure Code, which require arbitration agreements to be in writing.  Panels of arbitrators are available through the Iraqi Union of Engineers, the Iraqi Federation of Industries, and private arbitrators. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND INCENTIVES The National Investment Law allows in theory both domestic and foreign investors to qualify for incentives equally.  It also allows for investors to take out capital brought into Iraq and its proceeds in accordance with the law.  Foreign investors are able to trade in shares and securities listed on the Iraqi Stock Exchange.  The law also allows in principle investors who have obtained an investment license to enjoy exemptions from taxes and fees for a period of ten years.  Hotels, tourist institutions, hospitals, health institutions, rehabilitation centers and scientific organizations also are granted additional exemptions from duties and taxes on their imports of furniture and other furnishings.  The exemption theoretically increases to fifteen years if Iraqi investors own more than fifty percent of the project; however, the absence of implementing regulation makes uncertain the application of the law in practice. RIGHT TO PRIVATE OWNERSHIP AND ESTABLISHMENT The National Investment Law does not allow foreigners to own land. Foreign investors are permitted to rent or lease land for up to fifty years (renewable).  Foreign investors are also able to own investment portfolios in shares and securities. PROTECTION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS The GOI is in the process of developing a new intellectual property rights (IPR) law in line with the WTO Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), but the exact structure of this and related legislation is still being determined.  IPR protection functions are spread across several ministries.  The patent registry and industrial design registry remain a part of the Central Organization on Standards and Quality Control (COSQC), an agency of the Ministry of Planning and Development Cooperation. Copyrights are under the Ministry of Culture, and trademarks under the Ministry of Industry and Minerals.  The GOI's ability to enforce intellectual property rights laws, however, is weak because of the current security environment. Iraq is also a signatory to several international intellectual property conventions, and to regional or bilateral arrangements which include: -- Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1967 Act) ratified by Law No.  212 of 1975. -- World Intellectual Property Organizations (WIPO) Convention; ratified by Law No. 212 of 1975.  Iraq became a member of the WIPO in January 1976. -- Arab Agreement for the Protection of Copyrights; ratified by Law No.  41 of 1985. -- Arab Intellectual Property Rights Treaty (Law No. 41 of 1985). TRANSPARENCY OF THE REGULATORY SYSTEM The absence of implementing regulation for the National Investment Law makes uncertain the application of the law in practice.  Once fully implemented, the law would establish a legal framework for investment.  Potential investors would nonetheless still face significant hurdles in understanding the basic steps for starting and operating a business in Iraq given the complexity of Iraq's existing laws, regulations, and administrative procedures.  Iraqi government is still in the process of establishing its National and Regional Investment Commissions as required under the National Investment Law, a year after the law was officially published. The absence of other laws in areas of interest to foreign investors also creates ambiguity.  Competition and consumer protection laws that are critical for leveling the business playing field in the market are needed.  A competition law could help cut down on unfair business practices such as price-fixing by competitors, bid rigging, and abuse of dominant position in the market.  A consumer protection law that establishes definitions of unfair business practices would be useful.  While the Iraqis do not currently have a building code, the GOI is currently evaluating this area. EFFICIENT CAPITAL MARKETS AND PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT The Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) is responsible for conducting  BAGHDAD 00000148  003 OF 004   monetary policy in Iraq.  The CBI was re-organized by CPA Order No. 56 as a legal public entity that has financial and administrative independence.  The Iraqi banking system includes seven state-owned banks, the two largest being Rafidain and Rasheed, which account for about 96 percent of banking sector assets.  There are also 32 private banks and six Islamic banks licensed by the CBI (see CBI's website - www.cbiraq.org).  Eleven foreign banks have either been licensed or have strategic investments in Iraqi banks. However, the vast majority of banking operations are confined to basic consumer transactions leaving the provision of credit to individuals in private transactions.  Channeling financial transfers from the government to provincial authorities or individuals rather than business loans is the major activity of the private banks; Iraq's economy remains primarily cash-based.  In terms of true financial intermediation, Iraq is seriously "under banked". The Trade Bank of Iraq (TBI) was established as an independent government entity under CPA Order No. 20 in 2003.  The TBI's main purpose is to provide financial and related services to facilitate import trade.  The payments system began limited operation in August 2006. The letter of the National Investment Law allows for foreign investors to exchange shares and securities listed in the Iraqi Stock Exchange (ISX).  It also allows foreign investors to form investment portfolios.  Trading transactions and buy and sell orders are presently written by hand on grease boards in trading sessions. This system does not always allow for full transparency in terms of timing of market participants or knowledge of who has placed the bid.  The  automation of the ISX, expected by the end of first quarter, will provide much greater transparency as well as pave the way for foreign investment on the exchange in terms of dematerialized shares, easing the logistical burden of physical certificates.  In addition, a new permanent securities law is drafted as well as rules and regulations for the Iraq Securities Commission (ISC) and is expected to be introduced into Parliament in early 2008.  The status of the ISC is, however, in flux until a new law is enacted. POLITICAL VIOLENCE Security continues to be the number one concern of the Iraqi Government and interested businesses.  The security situation in Iraq remains serious.  Theft and violent crime persist in Iraq.  The threat of attacks against U.S. citizens and facilities remains high.  In addition, roads and other public areas continue to be dangerous for Iraqi or foreign travelers.  Law enforcement is limited, although new Iraqi police units continue to be trained and deployed.  Attacks against military and civilian targets throughout Iraq continue, including in the International (or "Green") Zone. Targets include trucking and military convoys, hotels, restaurants, police stations, security checkpoints, foreign diplomatic missions, international organizations and other locations with expatriate personnel.  In addition, there have been planned and random killings, as well as extortions and kidnappings.  U.S. citizens have been kidnapped, and several were subsequently murdered by terrorists in Iraq.  U.S. citizens and other foreigners, as well as Iraqi officials and citizens continue to be targeted by insurgent groups and opportunistic criminals for kidnapping and murder.  The U.S. Department of State issues up-to-date travel warnings for countries throughout the world, and U.S. companies and visitors are advised to carefully assess the situation in Iraq. State Department's Iraq Travel Warning (http://travel.state.gov/travel/iraq_warning. html) and Consular Information Sheet (http://travel.state.gov/travel/iraq.html) contain the essential security and safety information on travel to Iraq. CORRUPTION Corruption in all areas remains a significant problem.  Under Saddam's regime, corruption was a fact of life for every Iraqi and touched upon every economic transaction.  The former regime's control of the economy left a legacy of heavy state procurement and subsidies distorting market prices. The Commission on Public Integrity (CPI) is an independent, autonomous Iraqi governmental agency, established by CPA Order No. 55, responsible for anti-corruption, law enforcement and crime prevention, as well as public education on these topics.  CPI investigates nationwide allegations of corruption within the government and refers cases to the Iraqi judiciary.  It performs its duties in conjunction with the Board of Supreme Audit (BSA) and the Inspector General (IG) from each ministry.  There is a need to impose and enforce credible penalties for government corruption, specifically adherence to laws related to government contracts, procurement and allegations of bribery.  The number of corruption cases brought to a successful conclusion remains quite small, and the statutory and regulatory provisions intended to control corruption will require substantial revision to be effective. BILATERAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION Iraq is a signatory to thirty-two bilateral, and nine multilateral agreements within the Arab League arrangements on Investments Promotion and Protection (IPPA).  Some of the bilateral agreements with other countries include Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Iran,  BAGHDAD 00000148  004.2 OF 004   Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritania, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Kingdom, Vietnam and Yemen. These agreements include general provisions on promoting and protecting investments, including clauses on profit repatriation, access to arbitration and dispute settlements, fair expropriation rules and compensation for losses. In addition, Iraq has bilateral free trade area (FTA) agreements with the following eleven countries: Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Yemen, and the United Arab Emirates.  Iraq is also a signatory to several multilateral agreements, including the "Taysir" agreement with Arab countries dated February 27, 1982, and ratified in January 11, 1982. On July 11, 2005, Iraq and the U.S. signed a Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) as a first step toward creating liberalized trade and increasing investment flows between the U.S. and Iraq.  The Iraqi Parliament has yet to ratify this agreement. OPIC AND OTHER INVESTMENT INSURANCE PROGRAMS The Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) finances a variety of investment projects with substantial U.S. participation in Iraq.  Some of OPIC's basic programs include structured finance projects, political risk insurance, investment funds and financing for small and medium-sized enterprises.  In addition, OPIC and the Government of Iraq have executed an Investment Incentive Agreement (IIA).  The Iraqi Parliament has yet to ratify this agreement. LABOR Iraqi labor law remains weak in promoting a flexible, business-friendly employment environment.  The existing Saddam-era law includes non-supportive benefit clauses, working conditions for foreign expatriate workers, and rules governing working hours. Iraq is a party to both International Labor Organization (ILO) Conventions related to youth employment, including child labor abuse.  The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA) also sets a minimum monthly wage for unskilled workers.  In addition, according to Iraqi law, all employers must provide some level of transport, accommodation, and food allowances for each employee.  The law does not fix allowance amounts. The National Investment Law states that priority in employment and recruitment shall be given to Iraqis.  In addition, foreign investors are expected to help train Iraqi employees as well as to raise their efficiency, skill, and capabilities.  There are existing labor-related requirements for foreign companies employing Iraqi or foreign workers. FOREIGN TRADE ZONES AND PORTS The Free Zone Authority Law No. 3/1998 (FZL) permitted investment in Free Zones (FZ) through industrial, commercial, and service projects.  This law operates under the Instructions for Free Zone Management and the Regulation of Investors' Business No.  4/1999 and is implemented by the Free Zones Commission in the Ministry of Finance. In theory, capital, profits, and investment income from projects in an FZ are exempt from all taxes and fees throughout the life of the project, including in the foundation and construction phases. However, according to Free Zones Commission officials, goods imported through FZs are still subject to Iraq's 5 percent tariff when they leave the zone (expect for re-export). Activities permitted in Free Zones include: (a) industrial activities such as, assembly, installation, sorting, and refilling processes; (b) storage, re-export and trading operations; (c) service and storage projects and transport of all kinds; (d) banking, insurance and reinsurance activities; and (e) supplementary and auxiliary professional and service activities.  Prohibited activities include actions disallowed by other laws in force, such as weapons manufacture, environmentally-polluting industries and those banned because of place of origin. There are currently four geographic areas designated as Free Zones. The Basrah/Khor al-Zubair Free Zone is and is located 40 miles southwest of Basrah on the Arab Gulf at the Khor al-Zubair seaport. This area has been operational since June 2004.  The Ninewa/Falafel Free Zone is located in the north, near roads and railways that reach Turkey, Syria, Jordan and the Basrah ports.  The Sulaymaniyah Free Zone is located in northern Iraq in the Kurdish area.  The al-Qa'im Free Zone is on the Iraqi-Syrian border.  It is close to roads and railways that reach Turkey, Basrah, and Jordan.  However, none of these areas are operating as significant loci for investment or trade, and only the Ninewa/Falafel zone has businesses operating in it. FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT STATISTICS According to the IMF, total foreign direct investment flows into Iraq were $300 million in 2006, estimated as 0.7 percent of GDP. Although data for 2007 is unavailable, final results will be strongly influenced by the GOI's awarding of three mobile telecommunications licenses in August 2007, priced at $1.25 bn each for a total of $3.75 bn. END TEXT  CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000149  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: SENIOR ISF OFFICERS KILLED IN NASIRIYAH CLASHES  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia due to reasons 1. 4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Summary: Several senior Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) officers died during January 19 clashes between members of Jund al-Sima'a (Army of Heaven - JAS) and ISF.  Although the situation now appears to have stabilized, the killing of several ISF leaders raises questions about the nature of the disturbance, including the possibility of Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) involvement, and the future stability of Dhi Qar province.  End Summary.  2.  (SBU) Fighting initially broke out at approximately 1300 when police tried to prevent JAS members from carrying weapons during a demonstration commemorating the holiday of ashura.  JAS members, wearing yellow headbands and carrying weapons, including RPGs and BKC machine guns, refused to disarm and began firing at the ISF.  One eyewitness said a JAS member yelled "The Imam Mahdi is returning today and we wish to fight the apostates at his side!"  Snipers also fired at the ISF from nearby rooftops.  The ISF, including the Iraqi Police, the Tactical Support Unit (TSU), the Rapid Deployment Brigade, and the Iraqi National Guard, counterattacked and eventually regained control of the streets.  JAS retreated into a school and adjacent building only to be surrounded and subdued by ISF.  3.  (SBU) A number of senior ISF officers were killed or seriously wounded in the attacks.  TSU commander Col. Naji al-Jibari (Abu Luka) was killed and Dhi Qar Head of Operations BG Rahim Jasim is in critical condition and receiving medical care at Talil AFB.  After the initial clashes a group of extremists attacked a police intelligence office with light and medium weapons, leading to another round of fighting in which Col. Zimal Ramid Maoud, an intelligence officer, was killed.  The commander of the Rapid Deployment Brigade, Brig. Abd al-Amir Jibar, was seriously injured when his unit responded to the fighting.  Casualty estimates vary wildly but are decreasing with subsequent news accounts.  A newspaper article published on January 20 stated the death toll at 29 civilians and ISF members and 19 followers of JAS.  4.  (S) Comment: JAS (sometimes known as Ansar al-Mahdi, or Supporters of the Mahdi) is a militant spiritual movement led by Ahmad Hassan al-Basri, who calls himself 'the Yemini.' The group believes that the return of the mahdi, or 12th Imam, is near, and that Basri is an ambassador of the mahdi. During the 2007 commemoration of Ashura over 260 JAS members were killed in fighting between JAS and ISF and coalition forces (CF) in Najaf and Karbala. Shi'a movements such as JAS have appeared with greater frequency in the south since the overthrow of the previous regime.  5.  (S) Comment C'td: The killings of a number of senior ISF officers does not bode well for future stability in Dhi Qar. The fact that most of those killed were anti-JAM officers also raises questions as to whether the disturbance served as a cover for the planned assassinations of key ISF leaders by JAM.  Several JAM associates wanted Abu Luka dead due to the TSU's operations against JAM, including the recent arrest of  SIPDIS former JAM commander Ali Shlewet.  As early as May 2006 Aws al-Khafaji, a spiritual leader and former JAM commander, had issued standing orders to kill Abu Luka.  End Comment. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000150  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/20/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: UPDATE ON THE IRAQI FLAG CONTROVERSY  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ,d).  1.  (C) Summary and comment: A brief but impassioned debate over revising the Iraqi flag appears to have yielded an agreement on a one-year placeholder flag, resembling the older one but with less Ba,th party and Arab nationalist symbology.  The Kurdistan Alliance in the Council of Representatives has driven much of the dispute, demanding both the inclusion of yellow to represent Kurds and the removal of Saddam Hussein,s handwriting and the pan-Arabist stars color scheme.  The COR has not reached a final agreement, but appears close to agreement on a one-year interim flag that the Kurds will agree to fly at international events in Iraqi Kurdistan.  This seemingly abstract issue, coming at nearly the same time as the de-Ba,thification debate, highlights the countervailing passions still at work as the COR attempts to grapple with the Ba,th party,s legacy.  End summary and comment.  Flagging Support for Ba'thist Iconography -----------------------------------------  2.     (C) Kurds object to the old Iraqi flag on several counts.  First, they protest the &Allahu Akbar (God is great)8 printed in the middle, since the script is widely believed to be Saddam Hussein,s own handwriting.  Their second objection is to the flag,s symbols of Arab nationalism, an ideology many consider chauvinist and anti-Kurd.  The three stars represent, depending on who one asks, either Egypt, Syria, and Iraq (in the 1960s intended as the three components of the United Arab Republic), or Unity, Freedom, and Socialism, once an Arab nationalist slogan.  The colors of the flag ) red, white, and black ) similarly represent pan-Arabism, as evident in the flags of Egypt, Syria, and several other Arab countries.  3.     (C) The first objection was an easy fix ) the words &Allahu Akbar8 remain, but in Kufic script, a style of Arabic calligraphy native to Iraq and common across the Arab world.  The Kufic writing has been common on Iraqi flags for several years now, but the GOI has not yet canonized it as the official design.  The symbols are more difficult ) some argue for excising them entirely and marking a new Iraq era with an all-new flag, while others argue for simpler tweaks. The Kurds argued either the lettering or the stars should be yellow, the Kurdish color.  This prompted the Turcomen to demand the inclusion of their color, blue, and others to protest that any yellow would be invisible against a white background.  The January 15 session of the Council of Representatives produced a string of suggestions on different variations of the Iraqi flag, too numerous and with too many minutiae for the full session to debate.  COR Agrees to Set New Standard ------------------------------  4.     (C) The next step is a meeting of COR bloc leaders which Deputy Speaker Khalid Attiya announced on January 15, followed by the bill,s third and final reading.  Kurdish MP Mahmud Uthman detailed for us what he claimed is a decisive agreement on most of the points.  The design that passes a third reading will be in place for a year, during which time a national contest will determine the permanent Iraqi flag. The lettering on the interim flag will be Kurdish yellow, and the three stars will now represent peace, justice, and tolerance.  Top KDP official Rowsch Shaways expressed skepticism the GOI would actually generate a permanent flag within a year, but said the Kurds are satisfied now that the Ba,thist symbols have been removed or redefined.  5.     (C) Perhaps most importantly, Kurdistan Regional Government President Massoud Barzani told the press the new Iraqi flag ) not the Kurdish flag ) would fly in March above the summit of regional parliament leaders in Erbil. KRG events repeatedly have featured the Kurdish flag more prominently than, or to the exclusion of, the Iraqi flag. Such political theater is lost on neither the Arabs to the south nor the Turks to the north, and would be particularly unhelpful at a time of heightened tension between the Kurds and both.  This tension provides the imperative for a quick resolution to a deceptively volatile debate. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000153  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE PASS USAID  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ECON, EAID, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: PRT BRANCH OFFICE HOSTS ECONOMIC FORUM IN SOUTH  Classified By: Ninewa PRT Team Leader Jason Hyland for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT), Southern Branch Office, message.  Summary -------  1. (C) PRT Ninewa's Branch Office in Qayyara, covering southern Ninewa, expanded in January from the one liaison officer who staffed it since mid-2007 to a three-man team of civilian surge and military personnel.  The office received superb support from local Coalition Forces to host on January 16 the first of its kind southern Ninewa economic forum among government and business leaders at the provincial and district levels.  Building on the PRT's series of preparatory meetings with local leaders over the last month, the forum's participants explored ways to improve electricity generation and distribution, hire more teachers, reopen factories, and provide greater supplies of kerosene and benzene.  The meeting concluded with a commitment to follow-up with the crucial electricity and fuel issues at the provincial level.  2. (C) Provincial Governor Duraid Kashmoula, Provincial Council Chair Hisham al Hamdani, Municipal Reconstruction Committee head Ismael Faris and Director General of Education Aliya Hassan Ismael represented the provincial government at the January 16 meeting in Qayyara, an economically important sub-district town in southern Ninewa.  The local contingent included the mayors of Qayyara and Al Shoura, managers of the electricity and refining industries, local investors, and heads of municipal offices.  Energy Generation and Distribution Top Concern --------------------------------------------- -  3. (C) The mayors and factory managers complained about the lack of reliable electricity to southern Ninewa, which they said receives only a few hours per town on some days.  The manager of the Al Shemal Power Plant, an incomplete generator project begun in Al Shoura more than two decades ago, said that his plant could produce 1,400 megawatts of power if he had more support from the Ministry of Electricity for equipment installation, training and maintenance.  This additional electricity would help bypass what the southern Ninewans see as electricity distribution choke points outside the province, according to the Al Shoura mayor.  In addition, the additional electricity could help boost operations and output at the Qayyara refinery, according to that plant's manager.  Possible Increase in Teaching Jobs in 2008 ------------------------------------------  4. (C) The Director General of Education said local leaders' complaints of insufficient teacher hiring in southern Ninewa mirror the situation across the province.  Overall, she said only 2,300 teacher positions have been filled province-wide, out of a total of 7,000.  She predicted that southern Ninewa would receive more teachers in 2008, possibly pulling from the provincial pool of university-trained lecturers.  COMMENT -------  5. (C) The southern Ninewa leaders' ability to identify, prioritize and advocate for their concerns with provincial leaders displayed an increasingly sophisticated ability to work within designated provincial governance structures to achieve their political and resource goals.  Specifically, the Qayyara mayor and managers of the electricity and refining plants used the January 16 meeting as a springboard to direct meetings they have scheduled with provincial leaders in the coming weeks.  Although the January 16 forum resulted in no concrete commitments, it represented a step in the direction of local decision-making.  For the Al Shoura mayor, that in itself was enough to describe the meeting as "better than excellent." CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000154  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: PRT ANBAR: ANBAR HIGHER COMMITTEE ENGAGES GOI OFFICIALS  REF: A) BAGHDAD 4192 B) BAGHDAD 4224  BAGHDAD 00000154  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: PRT Anbar Team Leader James Soriano for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (U) This is a PRT Anbar reporting cable.  2.  (C) Summary.  The six members of the recently-established Anbar Higher Committee (AHC) visited Bagdad January 15-16 in their first engagement as a group with senior GOI officials. The proximate reason was to follow up on unfulfilled GOI commitments made at last September's Anbar Forum II. Progress on the two top priorities, fuel and electricity supply, was disappointing, but Governor Ma'amoun was pleased to get greater authority over the Anbar police budget.  The group made calls on President Talabani and VP Hashimi. Another key topic was Anbari concerns over Shia designs to expand Karbala provincial boundaries at the expense of Anbar.  Although AHC is still working to formalize its own ground rules, the Anbaris made a concerted effort to act as a unified front to increase leverage vis--vis the GOI.  End Summary.  First Outing ------------  3. (C) In its first engagement as a group with high-ranking GOI officials, the recently formed Anbar Higher Committee (Ref A) traveled to Baghdad January 15-16 to press for GOI economic support.  The group met with President Jalal Talabani, Vice President Tariq Al-Hashimi, Deputy PM Barham Saleh, and at least two Cabinet ministers.  4. (C) The proximate reason for the visit was to review progress on GOI economic commitments made at last September's Anbar Forum II in Ramadi, which was chaired by the DPM.  The AHC met with the DPM at his residence on January 15, where they also had discussions with Finance Minister Bayan Jabr and Electricity Minister Abdul Kareem Waheed.  Dr. Barham invited the group to stay overnight at GOI guest quarters so that appointments could be arranged the following day with Talabani and for follow on discussions.  A Conflict Resolution Mechanism -------------------------------  5. (C) Six Anbari political figures formed the AHC last month as a conflict-resolution mechanism, prompted by renewed pressure from Sheikh Ahmad Abu Risha's Iraq Awakening Movement, or Sahawa Al-Iraq (SAI, see reftels).  As Anbar transitions into the post-conflict period, squabbles are on the rise over the control of financial resources and patronage.  In a bid to wrest more power for itself, the SAI turned up the heat in November when it boycotted the Provincial Council and called for the ouster of the Iraqi Islamic Party's (IIP) Abdulsalam as that body's chairman.  Top Priorities --------------  6.  (C) The AHC went into the January 15 meeting with two top priorities in mind ) increasing the supplies of fuel and electricity to the province.  They walked away with numerous promises, but disappointing tangible commitments.  7.  (C) The key issue on fuel was to reach consensus on transporting crude from the Bayji refinery in Salah Al-Din Province to Anbar's now-idle K-3 refinery near Haditha.  Work on restarting one column at K-3 is well underway, but there is no GOI plan to supply it with crude.  The Anbaris advocate delivering Bayji crude by rail and were looking for GOI support for that plan.  However, Oil Minister Shahristani was not available to meet with them and no meaningful decisions were reached.  In his stead, was the DG for Distribution, who tentatively committed to a variety of measures, provided they get ministerial approval.  Governor Ma'amoun later signaled his desire to return to Baghdad to meet jointly with the Ministers of Oil and Transportation on an agreed method for supplying K-3 with crude.  8.  (C) Electricity Minister Waheed made several apparent commitments, the most important of which was a promise to select "within a week" one of two contractors to install French-made generators at the Tahadi power station near Haditha.  Ma'amoun was skeptical about Waheed's other commitments, which included examining the possibility of importing electricity from Syria and Waheed's own visit to the power station at the Haditha Dam.  Pointing to the Tahadi contract as the only meaningful initiative, Ma'amoun dismissed the other proposals as merely talk.  The DPM and the Economic Zone  BAGHDAD 00000154  002 OF 002   -----------------------------  9.  (C) Barham Saleh raised the issue of moving forward with studies for proposed Economic Zones (EZ) near the Syrian and Jordanian borders.  The initiative is not a high Anbari priority, but is worthy of study.  A decision was reached to hold an Anbari-GOI-CF meeting in Ramadi in the near future to discuss varying approaches for the EZs and to seek a unified way ahead.  Barham opined that the EZs would stimulate trade with Syria and Jordan.  The Police Budget -----------------  10.  (C) One unexpected result of the meeting was Finance Minister Jabr's decision to devolve control of the police budget to the province.  At one point, Ma'amoun complained to Jabr that the Interior Ministry's centralized system of management cripples Anbar's police force.  Accordingly, that budget is dribbled out to the province throughout the year in small amounts, which are replenished when the funds are spent.  This frequently leads to the curtailment of police operations -- police cruisers sit idle for lack of fuel, e.g. ) whenever there is a temporary lapse in the funding stream.   11.  (C) Ma'amoun argued that management of the police budget should be his responsibility as the province's chief executive officer.  Jabr agreed.  The two met again on Jan. 16, when Jabr provided Ma'amoun a copy of his order authorizing the transfer of Anbar's police budget to the provincial treasury.  Meetings with Talabani and Hashimi ---------------------------------  12.  (C) The AHC called on President Talabani and VP Hashimi on January 16.  There was no CF presence, but both Ma'amoun and PC Chairman Abdulsalam later told us that the issue of the provincial district of Nukhayb, a desert oasis town 120 miles south of Ramadi, figured in the discussions.  The Anbaris have long been concerned by encroachments by Karbala and Najaf police into the Nukhayb area, as well as by the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq's intention to re-adjust the Anbar-Karbala boundary within the context of the Article 140 process.  Talabani invited Ma'amoun and AHC member Sheikh Ahmad Abu Risha to return to Baghdad to discuss Nukhayb in greater detail.  (Note: When Ma'amoun returned on January 19, Talabani unexpectedly declined to meet. End Note)  Comment -------  13.  (C) Several weeks after its establishment, it remains to be seen whether the AHC will live up to its billing; that is, whether it will actually mitigate political pressures on the local scene.  During the visit to Baghdad, the AHC held an organizational meeting to discuss its own ground rules and to reinforce the need for local unity in the post-conflict period.  At this stage, it is not clear whether Sheikh Ahmad can be kept on board as a team player, or if he will succumb to pressures within his own SAI to re-escalate power-sharing demands on the Provincial Council.  Nor is it clear if the AHC itself will pass muster with other tribal sheikhs who are not among its members.  One outsider, a city mayor, criticized the AHC for being set up without wide consultation with other local figures.  In the words of one AHC member, the body is admittedly "plastic surgery," an inelegant attempt to channel Anbari energies onto a constructive path. Still, it made a fine effort at promoting provincial interests in its January 15-16 visit to Baghdad. End Comment. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000156  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: FM ZEBARI DISCUSSES NEIGHBORLY RELATIONS WITH MENENDEZ   Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.4(b) and (d).   1.  (C)  Summary:  On January 20, Senator Robert Menendez (D-NJ) and the Deputy Chief of Mission met with Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari to discuss Iraq's relationship with its neighbors, the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) and current Iraqi legislation.  Zebari updated Menendez on the upcoming Neighbors Ministerial in April, re-energizing the working groups, and plans for new missions from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, UAE, and Kuwait to open in Baghdad.  He also described Iraq's cooperation with Turkey in reducing the PKK threat, and gave a frank assessment of Iran's attempts to gain influence in Iraq.  Zebari assured Menendez that Iraq was serious about moving forward with the SOFA and hoped to have it settled by July.  On the provincial powers legislation, Zebari said most Iraqi people wanted a strong federal government.  He also said that the legislative priorities were hydrocarbons, provincial powers, revenue sharing and elections law.  He stated, "this package of legislation will show others that the Iraqis are willing to live together and share the wealth of the nation."  End Summary.  ARAB NEIGHBORS --------------  2.  (C)  On January 20, Senator Robert Menedez (D-NJ) met with Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari.  Menendez asked Zebari how he saw Iraq's relations with Iran, Turkey and its Arab neighbors.  Zebari started with the Arab neighbors and described a recent Arab League Ministerial meeting to discuss the situation in Lebanon, during which he met with President Mubarak of Egypt and the Emir of Kuwait.  Both indicated they were working to re-open their embassies in Baghdad.  He said that for the first time in the four years he has been Foreign Minister, he has seen a positive change in the Arab neighbors' attitude toward Iraq.  They are seeing progress in the security situation, in economics and in national reconciliation.  They also see that the current regime in Iraq is here to stay, and that helps.  Zebari stated his plan for 2008 is to focus on strengthening these relationships. He also mentioned that the Neighbors Ministerial is to be held in Kuwait in April and that he had sent out a letter the night before inviting the three working groups to Baghdad in the next few weeks to re-energize their work.  TURKEY ------  3.  (C)  Zebari said the relationship with Turkey was a good one -- Turkey has a strong embassy here and a consulate in Mosul, and Iraq has a presence in both Ankara and Istanbul. He said the problem is the PKK.  He described Turkey's concern as "legitimate" and said that Iraq has condemned the actions of the PKK.  However, he believes Turkey's response has been out of proportion to the threat, and with troops massed on the border, he fears an invasion.  He said it was not only destabilizing, but an embarrassment to the U.S. to have a NATO ally prepared to invade a country the U.S. is charged with protecting.  Zebari described Iraq's action to close front charities that are raising money for the PKK and how KRG has taken concrete steps to help.  He likened it to the situation between Afghanistan and Pakistan and said it was hard to control such remote areas.  He is trying to convince the Turks that this situation cannot be solved by force alone; there needs to be a political perspective, also.  IRAN ----  4.  (C)  Menendez asked about Iran's interests in Iraq.  The Foreign Minister said the two countries have had historical grievances, including the waterway issue and reparations from the first Gulf war.  However he pulled no punches in describing Iran's main interest as dominating Iraq.  He said the Iranians want a friendly government in Baghdad.  That is one of the reasons they have reined in the Mahdi Army (JAM). The violence had backfired and undermined a government the Iranians support.  Iran is also trying to strengthen religious ties in order to extend its influence as much as possible.  They want a regional alliance of Iran, Iraq, Syria, Hamas and Hezbollah.  He said Syria has similar goals, but is using economic integration and security concerns to increase its influence.  Zebari opined that Iran fears the U.S. presence in the region and he fears they want to settle the score with the U.S. in Iraq. He told the Iranians, "this is an opportunity -- the U.S. won't be here forever, and we're destined to live together."  SOFA ----   BAGHDAD 00000156  002 OF 002   5.  (C)  The last statement prompted Menendez to ask about the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).  Zebari said he had discussed it with the Secretary when she was in town.  He informed Menendez that the members of the 3 plus 1 were each designating a representative to the Iraq team, and promised that the negotiations would be conducted in a professional and meaningful way, unlike the UNSCR renewal of the MNF-I mandate in December.  He said that timing was key.  Although the Iraqi security forces are not ready to take over entirely, the agreement cannot be open-ended.  It is a matter of sovereignty and other sensitive issues, such as command of the Iraqi forces, the immunity of security details, and who controls entry into Iraq.  When asked about the Minister of Defense's comments on how the Iraqi armed forces will not be able to secure the country from external forces until 2018, Zebari said the Minister had misspoken and was answering the question as a soldier and not a diplomat.  He said 2007 had been a tough year, but that he thinks Iraq has passed the threat of sectarian and civil war.  Now there is international support, money in the budget because of high oil prices, and better reconciliation -- "a single sect cannot govern Iraq."  LEGISLATION -----------  6.  (C)  Menendez apologized for asking a domestic policy question, but wanted the opinion of the Foreign Minister on the domestic aspects of the provincial powers legislation and the issue of internally displaced persons (IDPs).  Zebari opined that the majority of Iraqis have the desire for a strong federal government -- it is part of the Constitution. He listed the main legislation that needs to be finalized as the laws on hydrocarbons, provincial powers, revenue sharing and elections.  He also lamented the work of the Council of Representatives (CoR), saying that they needed to work with the executive branch more and manage legislation better, including obtaining a quorum and coalition-building.  Zebari also mentioned the need for the Awakening movements to be integrated immediately, into either the Iraqi security forces or the government or this could become an explosive situation.  In the end, it is about reconciling the nation. According to Zebari, "this package of legislation will show others that the Iraqis are willing to live together and share the wealth of the nation."  7. (U)  CODEL Menedez did not have the opportunity to clear this cable before departure. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000157  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: VP HASHIMI ON POWER-SHARING, RECONCILIATION, AND FEDERALISM WITH CODEL MENENDEZ  REF: BAGHDAD 117  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary: Vice President Hashimi told Senator Bob Menendez (D-NJ) and the Deputy Chief of Mission (DCM) on January 20 that PM Maliki recently expressed his willingness to be a partner on the 3 plus 1 Executive Council and is optimistic about this new "team spirit" in the leadership. Hashimi expressed disappointment regarding some of the amendments in the recently passed Justice and Accountability law, highlighting an amendment he fears will force loyal, patriotic Iraqi National Intelligence Service (INIS) employees to retire.  On federalism, Hashimi said he supports decentralization to the provinces, but with a "strong" government in Baghdad.  When asked about the regions law, he said it is "not a priority" for him.  End summary.  NEW "TEAM SPIRIT" FOR POWER-SHARING -----------------------------------  2. (C) VP Hashimi told Senator Bob Menendez (D-NJ) and the DCM he is optimistic about PM Maliki's recent willingness to be a partner in the Executive Council (formerly known as the 3 plus 1).  He acknowledged this new "team spirit" will be good for the GOI leadership.  VP Hashimi talked about the many stumbling blocks of the last year in the political process and expressed hope the "stagnation" is over.  He criticized the USG for focusing too much on benchmarks like the hydrocarbon law, instead of overall stability in Iraq. Senator Mendendez asked VP Hashimi about what he sees as priorities for Iraq in 2008.  Hashimi identified reconciliation, provincial elections, power-sharing, and combating corruption.  Hashimi would like to see sectarianism reduced in 2008 with everyone considered "Iraqi citizens" instead of belonging to a particular sect.  VP'S REACTION TO JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY LAW --------------------------------------------- --  3. (C) In discussing reconciliation, VP Hashimi told Senator Menendez he believes the new Justice and Accountability law will "partially" resolve the problem.  He added, "I am not happy with this law."  Overall, he said, he agrees with the legislation, but is upset with some of the amendments. Specifically, he said the legislation as passed by the Council of Representatives (CoR) will practically "shut down" the Iraqi National Intelligence Service (INIS), which includes former Ba'athists.  Hashimi complained that if the law is implemented as passed by the CoR, a thousand INIS employees would be forced to retire.  He said an exception was needed for those employees who have helped to stabilize security since 2003.  MIXED MESSAGES FROM HASHIMI ON FEDERALISM IN IRAQ --------------------------------------------- ----  4. (C) VP Hashimi gave mixed messages in responses to questions from Senator Menendez about his opinions on federalism in Iraq.  Initially he exclaimed, "Federalism is a recipe for a civil war!"  However, moments later he said he supports decentralization of authority to the provinces -- but with a "strong" government in Baghdad.  In response to Senator Menendez's question about what Hashimi thinks will happen when the regions law is implemented in April 2008, Hashimi only said, "I am not giving it a priority."  He added that it is a controversial issue and he recommends not pushing it quickly until there is stability in the provinces.  "Each province can then select their future without any form of oppression," Hashimi said.  5. (U) Senator Menendez did not have the opportunity to clear this cable before his departure. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000159  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: TRIBAL AWAKENINGS: SOUTHERNERS STILL HALF-ASLEEP  REF: A. BASRAH 000115      B. BAGHDAD 00008  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (U) This is a joint Baghdad POL - PRT Maysan, Muthanna, Karbala, Najaf, Dhi Qar, Diwaniyah, Babil, Wasit and REO Basrah cable.  2.  (C) Summary: There is no "Shi'a awakening" in southern Iraq comparable to the ar-Ramadi based Sunni Awakening. There is a plethora of independent tribal movements of unknown influence, including groups in Basrah, Dhi Qar, and Maysan and more clandestine groups in Karbala and Najaf. Individual sheikhs in many southern governorates have also approached U.S. REOs and PRTs in hopes of securing U.S. support for a southern awakening movement.  Independent tribal movements and sheikhs currently lack real power and influence, although they could pose a future political threat to the religious parties if they are able to capitalize on growing popular resentment over provincial government performance.  The establishment, both the Supreme Council (ISCI) and Dawa, are watching with concern.  In the meantime, the southern tribes are no longer asleep, but not yet fully awake. End Summary.  Independent Shi'a Awakenings ----------------------------  3.  (S/NF) In an echo of the "awakenings" by Sunni tribes in Anbar and elsewhere, several independent tribal movements have also emerged in the south.  The Independent National Iraqi Tribal Assembly was started in Basrah by technocrats, local NGOs, and sheikhs from 33 tribes.  The group's stated goals are to end sectarianism and the rule of religious parties and to support a unified Iraq.  The group is slowly expanding into Maysan, Dhi Qar, and Muthanna.  4.  (S/NF) A second group, the Maysan Tribal Council, is led by Sheikh Muhammad Hassan Sajar al-Fartusi. Some 500 tribal members from Maysan, Wasit and Basrah reportedly attended the last council conference held in December 2007.  The conference culminated in the release of a 10 point statement that featured the rejection of any armed groups, statements supporting national unity and federalism, and calls for parties to sign an honor document to maintain security.  5.  (C) In addition to the Maysan Tribal Council, two other tribal groups are reportedly based in Maysan.  Both were founded by Kareem Mahmoud al-Muhammedewi (Abu Hatim).  The first, the Maysan Nobles Council, was founded in March 2006 to lobby the provincial government and eventually field candidates in provincial elections.  Mahmoud subsequently founded the second, the National Front for the Salvation of the South, to combat Iranian activity.  No further information is available on either group.  6.  (S/NF) There are rumors of Shi'a awakening councils being established in Karbala, especially in the al-Husseiniya sub-district in response to al-Qaeda activity in nearby North Babil.  These councils do not enjoy a large degree of popular support because the public considers Karbala relatively safe and sees no need for additional armed groups.  Separate reporting indicates that senior sheikhs in Najaf have founded a secret Shi'a awakening movement with CDR of the 5th Border Patrol Unit MG Ghazali in order to combat Iranian influence. Finally, individual sheikhs from Basrah, Karbala, Dhi Qar, Maysan and Babil have approached the Regional Embassy Offices in Basrah and Hillah in hopes of receiving U.S. support for an Anbar-style awakening movement against Iran.  7.  (S/NF) The exact influence and strength of these independent movements is unclear, but at present the tribes appear unwilling or unable to meaningfully influence politics without U.S. support.  However, some sheikhs are tentatively beginning to seek alliances with political independents and other civil society groups.  If they are able to form a common political front, they could in theory capitalize on resentment towards religious parties to compete in the next round of provincial elections.  Iranian, Sadrist, and GOI opposition ------------------------------------  8.  (S/NF) Provincial governments in the south are uniformly hostile to these independent movements.  Abd al-Aziz Hakim and other ISCI heavyweights have expressed concern over what they admit are unsubstantiated rumors of USG support to southern tribal awakening groups. In meetings with U.S. officials, the ISCI and Da'wa governors of Babil, Najaf, Karbala, and Diwaniyah have repeatedly warned that the absence of al-Qaeda and the presence of ISF and strong  BAGHDAD 00000159  002 OF 002   provincial governments make any attempt to replicate the Anbar awakening unnecessary and dangerous.  9.  (S/NF) Iran opposes any tribal awakening movement and is pursuing its own strategy of tribal engagement.  Iran's al-A'lam satellite channel regularly condemns tribal awakening as a U.S. government plot to divide Iraq and undermine the GOI.  In a meeting with the REO, Basrah sheiks warned that Iran was recruiting tribal leaders to preempt any U.S. policy of tribal engagement (reftel A).  In November, Iran invited 60 sheikhs and family members from Wasit for a 15-day tour of the country that included visits to holy sites and anti-American lectures (reftel B).  Reporting suggests that the Sadr movement is likewise opposed to these movements and is trying to infiltrate or suppress movements in Basrah and Maysan.  Comment -------  10.  (S/NF) Many of the south's tribal leaders are not content with their political and economic circumstances, although the amount of frustration depends on the degree to which political power mirrors tribal power in the south.  In the majority of the south the political dominance of the religious parties has marginalized the sheikhs while their tribesmen have become entangled in militia fighting.  The sheikhs are also envious of U.S. support for their Sunni counterparts.  11.  (S/NF) This frustration and envy has led to the appearance of several independent tribal movements throughout the south.  It is unclear how much influence and power these movements have, if any, but most seem limited at present to an advocacy and civil service role.  The U.S. would likely be aware of any substantial tribal movement, if only because provincial government officials would immediately accuse us of providing the movement support.  Many of these leaders are mimicking the organization and rhetoric of the Anbar awakening, albeit against Iran rather than AQI, in hopes of gaining U.S. support.  Southern tribes could in theory mobilize against Iranian and militia influence in the same way their Sunni cousins banded together against al-Qaeda. However, as Dawa member and advisor to the Prime Minister Sami al-Askari admitted to us, this would be actively opposed by the GOI and the major religious parties.  Absent a radical change in U.S. policy, which would trigger a major confrontation with the government, there is little to no chance of a spontaneous tribal awakening in the south.  A slightly more likely possibility is a "political awakening" of tribal leaders participating in the next round of provincial elections.  To succeed, a political awakening would have to contend with the considerable organizational and militia strength of the religious parties, who much prefer the tribes continue their slumber.  End Comment. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000160  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR ISSA HAMEED AHMED, SHALLAL HABEEB RASOOL AL-RUBAYE, RAHIM NAEEM HWIEN AL-DALMY, JASIM FAISAL HUSSEIN, MOHAMMED HASSOMI HUSSEIN, KAREEM NEAMAH ABED WASSAF, ISMAEL MOHAMMED SELBI, SAAD RIDHA MOUSA ABU ALHAB   1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following eight (8) candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME:  Issa Hameed AHMED POSITION:  Colonel, Iraqi Army DOB:  February 1, 1957 TYPE OF TRAINING:  AMC Depot Tour to U.S. TRAINING LOCATION: Texarkaran, TX and Anniston, AL DATES OF TRAINING: March 8, 2008 to March 30, 2008  NAME:  Shallal Habeeb RASOOL Al-Rubaye POSITION:  Brigadier General, Iraqi Army DOB:  August 28, 1959 TYPE OF TRAINING:  AMC Depot Tour to U.S. TRAINING LOCATION: Texarkaran, TX and Anniston, AL DATES OF TRAINING: March 8, 2008 to March 30, 2008  NAME:  Rahim Naeem HWIEN Al-Dalmy POSITION:  Brigadier General, Iraqi Army DOB:  July 1, 1956 TYPE OF TRAINING:  AMC Depot Tour to U.S. TRAINING LOCATION: Texarkaran, TX and Anniston, AL DATES OF TRAINING: March 8, 2008 to March 30, 2008  NAME:  Jasim Faisal HUSSEIN POSITION:  Major, Iraqi Army DOB:  January 15, 1964 TYPE OF TRAINING:  AMC Depot Tour to U.S. TRAINING LOCATION: Texarkaran, TX and Anniston, AL DATES OF TRAINING: March 8, 2008 to March 30, 2008  NAME:  Mohammed Hassomi HUSSEIN POSITION:  Colonel, Iraqi Army DOB:  December 8, 1962 TYPE OF TRAINING:  AMC Depot Tour to U.S. TRAINING LOCATION: Texarkaran, TX and Anniston, AL DATES OF TRAINING: March 8, 2008 to March 30, 2008  NAME:  Kareem Neamah ABED Wassaf POSITION:  Colonel, Iraqi Army DOB:  January 1, 1962 TYPE OF TRAINING:  AMC Depot Tour to U.S. TRAINING LOCATION: Texarkaran, TX and Anniston, AL DATES OF TRAINING: March 8, 2008 to March 30, 2008  NAME:  Ismael Mohammed SELBI POSITION:  Colonel, Iraqi Army DOB:  January 3, 1963 TYPE OF TRAINING:  AMC Depot Tour to U.S. TRAINING LOCATION: Texarkaran, TX and Anniston, AL  DATES OF TRAINING: March 8, 2008 to March 30, 2008  NAME:  Saad Ridha MOUSA Abu Alhab POSITION:  Colonel, Iraqi Army DOB:  May 31, 1965 TYPE OF TRAINING:  AMC Depot Tour to U.S. TRAINING LOCATION: Texarkaran, TX and Anniston, AL DATES OF TRAINING: March 8, 2008 to March 30, 2008  CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000161  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR ALAA HUSSEIN KHALEEL AL SHAIKHLI  REF:  Baghdad 3964  1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME: Alaa Hussein Khaleel AL SHAIKHLI POSITION:  Colonel, Iraqi Army DOB:  March 9, 1961 TYPE OF TRAINING:  English Language Course, International Fellows Orientation TRAINING LOCATION: Lackland AFB, San Antonio, Texas and Army War College, Carlisle, PA DATES OF TRAINING: February 15, 2008 to June 6, 2009  CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000162  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PREL, IZ, REL UK SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - January 17 & January 20   1. SUMMARY: The Provision of Services Committee met for the first time in slightly more than a month on Tuesday, January 15. The Ministries of Oil, Trade, Health, Education and Defense attended. The National Security Advisor was represented as was the Joint Planning Commission, Iraqi Ground Forces, the Amanat, FAQ (Baghdad Security Plan) spokesperson, MNF-I, MNC-I and the US Embassy. Topics included oil, highlighting kerosene and jet fuel shortages; inadequate schools; health; and significant service shortages in Ghazaliya. A special session was called on January 20 to address pharmaceutical procurement. END SUMMARY.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - Not Unlike Previous Meetings: Ministries Detail Issues - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  2. The Ministry of Oil (MoO) suggested that "some" entity be responsible for monitoring crude shipments to factories.  It was previously reported that factories are selling the crude rather than using it to operate their facilities because it is more profitable. A committee member suggested that the local council be responsible for this issue, but no final decision was made. MoO reported that fuel had been provided to Sabi' Al Bor, a suburb of Baghdad, also a previous committee recommendation. The representative also asked MNF-I why repair to the 14" pipeline to Doura was postponed on January 15. MNF-I responded that the work will commence on January 24, but wasn't certain of the cause for delay. Finally, the MoO warned of continued jet fuel and kerosene shortages due to unreliable electricity at refineries. The MoO suggested purchasing generators to operate refineries when necessary. Fuel for the generators would still need to be supplied.  3. Representatives from the Ministry of Health (MoH) claimed that there was a nation-wide shortage of medical equipment like CT scans and MRIs. They also complained that there has been no resolution to the ongoing shortage of life saving medications. This procurement delay was attributed to Khamidiya, the MoH's internal procurement process, and the rules and regulations more generally governing prescription drug procurement. Chalabi called a special health session to be held on Sunday, January 20 to address this issue. The committee agreed. The MoH announced that the transfer of the Al Karkh Hospital was complete and it will open this week for military personnel.  4. Dr. Chalabi again rattled out numbers of schools needed nation-wide. He said that Baghdad alone needs 1,000 more. Previously land rights were an issue, but according to several committee members the Amanat, the Provincial Council and the Ministry of Education (MoEd) has come to an agreement. Chalabi requested a report on the schools throughout Baghdad, highlighting which schools need to be rehabilitated and where new schools can be built. ITAO Director Tokola reminded the committee that Prime Minister Maliki had suggested renting space for schools if construction would take long. The committee did not favor the idea of renting, but another member suggested the use of trailers.  5. The committee reviewed decisions taken to alleviate the potable water shortage in Nahrawan, including the use of trucks to deliver water to the province. The Amanat said that tankers were not an efficient solution to the problem. They questioned who would be responsible for the tankers and they pointedly stated that the Baghdad Water Authority really should solve this problem.  6. Chairman of the Joint Planning Commission, Mr. Riyadh Filaheh discussed the inadequate services in Ghazaliya, due largely to militia influence. He reported that the JPC was reviewing service sector areas by security districts, as designated in the Baghdad Security Plan (BSP). The JPC will now review projects by political districts to ensure all areas are completely reviewed. Riyadh also noted that local councils have significant vacancies which continue to hinder local service delivery and infrastructure improvements. He said that individuals have volunteered, but were unqualified, lacking formal educations or having criminal records. Dr. Chalabi encouraged them to appoint local council members as quickly as possible.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Special Session on Health Issues - Sunday, January 20 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  7. Dr. Chalabi, Dr. Adel, the Deputy Minister of Finance, the US Embassy Health Attach, Dr. Tahseen (the FAQ spokesperson), and two other representatives from MoH attended the special session on life saving drugs procurement. The DG of pharmaceutical safety joined the group at the very end of the meeting.  8. The first discussion revolved around the committee's previous recommendation to pay doctors overtime for on-call services. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) is still holding up this funding. Another letter will be sent to the PM urging his interference in this matter.  9. The group then discussed the best way to purchase 75 life saving  BAGHDAD 00000162  002 OF 002   drugs. They concluded that the current process is too cumbersome and will not allow for an immediate resolution to the ongoing shortage. The recommendation was adopted to send a letter to DPM Barham Saleh to authorize the MoH to purchase life saving drugs from the private sector directly, similar to the agreement the Ministry of Trade has regarding food purchases. It is not clear how many vendors are available to purchase drugs directly from in Iraq, but the IG estimated 14 vendors. Chalabi questioned whether or not the MoH's reputation with these vendors was strong enough for direct purchase. The IG insisted it would work. Chalabi also suggested that the current mandatory bidding process could be avoided if the MoH set a fixed price and then allowed any vendors to sell the product if they meet the MoH set price.  - - - - Comment - - - -  10. After the lengthy holiday, the Services Committee seems to be back in the swing of things, business as usual. The Ministry of Electricity and the Baghdad Operations Command both were absent from the meeting, which Chalabi expressly noted, promising to send a letter to General Abhoud and Dr. Karim. An interesting observation was Dr. Chalabi's remark that the work of the Services Committee is not long-term, as that was the function of the ministries as well as the Amanat and Provincial Council.  He emphasized short-term, immediate fixes.   Crocker 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000164  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2018 TAGS: PINS, PGOV, MOPS, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: CONCERNED LOCAL CITIZENS PROGRAM:  SECURING COMMUNITIES  REF: A. BAGHDAD 3722 (2007)      B. BAGHDAD 3957 (2007)      C. BAGHDAD 4189 (2007)      D. BAGHDAD 4205 (2007)  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary: The expansion of the Concerned Local Citizens (CLC) program in 2007 has augmented Multinational Force - Iraq (MNF-I) efforts to bring security to Iraq.  CLCs are temporary arrangements that were organized by Coalition and Iraqi Security Forces in order to augment local force protection, law enforcement and infrastructure security. CLC groups have been credited with sharp reductions in violence in areas where they are present.  Always viewed as an interim solution to neighborhood security and the lack of local police, a significant portion who meet the qualifications, are starting to be integrated into Iraqi Security Forces (ISF).  The remaining CLCs will be eligible for training and employment opportunities within their communities.  The core of this transition will be the transfer of the CLC program to the GOI, which will assume responsibility for control and funding of the CLC program.  End Summary.  ------------------------------------------ Definitions and Origins of the CLC Program ------------------------------------------  2. (U) The CLC program was established in 2007 as a temporary security program administered by MNF-I and Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) to augment local force protection, law enforcement and/or infrastructure security.  These groups of local Iraqi citizens use intimate knowledge of their local neighborhoods in order to detect and deter extremists from within or outside of their communities to reduce violence against the local population.  CLC members sign a pledge of loyalty and undergo a screening process, including biometrics registration.  Most CLCs are paid under a contract currently administered by Coalition Forces.  Salaries for rank and file members average about $300 per month.  3. (C) CLC members are motivated by a variety of interests, including a sense that al-Qaida (AQI) had become a destructive force in their communities, that the time had come to reject AQI's corrupt ideology and remove AQI from their communities, as well as the need for employment.  These communities stand to benefit from reconstruction opportunities as well as the development of local institutions. Their rapid expansion in 2007 was a direct consequence of the surge.  4. (U) The first group of CLCs emerged in Ramadi in late 2006, out of the al-Anbar Awakening.  Local tribal leaders, led by Sheik Sattar abu Risha, had become disillusioned with the activities of al-Qaida agreed to work with Coalition Forces and Iraqi Security Forces to secure their neighborhoods against AQI.  The well-publicized successes of the al-Anbar Awakening spurred numerous similar "awakening" groups ("sahwa") gaining momentum particularly throughout the spring and summer of 2007.  CLCs are also known as Iraqi Security Volunteers in Baghdad.  --------------------------------------------- ----- CLC Numbers, Locations, and Religious Affiliations --------------------------------------------- -----  5. (C) The CLC program has grown from a handful of initiatives in early 2007 to around 136 separate CLC initiatives across the country today, totaling over 80,000 volunteers, of which almost 70,000 are on contract.  That number is expected to increase, though the GOI has been informed that 100,000 is the likely upper limit.  The composition of CLCs tends to reflect the local sectarian distribution in the affected areas:  there are now Sunni, Shia, and mixed CLC initiatives, covering a diverse set of areas from the desert of western Anbar to the dense urban neighborhoods of Baghdad.  However, the majority remain Sunni, reflecting both the decision by Sunni neighborhoods to turn against AQI and the fact that it is primarily Sunni neighborhoods and towns that are without local police forces.   --------------------------- CLC Training and Operations ---------------------------  6. (U) CLC activities take a number of forms, including intelligence-gathering arrangements, infrastructure protection, and checkpoint duty.  They work closely with CF in the area, and in many cases with ISF units as well.  Some CLCs have been provided up to 80 hours of training, though many receive only very basic instruction in communications  BAGHDAD 00000164  002 OF 002   procedures with CF.  According to principles agreed between CF and the GOI, CLCs must be recruited locally, and operate only in the neighborhoods where they reside.  All volunteers are entered into the CF biometrics database.  Inevitably, there have been a small number of incidents of misbehavior by individual CLC members.  Where this has occurred, the biometrics and other controls in place have been sufficient to identify and detain these individuals.  ------------------- Arms and "Uniforms" -------------------  7. (U) CLC members are allowed to carry their personally-owned small arms (e.g. AK-47) while on duty. MNF-I does not provide weapons to CLCs.  CLC members often wear distinctive clothing and markings so that citizens and security forces can easily identify them.  These "uniforms" vary widely from one CLC to another.  -------------------------------------------- Not All CLCs Will be Integrated into the ISF --------------------------------------------  8. (U) Approximately 80,000 CLC members are currently enrolled in the CLC program, of which 69,800 are currently paid by Coalition Forces on three-month renewable contracts, using CERP funding.  The remainder are unpaid volunteers working with Coalition Forces in a variety of ways.  The vast majority of these CLCs are concentrated in Baghdad and the areas immediately surrounding Baghdad to the west and south.  9. (U) MNF-I is working with the GOI to bring a portion of these individuals into the Iraqi police and Iraqi Army.  A first group of about 1,700 volunteers were hired into the Iraqi police last fall, most of them from the formerly troubled West Baghdad Sunni neighborhood of Abu Ghraib.  Many of these volunteers had been associated with armed insurgent groups, but had turned against al-Qaida and created one of the early success stories for the program.  10. (C) About 23,000 CLC members have now indicated interest in joining the ISF directly.  PM Maliki has agreed to a CF proposal to integrate about 20-25 percent of all CLC members into either the MOI or the MOD.  The GOI has developed a process for prioritizing this hiring via the Prime Minister's Implementation and Follow-up Committee for National Reconciliation, headed by Deputy National Security Advisor Safa al-Shaykh.  Hiring lists are vetted by the Committee, then sent to the MOI for hiring orders.  Over the last four weeks, over 5,000 Baghdad CLC names have been released to the MOI for hiring orders, and a first group has begun police training.  Several thousand additional CLC names are likely to be released soon, contributing to a portion of the 12,000 additional police envisioned under the Baghdad police hiring plan.  11. (C) The GOI has agreed to work with CF to find training and employment opportunities for the remaining 75-80 percent of the CLCs, including assistance with finding jobs in both the private and public sector, small business loans and grants, vocational training and education.  MNF-I intends to support the development and implementation of these reintegration programs and where appropriate fund portions of the program to accelerate the implementation using the CF Iraqi Security Force Funds allocated to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).  The GOI has agreed to match CF funding, and has promised USD 155.5 million in 2008 for such programs.  USM-I will use some of its funds to create vocational/technical and other job training programs that will help to train some of these volunteers who choose not to continue in the security field.  While it will be an enormous challenge to transition these very diverse local forces into non-security employment, the GOI has made clear to us that they also recognize how critical it will be to get this right. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000166  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/17/2018 TAGS: IZ, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PINS, PNAT, PTER, TU SUBJECT: MALIKI ON CABINET SHAKE-UP, RETURN OF TAWAFAQ, AND MAJOR LEGISLATIVE CHALLENGES  BAGHDAD 00000166  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) SUMMARY: In a wide-ranging weekly security meeting on January 17, Prime Minister Maliki told Ambassador Crocker and General Petraeus that a Cabinet shake-up was very possible within a few weeks which would likely result in a technocratic government with fewer ministries. Maliki expressed hope that the Tawafaq party could be induced to return to the government at the same time. Maliki expressed optimism about passage of some form of a Provincial Powers Law, agreed to push the Accountability and Justice Law through the Executive Council, and remained doubtful about the moribund Hydrocarbon Law unless President Talibani pressed his Kurdish political allies. Concerning employment of Concerned Local Citizens (CLCs), the Ambassador stressed the need for the GOI to develop a comprehensive employment program.  Maliki agreed and proposed using a joint USG-GOI $300 million fund to seed the program. General Petraeus briefed progress in Baghdad security but noted that Jaysh al-Mahdi Special Group (JAM-SG) leaders were re-infiltrating Sadr City.  Prime Minister Maliki proposed using Iraqi forces armed with USG and GOI intelligence to eliminate the problem. The meeting concluded with a short discussion about the Makmour Refugee Camp, where Maliki expressed frustration in diplomatic progress on the issue with Turkey. END SUMMARY.   Cabinet Shake-up and Reduction ------------------------------  2. (S) In his weekly security meeting with the Ambassador and General Petraeus, Prime Minister Maliki disclosed that a possible cabinet shake-up could occur soon, possibly within the next two weeks. He said he has already taken his proposal for a technocratic government--without any political party quotas--to the Executive Council. Maliki said he envisions a smaller cabinet whose members speak with one voice, remain partners in the political process, and work towards reconciliation. He noted, however, that the smaller political parties may lose currently held ministries in the downsizing.  Tawafaq Return -------------- 3. (S) Maliki expressed hope that this reshuffling would provide an opportunity for the Tawafaq party to return to the government. He described the ongoing negotiations noting he had already acted to extend government pensions to ministers that Tawafaq would not reappoint. The Ambassador urged the PM to meet Hashimi half way in his requests. Both sides would need to compromise.  4. (S) Maliki noted that former PM Allawi's Iraqiyya party also wanted to rejoin the government but was demanding that he fire two ministers who had remained in the cabinet after Allawi ordered their resignation. But even on this issue Maliki left the door open, saying he did not consider the loss of ministerial posts during a Cabinet reduction a "dismissal".  5. (S) In response, the Ambassador urged Maliki to use performance criteria as the primary basis for keeping current ministers in a new cabinet. Maliki concurred, but added once again that loyalty of the two Iraqiyya ministers to their country--over partisan politics--would be considered an extenuating circumstance. When the Ambassador asked if Maliki and the Minister for Communications, Muhammad Allawi, had met on this issue, the Prime Minister said yes and revealed his belief that family pressures--not politics--were the primary reason Allawi boycotted the government.  Pending Legislation -------------------  6. (S) Turning to the Provincial Powers Law currently under consideration by the Council of Representatives (CoR), Maliki said he believed one of the two competing bills would pass and subsequently pave the way for new provincial elections. He stated that the biggest obstacle to passage was disagreement among the Shia parties, some of whom feared a return of a strong central government like that of Saddam Hussein, while others wanted more control over Provincial Governors and their security forces.   BAGHDAD 00000166  002.2 OF 003   7. (S) Agreeing the law could soon generate new provincial elections, General Petraeus urged Maliki to press the parliament on the issue. He stressed that this law would give hope to new political forces in the provinces which had courageously faced down Al-Qaeda and other militia groups. These people, he added, now wanted a voice in their own local government.  General Petraeus asked Maliki if he would compromise on the ability of the PM to fire a governor if the provinces compromised on their desire for the governor to be able to control federal security forces in an emergency. Maliki replied only that he did not want a return to a Saddam-like central government.  8. (S) Regarding the Accountability and Justice (de-Baathification) Law, the Ambassador recalled the strong endorsement given it by Secretary Rice during her recent visit. He emphasized the Secretary's desire that this completed legislation move quickly through the Executive Council into law.  Maliki agreed and noted the next meeting of the Council was Monday, January 21.  9. (S) The Ambassador also expressed his belief that the pending Hydrocarbon Law would be the toughest legislative issue of the three and would require high-level Iraqi government attention to move it forward in the CoR.  He noted that Under Secretary Jeffrey had come to Iraq to encourage progress and asked whether it was time for the Prime Minister to make a strong public statement endorsing its provisions.  10. (S) Maliki agreed the hydrocarbon legislation was a complicated issue, and he blamed the parliamentary delay on the Kurdish parties.  Rather than make a statement himself, he proposed waiting for President Talibani who, as a Kurd, would be in a better position to influence his political allies. Maliki added that Talibani had assured him that the KRG had agreed to freeze their demands for changes in the law and stop signing new contracts.  Concerned Local Citizens (CLCs) -------------------------------  11. (S) Ambassador Crocker thanked the Prime Minister for his assistance in the hiring of CLC members into Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and other local security units. The Ambassador also acknowledged these security forces could not absorb all the CLC personnel. He urged Maliki to concentrate on creating alternative jobs in the civilian sector. General Petraeus added that the infusion of about a billion dollars into the program now, coupled with a public announcement, would be a very positive step until the jobs creation processes caught up.  12. (S) Although Prime Minister Maliki expressed his strong support for the program, he proposed starting with the $300 million USG-GOI matching funds which have been previously identified. He remarked that his staff was already considering options like job training centers, small business loans, and civil service employment. He agreed to solicit additional ideas from USG counterparts.  Baghdad Security ----------------  13. (S) General Petraeus gave the Prime Minister a brief overview of Baghdad security issues, describing extensive combat operations against Al-Qaida (AQI) in the South, noting that no civilians had been seriously injured or killed. Acknowledging media reports regarding the large number of coalition aircraft bombing missions, General Petraeus said they successfully targeted large numbers of hidden improvised explosive devices (IEDs), which had produced some secondary explosions. He reported that Coalition Forces (CF) had also discovered, and were in the process of clearing, a large number of AQI bunkers to the southwest of Samarra.  Turning to Sadr City, General Petraeus reported that Jaysh al-Mahdi Special Group (JAM-SG) leaders were infiltrating back into the densely populated Shia neighborhoods but that additional Interior Ministry checkpoints around the area had reduced the number of IED attacks there.  14. (S) Maliki thanked General Petraeus for the update and expressed hope that newly trained Iraqi units--which Maliki had personally observed--would be able to assume security  BAGHDAD 00000166  003.2 OF 003   duties in Sadr City.  National Security Advisor Rubaie wondered if the CF could share the intelligence data on the JAM-SG leaders who had returned.  Maliki added that many Sadrists were now providing the ISF with additional intelligence.  Maliki said it was desirable for Iraqi security forces to arrest these individuals with a minimum disruption to the local community.  15. (S) General Petraeus reminded NSA Rubaie that he already possessed most of the CF intelligence available on these individuals but offered to provide an additional briefing detailing their transit routes from the Iranian border to Baghdad.  Makhmour Refugee Camp --------------------  16. (S) Rounding out the meeting, General Petraeus highlighted the recent visit of Turkish Deputy Chief of Staff General Saygun to MNF-I headquarters. General Petraeus said he had urged the Turkish Deputy to carry back a message for the GOT to pursue a diplomatic solution to the Makhmour Refugee Camp, perhaps through the UNHCR. General Petraeus said it would be useful if the Prime Minister could press UNAMI to use whatever influence it had on UNHCR.  Maliki shrugged his shoulders and lamented that when the GOI last broached the subject of negotiations with the GOT, the Turks told him "it's our business but we'll think about your offer." CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000167  SIPDIS  STATE FOR USAID  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/22/2018 TAGS: PREF, PTER, PHUM, TU, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: MAKHMOUR REFUGEE CAMP -- STILL NO SOLUTION IN SIGHT  REF: A. 2005 MOSUL 150      B. 07 GENEVA 988  Classified By: Ninewa PRT Leader Jason Hyland: Reasons 1.4(b) and (d)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  Summary -------  1. (SBU) The director of the Makhmour refugee camp Ahmed Dzayee discussed the status and future of the camp with the PRT leader and representatives on January 15.  He described the ways that people in the camp make a living, how the camp is supported and the security situation.  New families moved into the camp in November.  No progress has been made toward finding a durable solution for the refugees in Makhmour.  Makhmour: Background --------------------  2. (SBU) The Makhmour refugee camp was opened in 1991 to support a population of Kurdish refugees from Turkey.  The refugees came into Iraq to escape hostilities between the Turkish government and the terrorist group Kongra-Gel/PKK. The camp was established by the Iraqi government and then turned over to the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) (ref a).  Responding to concerns that the camp provided a safehaven for PKK activity and a fertile ground for new terrorist recruits, and as part of the trilateral GOT-GOI-U.S. process to counter the PKK, the Government of Turkey (GOT), the Government of Iraq (GOI) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees (UNHCR), with the United States as an observer, attempted to negotiate and sign a Tri-Partite Agreement to find a durable solution for the residents of the Makhmour refugee camp.  Negotiations stalled after an April 2007 meeting in Geneva revealed enduring differences among the parties (ref b).  3. (C) In January 2007 the Iraqi Security Forces inspected the camp and turned up no weapons and no one professing to be PKK.  After that, the UNHCR considered the civilian character of the camp restored and it appeared to lose the sense of urgency in closing it.  The draft trilateral agreement remains stalled.  UNHCR will not move forward with conducting a survey of camp residents to determine their resettlement preference following the camp,s closure (return to Turkey, integrate elsewhere in Iraq, or third country resettlement), absent clear information from the GOT regarding what type of assistance returnees to Turkey will receive and whether specific individuals will be subject to prosecution for past crimes.  The Turks have refused to give such assurances regarding prosecution and GOT officials have said in the past that returnees from Makhmour would be eligible for the same, relatively small assistance package provided to internally displaced persons forced to move during the counter-insurgency operations in the 1990s.  The GOT has held to its position that direct PKK influence over the camp and its residents must be brought to a halt before residents, true preferences on resettlement can be stated.  Camp Supported by the UN, with Help from the Kurds --------------------------------------------- -----  4. (SBU) In a 15 January meeting with PRT leader and representatives, the director of the Makhmour refugee camp Ahmed Dzayee said that the primary source of aid for the refugee camp remained UNHCR, with the Swedish humanitarian non-governmental organization Qandil and the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) providing the rest.  Dzayee stated that UNHCR had recently increased aid, especially for security.  The Ninewa Government had improved its support to the camp with more frequent shipment of Public Distribution System (PDS) rations and fuel.  However, PDS rations were frequently missing one or more items and fuel shipments were sporadic at best.  The December bombing by insurgents of the bridge at Qayarra had severely hampered supply shipments to the camp, further reducing the amount of fuel delivered. Water supply continued to be a serious issue; lack of electricity impeded the pumping of water both from the town of Makhmour and from wells within the camp itself.  The KRG had been sending four tankers per day of potable water to the  BAGHDAD 00000167  002 OF 002   camp from Erbil.  UNHCR Building New Schools --------------------------  5. (SBU) According to Dzayee, UNHCR had recently committed to building two new schools in the camp to alleviate over-crowding in the existing schools.  116 refugees from the camp were currently studying at the University of Erbil. They have been supported by the KRG with an additional stipend from UNHCR.  Refugees Rely on Outside Work -----------------------------  6. (SBU) The men of the camp relied primarily on day labor for income, Dzayee said.  Approximately 300 men traveled back and forth to Erbil every day while others relied on the local economy for jobs.  Passes for travel outside the camp and into and out of the District were issued for a month at a time through the camp director himself.  Dzayee also stated that residents of the camp were required to carry their UNHCR registration papers at all times when they were outside the camp.  Security not an Issue ---------------------  7. (SBU) Dzayee reported that the refugee camp was secure and there were currently no specific threat against the village of Makhmour or the camp.  Security for the camp continued to be provided by the Ninewa Iraqi Police and supported by UNHCR.  New Families Arriving Still ---------------------------  8. (C) In November 2007, 22 new families arrived from Turkey and requested refugee status and entry into the UNHCR camp. Dzayee told the Team Leader that UNHCR had recently conducted training and coordination as a precursor to the establishment of a committee to respond to new applications for refugee status.  The committee was comprised of camp management, additional UNHCR representatives, and representatives from the Makhmour police, court and Mayor,s office.  New applicants would not be allowed into the Makhmour camp until the committee had screened each applicant and confirmed their refugee status.  The mayor of Makhmour donated a building to be used to house potential applicants as well as conduct the screening process.  The 22 new families were screened and granted refugee status and have moved into the camp.  Four more new families had recently arrived and were awaiting completion of the screening process.  Comment -------  9. (C) According to Dzayee, the intention of UNHCR was still to close the camp at Makhmour.  However, no progress has been made toward a solution for its refugee population.  Absent a solution, the camp will continue to need aid and support for the foreseeable future.  Security does not seem to be an issue inside the camp.  10. (C) Embassy Comment: Recent Turkish military action against the PKK in northern Iraq may have created the political space necessary for the GOT to begin to take other non-kinetic steps as part of a comprehensive settlement to the PKK issue, to include re-consideration of an offer of limited amnesty to returnees from Makhmour.  Post is encouraging re-engagement by the negotiating parties to seek a durable solution for the refugees and close the camp.  UN SRSG Staffan De Mistura undertook to engage the UNHCR to urge that they approach the GOT to continue negotiations.  S/I Satterfield raised the issue with GOT interlocutors in Ankara January 18. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000175  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/26/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MOPS, MARR, SENV, EAGR, IZ SUBJECT: JANUARY 20 MCNS DISCUSSES ASHURA SECURITY, STRATEGIC WATER POLICY, AIRPORT SECURITY CONTRACT  REF: 2008 BAGHDAD 00126  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (S) Summary: The Ministerial Committee on National Security (MCNS) met January 20 to review the readiness of the Ministry of Interior forces, Baghdad International Airport's security contract, fuel allocations/deliveries for border security forces, and the success of security measures for the Ashura festival.  The largest amount of time was devoted to a presentation by the Minister of Water Resources (MWR) on the situation of Iraqi water resources and its strategic implications now and for the future.  End Summary.  Ashura Security Measures ------------------------  2. (C) The PM opened the meeting with a request for an assessment from the MOI on the security measures undertaken for the Ashura festival.  MOI reported that the security measures had been implemented well with good coordination, arguing the greater the unity of security forces' efforts, the better for security.  Commanding General (CG) David Petraeus praised MOI and MOD efforts, calling their coordination very good.  CG also praised the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) actions in Basra and Nasariyah against extremist elements.  MOI Readiness -------------  3. (S) Minister of Interior Bulani reported that MOI was on track to be fully-staffed and resourced before the end of the year.  This forms a necessary part of the preparations for Provincial Iraqi Control (PIC) in all the provinces of the country by the end of 2008.  There remains a shortage of vehicles - while 4,000 up-armored HMMWVs should be transferred from the Coalition Forces to the ISF in 2008, only in 2009 will the shortage be resolved with the transfer of a second tranche of 4,000 vehicles.  National Security Advisor Rubaie asked if all local police had been issued weapons.  Bulani responded that many vehicles and weapons were at the ports of Aqaba and Kuwait awaiting transport to Iraq.  He noted that MOI now has 23 training centers, 17 more than last year.  These centers were successfully preparing officers and re-training those who need it. Responding to Rubaie, Bulani asserted that Iraq would be self-reliant for internal security by the end of the year. (Note: after the meeting, General Petraeus told Rubaie that Bulani was being very optimistic and that the MOI and MOD forces are nowhere near self-sufficiency.  End Note.)  Fuel for Border Security Forces -------------------------------  4. (S) A frank exchange took place on the allocation and delivery of fuel to MOI and MOD forces.  The CG noted that the allocations for the MOI and MOD were less than half of their needs and even those allocations were not being delivered.  The Deputy Minister of Oil argued that the current security situation dissuaded truckers from making deliveries.  CG, joined by MOI and MOD, responded that perceptions of insecurity on the routes were several months out of date and are based on a situation of violence that has been overcome. CG also noted that with the income from oil sales, the Ministry of Oil could afford to purchase many times the number of trucks lost over six months ago. The Finance Minister asked why the refinery at Haditha was not operating.  The Oil Ministry's response that it was unsafe to deliver crude from the terminal at Baiji to Haditha impressed no one - PM noted that tribal leaders in the area had agreed to provide security for truckers. MOD intervened that his forces would provide security for deliveries, noting they have been doing so for some time, but that the Oil Ministry must provide the transport and drivers.  Anbar Security Chief --------------------  5. (S) Ambassador Crocker raised issue of proposed dismissal of Anbar province Border Security Commander for the region in Anbar Province that includes the Ar Ar Crossing with Saudi Arabia.  He noted that the Awakening Council, the Governor, the Police Commander, and the Provincial Council - a rare consensus - all opposed his removal from office.  He counseled delay and discussion with the interested parties.  The MOI responded that the commander in question, a Colonel Abdallah, would remain  BAGHDAD 00000175  002.2 OF 003   in office temporarily, but that he was not a trained officer and therefore his appointment had been irregular.  He must be replaced, but Minister Bulani promised to consult with provincial leadership to find the right man to replace Colonel Abdallah.  Airport Security Contract -------------------------  6. (S) Once the issue of delayed payments to Baghdad International Airport (BIAP) contractor Global Security was finally raised, National Security Advisor Rubaie recommended putting off the issue until next week due to the absence of the Minister of Transportation.  (Note: The GOI is once again in substantial arrears with security contractor Global RSL, who are threatening to suspend operations at the airport.  This could lead to suspension of ICAO certification.  Work by MNF-I on 21 January appears to have resulted in MinTransport signing payment authorizations to keep the contract in place and BIAP open to international air traffic. End Note.)  Strategic Water Policy ----------------------  7. (C) The Minister of Water Resources, Abd al-Latif Rashid, presented an overview of the strategic value of water resources and steps that must be taken soon to address the problem that Iraq is likely to face in the future.  He opened his remarks by noting that most of Iraq's water originates in Turkey, Syria, and Iran.  Though relations with Turkey and Syria regarding water have been good, development projects in Turkey over the next decade could decrease the flow of water into Iraq from Turkey by 60 percent.  He noted that discussions had taken place in Damascus with the Syrian and the Turks and they had reached agreement on coordination and cooperation, but this was not a binding international agreement.  Iran has not been cooperative at all regarding water resource management, diverting several rivers' courses so that waters do not flow into the Shatt Al Arab.  8. (C) Rashid also noted the importance to put in place modern irrigation and water conservation programs, maintain over 80 thousand kilometers of irrigation canals, clear weeds from rivers, streams, and drainage channels, and build reservoirs to store large amounts of water.  Several rivers also need to be dredged, he added.  9. (C) Regarding the Mosul Dam, Iraq's largest and most important, he insisted that improvements to structure had already been made and the situation of the dam is no longer grave.  That said, extensive repairs are still needed to realize the dam's full potential.  (Note: as long as the Iraqis keep the reservoir pool at 319m or less, rather than the max height of water of 337m, and move forward with a long term plan to add a cut-off wall to reinforce the dam, the Mosul Dam will not likely fail. End Note.)  10. (C) Responding to Ambassador Crocker's question, Rashid said that work on the Nasariyah drainage project had been slowed by the transition from project management by the Washington Group to the MWR.  CG noted that a recent Iraqi change in the project manager should lead to improvements in project implementation.  He also noted that some of the current budget surplus could be used to hire unemployed young men to clear and repair parts of the irrigation system.  Rashid expressed support for this plan, adding that MWR needs kelp-cutters and other equipment.  Finance offered additional funding for the necessary equipment and suggested consulting with the Italians who have expertise in this work.  11. (C) Rashid suggested that the GOI should move towards formal agreements with its neighbors regarding water management. The MOI suggested that cooperation rests on good relations with the neighboring states, also, multi-lateral agreements will likely be needed.  The Foreign Minister agreed that formal agreements on water flow and water quality will be needed but that it is not yet time to involve the larger international community. (Note: One of the MWR recommendations was to use pressure from the Arab League to increase cooperation from Turkey. End Note.)  A consensus emerged that the GOI must continue to engage with Syria and Turkey regarding water resources and that formal legal agreements on water flow quality and quantity will likely be needed in the future.  12. (C) Rubaie praised the MWR presentation for reminding  BAGHDAD 00000175  003 OF 003   the MCNS of the importance of water, for agriculture, personal use, industry, and energy production, which makes its proper management a strategic security issue.  Given that most of Iraq's water originates outside of the country, consultation and arrangements with neighbors will be a vital component of strategic water resource management. CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000176  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  NEA/I AID/W/ANE/IRO FOR PRYOR AND STAAL  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AMGT, PGOV, ECON, PREL, SOCI, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: INFORMAL MINISTERIAL CAPACITY ASSESSMENT 2007  1. (SBU) Summary: The Ministerial Engagement Team (MET) leaders in Embassy Baghdad conducted the second of two informal assessments to determine the level of institutional capacity of several Iraqi ministries.  The Mission used the same methodology in both years and the results of the December 2007 review were compared to the August 2006 assessment.  There was across-the-board improvement in all ministries, with an estimated 12% overall average improvement in the last year.  The survey results noted significant improvements in budget execution, contracting and procurement metrics; these findings are confirmed by increased national spending rates.  The Government of Iraq (GoI) is poised to capitalize on this increased capacity development in 2008 if political will supports continued development in key public administration processes, training, and political commitment to service delivery.  Significant weaknesses exist in the use and development of technology, strategic planning, and human resource and workforce management.  USG and donor representatives continue to encourage the GoI to invest its national resources in these areas, while USG technical assistance also continues to address these weaknesses.  We caution that this is an informal assessment and should only be used to assess trends, not interpreted for mathematical precision or the effectiveness of U.S. assistance programs. END SUMMARY.  INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY OF 12 MINISTRIES WAS REVIEWED IN 2006 AND 2007.  2. (U) Background: Embassy Baghdad conducted a second annual assessment of several Iraqi ministries in December 2007 to review their performance and determine whether there has been progress against a set of indicators.  Although the assessments provide information to confirm and develop Embassy Baghdad,s capacity building assistance plan for 2008 they do not directly gauge effectiveness of US assistance in this area.  The focus was squarely on the GoI.  Twelve ministries were measured in 2006 and 2007.  The ministries assessed in 2007 were Agriculture, Education, Electricity, Finance, Health, Justice, Municipalities and Public Works, Oil, Planning and Development, Water Resources, and Trade.  3. (U) Methodology: In almost all cases ministerial capacity assessment models assume regular access to the ministries and that the structure of an assessment system is already in place.  The models also suggest yardsticks to measure the progress of ministerial capacity building.  To carry out these assessments in a methodologically rigorous manner usually means assembling a team of assessors who are trained to assess to a common standard.  When the assessment is repeated, the same or similar team needs to be assembled to meet the same common standard.  For environments like Iraq, where it is unlikely that the same specialist team will be assembled for successive assessments, the criteria must be simple so an ad-hoc team can assess with the minimum of training time.  This also means that some measures will be left out, despite the desirability of their being assessed.  DEVELOPING THE METRICS USED IN THE ASSESSMENT  4. (U) Ideally, the metrics should act as a benchmark, allowing comparison with other governments.  Organizational Excellence models (EFQM Model and Malcolm Baldridge) and Capability Maturity Models should be able to give a benchmark against international standards; however, it is obvious that the GoI cannot yet be meaningfully measured to these standards.  However, there are available tools that can be used to identify a trend.  By surveying with the same questions annually, a general description of how the GoI is developing could be produced, but cannot be used as a comparison with other organizations or governments.  5. (U)  In developing a tool to measure ministerial performance in Iraq, the Mission identified the source objectives and goals for Ministerial Capacity Development, using the Effective Government and Essential Services Annex to the Joint Campaign Plan.  The US intent -- to help the GoI create the capacity to govern effectively and to provide essential services -- leads to the overall objectives of capacity development and ministerial engagement with the GoI.  The Embassy Performance Plan for 2007 was also used in developing the assessment tool, as it sets out the goal for Management and Organizational Excellence and added two  BAGHDAD 00000176  002 OF 003   additional objectives of Communication and Consultation within Iraq and with the customers of the Ministries, and the Use of Information Technology (IT) and Web-based Information Management.  6. (U) We have tried to develop metrics that are as objective as possible while also being specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time related.  The guidance provided to Ministerial Engagement Leads by the Chair of the Ministerial Engagement Coordination Committee (MECC), the Coordinator for Economic Transition in Iraq (CETI), was to "call it as you see it," without reference to the baseline 2006 assessment.  As a result, caution should be used in comparing this data to the 2006 results.  7. (U) The degree of precision of any of the metrics used in 2006 and 2007 was affected by the security situation and, in some cases, lack of access and limited opportunity to observe development within the ministries.  CHALLENGES OF MEASURING INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY IN IRAQ  8. (U) Assessment Criteria and Measurement Indicators.  The assessments were based upon a four-point measurement, with ratings ranging from ineffective (one point), partially effective (two points), largely effective (three points), and fully effective (four points).  The review examined 53 metrics distributed among the following nine areas of interest: (1) Can the Ministry sustain its outputs? (2) Does the Ministry have sufficient long term plans and processes? (3) Are there appropriate, transparent financial systems in the Ministry? (4) Has the Ministry adopted procedures to counter corruption? (5) Has the Ministry developed a professional civil service? (6) Does the Ministry use technology effectively? (7) Does the Ministry have an effective information management system? (8) Does the Ministry reach out to its customers and Iraqi society? (9) Does the Ministry manage its resources effectively?  9. (U) Despite the appearance of precision in this assessment tool, post advises caution on considering the assessment data as definitive.  The comparisons of data and findings are offered with this disclaimer: The results confirm the impressions and understanding of the MET leads and others at post who deal with their Iraqi colleagues on a daily basis in the ministries.  However, it is based on limited data. Furthermore, the sensitivity of this undertaking (which did not include full disclosure to the ministries assessed) requires that the findings be treated with discretion.  The conduct of this informal assessment by the MET leads might be interrupted as less than fully independent, as the leads work closely with the ministries they assessed and the outcome of the assessments could be viewed as an assessment of their own performance.  An outside, independent assessment would be neither cost effective nor feasible at this time.  The GoI ministries are undertaking an initial round of self-assessments, a good step toward effective public administration.  THE RESULTS  10. (SBU) 2006 Data.  The 2006 cumulative data points indicated that institutional capacity was mixed.  Three percent of the government functions were fully effective, 14 percent largely effective, 28 percent partly effective, 28 percent ineffective, and 27 percent of the functions could not be evaluated due to lack of access, limited information, or poor security.  11. (SBU) 2007 Data.  The 2007 cumulative data points indicated institutional capacity distributed across the GoI as follows: -- 5 percent of the government functions were fully effective -- 23 percent largely effective -- 45 percent partly effective -- 25 percent ineffective -- 2 percent of the functions could not be evaluated due to lack of access, limited information, or low security.  BAGHDAD 00000176  003 OF 003    12. (SBU) Assessment of Trend from 2006 to 2007.  There was an across-the-board improvement in all ministries, with an estimated 12 percent overall average improvement from 2006 to 2007.  Significant improvements reflected in the data in budget execution, contracting and procurement metrics are confirmed by increased national spending rates.  The GoI is poised to capitalize on this increased capacity development in 2008 if its political will supports continued development in key public administration processes, targeted technical training, and increased improvements to the civil service. Weaknesses were identified in the use and development of technology, strategic planning, and human resource and workforce management.  The USG has existing programs that will continue to focus on capacity development in these areas.  USG and other donor representatives continue to encourage the GoI to invest its national resources in these areas in addition to support provided by foreign assistance.  13. (SBU) Summary of Capacity Development Progress.  The overall progress in the nine areas of interest of ministerial capacity was mixed among the ministries.  Three ministries (Oil, Electricity, and Water Resources) showed significant improvement overall.  An equal number of ministries were generally unchanged in the aggregate (Municipalities and Public Works, Health, and Planning), while the ministries of Environment, Education, Trade, Agriculture, and Finance declined slightly overall.  Most of these ministries have progressed from near paralysis to moderately effective.  14. (SBU) Overall, the Ministries of Water and Electricity exhibited the highest degree of capacity in accomplishing the mission of their ministry.  The effectiveness of the Ministry of Municipalities and Public Works has not increased despite considerable efforts by the USG, GoI, and donors.  15. (SBU) The progress of all ministries in managing their resources showed a modest upward slope.  They have slowly graduated to slightly functioning with the exception of the Ministry of Oil, which is hampered by its inability to counter corruption.  Ministries that improved in reaching out to their customers and Iraqi society were Electricity, Health, and Education.  16. (SBU) Across the board, all the ministries are ineffective in the use of information management systems due to the lack of communication infrastructure.  Immediate assistance efforts were targeted using satellite technology, and ongoing efforts include IT assistance, but this only meets a small percentage of the needs.  The GoI must make significant investments in communication infrastructure over many years to develop the necessary tools to improve government efficiency and to be competitive in the international markets.  17. (SBU) Progress in long term planning was uneven, with marginal advancement in the Planning, Education, Trade, Environment, and Finance ministries.  Progress declined in the Public Works ministry due to leadership issues.  18. (SBU) COMMENT:  The findings of the assessment and comparative analysis with the 2006 survey were shared throughout the MECC and relevant USG agencies working on capacity development at post.  Just as the findings on weaknesses in budget execution in 2006 contributed to that focus in 2007, the findings from this year will help to guide ongoing assistance to the ministries assessed.  The MECC Chair has directed the ministry leads to gauge their respective ministries, reactions to the identified areas of weakness, without going into detail on the assessment and its results.  The MECC provides a forum for such information sharing and cross-ministerial direction to be provided to agencies at post engaged with the GoI, and to ensure that consistent priorities direct our ongoing engagement with the ministries. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000177  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2017 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, PINS, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: AMIDST THREATS, A GLIMPSE OF COURAGE IN BAGHDAD  REF: A. 2007 BAGHDAD 3545 - BUILDING GOI CAPACITY TO         DELIVER SERVICES      B. 2007 BAGHDAD 4002 - I-ESC 7 DECEMBER 2007  Classified By: PolCouns Matt Tueller for Reasons 1.4 (b,d).  1.  (C) SUMMARY: In a raw and revealing moment following the assassination of a colleague and direct threats against another, a close-knit group of Iraqi officials in Baghdad demonstrated January 22 their determination to continue fighting corruption and militia profiteering in an essential service -- the distribution of kerosene to heat homes during a cold Baghdad winter.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------------- PROJECT CLEAN DELIVERY ----------------------  2.  (C) In December 2007, an Iraqi inter-ministerial team (with support from the Embassy, the Baghdad PRTs, and MNF-I) launched a pilot project to improve the delivery of kerosene in Baghdad (reftels).  Code-named "Project Clean Delivery," the initiative aimed to reduce corruption and choke off a major source of militia funding.  The pilot project was an immediate success, and local militants lost no time in striking back.  Three terrorists entered the home of one Project Clean Delivery team member, Hani Suleiman, on January 14 and shot him 11 times in front of his family.  Another team member began receiving death threats in early December, but has refused to abandon the project.  With GoI plans advancing to expand the project to six additional Baghdad neighborhoods, local militants are on the attack, but committed Iraqi officials are standing their ground.  ----------------------- A RAW MOMENT OF COURAGE -----------------------  3.  (C) On January 22, in the Iraqi team's first meeting following Suleiman's assassination, a new participant challenged the team's commitment.  Zaydun Kramit (strictly protect), Deputy Director General for Distribution in the Ministry of Oil, interrupted the planning session by declaring it impossible to expand the pilot project because Baghdad is not currently receiving a sufficient supply of kerosene.  He said that, on average, Baghdad is receiving 500,000 liters of kerosene per day, which is not enough to expand the project to six additional neighborhoods at the same time -- the project's next step, as decided by the Iraqi team members on January 2.  4.  (C) Amid debate and dissension sparked by Kramit's intervention, the buzz at the meeting suddenly stopped when Kefa Al-Amin (strictly protect), aide to Deputy Prime Minister Barhim Salih, asked everyone to be quiet.  He delivered an impromptu speech directly to Kramit: "I have been involved with this project since it started.  We have worked successfully together for several months -) so successfully that we invented a new distribution mechanism that will be used nationwide.  And now you have entered the meeting today with a negative attitude, telling us what we can't do.  That's not how we work.  We come up with solutions for what we can do.  Tell us what you can do for us, and that is all we are asking for."  5.  (C) At that point, the Iraqi team leader, Saeed Nemah Jabor (strictly protect) of the Iraqi National Security Council, rallied behind Al-Amin: "Yes.  That is true.  I am not interested in how many liters per day you can provide us for distribution.  Even if you tell me you can only get us one liter, then that is fine.  Our job is to make sure that that one liter gets to the Iraqi citizens, and not to corrupt officials or militias.  I don't care about the number of liters.  I care about delivering kerosene to the Iraqi people."  Kramit, clearly moved by these statements and the silent stares of the whole Iraqi team, responded: "Yesterday I approached the Minister of Oil to ask for one month off.  I received a kidnapping threat against my son.  I am already at risk in my job.  I know that.  But I did not come here to cause problems.  I will work with you."  ------------------------------------------- "WE ARE HERE TO DO A JOB AND WE WILL DO IT" -------------------------------------------  6.  (C) Jabour replied with a speech of his own: "Everyone in this room who joined the government did so knowing that he was risking his life, but they did it because they want to build a better Iraq.  Anyone who cares to make a change or a difference in fixing the fuel distribution system is bound to be a target of assassination.  I have had death threats; my colleagues have been kidnapped and murdered.  The criminals will not sit back and allow this new distribution model to  BAGHDAD 00000177  002 OF 002   take away revenue that they are used to stealing.  But we are here to do a job and we will do it."  -------------- PRESSING AHEAD --------------  7.  (C) After this dramatic exchange, the Iraqi team returned to problem-solving and reached a compromise solution: rather than retreat from their initial intention to expand their new distribution plan to additional neighborhoods, they decided to adopt a phased approach that would account for projected supply.  They agreed to implement the plan in two neighborhoods per week over a three-week period. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000178  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/22/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: SAMI AL-ASKERI DESCRIBES JANUARY 19 ATTACK ON NSA RUBAIE  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) Summary:  PM Advisor Sami al-Askeri described scrambling to reach out to Sadr/JAM contacts and organize a GOI response to an apparent JAM attack on a mosque where National Security Advisor Muwafaq al-Rubaie was attending Ashoura services Saturday evening.  As Rubaie remained holed up in the mosque, Sadr leaders first denied responsibility then offered safe passage under JAM escort.  When ISF units were slow to respond, PM Maliki sent al-Askeri, MinInt Bolani, and his own PSD team to extricate Rubaie amidst gunmen and demonstrators outside the mosque compound.  The mosque siege, along with a recent statement (which came prior to the incident) by a Sadr spokesman, have raised some concerns about the fragility of the Sadr freeze, which has had a significant effect in reducing violence.  The GOI remains reasonably confident that the freeze will hold for now, though ISCI/Badr conflicts with Sadrists in the south remain a source of tension and could eventually trigger an end to the freeze.  End Summary.  2. (S) In a 20 January conversation with State and MNF-I co-directors of the Force Strategic Engagement Cell (FSEC), PM Advisor and CoR member Sami al-Askeri gave a first-hand account of the GOI response to the apparent JAM attack on a Baghdad mosque where National Security Advisor Muwafaq al-Rubaie was attending Ashoura services.  The 19 January incident, coupled with a recent statement by Sadr spokesman Salah al-Obeidi, has generated concern about the fragility of the JAM freeze among some Iraqi observers, as well as some amusement at the predicament of the unpopular al-Rubaie.  3. (S) A close Maliki confidante, al-Askeri among other things plays a key role in handling Maliki,s relations with the Sadr movement.  He said he was with the PM and Interior Minister Bolani on the evening of January 19, preparing to begin the main Ashoura prayer service, when they received a call from al-Rubaie saying he was under fire and holed up in a mosque in Baghdad,s Shuala neighborhood, a JAM stronghold.  By Rubaie,s account, JAM had surrounded the mosque, disarmed his bodyguards, and shot out the tires on his vehicles (another source told us the attackers further humiliated Rubaie,s guards by forcing them to strip). Rubaie and the mosque Imam had retreated to the mosque,s inner sanctuary as shots began coming through the windows.  4. (S) Al-Askeri said he immediately called Baghdad Operations Center chief LTG Abud and Baghdad Police chief MG Kazim, asking them to get units to the mosque.  He then started calling "all my Sadrist contacts," asking them "what happened to the freeze."  His contacts, among them Sadr office Political Committee Chair Luay Sumaysim and former Sadr City "mayor" Rahim al-Daraji, assured him the attack was not being carried out by Sadr militias.  Al-Askeri put them in direct contact with Rubaie in the mosque.  Meanwhile, as Rubaie later recounted, a group 3-4 JAM leaders had entered the mosque and one of them handed him a phone saying it was Moqtada himself.  Rubaie remained skeptical that he was actually talking to Muqtada, but the caller offered him safe passage out of the mosque under escort by the gunmen. Rubaie, concerned that it was a trap, refused the offer.  5. (S) Meanwhile, PM Maliki was uneasy about the ISF response, and asked al-Askeri, and MOI Bolani to take the PM,s own bodyguards and car to extricate Rubaie.  They loaded up and made the short drive to the Shuala neighborhood, arriving to a chaotic scene.  The local police were disengaged, standing blocks away from the mosque.  ISF units were not to be seen.  By the time they arrived, the shooting had paused, and "groups of teenagers" were hurling stones at the mosque entrance.  There were also what appeared to be plainclothes militia members walking the perimeter of the compound.  6. (S) The PM,s PSD team was able to extricate Rubaie into an armored SUV and depart the scene, though Rubaie claims a shot was fired into the SUV,s rear window as the vehicle pulled out.  Rubaie, understandably angry, fully blames JAM for what he believes was a premeditated kidnapping attempt. He later told GEN Petraeus he is "ready to declare war on JAM."  7. (S) Al-Askeri was equally unconvinced by Sadrist denials, but more circumspect in his response.  He said he continues to have concerns about Muqtada,s "unpredictability," as well as his spotty control over his own organization.  He said Muqtada lacks a steady hand among his advisors who can steer his decision making.  He noted efforts underway among some Sadrist leaders to create alternate political leaderships, though these are still at a formative stage.  8. (S) Despite these concerns, al-Askeri is reasonably  BAGHDAD 00000178  002 OF 002   confident that the freeze will hold for the time being.  He said Badr-JAM tensions in the south continue to be the main irritant in GOI-Sadrist relations.  The PM continues his efforts to rein in what al-Askeri called "Badr extremists" who command some ISF units in the south, and engage in what Al-Askeri sees as unnecessarily provocative actions against Sadrists there.  These tensions were behind the recent statement by Sadr spokesman Salah al-Obeidi threatening to lift the freeze.  Al-Askeri noted that the PM could only go so far in controlling ISCI/Badr, given the political realities he faces, but said he remains fully engaged on these issues.  (Note: MNF-I conversations with Sadrist CoR member Baha al-Arraji on 21 January also indicate the JAM freeze will stay in effect.)  9. (S) Comment: al-Askari is the closest of Maliki's advisors to the Sadrists if not JAM.  His concerns, and his willingness to share them with us, may represent a growing sense within the Prime Minister's circle of the dangers posed by elements within the Sadr trend. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000179  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2018 TAGS: PHUM, KDEM, KJUS, PGOV, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: MINISTER OF HUMAN RIGHTS ON PRISONS AND COR HR COMMITTEE  REF: 2007 BAGHDAD 3591  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Ellen Germain for reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Minister of Human Rights Wijdan Salim on January 19 criticized living conditions she observed during a recent unannounced visit to the Ministry of Justice (MOJ)-operated Khadamiya women,s prison that she undertook at PM Maliki's request.  She said that while some inmates alleged that police tortured and raped them at police stations, they did not allege rape at the prison itself.  The Ministry of Human Rights (MOHR) is helping the prison institute a checklist to check for signs of rape and pregnancy during the inmates' intake process.  Wijdan described another MOHR visit to the Adala facility, to investigate allegations (apparently untrue) that women were being held with men.  The Minister complained that Minister of Justice al-Safi was trying to impede MOHR visits to MOJ prisons and was spreading misinformation about the torture of MNF-I security detainees at Camp Bucca.  Wijdan expressed frustration over tense relations with the Council of Representatives, (CoR) Human Rights Committee, but also noted she would still try to coordinate with the committee on substantive issues such as the Amnesty Law and the High Commission on Human Rights (HCHR) Law.  She flatly rejected an assistance role for UNAMI on the HCHR Law.  END SUMMARY.  MOHR:  NO RAPE AT WOMEN'S PRISON, BUT POOR CONDITIONS  2. (C)  In a January 19 meeting with PolOffs, Minister of Human Rights Wijdan Salim said she had made an unannounced visit to MoJ-run Khadamiya women,s prison on a direct request from PM Maliki to investigate rape and torture allegations.  The Minister said she saw no such evidence in the prison, but that some inmates alleged that police raped and tortured them at police stations six months to a year before their arrival at Khadimiya.  She said one solution is for women to have lawyers at the detention stage, when many violations reportedly take place.  She reported that prison conditions were poor:  there was no heat or electricity, 23 babies were in custody with their mothers, and the medical clinic lacked a women,s doctor and capacity to properly evaluate medical conditions.  The Ministry of Human Rights (MOHR) is planning to send the clinic a comprehensive checklist for examining women for torture, rape, or pregnancy.  The clinic currently only checks women for signs of torture, rape, or pregnancy if the women report such incidents.  She said that women are afraid to make torture or rape accusations, and so the clinic should check every woman upon arrival from police stations.  3. (C) Also upon request from the PM, an MOHR team investigated allegations that women were being held with men at the Ministry of Interior (MOI) Khadimiya Second National Police detention facility at Forward Operating Base (FOB) Justice (also known as "Adala")  The team said that women were only held at the facility upon arrest and were transferred to Khadamiya within a day, and so they found no evidence to support the allegation.  The Minister said MOHR has visited all Iraqi police stations in the last three months and alleged that many stations are being used as prisons even after the cases are decided by judges.  She said that all MOHR reports on prisons and police stations are sent to the PM, Ministers, CoR, and Commission on Public Integrity (CPI), and that then the MOHR and CPI work together to investigate allegations of murder.  COMPLAINTS ABOUT JUSTICE MINISTER  4. (C)  Wijdan embarked on a series of complaints about the Minister of Justice, Dr. Safa al-Safi, saying Al-Safi called her after these recent visits and told her angrily that MOHR could not visit any more prisons without his permission and could not bring cameras to document violations.  Al-Safi reportedly recently sent a letter to other ministries saying his permission was needed before any prison inspections. Wijdan said the PM had issued a letter ten days earlier saying the MOHR has the right to visit any prison at any time.  She said she asked the PM on January 18 to remove Al-Safi from his position, and predicted he would not remain Minister of Justice for much longer.   She also complained that al-Safi is spreading &lies8 about torture violations in MNF-I Bucca prison (NFI).  MOHR: RELATIONS WITH COR HR COMMITTEE ARE TENSE 5. (C) After several months without meeting, Wijdan and eight members of the CoR Human Rights Committee, including the chair and the deputy chair, met on January 16 because (Wijdan claimed) CoR Speaker Mashadani scolded the Committee for not cooperating with the MOHR and admonished them for being an ineffective committee.  Wijdan admitted she had complained to  BAGHDAD 00000179  002 OF 002   Mashadani about the committee the day before.  She said the meeting failed to address substantive issues, but did attempt to resolve communication problems.  MOHR REJECTS UNAMI ROLE IN FACILIATING HCHR LAW 6. (C) Wijdan said she would meet soon with the committee to discuss the Amnesty Law and the three laws regarding the three human rights institutions: the MOHR, the High Commission on Human Rights (HCHR)(reftel), and the Institute for Human Rights.  She was somewhat receptive to the idea that the meeting could be facilitated by USG coordination but adamantly refused any participation by UNAMI, which she said has meddled too much.  "It is for us to decide," she declared.  Regarding the HCHR Law, Wijdan said she asked Mashadani and al-Safi to get the law out of the Shura Council (where she said it has been sitting for a while) and send it to the CoR.  She said she would work with the HR Committee on coordinating her version and the committee,s version of the HCHR draft law.  (Note:  UNAMI's Human Rights Office has proposed chairing a roundtable between MOHR and the HR Committee, with U.S. and UK participation, to try to resolve legislative differences.  There may be precedent for this type of effort, as Wijdan noted she had agreed to put together a roundtable to work on the Ministry of State for Civil Society Law.  End Note.) 7. (C) COMMENT:  Wijdan is an active participant in government activity regarding human rights, especially with regard to prison investigations.  The fact that these recent visits were at the behest of the PM is encouraging, as it seems to indicate that at least some parts of the Iraqi government are taking allegations of torture, rape, and other violations seriously.  Additionally, although the High Commission for Human Rights Law has been stuck in various review stages, mostly because of a lack of cooperation between the Ministry and the Committee, recent and possible future meetings between the parties are signs of progress. END COMMENT. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000180  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2023 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: ERBIL: KRG PM DISCUSSES 2008  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 4096  Classified By: Classified By Jess Baily, Regional Coordinator for reaso ns 1.4 (b) and (d).  This is an Erbil Regional Reconstruction Team message.  1. (C) Summary:  Secure as Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) Prime Minister for the foreseeable future, Nechirvan Barzani told RRTOFFS January 15 that 2008 will be a challenging year for the Kurds and for the KRG.  He outlined a number of long pending reforms within the regional government (reduction of ministries, increasing transparency), but offered few new or specific ideas on how he plans to push these through, particularly with many in the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) smarting from the decision to keep Nechirvan as PM.  On Article 140, he vacillated between conciliatory comments (reaching out to other groups and accepting "60 percent" of their goal) and a strong line, notably that the process must lead to Kirkuk becoming part of the KRG.  Noting that he was initially skeptical of UN involvement on Article 140, Nechirvan volunteered that a first meeting with SRSG de Mistura had altered his opinion, for the better.  He reported that his uncle, KRG President Masoud Barzani, had hesitated in attending the January 15 meeting with Secretary Rice but had decided to go to Baghdad at the strong urging of the PM.  In the end, President Barzani was pleased with the meeting and thanked Nechirvan for the push. End Summary.  Meeting with Secretary Positive -------------------------------  2.  (C) During an informal January 15 dinner with Regional coordinator and acting USAID rep, KRG PM Nechirvan Barzani reported that his uncle KRG President Masoud Barzani was pleased with his meeting with Secretary Rice and other Iraqi leaders.  According to Nechirvan, the elder Barzani was initially not inclined to fly down to Baghdad and it took the PM until late into the night of January 14 to convince his uncle to accept the invitation.   After a short telephone conversation with his uncle upon the latter's return to Erbil, a smiling Nechirvan noted that his uncle had thanked him for pushing him toward the right decision.  3.  (C) The PM offered little on the substance of the meeting, noting only that the Secretary had asked the KRG to suspend signing new oil exploration contracts, which he described as "not a problem."  (Note:  International oil companies already have contracts on the most promising 20 blocs, and several others have been reserved for the Kurdistan Regional Oil Company.  End note.)  He reported that KRG Minister of Natural Resources Ashti Hawrami had met with the PM Maliki for over an hour in December and left feeling that Maliki understood the KRG position better.  The best way forward, Nechirvan added, was to handle the difference over the national hydrocarbon legislation through a small group, perhaps Ashti and a representative from the GoI (not Minister of Oil Shahristani) with the US as facilitators.  (Note: The KRG announced to the media that MoNR Ashti went to Baghdad on 21 January to continue talks on hydrocarbon laws. However, MoNR Ashti told us his visit to Baghdad had concerned other issues, since the GOI was still not ready to move forward on the hydrocarbon legislation. End note.)  Problems with Maliki --------------------  4.  (S) Elaborating on the Kurds' frustration with PM Maliki, Nechirvan reported that Masoud refused to meet one-on-one with the PM during his January 15 trip.  Nechirvan opined that Kurds "could topple Maliki if the U.S. "gave them the green light. . . not conflicting views from various departments."  RRTOffs emphasized the need to make the current government work in order to advance political reconciliation in the wake of recent security gains. Nechirvan retorted that replacing the PM would be easy, requiring "only 50 percent" and they had a good PM candidate in Vice President Adil Abd al-Mahdi.  But stepping back from this proposed coup, he admitted that gaining two-thirds of the Council of Representatives to agree on a replacement Vice President would be "very difficult."  Secure as PM, Agenda for 2008 -----------------------------------  5.  (C) Nechirvan acknowledged that 2008 will be a tough year for the KRG as performance is not meeting citizens' expectations.  He intends to push forward with a reduction in the number of ministries, cut the number of government employees, improve services particularly electricity, and launch transparency initiatives.  When asked about the current electricity shortage currently affecting the region,  BAGHDAD 00000180  002 OF 002   he did not offer any immediate solutions to deal with the problem and instead cited two build-own-operate power plants due to come on line sometime in 2008.  He boasted that the KRG will announce plans to reduce the number of ministries "by the end of the month" but then admitted that balancing KDP, PUK, and smaller parties interests will be a challenge. He complained that divisions in the PUK made such decisions difficult.  Even on small items, gaining the agreement of Deputy PM Omar Fatah did not guarantee PUK support. "You have to go to (Vice President) Kosrat (Rasoul) and then others." This is not made any easier by anger within the PUK over President Talabani,s decision to ask Nechirvan to stay on as PM.  Article 140:  60/40 Solution must give Kirkuk to Kurds --------------------------------------------- ---------  6.  (S) His agenda for 2008 concluded with implementation of Article 140.  Noting that he was initially skeptical of UN involvement, he credited his first meeting with SRSG de Mistura as changing his attitude.  Expressing concern about violence associated with a large scale referendum, he said he supported using the 2005 elections as the basis for a solution but did not think President Barzani should have endorsed such a solution publicly, as he did at a memorial service for Anfal victims on January 14. (Note:  The following day KRG Minister of External Affairs Mohammad Ihsan elaborated that using the 2005 elections would involve placing districts where Kurds received over 80 percent of the vote within the KRG and narrow the places where a new referendum would be required.  End note.)  Sounding conciliatory, he said the Kurds must reach out more to Turkomen, Arabs, and other communities and be ready to achieve "only 60 percent" of their goals.  He suggested that the Kurds would be more flexible in northern Ninewa, but then labeled any result that doesn,t have Kirkuk within the KRG as "unacceptable."  Investment ----------  7.  (C) Nechirvan noted that the decision to retain him as PM played positively with potential investors.  He said Saudi investors had recently shown interest in concrete factories and agriculture but most of what he spoke about was high-end property development in Erbil.  This is a sector where the government benefits through its control of land but developers often do not use local labor in construction. DAMAC of Dubai, for example, will develop housing, a hotel and golf course between Erbil and Salahaddin, while the Iraqi owner of Le Royal Hotel in Amman expressed interest in building a hotel and private hospital.  Security:  Pleased with US intelligence cooperation --------------------------------------------- ------  8.  (S) Asked about security concerns, Nechirvan felt confident that KRG could keep al-Qaeda terrorists out of the region and instead worried more about Iran and Ansar al Islam/Ansar as Sunnah.  He went out of his way to praise the current level of intelligence sharing with the U.S. In the past, he said, the KRG did not always feel like the U.S. took the KRG,s information seriously.   Now their U.S. interlocutors not only took them seriously but also reciprocated by sharing a higher level of intelligence with their KRG counterparts. "Over the past eight months, we,ve seen a changed attitude."  9. Comment:  Over the course of three hours, Nechirvan recognized that 2008 will be a challenging year for the region but offered little of substance on how he plans to institute politically difficult reforms within the government, increase transparency and meet growing public frustration over poor services, especially electricity.  On national issues, he continues to moderate President Barzani,s worst impulses and harsher rhetoric.  But like his uncle, he doubts Prime Minister Maliki will meet the Kurds, demands for reform within the government.  And like most Kurds, he sees any outcome on Article 140 short of delivering Kirkuk to the KRG as unacceptable.   End Comment CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000183  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PREL, IZ, REL UK SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - January 22   1. SUMMARY: Attendance was high at the January 22 meeting of the Baghdad Services Committee, both from the Government of Iraq (GoI) and USG sides. The Baghdad Deputy Mayor started the meeting, emphasizing the need for better service project coordination between the Amanat and the USG. The Joint Planning Commission (JPC) Chairman outlined what he believed to be shortcomings in the USG contracting process. As a result, a special JPC session will be dedicated to this issue. Trash, sewerage, fuel and PHCs also topped the agenda. The committee concluded the meeting by reviewing previous recommendations charged to the Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) and a review of recommendations for service improvements in Abu Ghraib. END SUMMARY.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - This Week's Recommendations - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  2. After a critical discussion regarding USG contracting procedures it was decided that at an upcoming JPC meeting, the committee would discuss USG contracting procedures, including selection, payment, oversight and coordination with GoI entities, particularly the Amanat. A National Security Advisor representative, Mr. Sayid, recommended that an official link between the JPC and the GoI, possibly even the Provision of Services Committee, be created. Dr. Chalabi noted that he does send a representative to the JPC, but Sayid still pressed for an executive order from the Prime Minister or the Council of Representatives, as well as a stronger connection with the Services Committee. (Note: Sayid had previously said that the Chairman of the JPC, a technocrat from former Deputy Prime Minister Zobai's office, should no longer be Chairmen, because he is not "technically" part of the government. End Note)  3. ITAO Director too issue with the general description of U.S. efforts and suggested that the specific issues be raised in appropriate for a. He then noted that Primary Health Centers (PHCs) staffing shortages are a concern. He suggested investigating the possibilities of health care workers from outside of Iraq operating PHCs for the MoH. These organizations could hire, on a short-term basis, Iraqi physicians and other health care staff that previously fled the country. (Note: Physicians and other health related professionals were targeted by various malignant actors which resulted in a sizeable exodus. End Note) After a fixed period of time, they could then be eligible to be hired by the MoH.  Dr. Adel, the Inspector General (IG) of Health, strongly opposed "handing over" any PHCs to NGOs. He maintained that the MoH is actively working on a recruitment plan that will address staffing shortages. Chalabi intervened to note that the GoI is indeed considering alternatives to PHC staffing.  4. Other decisions reached at the meeting were to focus on sewerage problems in the Husseiniya area at the next Provision of Services Committee meeting. Also at the next meeting, the Amanat is to provide further information on transferring garbage collection responsibilities to the private sector. In the meantime, the Committee will send a letter to the Ministry of Transportation to seek opportunities to rent their trucks for garbage collection. Additionally, the Amanat is to provide a list of streets blocked by t-walls or other security related measures that are ready to be opened. Related to traffic problems, the Amanat raised the issue of unlicensed street vendors which also causes traffic. Chalabi directed the Amanat to conduct a study to determine who these vendors were, whether they can be re-employed or moved to a different area, etc.  The report should be delivered at next week's meeting.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - A Closer Look at the Discussions: USG Contracting Process under Fire - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  5. Deputy Mayor Naiem highlighted an April 2006 agreement between the Amanat, the Baghdad PRT and the JPC that requires all projects related to the Amanat to be coordinated with the JPC and the Amanat. He believed that agreement had been breached numerous times. As such, the Provincial Council (PC) asked that future projects be held until projects could be coordinated and contractor selection could be reviewed. Naiem criticized USG projects, saying that they were small and not strategic. ITAO Director objected on factual grounds.   6. Chairman of the Joint Planning Commission, Mr. Riyadh Filaheh said that the US is only partly to blame. He criticized the USG contracting process, particularly highlighting the inadequate contractor standards, the method of up front payment and the use of too many subcontractors. He suggested that contractor selection be coordinated with the Ministry of Planning (MoPDC) and that all projects be better coordinated with local councils.  7. The Health IG chimed in, noting that the USG pays "exorbitantly" more for PHC construction than the GoI would under the same circumstance. He claimed that the USG was paying $1 million for each PHC. Deputy ITAO Director, General Snyder, reminded the committee that there are three different types of PHCs that the USG is  BAGHDAD 00000183  002.2 OF 003   building which vary in cost - the most expensive is approximately $1million. The IG also complained that by the time the MoH actually received the PHCs and medical equipment, the warranties were expired. The USG noted this was a problem.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  -- - - - - - - JPC: Best Forum to Address USG Contract/or Issues - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  8. General Snyder suggested that these contract/or issues, as well as coordination conversations happen at the JPC. He also mentioned that the USG was aware of only a small percentage of quality control issues or incomplete projects and that ministries and other officials needed to be involved and call out attention to those specific issues. Chalabi agreed and noted that improved dialogue with the USG and amongst the various GoI actors would provide noticeable improvements in local service delivery.  9. NSA representative, Sayid, piggy-backed on the JPC discussion, noting that there is no real affiliation between the JPC and the GoI. He emphasized that the link be official through an executive order by the Prime Minister or the Council of Representatives (COR). He also suggested a stronger connection between the JPC and the Provision of Services Committee. (Note: It is not clear if Sayid meant a separate affiliation with Chalabi's Committee and the GoI or if he saw them as one in the same. End Note) JPC Chairman responded noting that the JPC was slated to be an Iraqi institution last December, but it was the Iraqis who were not ready. Riyadh also took this time to encourage greater ministry participation in the JPC. He noted the regular absence of the MoH and the Ministry of Oil (MoO).  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - -  - - - Dr. Chalabi Wants to Address Sewerage in Husseiniya - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  10. Dr. Chalabi commenced the next part of the meeting by expressing serious concerns for the sewerage in Husseiniya. He stated that more than 50,000 Iraqis are suffering because the treatment plant is not working. He understood that there was some disagreement between the USG and the GoI regarding the location of the plant. MG Snyder stated that the US completed a master plan last fall, but did not have enough funding to complete the project. He confirmed that there was some disagreement about the location. Dr. Chalabi suggested that this issue be further explored at the next meeting.  - - - - - - - Amanat Up Next - - - - - - -  11. The Amanat addressed garbage collection, stating that they are working to transfer this responsibility to the private sector. Authorizing drivers continues to be an obstacle. Vehicle shortages also exacerbate the problem, but the committee decided that renting trucks from the Ministry of Transportation (MoTrans) may be a short-term, viable solution. A memo will be sent to the MoTrans. A Council of Representatives member cited a successful Japanese program that awarded local Iraqis monetarily per each bag of garbage they properly disposed of. This idea seemed to gain little to no traction.  12. The Deputy Mayor also complained about the traffic problems resulting from illegal street vendors. He said there is a current campaign underway to address the problem. The Amanat offered a building to these vendors, but few accepted the offer. A discussion then ensued regarding the background of these vendors, whether they were re-employable, or whether they were good candidates for training programs. The committee did agree that it was not possible to simply remove them without alternative employment opportunities. Chalabi recommended that a study be conducted to determine who these vendors were and then solutions be offered based upon those results.   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Previous Recommendations Reviewed - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  13. The BOC was in attendance and Dr. Chalabi seized the opportunity to review previous recommendations that fell in their scope of responsibility. One checkpoint has been established between Adnon Square and the Adimiyah Bridge. The BOC reported that the second requested checkpoint was not possible at this time. A new battalion has been created for the Rashidiyah area. It will be associated with the 5th ID.  14. The Director of the Abu Ghraib Hospital and the District Director for Abu Ghraib attended the meeting. They asked the BOC to reconsider moving a particular checkpoint that they claim is preventing the local people from getting their ration of fertilizer. The BOC maintained that it was not possible, but Dr. Chalabi asked them to reconsider. The Abu Ghraib representatives also asked the BOC to reconsider the location of a check point that is currently within a market. The BOC representative countered that the checkpoint was not in the market, but just before it and that it was  BAGHDAD 00000183  003.2 OF 003   necessary.  15. The Abu Ghraib representatives did not have any better luck with the Health IG. They claimed to be treating more than at least two times the bed capacity per day at their hospital and as such requested another hospital. The IG said that in the short-term, a new hospital was not possible, but a new hospital for the long-term may be possible. The reps then asked that a PHC be converted into a hospital, but again the IG said that was not possible due to structural design. The representatives did not stop there and pleaded for an additional floor or expansion to the existing hospital. The IG dismissed this idea and told them to visit the MoH with these issues as opposed to raising them at the Provision of Services Committee meeting. The representatives then detailed staffing shortages, but the committee meeting quickly adjourned before the issue could be further addressed.    Crocker 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000185  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2028 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: SUNNI PARTY LEADER ON NEW ANTI-KURDISH POLITICAL BLOC  REF: BAGHDAD 107  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  ------- Summary -------  1.  (S) Khallaf Allyan, leader of the National Dialogue Council party and senior figure in the Tawafuq Coalition, vented to Poloff on January 23 over perceived treachery by Kurdish political leaders and Vice President Hashimi's Iraqi Islamic Party.  Recent steps by these groups prompted his decision earlier this month to join forces with Prime Minister Maliki and other political leaders to form a new political bloc in Parliament dedicated to defending Iraq's Arab, nationalist equities (reftel).  Admittedly, the strength of that alliance is dubious, with little mutual trust among its participants.  On the issue of whether he will depart from the Tawafuq Coalition, Allyan said he and Adnan Dulaymi were seeking a meeting with their partner Tareq al-Hashimi to discuss strategy, but have so far been kept at arm's length by the Vice President.  Allyan sought USG support for this new voting bloc, criticized a draft amnesty law as too narrowly crafted, and counseled continued U.S. focus and backing to bring Sunni "awakening" members into the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF).  His views on recently-passed de-Baathification legislation were equally negative.  End summary.  --------------------- Kurdish, IIP Perfidy? ---------------------  2.  (S) Khallaf Allyan, Sunni Member of Parliament, and one of the Tawafuq Coalition's three party leaders, blasted the Kurds and Tawafuq partner Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) during a January 23 meeting with Poloff.  The IIP, he began, had reached "secret deals" with the Kurds, the Islamic Supreme Coucil of Iraq (ISCI), and "with Iran" to form three territorial regions in Iraq - Shia, Sunni, and Kurdish.  The prospective Sunni region, he said, would be led by Tareq al-Hashimi.  As a result of such deals, he continued, he and other political leaders decided to act to protect Iraq's national interests.  They would work either to withdraw Parliament's confidence in PM Maliki (to force a leadership change) or pressure him to act.  Maliki, he said, to their surprise, "took strong positions" - e.g., by rejecting Kurdish unilateral contracting with international oil companies, challenging Kurdish claims vis-a-vis the national budget, and by "placing obstacles in the way" of holding a referendum on the status of Kirkuk.  For this reason, he added, "we decided to support him, and we will continue to support him as long as he acts in the national interest."  ------------------------------------------ Seeking Support for the "National Project" ------------------------------------------  3.  (S) Allyan sought USG support for this new Council of Representatives voting bloc (the "National Project"), and continued to rant about perceived Kurdish perfidy.  He alleged that the Kurds "don't care about Iraq; they take advantage of Shia-Sunni fighting to further their own interests."  Asked about the strength and membership of this new voting bloc, Allyan quickly turned on Fadilah, accusing the Shia group of reaching their own "secret deals" with the Kurds on issues related to ministerial portfolios and interests in Basra.  As for plans to remain with the Tawafuq Coalition, Allyan said he and Adnan Dulaymi had been trying to meet with IIP leader Hashimi, but the latter had rebuffed their attempts to talk directly together.  "If I feel our requests are answered," he said, "we'll stick together."  If not, he concluded, his National Dialogue Council would seek to join forces with Saleh Mutlaq's Hewar bloc, Iraqiya, and the Arab Independent Bloc.  -------------------------------------- Maintain Support for CLC's, Awakenings --------------------------------------  4.  (S) Turning to security issues of importance to his Sunni constituents, Allyan pressed for the U.S. to continue its support for the Concerned Local Citizen (CLC) program and Awakening movements.  It was imperative, he said, that the CLC and Awakening members are brought into the Defense Ministry as professionals, so not to be considered militia members.  "We want our sons in the Army so they can defend us," he added.  ----------------------  BAGHDAD 00000185  002 OF 002   Amnesty, De-Baath Laws ----------------------  5.  (S) Asked about recent legislation debated in Parliament, including on amnesty and de-Baathification, Allyan complained that the amnesty bill, as presently drafted, was far too narrow to be meaningful.  The law has so many exemptions regarding those to whom amnesty would not apply, as to render the bill "useless."  Allyan hoped the Embassy would weigh in to widen the scope and breadth of the bill.  As for the Accountability and Justice bill, Allyan lambasted the legislation, saying that it would, among other things, have negative social impacts, including the punishment of family members of former senior Baathists.  What family would marry into a Baathist family, if the latter is prevented from having a future in this country?  6.  (C) Ending the meeting, Poloff urged Allyan and his parliamentarian allies to remain in Baghdad for the coming few weeks to ensure meaningful progress on legislative initiatives.  Allyan said he would be ready to leave Iraq the following weekend, complaining that the scheduled end-of-year break had been cut short.  Pressed further, he half-jokingly said that such holiday breaks were a sort of "tactic" which helped prevent passage of bills damaging to Iraq's national interests.  ------- Comment -------  7.  (S) While Allyan may still be able to deliver a handful of votes in the CoR, he remains on the fringes of Iraqi politics, reacting to perceived betrayal by the IIP, and accusations of Kurdish and ISCI political leger-demain. While out of step with the power-centers of Baghdad politics, his views do reflect common perceptions among the suspicious and frustrated Sunni populace.  It appears increasingly likely that he will depart the Tawafuq Coalition and join forces with whatever national political grouping has the best prospects of challenging the IIP and its Kurdish and Supreme Council allies.  In addition to pushing the agenda of the "National Project" group, it is probable that should he depart Tawafuq, his first step will be to join forces with Saleh Mutlaq's Hewar group.  But, with very little party structure or grass-roots organization, substantive policy momentum will be difficult for them to generate. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000187  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR MOHAMMED ANWER HAMA AMEEN   1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME: Mohammed Anwer HAMA AMEEN POSITION: First Lieutenant, Iraqi Army DOB:  June 1, 1987 TYPE OF TRAINING:  English Language Training/Intelligence Captains Career Course TRAINING LOCATION: San Antonio TX and Fr. Huachuca, AZ DATES OF TRAINING: May 28, 2008 to February 19, 2009  CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000188  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR HUSSEIN SALEEM ABDULMAHDI AND TALIB SHAGHATI MSHARI   1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME:  Hussein Saleem Abdulmahdi AL-MUDHAFAR POSITION:  Brigadier General, Iraqi Army DOB:  June 21, 1957 TYPE OF TRAINING:  Senior Executive Seminar to Combat Terrorism TRAINING LOCATION: Near East Southern Asia, Center for Strategic Studies, Washington, DC DATES OF TRAINING: March 3, 2008 to March 14, 2008  NAME:  Talib Shaghati MSHARI POSITION:  Lieutenant General, Iraqi Army DOB:  June 21, 1957 TYPE OF TRAINING:  Senior Executive Seminar to Combat Terrorism TRAINING LOCATION: Near East Southern Asia, Center for Strategic Studies, Washington, DC DATES OF TRAINING: March 3, 2008 to March 14, 2008   CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000190  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: WASIT IHEC LEADER PREDICTS ELECTIONS IN 2008  Classified By: Wasit PRT Team Leader Wade Weems. Reasons 1.4 (b,d)  1. (C)  Summary.  In a January 23 meeting with Wasit PRT Team Leader and Poloffs, Wasit Director of the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) Haydar Abd Allawi said he expected elections to happen in 2008 and expressed a strong preference for an open-list system.  He maintained his office could be ready for elections with as little as two months' notice despite challenges related to security and voter education.  Although reluctant to discuss politics, Haydar's comments made it clear there is widespread public dissatisfaction with the current provincial and national governments.  End Summary.  Details on the election process -------------------------------  2. (C)  Haydar mentioned recent media reporting on progress with the provincial powers and elections law and said he hoped the Council of Representatives (COR) passed the law soon.  He expected elections to happen sometime in 2008 and maintained that everyone in government and public wanted an open-list system.  Haydar added that an open-list system was best because "The Iraqi people need an open and simple system."  When asked if an open-list system would take power away from the political parties and if candidates capable of competing individually existed in Wasit, Haydar answered "I have only one thing to say about the open list: It is the one way for Iraq to pass from the darkness of tyranny into the light."  3. (C)  Haydar preferred to focus on the technical details of provincial elections.  Registration will require two forms of identification, including a ration card, passport, national ID, or marriage passport.  The IHEC will establish seven sub-offices in Kut and fifteen throughout the governorate. Each office will be staffed by twelve workers.  On election day, voters must cast their ballot in their resident political district.  Sub-offices will generate rolls and voters will be checked off the rolls as they arrive at polling places.  Despite the amount of work involved, Haydar maintained that his office could be ready for elections with as little as two months' notice.  Haydar said widespread public dissatisfaction meant that either no one would vote out of disenchantment with the democratic process or everyone would vote to completely change the current government.  4. (C)  Asked about challenges facing his office, Haydar identified security concerns and voter education.  On security, he mentioned the possibility of checkpoints and curfews preventing rural voters from voting as well as the need for metal-detector wands, T-walls, and razor wire to secure polling places.  On voter education, Haydar pointed to voter illiteracy as the greatest challenge and discussed the possibility of assigning a symbol to each party or individual candidate.  He maintained that the government needed authorization to regulate the behavior and message of the media during elections.  Central government a new Saddam -------------------------------  5. (C)  Haydar resisted attempts to turn the conversation to politics, repeatedly saying that he was a technical specialist and not a politician.  When pressed, he said that the central government pressured the provinces in a manner reminiscent of the Saddam regime and said, "Give us one national minister, or one deputy minister, or at least one director general from Wasit."  Haydar said this frustration led people to consider decentralization or regions formation, even though "Iraqi democracy is still in its adolescence, and many people are scared of the concept of regions."  Haydar expressed concern that militias would react violently to unfavorable election results.  Asked if militias were currently pressuring IHEC, he said no, then added, "Iraq is like any country, it has good qualities and bad qualities. Look at what is happening right now in Kenya."  Cooperation with PRT --------------------  6. (C)  Haydar agreed to provide the PRT with a list of local civil society organizations capable of working on voter outreach and education projects.  He asked the PRT for assistance for his office, including the procurement of an office vehicle.  Comment: Will discontent lead to change? ---------------------------------------- 7. (C)  Comment: Haydar's remarks echo similar comments from contacts throughout the south on public dissatisfaction with the current government.  It remains to be seen whether this discontent will translate into real political change, and  BAGHDAD 00000190  002 OF 002   Haydar was extremely reluctant to discuss the structural and political obstacles to real reform.   His comments also make it clear that militia intimidation and voter manipulation will pose serious threats to the integrity of the voting process.  End Comment.   CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000193  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/PPD  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, KPAO, IZ SUBJECT: ERBIL: KURDISTAN REGIONAL PRESIDENT MASOUD BARZANI REJECTS PRESS LAW  Classified By: Classified By Jess Baily, Regional Coordinator for reaso ns 1.4 (b) and (d).  This is an Erbil Regional Reconstruction Team Message  1. (C)  Summary. In response to extensive criticism by NGOs (both local and international) and local journalists, Kurdistan Regional President Masoud Barzani rejected the Press Law bill passed by the Kurdistan National Assembly (KNA) on December 11.  He returned the bill on January 15 to the KNA for revision.  The drafting of the bill and its tortuous path through the KNA to the presidency reflect political leaders' uneasiness with critical articles in the growing independent press in the region. Even mild criticism can provoke strong reactions from party and government officials.  The bill passed by the KNA neither strongly defended freedom of speech and information, nor instituted draconian restrictions.  It did, however, contain several vague prohibitions and hefty fines for libel that could have been used to limit press freedom.  Equally troubling was the lack of transparency in its movement through the KNA.  By forcing its reconsideration in the KNA, opponents of the draft Press Law achieved at least a temporary victory for press freedom and transparent legislative processes in the Kurdistan Region.  End Summary.  Party-Controlled and Independent Media in the KRG --------------------------------------------- ----  2. (SBU)  Most of the media within the Kurdistan Region is controlled by one of the two major political parties: the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) or the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK).  However, a number of independent and semi-independent media outlets, particularly in (PUK controlled) Sulaimaniyah, provide critical coverage of government and party corruption.  Print circulation numbers and opinion polls conducted by the American Democratic Foundation (funded by USAID,s Iraq Civil Society program) and Kurdistan Youth Competency (a local NGO) indicate that semi-independent radio (Radio Nawa); newspaper (Hawlati); and magazine (Lvin) media are the most popular.  Although print media reaches important opinion leaders, television remains the main source of information for most people in the region.  All Kurdish-language television stations are directly owned or otherwise controlled by political parties or senior KRG officials.  Opinion surveys indicate that the most popular terrestrial television station is operated by the Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU), rather than one of the two larger parties.  Although none of these media are entirely independent, all provide critical reporting of corruption, government mismanagement and human rights abuses.  The popularity of these sources indicates popular interest in this critical reporting.  3. (C)  Official and unofficial constraints restrict reporting about sensitive topics.  Self-censorship is rampant, particularly in the party press.  Libel remains a criminal offense in the region, as in the rest of Iraq.  In early November, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) completed a two-week assessment of the region and noted that "journalists have expressed concern about a rising number of physical attacks on the press, the arbitrary detentions of reporters by security forces, and the use of courts to harass journalists."  Journalists can be arrested on defamation charges.  For example, Hawlati reporter Rebaz Ahmad was briefly arrested in July 2007 for defaming Halabja Municipality Engineer Kawa Ali in an article alleging that parkland was illegally allocated for a residence in Halabja. Even indirect criticism of PUK or KDP leaders can cost journalists their jobs.  Stran Abdulla was forced to resign as editor of Aso for publishing a commentary speculating on KDP leadership succession after Masoud Barzani.  In December, KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani ordered the closure of the weekly magazine Bizaw.  The Editor in Chief told RRT officers that the magazine was closed for critical reporting regarding Iraqi President (and PUK General Secretary) Jalal Talabani's trip to Egypt.  (Note and comment: Aso receives most of its funding from the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih, while Bizaw received financial support from the KRG Prime Minister's Office; they are not truly independent organizations.  The aforementioned punitive actions reflected both parties' desire to avoid criticizing the other as part of their strategic alliance.)  Most recently, both Iraqi President Talabani and KRG President Barzani have announced that they will sue American Enterprise Institute scholar Michael Rubin under a Saddam-era law.  They claim Rubin defamed them in an article alleging nepotism and corruption in the KRG.  They have also sued Hawlati for printing Rubin,s article.   BAGHDAD 00000193  002 OF 003   New Press Law,s Tortuous Route in KNA -------------------------------------  4. (U)  The Kurdistan National Assembly (KNA) announced in March 2007 its intention to make passage of a new Press Law a top priority.  The law, according to the KNA Legal Committee Chair, was to be drafted to protect the freedom of speech and independence of journalists, while holding journalists to high ethical standards.  The Kurdistan Journalists, Syndicate, which is controlled by the KDP, provided input to the KNA's Legal Committee and Cultural Committee - the two committees responsible for drafting the legislation.  Early drafts created a registration (not licensing) procedure for media outlets, prohibited the arrest of journalists for their work, allowed journalists to maintain confidential sources, required public authorities to disclose more information, set labor standards for members of the press, and established a code of ethics for journalists.  5. (SBU)  The bill languished over the summer months, and then rumors began that the Journalists' Syndicate was working with the KNA committee to revise earlier drafts without making them public.  Concerns were raised that the newest version of the draft law contained a number of troubling clauses.  In its November assessment, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) compared the bill favorably to harsher media laws that are prevalent in the Middle East, but cited a number of vague prohibitions against news that "disturbs security, spreads fear, or causes harm to people," that "encourages terrorism and sows hatred," that runs counter to "public morals," or that is "untrue."  CPJ noted that these provisions were open to abuse and that the fines for violating these prohibitions could effectively close independent media.  An analysis prepared by Albany Associates, a consulting firm, for UNESCO, also cited a long list of concerns with the draft legislation, including conflicts with the Iraqi constitution over regulation of broadcast media, and creation of a High Media Council potentially subject to political control.  6. (C)  Despite these concerns, no draft of the legislation was formally released before the KNA addressed the issue. After a week of debate on the first four articles, a fifteen-article press bill was quickly passed by the KNA on December 11.  Several MPs representing the PUK either voted against the bill or walked out.  The Secretary General of the Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU) claimed that some of his deputies were duped into voting for a final version they had never seen.  In the end, the bill which passed closely resembled a draft that the RRT had seen in the spring, and omitted most of the provisions that had concerned Albany Associates.  Most notably, the bill which passed made no mention of broadcast journalists, leading the Director of Zagros TV, Niyaz Lajani, to ridicule the legislation and the lawmakers for failing to properly consult with journalists. The bill did contain a number of vague prohibitions against publishing items that "encourage terrorism and create hatred," insult religious beliefs, or "any item related to the private life of an individual - even if true - if this insults him."  Press Law Legislation Heavily Criticized ----------------------------------------  7. (U)  Independent journalists in the Kurdistan region and some PUK politicians immediately condemned the newly passed bill.  These protests were joined by international (CPJ) and national (Journalistic Freedoms Observatory) organizations, and eventually the Journalists, Syndicate asked President Barzani to reject it.  Critics of the bill have cited a newly added provision that permits newspapers to be closed and substantially increased fines for vaguely defined infractions.  Critics are also concerned about a newly added requirement that editors belong to the Journalists, Syndicate.  According to Hawlati, the legislation includes elastic expressions such as "public systems and traditions" and "security," which are subject to different interpretations.  "If the law is not amended, we will close Hawlati ourselves," the newspaper wrote on its editorial page.  Kwestan Muhammed, leader of the PUK in the assembly, told the newspaper Rozhnama that democracy and freedom had regressed several years with the bill.  The Chairman of the KNA's Public Relations and Cultural Affairs Committee Arez Abdullah (PUK) told Rozhnama that he would also ask President Barzani to reject the law.  Asos Hardi, editor-in-chief of Awene newspaper, told Aso newspaper that the legislation,s passage was the "death of press freedom."  Hardi said previous press laws were better because those laws did not provide for the closure of newspapers.  Hardi also noted that the bill paves the way for journalists to be prosecuted  BAGHDAD 00000193  003 OF 003   according to the terrorism law.  On December 14, journalists demonstrated in both Erbil and Sulaimaniyah to protest the press law legislation and to call on President Barzani to reject it.  8. (C)  KNA Secretary Fursat Ahmed defended the law to RRT Rule of Law Specialist, explaining that the only penalties for infractions under the new press law are fines - journalists could be imprisoned only under other laws (e.g. the Anti-Terrorism law of 2006).  Ahmed also stressed the need to balance journalists' demands for freedom against the demands of more conservative elements of society (clerics) to protect public morality.  Other members of the KNA have admitted that the purpose of the law is not so much to promote press freedom as to prevent misinformation, libel, and slander against government and party officials.  KNA Speaker Adnan Mufti stressed to RRTOff the need to reign in "immature" media which often engages in spreading rumors.  If at First You Don't Succeed -----------------------------  9. (U)  Before the official text of the press bill was available, KRG President Barzani announced that he would reject it and send it back to the KNA for amendment.  Barzani said, "Kurds have sacrificed their lives for freedom, and I fully support the media's right to criticize the government. I reject any law that is against journalists' fundamental rights.  But criticism should be constructive and there needs to be a balance between the freedom of expression and restricting harmful defamation of individuals."  Barzani returned the bill to the KNA on January 15.  The KNA has announced that their committees will revise the bill and call an extraordinary session to debate it.  Comment -------  10. (C)  The controversy surrounding the regional press law reveals fundamental weaknesses in the KRG's support for civil liberties and in the KNA's legislative processes.  The independent media in the region is relatively new and not always highly professional.  Nonetheless, even as they profess to uphold democratic freedoms, many KRG leaders have become accustomed to party-controlled media; they remain sensitive to criticism - even if based on rumor.  As critics of the bill noted, vaguely worded prohibitions against harming public morals, undermining security, or insulting an individual's private life are subject to abuse by the government.  The lack of transparency in the drafting and passage of the bill only exacerbated public doubt about the KRG's true motives.  President Barzani's decision to reject the bill was a positive step that reflected his toleration - at least for now - of the critical views of local and international civil society organizations and independent media outlets.  There is no guarantee, however, that the KNA will make fundamental changes to the draft legislation.  In the end, the real test of press freedom will come not only in the Press Law's final text, but in the way that it is implemented and enforced.  The recent threats to sue Hawlati for publishing an article by AEI,s Michael Rubin show that ingrained habits die hard. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000194  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: FADHILA PARTY BOSS SOUNDS OFF ON MALIKI, FEDERALISM, AND THE MARJA'IYYAH  REF: A. BAGHDAD 107 (NATIONAL PROJECT)      B. BASRAH 002 (BASRAH REGION)  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary: Shia Fadhila Party legislative bloc leader Hassan al-Shammari told the Ambassador January 22 that the recently-passed De-Baathification Law and prospective passage of a draft Provincial Powers bill are "false victories" and should not be mistaken for signs of political progress. Displaying the maverick spirit that led his party to break away from the Shia United Iraqi Alliance (UIA) and run afoul of the Maliki government, Shammari criticized the Prime Minister for his non-inclusive style; claimed the GOI is unable to account for USD 1.5 billion earmarked for investment spending; decried sectarian-based politics and urged the USG to support secular liberals; asserted that the Najaf-based Marja'iyyah no longer hold sway over the Shia masses; warned that Iraq is not ready for federalism; and predicted that formation of a Shia-based region or regions in south-central Iraq would only increase Iranian influence, which is already strong.  End Summary.  Bleak Political Landscape -------------------------  2. (C) Fadhila Party CoR bloc leader Hassan al-Shammari and his deputy, Bassim al-Sharif, were decidedly downbeat in their assessment of Iraq's current political situation. While Fadhila sees "true political participation" of all parties in the GOI as the only way forward, Maliki continues to rule in a non-inclusive manner and Shammari has all but given up hope that Maliki will include a Fadhila member in a re-shuffled cabinet.  On the contrary, Shammari asserted that Maliki seems intent on "punishing" Fadhila for withdrawing its 15-member CoR bloc from the UIA last year and he confided that he has heard from "international community" sources that he and Basrah Governor Waeli, a senior Fadhila Party member, may be in physical danger.  He said Maliki and the GOI can take absolutely no credit for Iraq's improving security situation, which is attributable only to Coalition Forces, "Awakening" movements, and Moqtada al-Sadr's "freeze" on JAM operations.  Shammari said he had not met with Maliki since the latter's return to Iraq after undergoing medical treatment in London.  3. (C) The glib 45-year old lawyer characterized the ruling "Group of Four" alliance between ISCI, Dawa, and the two leading Kurdish parties as a "failure," and says he advised President Talabani and Vice President Hashemi to include other parties in their "Group of Three" alliance between the two leading Kurdish parties and the Sunni IIP.  He was unenthusiastic about the fledgling "National Project" coalition (Ref A), alleging that it played to ethno-sectarian divisions and was supported by unnamed "external forces."  He encouraged greater USG support for "liberal" political groups and parties because they enjoy greater public support than other parties, and cited as evidence the fact that Ayad Allawi's Iraqiyyah Party won 25 CoR seats in 2005 even though the party was openly opposed by the Shia Marja'iyyah.   Sour Views on Key Legislation -----------------------------  4. (C) In a previous meeting on January 10, Shammari told Poloff that his party had taken a "strategic decision" to prevent Maliki from achieving any sort of political success until he shuffles his cabinet to include Fadhila cadres, adding that Fadhila will try to prevent a quorum for a vote on any significant bill (possible exception is 2008 budget) and will vote against any bill that comes to a vote, even though they were not successful in blocking the De-Baathification law.  In his meeting with the Ambassador, Shammari said the party does not want to be an "obstacle" for Maliki but the PM must rule in a more democratic fashion.  He stated that the recently-passed De-Baathification Law and prospective passage of a draft Provincial Powers bill are "false victories" and should not e mistaken for signs of political progress.  Fadhila Deputy bloc leader Bassim chimed in that the De-Baathification Law created more problems than it solved because it bars key personnel from employment at several vital GOI Ministries.  Regarding ongoing CoR deliberation over the 2008 GOI budget, Bassim noted with a wry grin that the Ministry of Finance has been unable to provide a clear accounting for USD 1.5 billion earmarked for 2007 investment spending.  5. (C) In reply to the Ambassador's urging of rapid CoR action on a Provincial Powers law, Shammari said he took a dim view of the current draft bill on the grounds that it does not set forth a specific date for provincial elections.  BAGHDAD 00000194  002 OF 002   In Fadhila's view, the absence of a fixed date will all but guarantee that such elections will not be held this year. Fadhila wants provincial elections to be held before the end of April: Shammari said his party favors an "open list" system but anticipates that the Najaf-based Marja'iyyah will oppose "open lists."  He opined that the GOI is not serious about conducting elections.  In a previous January 10 meeting, Shammari predicted that Fadhila, the Sadrists, and Shia independents will split the vote in the southern and central Shia-majority provinces, exposing ISCI and Dawa as parties without a popular base.  Shammari and Bassim were noncommittal in response to the Ambassador's suggestion that the CoR forego a planned February recess and stay in session.   Federalism, Meddlesome Neighbors, Marja'iyyah ---------------------------------------------  6. (C) After the Ambassador asked about Fadhila views on a proposal floated in the "Washington Post" by National Security Advisor Muwafaq al-Rubaie that called for five regions, two of which would be located in Shia-majority areas, Shammari said that federalism is a good concept but inappropriate for Iraq at the present time.  He predicted that a Shia-dominated region or regions would only strengthen Iran's already significant influence in the south and center, lead to conflict between Iraq's Arab neighbors and Iran, and isolate such regions from the Arab and international communities.  (We note that Shammari's stated view on region formation is at odds with fellow Fadhila cohort Waeli's declared intention to move forward on forming a Basrah region (Ref B)).  7. (C) Shammari agreed with the Ambassador's observation that Arab neighbors appear to erroneously believe that Iraq's Shia are somehow beholden to Iran and that Arab states should have a greater presence here in order to counter Iranian influence.  In line with the Fadhila Party's belief that it -- and not the Sadrist Trend -- is the rightful heir to the teachings and orientation of Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr (Moqtada's late father), Shammari stated that the elder Sadr always emphasized the proud Arab identity of Iraq's Shia community and single-handedly ended a Persian tradition whereby Shia masses kiss the hand of senior religious clerics.  In addition to the above-cited examples of Shammari's negative perception of the Najaf-based Marja'iyyah, he asserted that the international community should recognize that the "traditional" Marja'iyyah no longer hold sway over the Shia masses who do not revere them as saints, and should look instead to other senior Shia clerics of influence.  (We note that while Shammari did not mention any such cleric by name, he may have been referring to Fadhila spiritual head Ayatollah Muhammad al-Yaqoubi). CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000195  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, EAID, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: MOSUL UNDER CURFEW AFTER MASSIVE JANUARY 23 EXPLOSION  Classified By: Ninewa PRT Leader Jason Hyland.  Reasons 1.4b,d  1. (U) This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  Mosul Tense After Explosion ---------------------------  2. (C/REL ACGU) On January 23, a large explosion in the Zanjali neighborhood in northwestern Mosul killed at least 25 Iraqi civilians, 3 Iraqi Army (IA) soldiers, and wounded over 170 civilians, according to local Ministry of Health (MOH) sources.  The casualty total will likely change as recovery operations continue.  The vast majority of casualties are Iraqi civilians.  No Americans were injured in the initial attack.  Rescue/recovery efforts continued throughout the night and the IA, with Iraqi Police (IP) and Coalition Force (CF) assistance, are working to secure the area.  The city is now under curfew, but the security situation appears to be under control, with the new Ninewa Operations Command Chief playing a key coordinating role.  Secondary Attack Kills Police Chief -----------------------------------  3. (C/REL ACGU) During follow-on security operations on January 24 in the vicinity of the bomb site, Iraqi and Coalition forces came under attack.  Ninewa Provincial Director of Police (PDOP) BG Salih Mohammed Hassan was killed by a suicide bomber.  The previous PDOP, MG Wathiq, will be returning to Mosul to oversee police operations, at least in the interim.  Local Officials Follow Up -------------------------  4. (C/REL ACGU) MND-N Deputy Commanding General BG Thomas, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment (3ACR) Commanding Officer COL Bills and PRT Leader Hyland went to Provincial Hall on January 24 to meet Ninewa Governor Duraid Kashmoula, recently appointed Ninewa Operations Command head MG Riyadh, and other senior Iraqi military commanders to discuss the incident. Kashmoula described the citizens in the vicinity as understandably angry.  He said he had instructed the Provincial Government and Provincial Director Generals to provide all possible support to the affected community, including providing shelter and jobs and the restoration of essential services.  He said he had also contacted the Prime Minister's Office to request immediate emergency funds and to declare the affected zone a disaster area.  (Note: Both Riyadh and Kashmoula called the Prime Minister's Office and other Baghdad contacts during the meeting.  End Note.)  After hearing news of the killing of the Police Chief and other terrorist attacks, Governor Ka shmoula and MG Riyadh decided to enforce a curfew from 1200 January 24 and announced it over a taped televised statement.  (Note: In driving through the streets of Mosul immediately after the meeting, PRT Leader observed store fronts shuttered and the streets nearly deserted.  In a flyover of the area with military leaders later in the day, PRT Leader saw at least a city block in rubble, surrounded by one- and two-story houses in a poor neighborhood.  There were still dozens of people at the site, even after the curfew.  End Note.)  PRT Partners Stepping Up to Help --------------------------------  5. (SBU) The PRT convened an emergency action committee to assist the Ninewa government and coordinate with coalition forces.  USAID implementing partners, International Medical Corps (IMC) and International Relief and Development (IRD), are leading the PRT's efforts.  IRD sent stocks of medical supplies to Mosul hospitals on January 23.  IMC and MOH sent large quantities of needed trauma and surgical supplies to the two main Mosul hospitals.  IMC is already preparing further resupply efforts in coordination with the MOH and the Iraqi Red Crescent.  Based on a secondary assessment, IMC is doubling the initial resupply amount to help address longstanding undersupply issues at Mosul's major hospitals. The supplies are expected to come from the Kurdistan Region in the next 12-48 hours.  3ACR is providing all essential security support to the IA and IP.  MND-N is planning to send  BAGHDAD 00000195  002 OF 002   emergency material such as search dogs and engineering equipment.  Comment: Quick Response Needed from GOI ---------------------------------------  6. (C/REL AGCU) The Iraqi Security Forces and the Provincial Government have done what they can do to take control of the situation on the ground at the site.  Governor Kashmoula and MG Riyadh have both now requested assistance from the Prime Minister's office in Baghdad.  The PRT has been coordinating with our Embassy colleagues to push the GOI to get aid and assistance for this crisis into Mosul as quickly as possible.  (Note: The PM's office has responded positively and the Governor claimed that the PM was going to send a team up with money soon.  End Note.)  Much of the public's perception in the first few hours immediately after the event was shaped by rumor and an information campaign by the terrorists to make the government look weak and ineffective.  By moving quickly and providing the emergency aid needed, the central GOI, along with the Provincial Government and the Iraqi Security Forces, can come out of this crisis looking stronger and more effective than ever.  The PRT will continue to work closely with our military and Iraqi colleagues to help ensure that emergency assistance is provided quickly and effectively. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000196  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, EAID, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: PRT NINEWA: MOSUL UNDER CURFEW AFTER MASSIVE JANUARY 23 EXPLOSION  Classified By: Ninewa PRT Leader Jason Hyland for reasons 1.4b,d.  1. (U) This is a PRT Ninewa reporting cable.  Mosul Tense After Explosion ---------------------------  2. (C/REL ACGU) On January 23, a large explosion in the Zanjali neighborhood in northwestern Mosul killed at least 25 Iraqi civilians, three Iraqi Army (IA) soldiers, and wounded over 170 civilians, according to local Ministry of Health (MOH) sources.  The Qsualty total will likely change as recovery operations continue.  The vast majority of casualties are Iraqi civilians.  No Americans were injured in the initial attack.  Rescue/recovery efforts continued throughout the night and the IA, with Iraqi Police (IP) and Coalition Force (CF) assistance, are working to secure the area.  The city is now under curfew, but the security situation appears to be under control, with the new Ninewa Operations Command Chief playing a key coordinating role.  Secondary Attack Kills Police Chief -----------------------------------  3. (C/REL ACGU) During follow-on security operations on January 24 in the vicinity of the bomb site, Iraqi and Coalition forces came under attack.  Ninewa Provincial Director of Police (PDOP) BG Salih Mohammed Hassan was killed by a suicide bomber.  The previous PDOP, MG Wathiq, will be returning to Mosul to oversee police operations, at least in the interim.  Local Officials Follow Up -------------------------  4. (C/REL ACGU) MND-N Deputy Commanding General BG Thomas, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment (3ACR) Commanding Officer COL Bills and PRT Leader Hyland went to Provincial Hall on January 24 to meet Ninewa Governor Duraid Kashmoula, recently appointed Ninewa Operations Command head MG Riyadh, and other senior Iraqi military commanders to discuss the incident. Kashmoula described the citizens in the vicinity as understandably angry.  He said he had instructed the Provincial Government and Provincial Director Generals to provide all possible support to the affected community, including providing shelter and jobs and the restoration of essential services.  He said he had also contacted the Prime Minister's Office to request immediate emergency funds and to declare the affected zone a disaster area.  (Note: Both Riyadh and Kashmoula called the Prime Minister's Office and other Baghdad contacts during the meeting.  End Note.)  After hearing news of the killing of the Police Chief and other terrorist attacks, Governor Ka shmoula and MG Riyadh decided to enforce a curfew from 1200 January 24 and announced it over a taped televised statement.  (Note: In driving through the streets of Mosul immediately after the meeting, PRT Leader observed store fronts shuttered and the streets nearly deserted.  In a flyover of the area with military leaders later in the day, PRT Leader saw at least a city block in rubble, surrounded by one- and two-story houses in a poor neighborhood.  There were still dozens of people at the site, even after the curfew.  End Note.)  PRT Partners Stepping Up to Help --------------------------------  5. (SBU) The PRT convened an emergency action committee to assist the Ninewa government and coordinate with coalition forces.  USAID implementing partners, International Medical Corps (IMC) and International Relief and Development (IRD), are leading the PRT's efforts.  IRD sent stocks of medical supplies to Mosul hospitals on January 23.  IMC and MOH sent large quantities of needed trauma and surgical supplies to the two main Mosul hospitals.  IMC is already preparing further resupply efforts in coordination with the MOH and the Iraqi Red Crescent.  Based on a secondary assessment, IMC is doubling the initial resupply amount to help address long-standing undersupply issues at Mosul's major hospitals. The supplies are expected to come from the Kurdistan Region in the next 12-48 hours.  3ACR is providing all essential security support to the IA and IP.  MND-N is planning to send emergency material such as search dogs and engineering equipment.  BAGHDAD 00000196  002 OF 002    Comment: Quick Response Needed from GOI ---------------------------------------  6. (C/REL AGCU) The Iraqi Security Forces and the Provincial Government have done what they can do to take control of the situation on the ground at the site.  Governor Kashmoula and MG Riyadh have both now requested assistance from the Prime Minister's office in Baghdad.  The PRT has been coordinating with our Embassy colleagues to push the GOI to get aid and assistance for this crisis into Mosul as quickly as possible.  (Note: The PM's office has responded positively and the Governor claimed that the PM was going to send a team up with money soon.  End Note.)  Much of the public's perception in the first few hours immediately after the event was shaped by rumor and an information campaign by the terrorists to make the government look weak and ineffective.  By moving quickly and providing the emergency aid needed, the central GOI, along with the Provincial Government and the Iraqi Security Forces, can come out of this crisis looking stronger and more effective than ever.  The PRT will continue to work closely with our military and Iraqi colleagues to help ensure that emergency assistance is provided quickly and effectively. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000199  SIPDIS  STATE FOR USAID  SIPDIS  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, EAID, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: MOSUL UNDER CURFEW AFTER MASSIVE JANUARY 23 EXPLOSION  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  Mosul Tense After Explosion ---------------------------  1. (C/REL ACGU) On January 23, a large explosion in the Zanjali neighborhood in northwestern Mosul killed at least 25 Iraqi civilians, 3 Iraqi Army (IA) soldiers, and wounded over 170 civilians, according to local Ministry of Health (MOH) sources.  The casualty total will likely change as recovery operations continue.  The vast majority of casualties are Iraqi civilians.  No Americans were injured in the initial attack.  Rescue/recovery efforts continued throughout the night and the IA, with Iraqi Police (IP) and Coalition Force (CF) assistance, are working to secure the area.  The city is now under curfew, but the security situation appears to be under control, with the new Ninewa Operations Command Chief playing a key coordinating role.  Secondary Attack Kills Police Chief -----------------------------------  2. (C/REL ACGU) During follow-on security operations on January 24 in the vicinity of the bomb site, Iraqi and Coalition forces came under attack.  Ninewa Provincial Director of Police (PDOP) BG Salih Mohammed Hassan was killed by a suicide bomber.  The previous PDOP, MG Wathiq, will be returning to Mosul to oversee police operations, at least in the interim.  Local Officials Follow Up -------------------------  3. (C/REL ACGU) MND-N Deputy Commanding General BG Thomas, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment (3ACR) Commanding Officer COL Bills and PRT Leader Hyland went to Provincial Hall on January 24 to meet Ninewa Governor Duraid Kashmoula, recently appointed Ninewa Operations Command head MG Riyadh, and other senior Iraqi military commanders to discuss the incident. Kashmoula described the citizens in the vicinity as understandably angry.  He said he had instructed the Provincial Government and Provincial Director Generals to provide all possible support to the affected community, including providing shelter and jobs and the restoration of essential services.  He said he had also contacted the Prime Minister's Office to request immediate emergency funds and to declare the affected zone a disaster area.  (Note: Both Riyadh and Kashmoula called the Prime Minister's Office and other Baghdad contacts during the meeting.  End Note.)  After hearing news of the killing of the Police Chief and other terrorist attacks, Governor Kashmoula and MG Riyadh decided to enforce a curfew from 1200 January 24 and announced it over a taped televised statement.  (Note: In driving through the streets of Mosul immediately after the meeting, PRT Leader observed store fronts shuttered and the streets nearly deserted.  In a flyover of the area with military leaders later in the day, PRT Leader saw at least a city block in rubble, surrounded by one- and two-story houses in a poor neighborhood.  There were still dozens of people at the site, even after the curfew.  End Note.)  PRT Partners Stepping Up to Help --------------------------------  4. (SBU) The PRT convened an emergency action committee to assist the Ninewa government and coordinate with coalition forces.  USAID implementing partners, International Medical Corps (IMC) and International Relief and Development (IRD), are leading the PRT's efforts.  IRD sent stocks of medical supplies to Mosul hospitals on January 23.  IMC and MOH sent large quantities of needed trauma and surgical supplies to the two main Mosul hospitals.  IMC is already preparing further resupply efforts in coordination with the MOH and the Iraqi Red Crescent.  Based on a secondary assessment, IMC is doubling the initial resupply amount to help address longstanding undersupply issues at Mosul's major hospitals. The supplies are expected to come from the Kurdistan Region in the next 12-48 hours.  3ACR is providing all essential security support to the IA and IP.  MND-N is planning to send  BAGHDAD 00000199  002 OF 002   emergency material such as search dogs and engineering equipment.  Comment: Quick Response Needed from GOI ---------------------------------------  5. (C/REL AGCU) The Iraqi Security Forces and the Provincial Government have done what they can do to take control of the situation on the ground at the site.  Governor Kashmoula and MG Riyadh have both now requested assistance from the Prime Minister's office in Baghdad.  The PRT has been coordinating with our Embassy colleagues to push the GOI to get aid and assistance for this crisis into Mosul as quickly as possible.  (Note: The PM's office has responded positively and the Governor claimed that the PM was going to send a team up with money soon.  End Note.)  Much of the public's perception in the first few hours immediately after the event was shaped by rumor and an information campaign by the terrorists to make the government look weak and ineffective.  By moving quickly and providing the emergency aid needed, the central GOI, along with the Provincial Government and the Iraqi Security Forces, can come out of this crisis looking stronger and more effective than ever.  The PRT will continue to work closely with our military and Iraqi colleagues to help ensure that emergency assistance is provided quickly and effectively. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000200  SIPDIS  STATE FOR USAID  SIPDIS  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, EAID, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: MOSUL UNDER CURFEW AFTER MASSIVE JANUARY 23 EXPLOSION  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  1. (U) This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) reporting cable.  Mosul Tense After Explosion ---------------------------  2. (C/REL ACGU) On January 23, a large explosion in the Zanjali neighborhood in northwestern Mosul killed at least 25 Iraqi civilians, three Iraqi Army (IA) soldiers, and wounded over 170 civilians, according to local Ministry of Health (MOH) sources.  The casualty total will likely change as recovery operations continue.  The vast majority of casualties are Iraqi civilians.  No Americans were injured in the initial attack.  Rescue/recovery efforts continued throughout the night and the IA, with Iraqi Police (IP) and Coalition Force (CF) assistance, are working to secure the area.  The city is now under curfew, but the security situation appears to be under control, with the new Ninewa Operations Command Chief playing a key coordinating role.  Secondary Attack Kills Police Chief -----------------------------------  3. (C/REL ACGU) During follow-on security operations on January 24 in the vicinity of the bomb site, Iraqi and Coalition forces came under attack.  Ninewa Provincial Director of Police (PDOP) BG Salih Mohammed Hassan was killed by a suicide bomber.  The previous PDOP, MG Wathiq, will be returning to Mosul to oversee police operations, at least in the interim.  Local Officials Follow Up -------------------------  4. (C/REL ACGU) MND-N Deputy Commanding General BG Thomas, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment (3ACR) Commanding Officer COL Bills and PRT Leader Hyland went to Provincial Hall on January 24 to meet Ninewa Governor Duraid Kashmoula, recently appointed Ninewa Operations Command head MG Riyadh, and other senior Iraqi military commanders to discuss the incident. Kashmoula described the citizens in the vicinity as understandably angry.  He said he had instructed the Provincial Government and Provincial Director Generals to provide all possible support to the affected community, including providing shelter and jobs and the restoration of essential services.  He said he had also contacted the Prime Minister's Office to request immediate emergency funds and to declare the affected zone a disaster area.  (Note: Both Riyadh and Kashmoula called the Prime Minister's Office and other Baghdad contacts during the meeting.  End Note.)  After hearing news of the killing of the Police Chief and other terrorist attacks, Governor Kashmoula and MG Riyadh decided to enforce a curfew from 1200 January 24 and announced it over a taped televised statement.  (Note: In driving through the streets of Mosul immediately after the meeting, PRT Leader observed store fronts shuttered and the streets nearly deserted.  In a flyover of the area with military leaders later in the day, PRT Leader saw at least a city block in rubble, surrounded by one- and two-story houses in a poor neighborhood.  There were still dozens of people at the site, even after the curfew.  End Note.)  PRT Partners Stepping Up to Help --------------------------------  5. (SBU) The PRT convened an emergency action committee to assist the Ninewa government and coordinate with coalition forces.  USAID implementing partners, International Medical Corps (IMC) and International Relief and Development (IRD), are leading the PRT's efforts.  IRD sent stocks of medical supplies to Mosul hospitals on January 23.  IMC and MOH sent large quantities of needed trauma and surgical supplies to the two main Mosul hospitals.  IMC is already preparing further resupply efforts in coordination with the MOH and the Iraqi Red Crescent.  Based on a secondary assessment, IMC is doubling the initial resupply amount to help address long-standing undersupply issues at Mosul's major hospitals. The supplies are expected to come from the Kurdistan Region in the next 12-48 hours.  3ACR is providing all essential  BAGHDAD 00000200  002 OF 002   security support to the IA and IP.  MND-N is planning to send emergency material such as search dogs and engineering equipment.  Comment: Quick Response Needed from GOI ---------------------------------------  6. (C/REL AGCU) The Iraqi Security Forces and the Provincial Government have done what they can do to take control of the situation on the ground at the site.  Governor Kashmoula and MG Riyadh have both now requested assistance from the Prime Minister's office in Baghdad.  The PRT has been coordinating with our Embassy colleagues to push the GOI to get aid and assistance for this crisis into Mosul as quickly as possible.  (Note: The PM's office has responded positively and the Governor claimed that the PM was going to send a team up with money soon.  End Note.)  Much of the public's perception in the first few hours immediately after the event was shaped by rumor and an information campaign by the terrorists to make the government look weak and ineffective.  By moving quickly and providing the emergency aid needed, the central GOI, along with the Provincial Government and the Iraqi Security Forces, can come out of this crisis looking stronger and more effective than ever.  The PRT will continue to work closely with our military and Iraqi colleagues to help ensure that emergency assistance is provided quickly and effectively. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000201  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: SALIH TO CODEL: "PLEASE DON'T PULL THE PLUG ON THIS MISSION"  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Summary:  Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih on January 15 urged Codel Davis (Reps. Lincoln Davis (D-TN), Tim Walberg (R-MI), John Barrow (D-GA), Marsha Blackburn (R-TN), Brad Miller (D-NC) and Niki Tsongas (D-MA)) against a precipitous U.S. withdrawal from Iraq.  He enumerated security gains in 2007 and signs of hope for political and economic improvement in 2008.  Salih said the majority of both Iraqi politicians and citizens would fear a U.S. withdrawal, harsh rhetoric notwithstanding, and estimated U.S. forces could fall back to a supporting role in security within two to three years.  The DPM warned that every neighboring country has "a dog in this fight," arguing the best thing for Iraq would be for all of them to eschew intervention.  End summary.  Hope For Political, Economic Gains in 2008 ------------------------------------------  2.    (C) Salih opened the meeting by explaining that he values meeting members of Congress because it allows him to explain the complexities of Iraq,s situation.  Iraq,s liberation unleashed powerful conflicting forces, but many Iraqis are trying to build a democracy and have made major progress by any standard.  Al Qa,ida lost in Anbar because the population rejected it, not because the GOI or US had ordered them out, and the event thus marked the genesis by a native Muslim population of Al Qa,ida,s global defeat. Salih argued that Iraqi security forces have made huge strides since 2004; while he expressed reluctance to set timelines, he estimated that U.S. troops could withdraw to a supporting role within two to three years at most. Furthermore, Iraqi political actors are ready for more serious political dialogue despite their ongoing disputes, and the shift of fighting from the street to the political system and Iraq,s free press is itself an encouraging sign.  3.    (C) Rep. Lincoln Davis (D-TN) argued that no country can exist without robust commerce, financial institutions, roads and other infrastructure, and service delivery, and asked Salih if he envisions an Iraqi system of governance in which commerce can flourish.  Salih said the economy had improved modestly in 2007, and would improve more in 2008 thanks to the largest Iraqi budget ever.  Referencing Iraq,s plentiful natural resources, Salih said he told Kurdish students "this is a country I don,t want to leave."  Combating Extremism and Anti-U.S. Sentiment -------------------------------------------  4.    (C) Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-TN) declared that she and Salih share constituencies, due to the expatriate Kurdish population of Nashville.  She pushed back on Salih,s reluctance to set timelines, explaining that she learned their value in solving problems during her previous career in marketing.  She asked how the GOI is ensuring that young Iraqi women are choosing a life of freedom and a life of liberty, as opposed to choosing a system that gives absolute power to a dictator or religious extremist.  Salih responded that this is the most important question of all.  Islamic fundamentalism is a problem across the Arab world, which Salih attributed to an "angry generation" arising from fifty years of dictatorship in many Arab countries.  He cited Egypt, where much of the population is hostile to its government and the west despite U.S. annual aid in the billions of dollars, and said supporting democratizing Muslim societies like Iraq or Kosovo is a much better investment.  5.    (C) Rep. Brad Miller (D-NC) asked about Iraqi public opinion on the U.S. presence, noting that polls suggest overwhelming opposition, and that even the majority of the COR had called for a U.S. withdrawal.  Salih conceded that there would always be impulsive distaste for foreign troops on one,s soil, but that if the U.S. announced its imminent military withdrawal, the public would urge troops to stay for the sake of stability.  Similarly, politicians criticize the U.S. to score points with their constituents, but no serious Iraqi leaders except the Sadrists oppose a long-term U.S. security presence.  Salih added an earnest plea for continued U.S. engagement in Iraq, saying "please don,t pull the plug on this mission."  6.    (C) Rep. Miller asked about Iranian and Turkish interference in Iraq.  Salih responded that all of Iraq,s neighbors have major stakes in the outcome of Iraq,s internal struggles, and that the best thing would be for none to interfere.  Turkey lacks the necessary leverage to manipulate Iraqi domestic politics, but is intervening militarily, albeit out of legitimate security concerns. Salih asked Ambassador Crocker about the status of U.S.-Iran talks, which the Ambassador said Iran had backed away from  BAGHDAD 00000201  002 OF 002   but is welcome to restart any time.  7.  (U) Codel Davis did not have the opportunity to clear this cable. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000202  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: TALABANI ON EARLY EXECUTIVE COUNCIL BUSINESS, DEBA'ATHIFICATION   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Iraqi President Jalal Talabani discussed the Executive Council (formerly known as the "3 1") and other topics in an informal dinner on January 20 with the Ambassador.  He said the Council plans to shrink the Council of Ministers by nearly half, but also to reincorporate most of the blocs that for months have been boycotting its meetings.  Talabani claimed to have persuaded Vice President Hashimi not to veto the de-Ba'athification law, in return for promising to support Hashimi's proposed amendments to the law at a later date.  Finally, the President argued that the time has come for Tawafuq head Adnan Dulaymi to leave Iraq.  End summary.  Executive Council to Shrink the Cabinet ---------------------------------------  2.    (C) Talabani discussed the early business of the Executive Council, the name of which he credited to Vice President Hashimi and which derives from Article 66 of Iraq's constitution.  A priority is to trim the cabinet to 22 members, which will include dismissing all ministers of state.  Talabani acknowledged the potential difficulties with all political groups losing representation.  He said the re-shuffle could happen either by persuading each minister to resign, or by Maliki himself resigning but receiving a letter the same day recommending his reappointment with a new cabinet.  Talabani was unable to suppress a mischievous grin as he said this, presumably because all in the room knew he very nearly participated in a move to oust Maliki a month earlier.  Talabani also said Fadhila had agreed to return to the cabinet and Tawafuq and Iraqiyya had held productive talks on the subject, but did not specify how this would square with a reduced ministerial cadre.  Finally, Talabani said the Executive Council would meet next on Wednesday, January 23, not Monday the 21st because of a request from Maliki.  Hashimi Not Vetoing De-Ba'ath -----------------------------  3.    (C) Talabani said he and Hashimi agreed that the latter would not veto the de-Ba'athification law if Talabani in the future supported a list of amendments to the bill.  The Ambassador thanked Talabani for his helpful influence on the Vice President, to which Talabani replied that Hashimi had come to trust him and understand that he supported him and his party.  "Leave Hashimi to me," Talabani quipped, "and Maliki is for you."  (Note:  Hashimi's senior political advisor confirmed this arrangement between Talabani and Hashimi to Poloff on January 21, adding that the VP would sign the bill but "with a condition" -- that is, signature along with a statement explaining the Vice President's understandings on how particular elements of the legislation are to be implemented.  End note).  Dulaymi Must Leave Iraq -----------------------  4.    (C) In a private aside, Talabani said it was time for Tawafuq leader Adnan Dulaymi to leave Iraq permanently. Dulaymi's son, in Talabani's estimation, is guilty of the criminal charges against him, and Dulaymi's meeting with Maliki the previous day had been courteous but produced little of substance.  Parliament speaker Mahmoud Mashadani expressed the same sentiment in a meeting the previous day, Talabani added. (Note: Dulaymi's son and bodyguards were arrested November 29 after car bombs were discovered alongside Dulaymi's office.  Talabani subsequently assigned a Peshmerga security detail to protect Dulaymi.) CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000203  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, UN, IZ SUBJECT: SRSG'S STRATEGY ON IRAQI PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS AND ARTICLE 140 IMPLEMENTATION  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4(b) and (d).  USG Participants ----------------- Ambassador Crocker David Pearce Brett McGurk, NSC Cathy Westley  UNAMI Participants ------------------ SRSG Staffan de Mistura D-SRSG Andrew Gilmour  1.  (C)  Summary:  On January 18, Special Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) for Iraq Staffan de Mistura met with the Ambassador to discuss the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq's (UNAMI) plan of action to fulfill its expanded mandate under Resolution 1770.  Topics included increased staffing for UNAMI; alternatives for its new compound; elections strategies; and Article 140 implementation.  De Mistura was open about the obstacles facing him within his own organization and ways in which the Embassy could be of assistance.  De Mistura and the Ambassador were of one mind on the need to conduct provincial elections this year and to see progress on Article 140 implementation in the next six months.  End Summary.  EXPANDING THE MISSION ---------------------  2.  (C)  De Mistura described his efforts to increase staffing at UNAMI and cajole various UN agencies into establishing a permanent presence in Iraq.  He informed the Ambassador that UNAMI had the capacity for 140 international staff (not including security) at their present location. Their current staffing level ceiling is 85.  He plans on requesting an increase of 19.  He said he is looking for quality, not quantity, and that he would have a better chance at slowly increasing staff levels rather than asking for all 140 at once.  He confirmed Under Secretary for Safety and Security Sir David Veness's upcoming trip to Baghdad to assess the security situation.  He said that Veness's perceptions will be colored by the December 11 bombing near the UN headquarters in Algiers.  3.  (C)  Offering up some good news, de Mistura informed the Ambassador that the United Nations High Commission on Refugees (UNHCR) will be sending a full-time international staff person to Baghdad at the end of January and will recruit three national staff.  The World Food Program (WFP) plans to place one permanent international employee in Baghdad and one in Irbil.  In addition, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) will place one international staffer in Basrah and one in Irbil.  De Mistura will press them to also place one in Baghdad.  He mentioned the World Health Organization (WHO) is getting pressure from the Iraqis to create a permanent presence in Iraq.  Even with these increases, de Mistura believes more could be done in moving other agencies to Iraq.  He requested that the U.S. continue to pressure Geneva about this.  He asked that it be done without mentioning his involvement because of the sensitivity of his position.  ALTERNATIVE SITE FOR UNAMI COMPOUND:  GEORGIA ON MY MIND --------------------------------------------- ------------  4.  (C)  Because of security concerns, the simple USD 30 million compound de Mistura had envisioned has now grown to a USD 200 million project.  De Mistura understands that 70 percent of the cost of relocating the new UNAMI compound to the old U.S. Embassy site would be for security upgrades such as setback walls.  He is also concerned that the International Zone (IZ) will continue to get smaller.  His goal is to locate the UNAMI mission in one of the last places "to go red."  De Mistura suggested the Georgian compound, located along the river and to the west of the New Embassy Compound (NEC).  He said they had considered the property earlier, but security experts were concerned that its proximity to the NEC could make it a target.  He pointed out that the current compound is closer to the embassy and has not caused any problems.  5.  (C)  Using his best sales techniques, de Mistura pointed out that the location near the NEC would reduce his security costs as UNAMI could take advantage of the security umbrella of the diplomatic neighborhood.  He added that other missions look to UNAMI when considering reopening their embassies in Baghdad, and by having UNAMI in the neighborhood, you increase the likelihood of bringing in more missions.  He also pointed out that the optic of requesting the Iraqis to help fund a USD 200 million compound when the UN is only  BAGHDAD 00000203  002 OF 003   providing USD 19 million to aid with internally displaced persons (IDPs) was not good.  The Ambassador promised to look into it.  IHEC:  SADR AND GOMORRAH? -------------------------  6.  (C)  De Mistura confirmed with the Ambassador that they were both hearing the same complaints about the Sadrist infiltration of the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) and that they were coming from the same people -- those who stand to lose big in the next round of provincial elections.  De Mistura said he talked with his election team about this, and they said there was a problem with nepotism and politicization at the govenorate level, but that the commissioners themselves, while being from various political parties, appeared to operate in a fairly neutral manner.  The chair of IHEC is a Sadrist, but he is also the most technically capable commissioner and has shown himself to be fair and independent.  Both de Mistura and the Ambassador agreed to press for specific information the next time they receive complaints about the politicization of IHEC.  ELECTIONS:  BACK TO THE FUTURE ------------------------------  7.  (C) The Ambassador questioned de Mistura on where the electoral process stands now and what needs to be done to move it forward.  De Mistura concurred with the Ambassador that provincial elections need to be held this year.  He said that he is hearing it from the Iraqis, too.  He opined that if the Sunnis want it and the Sadrists want it, perhaps elections should proceed whether or not IHEC is politicized. De Mistura then updated the Ambassador on voter registration and the need for an election law in order to complete the process.  They both discussed the possibility of reverting back to the 2005 election law and procedure if the current law remains deadlocked.  De Mistura suggested telling the Iraqis UNAMI is tired of babysitting them if they are not willing to try, and that UNAMI should hand-pick the commissioners and run the elections like they did in 2005, or at least threaten the the GOI with that.  The Ambassador asked whether the Prime Minister could make an executive order to make elections happen, but de Mistura worried that the PM would just raise the politicization of IHEC again, and they would be back at square one.  He pointed out that the main issue holding things up right now is resolving IDP voting.  The Ambassador suggested that they need to drill down to find out what the problem is, or just revert back to 2005.  8.  (C)  De Mistura brought up the topic of rolling elections.  He said that they could be done and requested Andrew Gilmour, Deputy SRSG for Political Affairs, to explain more.  Gilmour said the key to reducing voter fraud is having nationwide voter registration instead of registering one province at a time before each election.  De Mistura then added that the only way to satisfy people with rolling elections is to assure them that eventually all provinces will be able to hold elections.  It needs to be shown as a sequence of elections rather than favoring just a few provinces.  Gilmour pointed out that national voter registration was still going to be an issue that needs to be resolved.  ARTICLE 140 STRATEGY:  INFILTRATE AND NEUTRALIZE --------------------------------------------- ---  9.  (C)  Turning to UNAMI's assistance on Article 140, de Mistura said his initial focus will be on identifying practical confidence-building measures (CBMs) and getting technical assistance moving ahead, including increased hiring of experts.  He agreed with the Ambassador that quick action to demonstrate progress would be important politically. UNAMI will follow up with the Embasy to coordinate movement along two tracks, technical and political, De Mistura said.  10  (10)  De Mistura emphasized that UNAMI ties its assistance to its expanded mandate under Resolution 1770 to assist with internal boundary adjustments, in part to avoid the politically charged constitutional question of the status of Article 140 with the passage of the December 31 deadline for a referendum.  As its work moves ahead, UNAMI will look for the easiest disputed territories to resolve and not begin with Kirkuk, de Mistura noted.  Defining disputed territories and gaining a detailed understanding of each area's issues will also be important.  De Mistura said UNAMI plans to work with the Prime Minister's High Committee on Article 140 and its Chairman, Minister of Science and Technology Raid Fahmi, as one vehicle to coordinate with the GOI.  "We will infiltrate it with some UN DNA," de Mistura offered.  Senior Advisor said that he agreed with this approach, but cautioned  BAGHDAD 00000203  003 OF 003   that some Iraqis view the committee as too biased towards the Kurds, and this perception would need to be taken into account and neutralized.  CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000204  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2018 TAGS: AMGT, EAID, ECON, ENRG, IZ, PGOV, PINR, PREL, SOCI SUBJECT: BAGHDAD ESSENTIAL SERVICES: 2007 YEAR IN REVIEW  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 3045      B. 08 BAGHDAD 0038      C. 07 BAGHDAD 3997      D. 08 BAGHDAD 0003   1.  SUMMARY:  Initiated in 2007, Fardh Al Qanoon (FAQ), aka the Baghdad Security Plan (BSP), emphasized several themes, including the delivery of essential services.  Although initially led by DPM Zoubai, his attempted assassination and the political boycott of the Tawafuq bloc hindered efforts to improve the delivery of services.  The recent Prime Ministerial appointment of Ahmed Chalabi to temporarily fill the leadership vacuum has been relatively successful, but only within the context as an ombudsman that provides quick, short-term solutions.  The GoI would be well served by resolving political impasses and appointing a new DPM to coordinate services.  Despite the absence of a DPM, the creation of the JROC/JPC proved to be a significant achievement in 2007 which promoted reconciliation and established inter-GoI lines of communication.  END SUMMARY.  --------------- Fardh Al Qanoon --------------- 2.  With the January 2007 commencement of Fardh Al Qanoon (FAQ), aka the Baghdad Security Plan (BSP), the Government of Iraq (GoI) created six supporting committees.  Oversight of the essential services portfolio was assigned to Deputy Prime Minister Salam Zoubai, who's USEMB counterpart was the Iraq Reconstruction Management Office (IRMO) Director, Ambassador Joseph Saloom (NOTE: In May 2007, IRMO evolved into the Iraq Transition Assistance Office, ITAO. END NOTE).  Each supporting committee was responsible for presenting a weekly report to the PM at the Iraqi Executive Steering Committee (IESC).  (NOTE: Leading to the September 2007 Congressional hearings the IESC was identified as Benchmark #8. END NOTE)  3.  Prior to his assignment, Zoubai had been viewed by his Iraqi counterparts as ineffective and incapable of delivering critical services.  FAQ invigorated his office, cultivating momentum and progress.  Furthermore, USG engagement contributed to increased GoI deference to the office of the DPM and consequently provided a foundation upon which the DPM built a new level of credibility.  The newfound authority allowed Zoubai to exert pressure and leverage on the Iraqi government at both local and national levels to ensure coordination in the provision of services.  Zoubai's legitimacy was demonstrated by his ability to host meetings with staunch Sadrist ministers, specifically the former ministers of agriculture and health.  This was a noteworthy political achievement as a Sunni and in the presence of USG officials.  4.  Myriad issues were jointly addressed by DPM Zoubai and IRMO: Procurement, transportation, and warehouse security of pharmaceuticals; increased salaries of Iraqi teachers; installation of solar street lights and provision of micro generators (1.75MW) to neighborhoods; reopening closed gas stations and addressed administrative corruption; municipal trash collection; and thwarting insurgent access to chlorine amidst terrorist attacks.  5.  One of the initial impediments resided at the deputy level.  On March 28, the first Deputy IESC (D-IESC) meeting convened in order to prepare IESC agenda items and track implementation of policy.  As the committee progressed, however, accusations of sectarianism were levied against the secretariat, Ali Yassri of the National Security Advisor's  SIPDIS office, who was alleged to be a member of the Office of Martyr Sadr (OMS).  Zoubai's advisors complained that agenda topics imposed by Ali were trivial and failed to address exigent issues.  The animosity also presented a bureaucratic obstacle to an avenue that otherwise would have been a means for IRMO to influence GoI strategy and elevate critical USG concerns.  6.  Another challenge was the dysfunctional nature of the national government.  It became evident that national leaders failed to communicate with each other at even the most basic of levels.  Ministries did not fully appreciate the interdependency of their respective sectors.  For example, the delivery of clean water to Baghdad residents requires fuel to run electrical generators, and subsequently water treatment facilities require electricity to power pumping units.  Above all, security is needed to protect the linear infrastructure that actually delivers the product. Unfortunately, absence of inter-ministerial dialogue resulted in a disconnect of project implementation and failure to deliver services.  ---------------- JROC/JPC Support ----------------  BAGHDAD 00000204  002 OF 003   7.  Reconstruction initiatives were also pursued simultaneously by several entities without knowledge of each other's activities.  The efforts were duplicative and counterproductive.  To deal with the problem, USEMB and MNF-I established the Joint Reconstruction Operations Center (JROC) and Joint Planning Committee (JPC).  8.  The JROC provides a common picture of all non-kinetic programs impacting BSP, and serves as a repository of reconstruction projects.  The primary responsibility of JROC personnel is the coordinated execution of projects.  The key deliverable is a weekly brief to the JPC outlining focus projects within target neighborhoods and identification of dilemmas requiring JPC resolution.  Providing strategic direction to the JROC, JPC composition includes myriad implementing agencies, both Iraqi and USG.  Most notably, members are derived from local organizations to ensure that community interests are adequately represented.  The group reviews local undertakings and verifies that mechanisms deliver essential services.  (Ref A)  9.  The JROC/JPC offers a forum in which Iraqi leaders vent frustrations and support local development efforts.  In particular, they allow Iraqis to jointly manage expenditures with their USG colleagues.  This counters perceptions of misdirected funding and ensures that demand equitably meets supply, thereby ensuring maximum efficiency.  10.  Zoubai's staff serve as co-chairs to both organizations, providing national oversight to an otherwise local endeavor. Their role is vital in verifying that District Advisory Councils (DAC) are actively committed to representing neighborhood interests.  DPM advisors also understand indigenous attitudes that are sometimes difficult for Coalition members to perceive.  -------------------------- Assassination & Withdrawal -------------------------- 11.  In the afternoon of March 23, 2007, a member of DPM Zoubai's security team detonated a ball bearing suicide vest inside Zoubai's residence.  Severely injured, Zoubai spent several months recuperating in Jordan.  His absence proved debilitating to efforts to improve the delivery of essential services.  Without Zoubai's authority, his advisors felt powerless and were timid in presenting reconstruction developments to the PM.  12.  Shortly after Zoubai's return to Iraq, the Tawafuq bloc withdrew from the PM's cabinet in August.  Several months passed without any political resolution.  In the interim, Zoubai's advisors continued to co-chair the JROC/JPC, but did not wield clout and remained under pressure to disband the office during Tawafuq's boycott.  (Ref B)  13.  In November, an Executive Order was issued by the PM that designated Ahmed Chalabi as temporarily lead for Baghdad services.  Since his appointment, however, his role and responsibilities remain fluid.  Chalabi does not occupy a constitutionally recognized cabinet position, and the Baghdad Amanat, Governor, Provincial Council, and Ministers do not necessarily recognize his authority.  Furthermore, he does not have direct access to financial resources.  Despite these administrative hurdles, he remains actively engaged and Iraqi citizens tend to swarm Chalabi with their petitions in public settings.  ITAO Director, Mark Tokola, has noted that Chalabi's advantage is expediency, but he may not be dealing with the most important issues.  (Ref C)  14.  Chalabi cheerfully admits that the purpose of his committee is "to provide band-aids, not structural solutions to problems."  Maliki's intent in putting Chalabi in charge of the committee was to produce quick, tangible solutions to Baghdad citizens' problems.  It is serving an ombudsman function rather than an overarching strategic purpose, and it is functioning relatively well within that limitation.  --------------- ITAO Reflection --------------- 15.  The Coalition's military surge has improved security throughout Baghdad.  The GoI is less often citing security as a primary concern that precluded policy implementation. Failure to offer alternative explanations, however, exposed the larger problem of a lack of capacity.  16.  The most successful achievement of 2007 was the establishment of inter-GoI lines of communication.  For example, the JPC fostered Iraqi relationships that did not exist previously.  The still imperfect rapport facilitates synchronization of projects and provides dialogue that is essential for reconciliation.   BAGHDAD 00000204  003.2 OF 003   17.  ITAO has cautioned that the USG should not overload Chalabi with issues nor become reliant upon his "fixer" role.  (Ref C)  Moving forward in 2008 it will be imperative that the USG continue to support existing institutions, i.e. the Amanat and the Ministries, rather than contribute to their diminishment.  18.  The best outcome would be for the GoI to appoint a Deputy Prime Minister to fill the long vacant position, and to empower the new DPM to pull the services ministries together.  The new DPM also could play a part in coordinating the efforts of the Ministries, Amanat, Governor, and Provincial Council.  Ahmed Chalabi does not have the institutional platform to play that role.  19.  During the September 28 IESC meeting, the PM declared 2008 would be the "Year of Services."  Later he would decide that the upcoming year would also focus on corruption. Meanwhile, during a December 30 meeting with the Ambassador and CG, DPM Salih opined that 2008 should focus on political and economic maturity.  (Ref D)  Despite GoI inconsistency and inability to establish priorities, essential services will remain a critical component of counterinsurgency, economic development, and winning the confidence of the Iraqi people in the Iraqi government. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000205  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, PTER, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: ANBARIS RAISE CONCERNS OVER KARBALA BOUNDARY DISPUTE WITH THE AMBASSADOR  REF: A) 07 BAGHDAD 4192 B) 07 BAGHDAD 4224 C) BAGHDAD      154  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (U) This is a PRT Anbar reporting cable.  2. (C) Summary: At a January 20 meeting in Ramadi, Anbar Governor Ma'amoun Sheikh Ahmad Abu Risha, the leader of the "Iraq Awakening Movement," and several other local notables raised their concerns with the Ambassador over putative Shi'a attempts on Anbar's southern boundary.  Ma'amoun asked USG assistance to block any such move.  The Ambassador told Ma,amoun that the boundary was an important issue that needs to be resolved peacefully.  The Governor also requested that the Ambassador help convince the Ministers of Oil and Transportation to visit Anbar and discuss plans to restart the K-3 oil refinery in Haditha.  Sheikh Ahmad thanked the Ambassador for U.S. support in the passage of de-Ba'athification legislation.  End Summary.  Boundary Issue --------------  3. (C) On January 20 the Ambassador met with Anbar Governor Sami Rasheed Ma,amoun, Sheikh Ahmad Abu Risha, leader of the "Iraq Awakening Movement," or Sahawa Al-Iraq (SAI), and several other Anbari sheikhs in Ramadi, in a discussion dominated by Anbari concerns over attempts by Shi'a politicians to transfer a swath of southern Anbar to Karbala Province through the Article 140 process.  4. (C) Governor Ma'amoun asked U.S. help to block any such attempt, and invited the Ambassador to visit Nukhayb, the largest town in the disputed area, and one with a large Shi'a population that lives in peace with its Sunni neighbors.  He offered to hold a special meeting of the Provincial Council in Nukhayb and invited the Ambassador's attendance. Ma'amoun, echoed by Sheikh Ahmad, said the Anbaris are united in their opposition to any boundary change.  Ma'amoun argued that Anbar's successful handling of security of the hajj routes last month, in stark contrast to the previous year's experience, proved that Anbaris were capable of administering the area.  5. (C) Ma'amoun complained that police from Karbala and other Shi'a provinces have encroached upon Anbar's jurisdiction in an attempt to establish a presence at the Arar crossing on the Saudi border.  This has resulted in a number of standoffs with Anbari police.  The encroachments were rebuffed, Ma,amoun said.  "People are instigating a confrontation," he added.  Sheikh Ahmad observed that the tribes are determined to defend Nukhayb; "We will not allow anyone to remove Nukhayb from Anbar."  6. (C) The Ambassador told Ma'amoun that the boundary issue was important and must be resolved peacefully, adding that violence is exactly what Al-Qaeda wants.  He added that Article 140 issues and the status of Nukhayb -- along with that of other disputed regions -- will be a significant issue in 2008, and that the U.S. and UN will be involved in the process.  The Ambassador told Ma'amoun that he had met with the Special Representative of the Secretary General to discuss ways to approach Article 140 issues.  Restarting the Haditha Oil Refinery -----------------------------------  7. (C) Turning to economic development, Ma'amoun asked the Ambassador's help prodding the GOI to re-start the K-3 oil refinery in Haditha.  Ma'amoun said he has so far been unsuccessful in his attempts to bring the Ministers of Oil and Transportation to Anbar to discuss K-3.  The Transportation Minister's involvement would be needed to reach consensus on whether to supply K-3 with crude by truck or rail.  "We have knocked on every door and have not been successful, so now we are knocking on your door," he told the Ambassador.  Ma'amoun also requested U.S. support for establishing Free Trade Zones in Anbar, and for recruiting foreign investment to develop the Akkas gas field near Husaybah.  Ma'amoun noted that he had met DPM Barham Saleh in Baghdad a few days earlier to discuss power plants, but offered scant detail on the discussion.  Thanks for Support on Tempering De-Ba'athification --------------------------------------------- -----  8. (C) Sheikh Ahmad thanked the Ambassador for U.S. support for the passage of legislation tempering the de-Ba'athification process.  Ahmad, who served in the Iraqi Army, said many Anbari men were officers who fought in the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq War.  Many of them feel they are being  BAGHDAD 00000205  002 OF 002   punished for defending the country against Iran, simply because they had leadership positions in the military.  The revised de-Ba'athification process will help to avoid punishing those who served their country but committed no crimes, Ahmad said.  Anbar's Place in History ------------------------  9. (C) The Ambassador emphasized U.S. admiration for the accomplishments of the Anbaris -- particularly their effort to improve security.  "History will show that the beginning of the end of Al-Qaeda started in Anbar," he said.  The Ambassador added that improved security means that Anbar can concentrate on economic development, and that the U.S. will support Anbar in this effort.  He congratulated the Anbaris on establishing the Anbar Higher Committee, a group of six Anbari leaders from across the political and tribal spectrum, designed as a consensus-seeking body to coordinate leadership decisions (Reftels). CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000208  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  STATE FOR NEA/I, INL  STATE ALSO PASS USAID FOR ANE  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: IZ, KCOR, PGOV, EAID, PINR SUBJECT:   NEW CPI COMMISSIONER FAVORS TRANSPARENCY AND TERM LIMITS OVER SENSATIONALISM AND PUBLICITY  1.  (SBU)  Summary and introduction:  Days after his appointment as the head of the Commission on Public Integrity (CPI), Judge Raheem Al-Ugaili sounded consistent themes in interviews with local media and meetings with emboffs.  Speaking frankly of the danger public corruption poses to Iraqi society, Judge Raheem called for a long-term strategy to combat this "cancer."  He spoke of the need for financial transparency throughout the public sector, adding a populist note by calling on parliamentarians to publicly declare all sources of income and decrying the disparity in compensation between elected officials and public servants.  In private discussions with emboffs, Raheem stressed the importance of maintaining CPI's independence.  He expressed gratitude for USG assistance to CPI and asked for the Embassy's continued support.  Judge Raheem does not foresee initiating an immediate housecleaning of CPI staff...with the exception of former acting-Commissioner Musa Faraj.  End summary and introduction.  --------------------- Changing of the Guard ---------------------  2.  (U) In meetings with emboffs on January 20 and 22, Judge Raheem received emboffs with credentials in hand, presenting a copy of the signed order from the Secretariat of the Council of Ministers (COM SEC) appointing him interim CPI Commissioner (effective January 17, 2008) and forwarding his name forward to the Council of Representatives (COR) as the new official head of the Commission. Under CPA Order 55, Judge Raheem will serve a five year term if ratified by the COR. (Note:  Post does not yet have a sense of when the COR will vote to ratify Judge Raheem's appointment.  End note.)  3.  (SBU)  This same COM SEC order dismissed Musa Faraj as acting CPI Commissioner.  According to Deputy CPI Commissioner Sami Shabek, Musa Faraj will officially remain on CPI's books on administrative leave for the next 30 days.  Judge Raheem told emboffs bluntly that Faraj will not be returning to CPI; criticizing Faraj's poor management skills and general unfitness for leadership, Raheem said firmly "I will not work with him." (Note:  In a January 21 interview with Baghdad Radio, Faraj blamed the U.S. for his dismissal from CPI, claiming that he had been fired in an effortQ cover-up his own corruption investigations.  End note.)  ---------------- The Work at Hand ----------------  4.  (SBU)  Judge Raheem, who served as deputy CPI Commissioner in 2004-05, stressed the need to build a culture of professionalism at CPI.  He described a deficit of leadership through the agency and stressed the importance of building institutional resiliency so that CPI "is not dependent on one man."  While quick to note that many CPI staff lack strong qualifications for their positions, Judge Raheem does not want to further damage agency morale by ordering mass dismissals.  Instead, he said that he will keep the current staff, but with the proviso that job performance will be monitored. Personnel who do not perform over time will face the consequences. Eschewing micromanagement, Raheem spoke of empowering CPI staff by providing the training and technology necessary to conduct quiet, professional investigations.  Saying that he wishes to lower the profile of CPI investigations and avoid the sensationalist appearance of political bias in order to build public confidence for the agency, Judge Raheem requested strong USG support for his efforts to develop CPI's capacity.   5.  (SBU)  In his press interviews, Judge Raheem minced no words about the challenge before CPI, saying that political will to address corruption remains weak.  He then called for a series of actions to enhance public sector transparency, such as requiring government agencies to account for the management of public funds and adequate wages for civil servants to inoculate against bribery. With emboffs, he spoke of his admiration for fixed terms of office, a practice Iraq should adopt to break the Ba'athist practice of allowing incumbents to hold lucrative offices for decades.  ------------------ A Respected Choice ------------------  6.  (U) Post has heard only positive reaction to Judge Raheem's appointment to CPI.  The Chairman of the COR Anti-Corruption Committee Sheik al-Sa'adi described Judge Raheem as a "first rate son of Iraq" whose patriotism and dedication will help guide the GOI its struggle to replace corruption with honesty.  Dr. Adel Mohsen, the Prime Minister's Anti-Corruption Advisor and member of the Joint Anti-Corruption Committee, observed that Judge Rahim was honest and  fair and predicted that his appointment would improve relations between the ministerial Inspectors General and CPI.  'Atifa 'AbdulQadir al-'Ubaydi, the Director General of the Judicial Training Institute, lamented Judge Raheem's departure from her faculty, but lauded him as the right man to tackle public corruption.  DOJ/ICITAP advisors report a marked uptick in morale among CPI staff since the announcement of Judge Raheem's appointment.  Judge Raheem has impressed Embassy and PRT staff familiar with his work at CPI, JTI and Baghdad's Karada trial court as a smart, serious and dedicated judge and administrator not known to mix politics with legal matters.  ------- Comment -------  7.  (SBU) The COM's appointment of a respected jurist to lead CPI is a strong step polishing the image of an agency tarnished by cross-accusations of mismanagement, malfeasance and political mischief following the dramatic departure of former Commissioner Radhi al-Radhi in September 2007.  Although acting Commissioner Musa Faraj had demonstrated some growth once in office in recent months - for example, becoming a surprisingly feisty advocate of CPI's independence - his political baggage and erratic leadership seriously retarded the agency's development.  In contrast, Judge Raheem's public and private remarks since his appointment reflect serious analysis of Iraq's vulnerability to corruption and offered reasoned strategies to boost society's immunity.  8.  (SBU)  As part of the Embassy's 2008 anti-corruption initiative, post will evaluate USG support for CPI to date and will determine how U.S. engagement should continue.  --------- Bio Notes ---------  9.  (SBU)  According to his C.V., Judge Raheem Hassan al-Ugaili was born in Baghdad in 1966.  He graduated with a law degree from Baghdad University in 1991 and worked as a lawyer for the next four years.  He began judicial training in 1995 and was given his first judicial appointment in 1997.  He served as a trial judge between 1999 and 2004.  He served with the General Secretariat of the Council of Ministries from August 2004 until April 2005, and with CPI as a commissioner from October - November 2004 and as deputy commissioner from April - November 2005.  Judge Raheem returned to work as a trial judge in Baghdad from September 2005 until his January 2008 appointment to CPI.  During the same period, he lectured at the Judicial Training Institute and published four major legal books.  Although his C.V. lists Arabic as his only language, Raheem's reactions in meetings with emboffs revealed a limited understanding of English.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000210  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE FOR NEA-I, EEB  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2018 TAGS: EPET, ECON, ENRG, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: PM'S ADVISOR SAYS POLITICAL WILL NEEDED TO PASS HYDROCARBONS LEGISLATION  REF: 2007 BAGHDAD 4090  Classified By: Acting Economic Minister Todd Schwartz for Reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: Dr. Thamir Ghadban, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki's chief advisor on oil and hydrocarbons legislation, told Under Secretary Reuben Jeffery that political will is needed to agree on the draft hydrocarbon framework law (HFL).  Ghadban enumerated six issues that he believes have stifled negotiations, laying the fault at the feet of the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG).  A career oil man, Ghadban lamented that Iraq was missing a golden opportunity in the present price environment to increase oil production and exports by passing legislation that would facilitate investment in the sector.  He also said that, given the impasse, the GOI Ministry of Oil (MoO) was increasingly interested in signing technical service agreements with international companies under Iraq's existing Saddam-era hydrocarbons legislation.  The requisite political will to finalize a HFL is unlikely to materialize until the parties involved genuinely believe that the long-term benefits of passing a new law outweigh the short- term costs of making the painful political compromises necessary to reach an agreement.  END SUMMARY.  ----------------------------- TECHNICAL TALKS ARE SENSELESS -----------------------------  2. (C) On January 16 Ghadban discussed with U/S Jeffery and Econoffs the present state of negotiations between the GOI and the KRG on the HFL, a version of which is pending in the CoR awaiting consensus in the GOI on what text to move forward.  U/S Jeffery asked Ghadban whether it made sense for Ghadban and KRG Minister of Natural Resources Dr. Ashti Hawrami to get together, take one of the several existing drafts of the HFL, isolate the specific provisions about which the parties disagree, and work out mutually acceptable language step by step.  Ghadban replied in the negative. Describing himself as "objective, not pessimistic," he said that absent the political will to agree on any version of the HFL, such talks would be in vain.  With political will at the top, however, he said reaching an agreement would be relatively straightforward.  ------------- BLAME THE KRG -------------  3. (C) Ghadban enumerated six issues that would need to be addressed before meaningful negotiations could proceed. First, the GOI and KRG would need to find a mutually acceptable way to deal with production sharing agreements (PSAs) the KRG signed with international oil companies (IOCs) after the KRG agreed in February 2007 to desist doing so until the HFL was approved.  (NOTE: Minister of Oil Hussein al-Shahristani and other GOI officials have said such contracts are illegal, null, and void; Shahristani has also written to several of the IOC signatories advising them not to anticipate participating in Iraq's oil sector in the future. The KRG, on the other hand, asserts that they waited more than a reasonable amount of time and warned the GOI that they would proceed with contracts if the government did not move on the legislation. END NOTE.)  Moreover, Ghadban opined that a recent agreement among the leading political blocs had strengthened the MoO's position on this point.  Second, and related, Ghadban said  that the KRG would need to recognize that it had no right to sign PSAs with IOCs covering exploration blocs in so called "disputed territories," outside of the recognized Kurdistan Region.  4. (C) Ghadban's list continued with several more general complaints.  Third, the KRG would need to coordinate better with the MoO regarding petroleum sector operations in Kurdistan: Ghadban cited the KRG's supplanting a MoO contract to procure equipment for the Kormor gas field with the KRG's own agreement with Dana Gas.  Fourth, the KRG would have to stop its "propaganda" against Minister Shahristani and stop, for example, calling for his resignation.  "This is no way to do business," he said.  Fifth, the KRG would need to amend its regional oil and gas law to reconcile it with Iraq's Constitution.  Ghadban argued that, inconsistent with Constitution Article 112, several clauses of the Kurdish law purport to give the KRG the lead role, versus the federal government, in developing the region's hydrocarbons fields.  BAGHDAD 00000210  002 OF 002   Sixth and last, the KRG could not dictate to the GOI what to do in the oil and gas sector countrywide.  Here, Ghadban focused on the KRG's predilection for PSAs.  Ghadban said that, while he is no t personally prejudiced against PSAs, popular memory of Iraq's checkered history with international firms had created certain political sensitivities to which the GOI had to respond.  The KRG's insistence that Iraq sign PSAs, as opposed to service agreements, with IOCs failed to recognize these political pressures and lacked flexibility.  Ghadban summed up the list stating that a KRG hard line on any of these issues would effectively preclude agreement on the HFL.  5. (C) Ghadban was similarly jaundiced about the prospects for the revenue management law (RML).  "How could the CoR pass the RML unless it were integrated into the federal budget process?" he asked rhetorically, referring obliquely to the KRG's refusal to support a law that grants to the GOI Ministry of Finance the power and responsibility to distribute the KRG's share of hydrocarbons revenues.  The current draft RML, he acknowledged, gives the central government complete control over revenues.  (NOTE: The GOI has been providing the KRG with its agreed share of oil revenues in the absence of a law, but the 17 percent share has become an issue in the current budget law as some lawmakers see it as too high.  END NOTE.)  --------------------------------------------- ------- GOI IS MORE EAGER TO PRESS AHEAD UNDER EXISTING LAWS --------------------------------------------- -------  6. (C) Given the divide between the GOI and the KRG on these and other issues, Ghadban said that the central government was increasingly eager to sign technical service agreements with IOCs under Iraq's existing Saddam-era hydrocarbons laws.  Ghadban said that with service agreements with firms to improve Iraq's petroleum infrastructure, technology, management and technical skills, Iraq could increase production by 500,000 barrels per day in two years.  U/S Jeffery expressed concern that, if the GOI moved ahead under the existing legislation, the world's top-tier contractors would be unlikely to bid on jobs and that it would cost the GOI a risk premium in the contracts.  Ghadban agreed that it would be preferable to have a new law but said that PM Maliki wants to move forward.  ------- COMMENT -------  7. (C) Ghadban's remarks evidence a hardening of the GOI position on the HFL, a development similarly seen on the KRG side (reftel).  The GOI and the KRG have fundamentally different visions for Iraq's petroleum sector, particularly regarding the respective roles for the central government and the regions in managing it.  The GOI sees existing and envisaged central government institutions--e.g., the Federal Oil and Gas Council (FOGC) foreseen in the HFL, the MoO, the yet to be created Iraq National Oil Company (INOC), and the Ministry of Finance--essentially controlling the sector and its revenues nationwide while carving out a narrow role for the KRG to manage, in cooperation with the federal authorities, fields located in Kurdistan and not assigned to the INOC.  The KRG, for its part, sees the FOGC as a coordinating body through which the KRG would influence central government plans for the sector at national level, while it manages semi-autonomously all fields in Kurdistan not specifically assigned to t he INOC.  The missing "political will" to which Ghadban refers is the will for either side to compromise on its fundamental vision.  Until the parties genuinely believe that the long term benefits they will reap from passing new laws outweigh the short-term political costs of compromising their vision, the necessary will to pass hydrocarbons legislation will not materialize.  Proponents of the legislation must therefore make the cost-benefit case to GOI and KRG leaders, because until such will materializes the parties' negotiators will not likely hold fruitful talks over the language of particular clauses in the draft laws where their respective visions clash most acutely. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000217  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE PASS TO SAM MUBANGU (S/WCI) AND STEPHEN EPSTEIN (NEA/I/PM)  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2018 TAGS: IZ, PHUM, PINR, PTER, KDRG SUBJECT: INTERIM RESPONSE TO IRAQ - GUANTANAMO DETAINEE TRANSFER FRAMEWORK  REF: STATE 2704  Classified By: Classified by Acting PolMil Couns Karen Sasahara for rea sons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) This is an interim response to reftel.  2. (S) On January 23, Post delivered the diplomatic note cited in Reftel to Iraqi ForMin Hoshyar Zebari who, as a Kurd, is also the best-placed POC for additional actions regarding this and future detainees.  3. (S) Post is developing a demarche to the GOI and KRG which will incorporate the objectives contained in Reftel and will advise the Department upon its delivery. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000218  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  STATE PASS TO PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR AND TO BILL JENSEN NEA/I/PM  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ETTC, IZ, KOMC SUBJECT: RESPONSE TO BLUE LANTERN LICENSE 05-050079420  REF: STATE 135  1. (U) Post has contacted the Multi-National Security Transition Command in Iraq (MNSTC-I) and they confirm that this is a legitimate purchase of ammunition by the Iraqi Army. The M855 ammunition is often referred to as "5.56 ball" and is the most commonly fired round for the M-16 / M-4 carbine.  2. (SBU) Currently, MNSTC-I has issued just over 30,000 M-16 variants and has an additional 15,000 in stock awaiting issue in conjunction with unit set fielding.  This will equip six Iraqi divisions and the Presidential Brigade--which amounts to just over half of the current Iraqi Army strength. MNSTC-I assesses that this order of 39 million rounds will not satisfy the base line requirements for Iraqi Army units "basic loads and individual qualification standards". They advise that DTCC should anticipate additional orders of this same ammunition in these amounts.  3. (U) Regarding the bona fides of Mr. Stuart Watkins, MNSTC-I confirms that he is a U.S. government contractor under their direct employment. Mr. Watkins manages the MNSTC-I fielding plan for equipping the Iraqi Security Forces with the M-16/M-4 carbine.  4. (U) MNSTC-I POC: Colonel Phillip Maxwell, U.S. Army Director, Strategic Initiatives Group (914) 822-1605 phillip.maxwell@iraq.centcom.mil  US Embassy Baghdad POC: Mr. Edward Gallagher PolMil, Security Cooperation and Arms Transfers (914) 822-0805 gallagherea@state.gov CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000221  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS UPDATE PART 1: TECHNICAL PREPARATIONS  REF: A. A. 2007 BAGHDAD 3442      B. B. 2007 BAGHDAD 3459      C. C. 2007 BAGHDAD 4142  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Ellen Germain for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  Post believes nationwide provincial elections can occur in 2008.  Technical preparations for elections are broken down into three areas:  voter registration, Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) capacity building, and Governorate Electoral Office (GEO) capacity building (including training of polling officials.) Each of these areas is underway -- the former being more advanced than the latter.  IHEC believes that elections could be held within 120-160 days of the passage of an election law.  Post believes that even though that estimate may be optimistic, provincial elections can take place in 2008. This is the first in a series of cables describing the process and preparations, both technical and political, needed to hold provincial elections.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  This cable draws from conversations with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), the International Foundation for Election Systems (IFES), and the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) board of commissioners.  VOTER REGISTRATION ------------------  3.  (C)  The Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) purchased the Public Distribution System (PDS, which is the nationwide food ration distribution system) data base and, with International Foundation for Election Systems (IFES) technical assistance, has converted it into a draft voter registration data base (reftel).  Even though the PDS data base has only rudimentary geographic information (essentially the province in which the PDS cardholder and his family live), it also contains information on the particular geographic food distribution center to which the family is assigned.  IFES reports that it is possible to use this information to develop voting districts.  Currently, IHEC is asking each food distribution center for the number of people it serve.  This information will be cross-referenced with the location of the centers in order to determine which geographically linked centers could be joined together to form a voting district. Each district would have a similar number of voters, but would not necessarily fall within the current kada and nahiya political districts.  While imperfect, this proxy districting mechanism will make for better representation and more accountability because elected officials will stand for election in provincial constituencies instead of for at-large seats, as they did in 2005.  Once the security situation permits, a census would need to be completed in order to re-draw districts with proper electoral boundaries containing equal populations, which would then be used for future provincial elections.  4.  (C)  The voter registration data base is ready for vetting at a provincial level.  IHEC plans to distribute the registry to each province for a "display period".  The entire provincial registry will be posted at voter registration centers such as schools and citizens will be able to check the list for their names and inform the Governorate Electoral Officer of those they know have died or moved from the area. There may be some incentive to keep "ghost" names on the list; citizens may believe that any name taken off the voter list would be sent to the Ministry of Trade, which oversees the PDS list, resulting in a reduction in their family's ration.  Thus there is strong incentive to keep dead family members on the PDS roll.  This will need to be addressed in IHEC's public outreach efforts and the Iraqi public convinced that -- as is indeed the case -- the voter registry information will NOT/NOT be passed back to the Ministry of Trade in order to update the PDS.  The IHEC leadership reports that after passage of an election law containing voter eligibility criteria such as length of residency and where internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees would vote, the voter registry display period can commence.  UNAMI Chief Electoral Officer Sandra Mitchell believes that IHEC could proceed with the registry display period earlier if the Council of Representatives (CoR) were simply to decide eligibility requirements and inform IHEC of them even before actually passing the law.  (Comment:  While this is in theory true, given the lack of political consensus in the GOI and CoR, it is highly unlikely to happen.)  IHEC CAPACITY BUILDING ----------------------  5.  (C)  As part of its USAID contract, IFES is not only  BAGHDAD 00000221  002 OF 002   working with IHEC to develop a voter registration data base, but also helping it gear up for the entire electoral process.  Key areas include designing a ballot and creating media campaigns such as voter registration drives.  IFES employs a Public Outreach Advisor who is helping with such campaigns. In addition, IFES is bringing in a Systems Administrator to assist IHEC in designing and maintaining a computer system that will help with communications and coordination in the field.  IFES is also helping with such basics as how to determine staffing needs and budgeting requirements in an election year.  UNAMI is working with IHEC on mechanisms to ensure free and fair elections, including the training of elections monitors.  GEO TRAINING ------------  6.  (C)  Much of the work in preparing for and actually implementing the elections will be done at the governorate level through the  Governorate Electoral Offices (GEO).  The GEO will be responsible for registering political parties and candidates, determining the location of polling stations, setting up security, and overseeing vote tabulation.  UNAMI and IFES will both be working with the GEOs on this. Currently, 13 of the 20 GEO Chief Election Officers (CEO) have been appointed.  The final seven appointments are stalled due to political maneuvering (refs B and C).  The law states that either the CoR or the provincial council may submit five candidates to IHEC, which will then choose one of them as CEO.  The CoR has now stated that of the five names submitted to IHEC, IHEC should choose a CEO, two deputies and two advisors, thus selecting all five candidates.  So far, IHEC has refused to do this.  While the drama of the CEO selection continues to unfold, IFES has plans to bring together those CEOs who have been appointed, along with governorate-level elections commission staff, for training in February.  Post also plans to bring together PRT election/governance advisors in February to discuss protocols for local-level engagement and assistance on election issues.  COMMENT -------  7.  (C)  After discussions with USAID and IFES, post believes that nationwide provincial elections can take place in 2008. The training currently being provided will enable the provinces to hold technically acceptable elections.  The real issue is the political preparations needed to ensure these are credible elections whose results reflect the will of the people.  End Comment. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000223  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE FOR NEA-I, EEB  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2018 TAGS: EPET, ECON, ENRG, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HYDROCARBON FRAMEWORK LEGISLATION STILL STALLED  REF: REF: A) BAGHDAD 87 B) 2007 BAGHDAD 4090  Classified By: Acting Economic Minister Todd Schwartz for Reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d)  1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Under Secretary Jeffery lobbied a series of GOI officials January 14-18 for speedier passage of the hydrocarbon framework legislation, but technical and political issues abound, and the law remains entangled among other legislative priorities (reftels).  END SUMMARY.  DPM Salih: No political will, but maybe a process --------------------------------------------- ---- 2.  (S) In a frank meeting on January 15 with U/S Jeffery and Ambassador Crocker, Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih said he was told privately by senior Kurdish officials during a trip to Irbil on January 14 that "there is no return to the (draft hydrocarbons) February text."  While Dr. Barham himself said he stood behind the February draft, he believes the legislation is not worth pursuing as long as there is no political will.  U/S Jeffery pointed out that this take is very different from what President Jalal Talabani had presented on the status of the hydrocarbons legislation the morning of January 15 in a meeting with Secretary Rice. Moreover, Ambassador Crocker noted that KRG Prime Minister Masoud Barzani also was present and said nothing to contradict Talabani's assessment.  (COMMENT: Barzani's understanding may have been hampered by the lack of translators during the Executive Council meeting. END COMMENT).  Dr. Barham said he believed Talabani supports the February text, but there are still other powerful players who do not want the hydrocarbons legislation.  The two driving forces against passing a hydrocarbons law, according to Dr. Barham, are Oil Minister Shahristani's determination not to have his power limited, and the Kurds not wanting to cooperate on certain issues with the central Baghdad authority.  3.  (S)  U/S Jeffery noted that even the February text means different things to different people, which suggests the need for a vetted political process for developing the hydrocarbons legislation.  For example, the Executive Council could be used as a venue in which a draft could be approved by all major political parties and then submitted to the CoR.  The key would be to establish a process with named Iraqi interlocutors.  Dr. Barham agreed that setting up a process with named interlocutors is a good idea, but also reiterated his concerns that the lack of political will is paramount. He telephoned the U/S the next day, January 16, and suggested that there was an agreement by the Executive Council to have the U/S mediate discussions between PM advisor Thamer Ghadban and KRG Minister for Natural Resources Ashti Hawrami, in Irbil.  Subsequent conversations with Iraqi officials did not substantiate that and revealed the lingering confusion and/or lack of communication within the GOI on the hydrocarbon law.  VP Hashimi: Constitution First ------------------------------ 4.  (SBU) VP Hashimi on January 16 returned to his theme that the constitution is the stumbling block over the hydrocarbon legislation; no one has much of a dispute about the contracting provisions.  He argued that the constitution does not define regional versus central authority, and that needs to be sorted out.  He said the new KRG contracts with IOCs need to be addressed, along with the basic issue of mutual mistrust.  Unless everyone acknowledges that their interests will be served by the central government, the law will not go forward.  Hashimi complained that USG priorities do not match GOI priorities, and argued that the USG should push first for constitutional reform.  MoO Shahristani: Not a good time and MoO has other plans --------------------------------------------- ----------- 5.  (SBU) Minister of Oil Hussein Shahristani reported to U/S Jeffery on January 17 that the Ministry plans to increase crude oil production to 2.9 to 3.0 mmbd by the end of the year, primarily by entering into technical service agreements with selected international oil companies (IOCs) under the authority of existing Iraqi law, which grants broad authority to the Minister.  He said his Director General for Licensing, Natik al Bayati, has spoken with the major IOCs (Shell, BP, Exxon-Mobil, Total and Chevron) about "bridging contracts" to work on large producing fields in need of rehabilitation and work-over.  Initially, the IOCs would work outside Iraq on planning and procurement, with Iraqi Ministry personnel performing the fieldwork.  Each contract would be no more than 2 years in duration and be less than USD 50 million  BAGHDAD 00000223  002 OF 003   each.  If successful, Shahristani projects production will increase by about 500,000 b/d.  Shahristani envisions a phased transition from the free work being provided now by the IOCs to full commercial relations.  6.  (SBU)  Bayati said the licensing of technical service contracts is taking longer than expected because the IOCs want to be paid in kind.  He explained that the MoO wants to avoid conflict with the requirements of the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI).  The Minister has tasked SOMO, the State Organization for Marketing Oil, to work out a system with the Finance Ministry to pay the contract fees in offsets that the companies would have to pay for crude oil exports, e.g., the companies would buy 100 barrels but only have to pay for 90 to cover the contract fees.  Shahristani asked for USG intervention with the DFI to permit such in-kind arrangements.  7.  (SBU) Shahristani reported the IOCs were initially hesitant to enter into service contracts before Iraq passes its national hydrocarbon framework law, but are now looking long term to establishing a track record with the Ministry in anticipation of future opportunities.  Shahristani said that in addition to the bridging contracts, the Ministry is concurrently working on prequalification a bid process for "full-fledged investment contracts," with company risk.  He said that he would announce the first round in May and pledged to follow the draft hydrocarbon law requirements for awarding contracts in a transparent manner (in contrast, he said, to the obscure way the Kurdish Region awarded its PSAs), except the Cabinet will approve them instead of the yet-to-be established Federal Oil & Gas Council.  He will include the Akkas gas field in the first round for both economic reasons and to build political relations with Europe.  Bayati added that the MoO remains interested in training on licensing procedures.  8.  (SBU) On the hydrocarbon legislation, Shahristani said the new KRG contracts have united 140 members of the Council of Representatives against the law.  Until the political situation settles, the law will not go forward.  Once it does, he thinks the political leaders will need to return to the February 2007 version, plus annexes, without any more changes to the text.  The political leaders could also work on the July 2007 draft, but the GOI will not accept any more of the KRG demands for changes.  Either way, the new KRG contracts are unacceptable.  Either version will face the same hostile climate in the CoR, he said.  He added that PM Maliki is not focused on the details, but there are a lot of political developments that are not conducive to resolution because so many issues are intermingled.  The PM is in no mood to move on the law until he sees movement on the other KRG issues (e.g., on the disputed territories).  NSA Rubaie:  Process needed --------------------------- 9.  (SBU) National Security Advisor Muwafuq Rubaie zeroed in on the question of mistrust over the hydrocarbon law, but said that the new KRG contracts present no real stumbling block.  He said the solution is to go back to the February version of the law, upon which everyone agreed, and if it is taken to the Executive Council and voted upon favorably, it can then go to the political leaders.  The catch is that the February version lacked the field annexes, he explained.  He suggested that representatives from the KDP, PUK, along with Rosch Shaways, Shahristani and Hashimi need to meet and come up with a final text.  Rubaie said that tf the USG became more assertive on this issue, and directed its pressure, it could be resolved.  10.  (SBU) Rubaie mused for a while about how mistrust can be dispelled via federalism (he released an op/ed on federalism the next day (Jan. 18) in the Washington Post), asked for advice on how to approach the international community at Davos' World Economic Forum, pushed for funds for vocational training to get youth off the streets, and asked about the economic component of the Strategic Partnership Agreement (adding he does not like the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) name).  FM Zebari: Looking for a Process -------------------------------- 11.  (C) Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari told U/S Jeffery January 17 that the government needs to move faster on the hydrocarbon legislation, but the shifting positions of the parties has bred a great deal of mistrust.  Nevertheless, he added, President Talabani had informed the Council of Ministers the day before that there is an agreement on the  BAGHDAD 00000223  003 OF 003   February text to be sent to the CoR for debate.  He said he had told Oil Minister Shahristani that relations were poisoned and he should stop negotiating through advisors.  He observed that to date, Prime Minister Maliki and Shahristani have been playing games, with Shahristani saying he speaks for the PM and the PM saying the oil law is Shahristani's responsibility.  To finalize the text, Zebari suggested that the Executive Council could establish a negotiating team, perhaps under the lead of VPs Hashimi and Mahdi, to advance the process.  KRG Minister Dr. Ashti Hawrami: 100 percent committed --------------------------------------------- -------- 12.  (C)  In a telephone conference with the U/S on January 18, KRG Minister of Natural Resources and lead KRG negotiator on the oil law, Dr. Ashti Hawrami, provided readout from his December 2007 visit to Baghdad.  Despite KRG intentions to engage the GOI, the KRG delegation had had no formal meetings on the hydrocarbon law.  On December 17, Ashti did have an informal session with Thamir Ghadban, and then a one-on-one with PM Maliki.  Ashti had reminded the PM of the irony that precisely one year earlier they had met on exactly the same topic.  Regarding the way forward, Ashti had suggested to the PM that Ashti and Ghadban should be authorized to continue negotiations, perhaps with the aid of legal experts and members of the CoR Oil & Gas Committee.  Once agreement is reached on each and every paragraph, the CoM could resubmit the text to the CoR.  Maliki had asked if Shahristani should be involved.  Ashti had said no (and continues to assert privately that Shahristani should be fired), but Maliki had said it would be difficult to exclude him.  13.  (SBU) Ashti complained to U/S Jeffery that no one in the GOI is in a hurry about anything (some wish to deny any success to the Maliki government), and few really understand why an oil law is needed.  Ashti said he was willing to spend time in Baghdad educating people about why Iraq needs a new oil law: for additional revenue to rebuild the country and to ensure Iraq does not remain divided.  The KRG, he added, is 100 percent committed to the hydrocarbon legislation.  14.  (SBU)  On the composition of a negotiating committee, Ashti said Ghadban should be involved, although at the moment he thinks the GOI has given him no authority.  Ashti observed that Ghadban is inclined to retain central control like Shahristani, but Ashti can work with him.  Ashti had thought that to follow-up on his talk in December, that Maliki would issue an order to set up a negotiating committee, but he has heard nothing at all from the GOI since.  Ashti acknowledged that to be fair, Maliki did become ill in January and has many other issues to consider.   Nevertheless, he concluded, the KRG does not want to let another year pass without any action on the oil law, it absolutely needs a revenue management law, and is committed to pressing as far as possible.  Ashti urged the U/S to convince Maliki that the hydrocarbon framework law is a priority for Iraq.  The U/S, in turn, encouraged Ashti to return to Baghdad to help focus officials on the issue.  COMMENT: -------- 15.  (C)  Despite indications (ref A) from President Talabani on January 9 that KRG Prime Minister Barzani had agreed to return to the February 2007 text of the Hydrocarbon Framework law, the meetings with GOI officials over the course of last week revealed that that agreement has not yet been communicated to the GOI, and that there is still some confusion over the text, which in all probability will require a negotiating committee to work through.  The scenario advanced separately both by NSA Rubaie and FM Zebari, to have the newly empowered Executive Council designate a negotiating committee, appears to be a logical next step, but will require endorsement and action from PM Maliki.  Our sense is that the GOI has stiffened its position over the power of the central government in the text, in light of the popular reaction against the new KRG contracts and public sensitivities about ownership of Iraqi oil, and have doubts that the political conditions are right to move forward quickly on the law.  Nevertheless, we will continue to press the Iraqis to create a process to resolve their differences on the hydrocarbon framework and revenue sharing legislation.  16. (U) This cable was cleared by U/S Jeffery prior to transmission.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000224  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: VP ADEL ON BUDGET, NEW CABINET, SECURITY, REGIONS, AND LTSR  REF: A. BAGHDAD 178 (ATTACK ON RUBAIE)      B. 07 BAGHDAD 4048 (JAM FREEZE UPDATE)  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary: Vice President Adel Abdel Mehdi told the Ambassador January 24 that Prime Minister Maliki continues to obstruct passage of the 2008 GOI budget, but it is unlikely that the budget would need to be submitted for an additional, time-consuming cabinet vote prior to final parliamentary consideration.  Adel said that Maliki was still mulling over a possible cabinet shuffle and had not yet decided whether his revamped government would have 17 or 21 ministerial posts.  He expressed concern over a January 19 attack on NSA Rubaie and requested consultations with the Mission and Coalition Forces to address a possible resurgence of Sadrist militia violence.  Acknowledging that legislative debate over a draft Provincial Powers bill turns on the issue of appointment/dismissal of provincial governors, Adel declared that the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq (ISCI) continues to believe that federalism is appropriate for Iraq and will continue to seek formation of a nine-province southern region in a "wise" and non-divisive manner.  Echoing concerns raised by ISCI chief Abdel Aziz al-Hakim, Adel said that problems within Iraq's electoral commission must be resolved in advance of provincial elections.  Noting that the Sadrists had left the GOI Political Committee in advance of internal GOI preparation for bilateral long-term security negotiations, Adel said S/I Satterfield's recent comments to the Arab media about such negotiations were helpful.  End Summary.  Budget Doldrums ---------------  2. (C) After receiving a telephonic budget situation report in our presence from GOI Finance Minister Bayan Jabr (who, like Adel, is a senior ISCI official), the Vice President said Maliki is exerting "negative pressure" on the Council of Representatives (CoR) to delay budget passage and that Maliki is using budget delay as a tool in his ongoing dispute with the Kurds.  Adel said there is no real CoR opposition to the proposed budget, and that it appears Jabr will be able to prevent the draft budget from being re-submitted to the full cabinet for deliberation and a vote, a move that would only lead to further delay.  Stating that the lengthy absence of Deputy PM Barham Saleh is badly hampering the budget process (Barham is not expected back to Baghdad until February 4), Adel said the bottom line is that Maliki must decide whether he wants a budget or not.  The Ambassador urged rapid closure, emphasizing that the votes are there now for CoR passage.  New Cabinet, New Flag ---------------------  3. (C) Adel characterized his January 23 "Executive Council" meeting with Maliki, Talabani, and Hashemi as "very positive on the surface (septel readout from Talabani).  The leaders said the right things and had the right attitude" but he warned that time will tell if this cooperative spirit continues.  He said that he had urged Maliki to move quickly to re-constitute his cabinet in a manner that would bring Tawafuq back into the fold, formally renew Maliki's PM position, remove poor performers, and improve GOI efficiency, noting that such a move would send a positive signal to the Iraqi public and facilitate political progress on various fronts.  Adel claimed Maliki is still grappling with the issue of cabinet size (17 or 21 ministers) and a proper tactical approach.  Adel said senior Dawa and ISCI officials were meeting to address these issues.  4. (C) The Ambassador thanked Adel for weighing in with Hashemi to overcome the latter's quibbles with the recently-passed De-Baathification law.  Adel cautioned that he was taking a wait-and-see approach to Hashemi's stated intention to not block the law.  Adel also stated Hashemi had told him that he was unenthusiastic about the new Iraq flag but that a majority of Iraq Islamic Party (IIP) CoR members voted in favor of the new design.  Adel said the decision was a good compromise and put a final end to the era of Arab nationalism and Baathism.  The Ambassador noted the importance that Iraq's Arab neighbors not view this development as a repudiation of Iraq's Arab nature and said IIP support would help in this regard.  Resurgent or Reduced JAM? -------------------------  5. (C) The Ambassador praised the Iraqi Security Forces for their performance in helping to ensure a calm Ashura Shia religious festival in most of Iraq and in effectively dealing  BAGHDAD 00000224  002 OF 002   with Ashura-related clashes in Basrah and Nasariyyah.  Adel agreed that the performance reflected growing capacity but lamented that "we lost some good men last week."  He said the security situation in Basrah was improving, but the reported January 19 attack by Jaysh al-Mehdi (JAM) elements on NSA Muwafaq Rubaie as he prayed at a mosque in a JAM-controlled Baghdad neighborhood raised many questions and concerns about Baghdad security and a possible resurgence of JAM operations (Ref A).  Speculating that the absence of a visible JAM public presence in last week's Ashura processions could signal either a sign of JAM weakness or reorganization, Adel and the Ambassador agreed to consult closely with Coalition Forces to address the possibility of renewed JAM violence in Baghdad.  Adel pointed out that President Talabani was helping to organize an upcoming conference of Adnan Shahmani's "National Gathering," a group that has broken with the Sadrist Trend (Ref B) that Adel characterized as comprised of intellectuals devoted to the ideas of Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr, Moqtada's late father.  Provincial Powers, Regions, Elections -------------------------------------  6. (C) Adel warned that unnamed sources (read Maliki) are trying to "manipulate" the draft Provincial Powers bill to reintroduce centralized rule, and that the critical issue is ensuring a degree of provincial independence consistent with Iraq's constitution.  Agreeing with the Ambassador's view that democratic experience shows that governors are best elected by their constituents and not appointed by an executive, Adel said the notion that the PM can appoint and dismiss governors violates the constitution.  He said ISCI continues to believe that federalism is Iraq's only appropriate model and that the current system "has no future."  He predicted that, over time, Sunnis would begin to understand that federalism is also in their interests since strong local governments can contribute to a strong federal government.  7. (C) Asserting that ISCI intends to pursue formation of a nine-province southern region after the GOI region formation law takes effect in April, he vowed that ISCI would act "wisely" and in a spirit of compromise to achieve this goal in a peaceful and non-divisive manner accepted by Iraqis and Iraq's neighbors.  Adel continued that, although all UIA parties had previously signed onto the nine-province region approach, there was now opposition within the Shia camp: Fadhila agrees with the concept but feels the time is not right; the Sadrists think the "occupation" must end before moving ahead on region formation; and Dawa fears that the plan will allow ISCI to dominate the entire south.  8. (C) Turning to provincial elections, Adel echoed the oft-stated concerns of ISCI boss Hakim about the true independence of the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) and said the IHEC issue must be resolved prior to elections.  The Ambassador related that UNAMI Chief De Mistura had told him that UNAMI assessed the situation differently and believes that free and fair polling can be conducted.  He urged Adel to talk to UNAMI.  Adel replied he had heard a contrary assessment from former UNAMI deputy von der Schulenburg, but said he would speak to UNAMI.  LSTR ----  8. (C) The Vice President noted the Sadrists had left the GOI Political Committee in advance of internal GOI preparation for bilateral long-term strategic relationship (LTSR) negotiations in order to distance the Trend from any association with the process.  Adel said S/I Satterfield's recent interview with "al-Sharq al-Awsat" newspaper about such negotiations was helpful as it dispelled the notion that the USG sought permanent military bases in Iraq.  He said Talabani would chair an upcoming meeting to reviews GOI LTSR preparations. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000229  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: PRT-WASIT: WASIT SHAYIKHS DISCUSS SAHWA AL IRAQ  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (U) This is a PRT Wasit reporting cable.  2. (C) On 18 January, ten Shi'a shaykhs from Wasit told PRT and CDR 214 FB that they intend to establish a branch of Sahwa al Iraq (SAI) in Wasit Governorate.  The group was led by Shaykh Raheem Bader Abood Al Hatem and included Shaykh Alwan Abd al Rytha al Bandar al Amara, who claimed to be the first cousin of Prince Rabi'yah. (Note. Prince Rabi'yah, directly related to the Jordanian and Saudi royal families, is the leader of the several million strong Rabi'yah Confederation -- a mix of Shia and Sunni tribes. End note.) The shaykhs opened the meeting with a proposal to provide security for Wasit utilizing a force of 5,000 to 6,000 tribesmen overseen by over 150 shaykhs.  Beyond describing the force as a "second line" behind the ISF, details were thin on exactly how these tribal forces would combat nefarious militia and Iranian influence.  More of a priority to the group than an actual plan to coordinate with ISF was emphasizing their logistical needs, including buildings, weapons permits, agricultural projects, and two IP bodyguards for each of the participating shaykhs.  3. (C) When pressed on an SAI political agenda for Wasit, Shaykh Raheem said he submitted a registration application to the National Government under the official name of "Supporters of Wasit."  He said the movement had 20,000 supporters but needed funding. Shaykh Raheem said he was in direct contact with Shaykh Abu Resha and stated three goals of the movement, (1) Security, (2) Democracy and (3) Justice.  He did not have a platform or political strategy beyond saying that SAI would "put the right people" in the "right places."  He said that Wasit Governor Abd al Latif Turfa had refused three requests to meet with him and two of the shaykhs complained that the head of office for the Wasit Directorate of Tribal Affairs, LTC Falih Hassan Nasir, had threatened them with arrest if they did not recover the SAI application forms distributed to Wasit shaykhs. PRT Team Leader and CDR 214 FB noted that the USG was watching SAI with interest and encouraged the shaykhs to concentrate on political goals and supporting capable, viable leaders willing to assume leadership positions in the Wasit government.  4. (C) On 23 January, Poloffs asked Wasit Iraqi Police (IP) Chief MG Abd Al Haninn about the possibility of the Sahwa al-Iraq (SAI) expanding into the south.  Hanin said that the Prime Minister,s Office and Ministry of the Interior had forbidden official support to any awakening movements south of Baghdad.  Hanin said he personally believed that, if properly organized, the tribes could impact provincial politics.  He then backtracked, saying "I,m supposed to stand with my tribe, but in truth the national spirit of the western tribes is stronger than the national spirit in the south."  Hanin explained that tribes currently approaching the PRT are not true patriots because they immediately ask for money.  5. (C) Comment. Tribal confidence in providing a robust tribal security force for the Province apparently does not translate into confidence that they can provide security for themselves in their own homes.  However, in our judgment, this lack of capability to deliver on the security aspect of the SAI movement does not mean that its potential as a political movement should be ignored.  Although there are significant obstacles, and we assess the odds of political success on the Provincial level as fair to low, we will continue to maintain a dialogue with the SAI shaykhs and encourage their interest in working towards better integrating the tribes in the political process.  We have not signaled any intention to respond positively to their request for funding, since Maliki and the national leadership have clearly laid down a red line regarding tribal awakenings in the south.  End comment. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000230  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: SAI AND ISCI: UNLIKELY ALLIANCE, UNCLEAR RESULTS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (S/NF) This is a joint Baghdad POL - Karbala and Najaf PRT cable.  2.  (S/NF) Summary: The Ramadi-based Iraq Awakening Movement (SAI) hopes to expand into the south to increase the standing of Ahmed Abu Risha and the strength of the SAI relative to the Tawafuq Bloc.  National GOI and ISCI leadership have been receptive to SAI's secular anti-AQI message and its potential to help over Article 140 negotiations, although it is unclear whether this support is shared by provincial officials and unlikely that SAI will ever transform itself into a pan-Iraqi political movement.  End Summary.  SAI's unlikely alliance with ISCI ----------------------------------  3.  (S/NF) In the fall of 2007, Sheikh Ahmed Abu Risha and a handful of SAI members made forays into establishing a presence in mixed Shi'a-Sunni areas and into the south. These efforts were at least tacitly supported by ISCI and the marja'iyya.  Ahmed met with ISCI leader Ammar al-Hakim and Badr head Hadi al-Amiri and sheikhs from Najaf and Karbala in October 2007.  Ahmed also met in July and October 2007 with Karbala governor Aqil al-Khazali as well as Karbala sheikhs. ISCI has also facilitated reciprocal visits of religious scholars from Anbar and the Shia heartland, and ISCI Chief Abdel Aziz al-Hakim is fond of telling interlocutors that such visits would have been "unimaginable" only a few months ago.  In December SAI and ISCI agreed to form a joint committee to facilitate IDP/refugee returns to Anbar, although negotiations are still underway.  Separate reporting indicates that teachers and students in the Najaf hawza believe the marja'iyya supports awakening councils in southern Iraq and credit improved road security in areas controlled by the SAI for enabling students to travel from Baghdad to Najaf to pursue religious studies.  According to an ISCI source, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani met in late 2007 with senior Sunni religious scholars from Ramadi in a visit that sprung from the burgeoning ISCI-SAI relationship.  4.  (S/NF) For both groups this unlikely alliance could provide tangible political gains.  For ISCI, support for SAI promotes the perception of ISCI and Badr as nationalist, Arab institutions and showcases Ammar as an emerging national leader.  ISCI's flirtation with SAI and Sheikh Ahmed is presumably driven in part by the Shia group's interest in locating an Anbar ally with whom it can discuss Karbala's border expansion, per the current Article 140 dispute between the two provinces (Note: Ahmed, during the Ambassador's January 20 visit to Ramadi, in a meeting attended by Anbar's Governor and other notables, clearly stated his opposition to ceding control of Anbar's Nukhayb region to Karbala.  End note).  For both the Marja'iyya and ISCI, supporting an expansion of the SAI is also a way to co-opt the tribes and preempt the emergence of any independent movements hostile to establishment interests.  Likewise, Ahmed is likely using the meetings to increase his standing as a national, rather than provincial, leader and to increase its strength versus the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP).  Provincial opposition and unclear results -----------------------------------------  5.  (S/NF) Despite these possible benefits, the sincerity of support for SAI expansion is suspect among both national and provincial leaders.  Karbala Governor Aqil (Dawa) explicitly opposed the establishment of an SAI office in his governorate.  In a November 2007 article the ISCI-linked Sawt an-Najaf newspaper warned that creating Sunni or Shi'a awakening councils in Najaf would open the door to foreign interference.  In December 2007 two leaders of the Community of Independent Iraqis (including an AmCit) were arrested by Najaf security forces after trying to found the "Awakening Council of Najaf."  Najaf Governor al-Ta'ie (ISCI) said the council did not follow correct procedures and maintained he received permission from PM Maliki to investigate and arrest the leaders.  6.  (S/NF) Due in part to ISCI ambivalence, the tangible results of this ISCI-SAI alliance and the expected role for southern SAI offices are unclear.  In a December 2007 letter addressed to the Wasit Provincial Council, Ahmed asked for their support in opening SAI offices in Wasit.  He referenced the October meeting with Hakim and quoted Sistani as saying "The awakening of Iraq is the fragrant tree of Iraq" to argue that the marja'iyya and ISCI supported the expansion of SAI into the south.  Ahmed promised that the SAI would work in the national interest and respect all provincial authorities and laws.  We do not know the response to this letter although the Governor and PC are resisting any such effort.  BAGHDAD 00000230  002 OF 002   Wasit Governor Turfa (independent) has refused to meet with sheikhs wishing to establish an SAI branch in the province and the head of the Wasit Directorate for Tribal Affairs has threatened to arrest the sheikhs for distributing SAI applications to tribal leaders. (Note: Further details on SAI's efforts to expand into Wasit will be reported septel. End Note.)  Although it is unconfirmed, we assume that similar letters were sent to other south-central governorates.  7.  (S/NF) Comment: ISCI's support for SAI's southern expansion is partly an effort to channel tribal frustrations into institutions friendly to the establishment.  It is unlikely that SAI will ever transform itself into a pan-Iraqi political movement with popular Shi'a support.  It is also unclear if ISCI will continue its support if SAI's expansion serves as a catalyst for greater tribal engagement in politics. End Comment. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000238  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: VICE PRESIDENT HASHIMI ON LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENTS, POLITICAL ISSUES  REF: A. BAGHDAD 209      B. BAGHDAD 118  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  ------- Summary -------  1.  (S) During their January 25 meeting, the Ambassador and Vice President Hashimi discussed the Executive Council, a draft amnesty law, Mosul, Concerned Local Citizens (CLCs), and Iran.  Hashimi voiced concern that PM Maliki might decrease relative authority of the Executive Council in favor of the Political Council for National Security.  Hashimi confirmed that some progress had been made on addressing the Tawafuq Front's demands, but said a deal on Tawafuq's return to the government remained elusive.  Hashimi continued his efforts to widen the scope of a draft amnesty law, and worried about the increasingly dangerous situation in Mosul following recent bombings there.  Hashimi also expressed concerns over the Concerned Local Citizen Program, and the increasing influence of Iran.  End summary.  ------------------------------------ Executive Council:  Trust But Verify ------------------------------------  2.  (S) Reviewing recent developments at the national leadership level, Hashimi discussed his impressions of the second meeting of the Executive Council (Ex-Co) and confirmed readouts of the meeting's substance conveyed by other sources (ref A).  He worried, however, that Maliki intended to decrease relative decision-making authorities of the Ex-Co vis-a-vis the Political Council for National Security (PCNS) -- which would be a walk-back on the PM's part from what he conveyed during their first meeting (Ref B).  The Ex-Co must be the "driving force, the decision maker," Hashimi said. "We're optimistic, yet cautious," he said, mentioning that a senior Da'wa Party confidante recently warned the VP that Maliki and his top advisors "had no plans to change course" (e.g., to share power with Sunnis).  Hashimi confirmed the PCNS would meet on January 26, and would create a secretariat to assure its continuity and professionalism.  Hashimi would press the Sadrists to rescind their recent decision to leave the PCNS, noting that a Sadrist delegation would dine with him on January 28.  Full participation in the PCNS, he said, is critical, particularly on upcoming negotiations with the U.S. on strategic relations.  ------------------------ Tawafuq Return Uncertain ------------------------  3  (S) On Tawafuq's return to government, Hashimi confirmed that the issue remained on the Ex-Co agenda, but that no resolution had been reached.  The Ambassador said he told Maliki during a recent meeting that Tawafuq had signaled its interest in returning to government, but that the PM needed to "meet in the middle" on the issue of each side's demands. Maliki, he continued, took the point on board, signaling that he was "prepared" to compromise.  Hashimi questioned the sincerity of the PM and especially his senior staff.  He shared that he had warned the PM's Chief of Staff Tareq Abdullah in writing against taking additional retributive measures against the office staff of resigned Deputy PM Salam al-Zoubai.  The warning was effective, he said.  On another positive note, Hashimi confirmed that the PM's office recently agreed to a key Tawafuq Front demand: that its ministers be allowed to formally resign their positions, vice being fired, in order to retain full retirement benefits.  ------------------------------ Amnesty Law, Other Legislation ------------------------------  4.  (S) Hashimi raised the draft Amnesty Law, saying that he had sent his "counter-proposal" to the Prime Minister and National Security Advisor a day earlier.  The Vice President said he was pressing to have his legal advisor sit with Judge Medhat, Talabani's legal advisor, and other legal experts to sort out substantive differences.  The law must be generous, "similar to previous amnesties," to be effective, he concluded.  The Ambassador noted that PM Maliki had conveyed to him during a recent meeting that he wanted the amnesty legislation to be as far-reaching as constitutionally permissible.  ------------- Mosul Attacks -------------  BAGHDAD 00000238  002 OF 002    5.  (S) Calling the recent bombings and killing of the Mosul Police Chief a "disaster," Hashimi recalled his warnings to political leaders "for months" about the worsening situation in Ninewa Province and the need for more troops, as Al Qaida-Iraq was asserting increasing control over the city and province.  Hashimi noted that he would send Maliki a letter on the situation, and press for additional attention to the key northern city.  It is imperative, he continued, that representatives of the ministries of defense, interior, along with the Kurdish Peshmerga and others sit to decide a strategy to "salvage the province."  The Ambassador proposed the issue be added to the agenda of the Ex-Co for its next meeting -- a suggestion Hashimi welcomed.  MNF-I, the Ambassador added, was working hard to determine who was behind the attack, and to squelch rumors that put the blame for the attack on Kurds, U.S. forces, etc.  ------------------------ Concerned Local Citizens ------------------------  6.  (S) Raising the Concerned Local Citizen (CLC) program, Hashimi called for the Ambassador's "understanding" on the growing sense of concern among Iraq's Sunni community that the program is going off-course.  Details on MNF-I plans to transfer 20 percent of CLC participants into the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF), he said, were "too vague."  The CLC's, he asserted, are not militias, but have proven themselves effective and must be encouraged.  They are part of the security reality on the ground and their needs must be met, he said.  If the GOI is worried about them, the best way for them to exercise control and oversight is by bringing them into the ISF.  Responding, the Ambassador said that part of the problem is communication.  There have already been hiring orders issued to bring nine thousand CLCs into the ISF, with others in the pipeline.  The right percentage of the total CLCs to bring into the ISF, we believe, should be somewhere around 25 percent of the total.  The remainder will be inducted into training programs to increase their marketability in the labor market.  The PM and other senior GOI leaders, at first skeptical about the program, now fully understand the strategic importance of the program's success, and have embraced it, the Ambassador said.  Hashimi wondered aloud who would replace the CLCs in neighborhoods where maintenance of the current security situation relied upon their presence.  The Ambassador assured the VP that the USG fully comprehended the strategic significance of the CLC program, and would not allow it to be muddled.  Hashimi likewise assured that his Iraqi Islamic Party would act constructively, and not interfere in the program.  ----------- Iran Issues -----------  7.  (S) Responding to Hashimi's question about Iranian dithering over another round of 3-way talks, the Ambassador confirmed Tehran's lack of reply on another round of talks. Hashimi noted that he was pressing with his Iraqi partners his idea to engage Iran in a direct bilateral dialogue, to "review all files" and not to focus exclusively on the 1975 treaty.  Issues might include the Shatt al-Arab waterway, Iranian interference inside Iraq, etc.  FM Zebari, he said, liked the idea.  The Ambassador thought the idea was worth pursuing within the GOI.  In a related discussion of Iranian economic interference, the Ambassador remarked on the prevalence of Iranian goods throughout Iraq.  Hashimi, expressing his worry over the security implications of the situation, noted that the lack of control over Iraq's borders and its food supplies, gave Iran another weapon to use against Iraq, if it chose, by blocking food supplies. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000239  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2023 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: "THE STREET IS STRONGER THAN PARLIAMENT:" SADRIST VOWS OPPOSITION TO LTSR  REF: BAGHDAD 103 (SADRIST ON IRAN INFLUENCE)  Classified By: PolCounselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary: As a harbinger of Sadrist Trend hostility to a prospective USG-GOI long-term strategic relationship (LTSR) agreement, Sadrist Deputy Governor of Karbala Jawad al-Hasnawi told us January 24 that if Trend efforts to quash parliamentary approval of the agreement were to fail (a highly unlikely event in his view), the Sadrists would lead Iraq's Shia masses into the streets in enraged protest, an action that Hasnawi guaranteed would doom ratification "because the street is stronger than the Council of Representatives."   He warned that Moqtada al-Sadr is serious about lifting his freeze on Sadrist militia operations unless the GOI stops attacking and arresting Sadrist loyalists. Hasnawi acknowledged splits within the Sadrist movement and predicted even more division as provincial and national elections draw closer, but said the Trend would remain strong.  When asked for a ten-year outlook for the Trend and Iraq, Hasnawi said the most likely scenario would be an Iraq ruled not by the Sadrists but by a "Persian dictatorship" headed by Abdel Aziz al-Hakim, who would act as Tehran's puppet.  He claimed he met in Jordan last week with a representative of UNSYG Ban Ki Moon about convening a conference under UN auspices in Morocco within the next two months with the real but undeclared purpose of providing a forum in which senior Sadrists and USG officials could meet far from Iraq and media glare to discuss the future of Iraq. He said Moqtada was aware of his contact with the UN and posed no objections.  End Summary.  Taking It To The Street -----------------------  2. (C) Hasnawi and fellow Sadrist Trend official Ghalib al-Dami claimed that Sadrists would actively oppose ratification of any GOI-USG agreement that permits an open-ended American military presence in Iraq, stating that the Trend insists on a date certain for departure of all foreign forces.  "Even if it is ten years from now, we want a timetable and deadline."  Hasnawi sneered that there is no need for training of Iraqi Security Forces because "after all the wars we have been through, Iraqis are militaristic people who already know how to fight."  Waving off our arguments that stability and resulting economic benefits would flow from such an agreement, he predicted that any agreement would not be ratified by the Iraqi Council of Representatives (CoR).  He claimed that 150 of the CoR's 275 members and an overwhelming majority of the Iraqi people were already opposed to the agreement in principle and that their ranks would swell as other members became aware that the agreement was "a deal against Iraq's interests between the Americans and the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq (ISCI), the Dawa Party, and the Kurds."  3. (C) When asked what the Trend would do if an absolute majority of CoR members ratified the agreement over Trend objections, Hasnawi replied without hesitation that Sadrists would lead street protests against the agreement until the agreement was dropped: he guaranteed that Sadrist street action would end the matter "because the street is stronger than the Council of Representatives."  When we pointed out that this sort of conduct does not comport with the democratic process, Hasnawi shot back that CoR action that does not reflect the will of the people is "false democracy."  He and al-Dami gratuitously advised us to avoid this outcome by bypassing the GOI and negotiating an agreement directly with the CoR, which he claimed might be amenable to a deal if it included a date certain for departure of foreign troops. Better yet, they intoned, wait until a new CoR is elected and negotiate a deal with them because the new CoR will better reflect the Iraqi people (Hasnawi previously predicted significant Sadrist Trend gains at ISCI and Dawa expense in future provincial and national elections).  Undeterred by our contrary interjections, al-Dami chimed in that talk of the agreement only confirms that the USG never intends to depart Iraq, a view he claimed is supported by media statements of various American politicians who reportedly said the U.S. presence in Iraq will be similar in duration and scope to that in Germany, Japan and South Korea.  Lifting the JAM Freeze? -----------------------  4. (C) With regard to a recent warning by Sadrist Trend spokesman Salah al-Obaidi that Moqtada al-Sadr is mulling over an end to his six-month "freeze" on Jaysh al-Mehdi (JAM) operations, Hasnawi said Sadr is angry and frustrated over an ongoing GOI crackdown on Sadr loyalists in several south-central provinces.  Claiming that senior Sadrist officials - but not Moqtada himself - have spoken several  BAGHDAD 00000239  002 OF 003   times to Prime Minister Maliki about Trend concerns, Hasnawi blurted that "we talk and talk but no one seems to listen." He claimed he had complained directly to a senior advisor of the GOI Minister of Interior who replied that many Iraqi Police brigades are controlled not by the MOI but by ISCI/Badr, particularly in Karbala, Diwaniyah, and Nasiriyah.  Apart from those areas, Hasnawi said relations between GOI security forces and Sadrists were good in Wasit, Najaf, and Maysan provinces.  Relations in Babil province had been smooth until Police Chief Qais al-Mamuri was assassinated ("he was a very good man") but have since deteriorated after an ISCI/Badr cadre assumed the post, while in "the Iranian city of Basrah," police still attack Sadrists and Fadhila. Hasnawi noted that Sadrist patience is running out and claimed Moqtada's threat to lift the freeze should be taken seriously.  5. (C) When asked whether Coalition Force activity is a factor in Sadr's freeze decision, Hasnawi said it is less important than GOI crackdowns because Sadrists view the latter as veiled attacks by ISCI/Badr, a more hated enemy than the U.S.  He said the purpose of the freeze - to identify, isolate, and expel Iranian loyalists within Sadrist ranks - is being achieved partially "because you are attacking the Iranian agents."  He added that when the Coalition performs an operation in Sadr City, it can assess whether it has attacked a true Sadr loyalist or an Iranian agent acting under Sadrist guise by the degree of resistance to the attack by Sadr City residents and the degree of subsequent Sadrist protest against the attack.  Hasnawi said the Trend has formed committees to expel disloyal elements, but he was evasive when asked about the manner and consequences of expulsion.  Trend Dynamics --------------  6. (C) Frequently straying into extended anti-Iran jags, Hasnawi said Iran has found it easy to exploit Iraq's stagnant economy and high unemployment to recruit Sadrists for training in Iran, followed by payment of a USD 300 per month salary.  Upon return to Iraq, the recruits are ordered to perform three sorts of tasks in descending order of priority: battle Coalition Forces, thus fulfilling the short-term Iranian goal of "turning Iraq into a battlefield and trap for the Americans"); fighting GOI security forces; and killing educated Iraqis and society leaders, thus fulfilling the long-term Iranian goal of weakening Iraqi society to make it subservient to Tehran.  He recounted a recent trip he made to Iran in which an Iranian government trade official confessed that Tehran pursues a policy of subsidizing exports of agricultural and consumer products to Iraq in an effort to undercut Iraqi costs of production, drive Iraqi producers out of business, and increase Iraqi dependence of Iran.  The Sadrists are convinced that ISCI and Dawa are in cahoots with Iran in this plan, he claimed, and American failure to stop Iran has led many Iraqis to believe that Iran and the USG have made some sort of deal on Iraq, an assertion we immediately rebutted.  7. (C) According to Hasnawi, decision-making within the Sadrist Trend consists of a "three step process" in which issues are funneled first through a relevant subject matter committee (for example, he listed a 7-person political committee headed by Luway Shumays, a fatwa committee, a military committee, a women's committee, and a social affairs and services committee), and then through two layers of senior advisors who "filter" and frame matters for Moqtada's exclusive decision.  In this manner, Hasnawi claimed, all competing views are heard and considered prior to decision. He acknowledged personal awareness of growing divisions within the trend "because Adnan Shahmani and other people who want to start a new group always approach me and ask me to join them."  He downplayed the significance of such splinter groups, particularly Shahmani's National Gathering movement, stating that the splits would weaken those who left but not the Trend itself.  He predicted that there would be more such splits in advance of future elections as people scramble for power and spoils.  He clarified that he is not among the seven political committee members, but rather is close to them and other senior Sadr advisors.  8. (C) Hasnawi asserted that the Trend has offices throughout Iraq and recently asked Sunni Anbar Awakening leader Ahmed Abu Risha for permission to open branch offices in Ramadi and Salah Al-Din province.  In addition, it maintains offices in Jordan, Syria, Egypt, Kuwait, and Iran, and receives funding from Saudi Arabia and other Gulf sources.  He denied that the Trend receives funds from Iran.  When asked to provide a ten-year outlook for the Sadrist Trend, Hasnawi replied that Sadrists face a powerful, well-armed, and well-financed enemy in ISCI/Badr, who act on Iran's behalf.  He said the most  BAGHDAD 00000239  003 OF 003   likely scenario in ten years would be an Iraq ruled not by the Sadrists but by a "Persian dictatorship" headed by ISCI boss Abdel Aziz al-Hakim, who would act as Tehran's tool. Hasnawi further stated that the USG's apparent inability to discern that ISCI is Tehran's main agent gives further credence to American-Iranian conspiracy theories among the public, adding that "since nobody in the Trend has been talking to you until now, our fear of this has grown." Al-Dami implored that "if you can't be fair to us, at least be neutral."  Possible UN Meeting? --------------------  9. (C) Hasnawi claimed he had met in Jordan last week with UN official Jamal Ben Omar, a Moroccan national who Hasnawi said is a representative of UNSYG Ban Ki Moon.  Hasnawi said the talks focused on convening a conference under UN auspices in Morocco within the next two months: while the conference's nominal agenda would be focus on the Sadrist Trend, the real but undeclared purpose would be to provide a forum in which Sadrist and USG officials could meet far from Iraq and media glare to discuss the future of Iraq.  He claimed Moqtada al-Sadr was aware of his contact with the UN and posed no objections. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000241  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PINS, PNAT, PTER, IZ, JO, SY SUBJECT: MALIKI REAFFIRMS DESIRE FOR CABINET SHAKE-UP, CALLS FOR PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS AS EARLY AS JUNE  REF: BAGHDAD 166  Classified By: CDA Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) SUMMARY: During the weekly security meeting on January 24 with the Ambassador, Prime Minister Maliki  reaffirmed his desire to reduce the number of cabinet posts and form a national unity government with ministers from a  broad spectrum of parties including Tawafuq and Iraqiyya. He expressed confidence the Council of Representatives  (CoR) would pass the Provincial Powers Act within the next week, leading to early provincial elections. Although he acknowledged many political hurdles, he suggested they might occur as early as June. He briefed the Ambassador on  issues facing Iraqi refugees returning from Jordan and  Syria, but noted his intention to use governmental funds to  induce these countries to ease their return. Maliki concluded the meeting with a discussion about the stalled CoR budget debate, blaming the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) for the impasse. END SUMMARY.  Cabinet Shake-up ----------------  2. (S) In his weekly security meeting with the Ambassador, a relaxed Prime Minister Maliki reaffirmed his desire to reduce the number of government ministries to around 17 or 18 (Note: there are currently 34 ministers between the ministries, the ministers' of state and the ministers' of state without portfolio. End note) and then appoint ministers from a broad spectrum of  parties, including Tawafuq and Iraqiyya (Note: both parties have boycotted their ministerial posts since August in a  dispute with the government. End note). Maliki said the Executive Council had already agreed to this proposal "in  principle" but he acknowledged significant negotiating hurdles, including former PM Allawi's demands that he fire the two Iraqiyya ministers who refused to boycott their posts (reftel). While extolling the patriotism of these two  ministers--whom he described as choosing country over partisan politics--Maliki once again left the door open to  compromise, remarking that a smaller cabinet with a new set of ministers might provide a face-saving means to resolving the issue. He described discussions with the Tawafuq party leaders as progressing reasonably well, adding that issues without legal or constitutional constraints could be quickly resolved. The Ambassador urged Maliki to be  flexible in order to set the right tone for political reconciliation within his government. Maliki assured the  Ambassador he would be generous in reaching out to them.  Provincial Elections by June? -----------------------------  3. (S) Turning to pending legislation, Maliki predicted the Council of Representatives (CoR) would pass the Provincial Powers Law by January 28, in one of the next three parliamentary sessions. The Ambassador expressed hope that passage would lead to early provincial elections. Maliki concurred, saying he supported new provincial elections "as soon as possible", possibly as early as June. He lamented that this position put him at odds with many political forces. He specifically cited problems with members of the Iraqi High Commission for Elections, describing them as under the influence of various political parties. Maliki proposed adoption of new laws or procedures strictly limiting their ability to influence the actual balloting. The Prime Minister noted that the new Special Representative of the Secretary General to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Steffan De Mistura, seemed equally optimistic about holding elections soon,  Iraqi Refugees --------------  4. (S) Regarding the increasing numbers of refugees returning home to Iraq, Maliki said Syrian authorities now put the number at over 700,000 which is causing recession in their economy. In Jordan, many of those attempting to return now face fines for overstaying their visas--which they cannot pay--putting them in limbo as they are forced to further extend their stay. Maliki said ForMin Zebari and IntMin Bolani are negotiating with the GOJ to allow these refugees to leave in return for GOI financial reimbursement for the visas and transportation. (COMMENT: Post believes the Syrian estimate on the number of Iraqi returnees is far too high--probably by several magnitudes--especially considering that the total Iraqi refugee population in Syria is estimated  BAGHDAD 00000241  002 OF 002   at around 1.2 million; available evidence does not support the fact that over half of the Iraqi refugees there have returned. Although good estimates are hard to come by, the most recent one by the Iraqi Red Crescent Organization says that 46,000 Iraqi refugees returned from Syria between September 15 and December 27, 2007. END COMMENT.)  KRG Budget Faces Opposition in CoR -----------------------------------  5. (S) Concluding with a discussion about the current budget debate in the CoR, Prime Minister Maliki suggested that the biggest issue was mounting resentment against Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) demands that the CoR approve additional funding for Peshmerga salaries. This had backfired, he said, and there was increasing pressure by non-Kurdish parties to reduce the KRG's 17 percent share of allocations. Noting that it would be highly unlikely for  the KRG to "federalize" the Peshmerga or to allow Iraqi Army bases in Kurdistan, Maliki worried this issue would  cause a major stalemate in the ongoing budget battle CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000243  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SECSTATE FOR USAID  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, EAID, PREL, SCUL, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA/MOSUL EXPLOSION: CURFEW LIFTED, MARKETS OPEN; PM'S REPRESENTATIVE BRINGS COMPENSATION FOR VICTIMS  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 2723      B. 07 BAGHDAD 2827  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  Summary -------  1. (C/REL ACGU) On January 26 Ninewa Governor Kashmoula lifted the all-day curfew imposed on Mosul after the massive explosion of January 23.  Shops and markets are open.  PRT Leader met January 27 with the Governor, Vice-Governor, other provincial officials, and Zuhair Al-Chalabi, the Director General in the Prime Minister's Office who handles emergency follow-up.  Al-Chalabi said that they had already begun distributing martyr payments from the evening of January 26 to victims of the explosion, and were about to hold a press event to continue the distribution.  Al-Chalabi made clear that the Prime Minister was well aware of the importance of quick central government follow-up to this tragedy.  He said that further emergency support would follow once the Cabinet officially declared Mosul a disaster area.  Vice Governor Khasro Goran said that the official casualty toll now stood at 38 dead and 234 wounded.  The vast majority of the casualties were handled by the Iraqi hospital system.  The PRT, through USAID-funded International Medical Corps (IMC), provided rapid response assistance to the hospitals.  Relief efforts are well underway, with provincial Iraqi institutions firmly in the lead.  Turkish Consulate General Mosul, working with PRT and Coalition Forces, arranged for emergency delivery of 13 tons of medical supplies as well as the medical evacuation of six seriously wounded victims of the attack. Even in the middle of responding to a humanitarian crisis, Al-Chalabi and the provincial leadership were focused on the political divide between Kurds and Sunni Arabs, and efforts to exploit it - highlighting the fear that ethnic tension will cause the situation in Mosul to worsen. END SUMMARY.  Compensation Payments Have Begun --------------------------------  2. (C/REL ACGU) PRT Leader met January 27 with the Ninewa Governor, Vice Governor Khasro Goran, other provincial officials, and Zuhair Al-Chalabi, the Director General in the Prime Minister's Office who handles emergency follow-up. Al-Chalabi said that they had already begun distributing martyr payments from the evening of January 26 to victims of the explosion, and were about to hold a press event to continue the distribution.  The payments were one million Iraqi Dinar (ID) for wounded persons and two million ID for families of those killed in the blast.  Al-Chalabi made clear that the Prime Minister was well aware of the importance of quick central government follow-up to the tragedy. He pointed out that the Prime Minister's senior official in charge of martyr payments had accompanied him to this meeting, a sign that the Prime Minister was serious about helping out in this crisis. He said that further emergency support would follow once the Cabinet officially declared Mosul a disaster area. Both Al-Chalabi and the Governor told PRT Leader that they intended to follow the model used after the August 14 bombings in Sinjar (ref a), and would set up a committee to administer reconstruction aid to the affected community. Both Al-Chalabi and the Governor also stressed that they intended to ensure that victims of other terrorist attacks in the province also received compensation due them.  Major General Wathiq, the previous Provincial Director of Police, was also at the meeting, demonstrating that he was back on the job as interim chief after the January 24 killing of his successor.  Curfew Lifted: Normalcy Returning -------------------------------  3. (C/REL ACGU) On January 26 Ninewa Governor Duraid Kashmoula lifted the full curfew imposed on Mosul after the massive explosion of January 23.  Shops and markets are open for business as usual.  More telling is the fact that the Governor, Vice Governor, and Prime Minister's Representative  BAGHDAD 00000243  002 OF 003   were planning to walk outside to the market after the meeting in order to demonstrate that conditions were returning to normal.  Casualty Toll Increases as Relief Efforts Continue --------------------------------------------- -----  4. (C/REL AGCU) Vice Governor Goran said that the official casualty toll now stood at 38 dead and 234 wounded. (Note: Al Chalabi told us that they had only brought enough cash to cover the payments for the 38 dead and about 170 of the injured; they will provide compensation to the remaining victims shortly.)  The vast majority of the casualties were handled by the Iraqi hospital system.  The PRT, through USAID-funded International Medical Corps (IMC), provided extensive rapid response assistance to the hospitals.  In both a substantive and symbolic move on the evening of January 25, the Turkish Consulate General for Mosul arranged for emergency delivery of 13 tons of medical supplies as well as for the medical evacuation of six seriously wounded victims of the attack.  This was possible through close cooperation among the PRT, Turkish Consulate General, Coalition Forces (CF) and our Iraqi partners.  All Seem Well Aware of Political Stakes ---------------------------------------  5. (C/REL AGCU) When asked how the province was responding after the explosion, the Vice Governor said that this was not the worst attack that they have suffered, and it won't be the last.  All of the leaders present realized that the speed and size of the response to this crisis would be a measuring stick that the people of Ninewa would use to measure the effectiveness of the central and provincial governments. PRT Leader asked if the Provincial Council had any authority to reprogram money from the 2007 provincial capital budget for emergencies. The Governor said that such spending was not allowed. Al Chalabi added that the provincial government manages its ordinary budget, and that it was the responsibility of the central government to provide assistance in emergencies.  Great Sensitivity About "Kurdish Issue" in Provincial Rule --------------------------------------------- -------------  6. (C/REL AGCU) Al-Chalabi, the Governor and Vice Governor engaged in an animated defense of the Ninewa provincial government, citing criticism by Council of Representative (COR) members in Baghdad that the Provincial Council consisted almost entirely of Kurds.  In return, Al-Chalabi called the COR delegation that represented Ninewa useless, charging it did not play the role that other parliamentarians did in lobbying for their provinces.  The Vice Governor went through a detailed run-down of the ethnic make-up of the Provincial Council, stressing that there were relatively few ethnic Kurds represented. (NOTE: Regardless of the ethnic make-up of the Provincial Council, the Kurds hold overwhelming control over the Council, in addition to having Governor Kashmoula, a Sunni Arab, representing their interests. End Note.)  He also said that the provincial government should not be blamed for the result of the Sunni Arab boycott of the 2005 elections.  Al-Chalabi said that, in a democracy, this issue should be resolved at the ballot box, and those who oppose the current provincial government should not weaken its ability to govern, but instead wait for their turn in the next elections.  (Comment: It is telling that in the middle of responding to this crisis, these provincial leaders, along with the Prime Minister's advisor, were focused on the Kurdish face of the province, clearly a highly sensitive point in the Sunni Arab-majority Ninewa. End Comment.) PRT Leader emphasized that the best thing that the central government and province can do at this point is to provide immediate and effective aid to show that the government is looking after the people.  Media Campaign Continues ------------------------  7. (SBU) The Governor repeatedly condemned the attack as the work of Al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) and promised swift security and relief operations.  Governor told PRT Leader that many  BAGHDAD 00000243  003 OF 003   citizens already know the truth of what happened January 23 and more and more will learn every day.  (NOTE: However, according to a PRT staffer based in the city of Mosul, many citizens still believe that Iraqi security forces were somehow behind the blast.  She added that there was widespread fear and anticipation of a major security offensive in Mosul. End Note.)  PM Maliki called Mosul "the final fight."  The Minister of Defense (MOD) came to Mosul January 26 and at a press conference promised a "decisive end" to "terrorist activities."  Provincial Director Generals are quoted in the local media as saying essential services, such as water, have been restored to the affected area.  Turkey/U.S. Humanitarian Cooperation ------------------------------------  8. (SBU) USAID-funded IMC delivered badly needed medical supplies to local area hospitals.  MOH officials expressed deep gratitude for all the assistance.  In an innovative example of trilateral cooperation, barely 48 hours after the attack, Turkish Consulate General Mosul arranged for an elite Turkish relief team to fly to the Coalition base in Mosul in a plane loaded with replacement medical supplies, valued at about $125,000 according to the Consul General. The plane was also configured as an air ambulance.  Through the efforts of the Turkish Consulate General, the PRT, Coalition Forces, and Iraqi partners, six seriously wounded victims were transported from local hospitals to the CF base where they were flown to Turkey for medical treatment courtesy of the GOT.  Comment -------  9. (C/REL AGCU) The central GOI, along with the provincial government leadership, has so far responded quickly to the January 23 bombing.  The speed in which payments have been meted out and the public nature of the discussion show that the Iraqi officials recognize the stakes.  One key indicator of sustained engagement will be how quickly the GOI provides long-term reconstruction aid to the affected area. PRT will continue to work closely with the provincial government to ensure that future efforts to rebuild moves forward.  10. (C/REL AGCU) It is important to note that, even in the middle of responding to a humanitarian crisis, Al-Chalabi and the provincial leadership were focused on the political divide between Kurds and Sunni Arabs, and efforts to exploit it.  A lengthy discussion of the ineffectiveness of the Sunni members of the COR from Mosul, coupled with a long explanation from Goran (also the President of the Kurdistan Democratic Party in Ninewa) about the ethnic makeup of the Provincial Council, highlighted the fear that ethnic tensions will cause the situation in Mosul to worsen.  All actors in the January 27 meeting stressed the need to work together to avoid such an outcome.  The PRT will encourage such political reconciliation and cooperation in our ongoing outreach and meetings with all parties. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000244  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SECSTATE FOR USAID  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, EAID, PREL, SCUL, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA/MOSUL EXPLOSION: CURFEW LIFTED, MARKETS OPEN;  PM'S REPRESENTATIVE BRINGS COMPENSATION FOR VICTIMS  REF: A) 07 BAGHDAD 2723 B) 07 BAGHDAD 2827  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  Summary -------  1. (C/REL ACGU) On January 26 Ninewa Governor Kashmoula lifted the all-day curfew imposed on Mosul after the massive explosion of January 23.  Shops and markets are open.  PRT Leader met January 27 with the Governor, Vice-Governor, other provincial officials, and Zuhair Al-Chalabi, the Director General in the Prime Minister's Office who handles emergency follow-up.  Al-Chalabi said that they had already begun distributing martyr payments from the evening of January 26 to victims of the explosion, and were about to hold a press event to continue the distribution.  Al-Chalabi made clear that the Prime Minister was well aware of the importance of quick central government follow-up to this tragedy.  He said that further emergency support would follow once the Cabinet officially declared Mosul a disaster area.  Vice Governor Khasro Goran said that the official casualty toll now stood at 38 dead and 234 wounded.  The vast majority of the casualties were handled by the Iraqi hospital system.  The PRT, through USAID-funded International Medical Corps (IMC), provided rapid response assistance to the hospitals.  Relief efforts are well underway, with provincial Iraqi institutions firmly in the lead.  Turkish Consulate General Mosul, working with PRT and Coalition Forces, arranged for emergency delivery of 13 tons of medical supplies as well as the medical evacuation of six seriously wounded victims of the attack. Even in the middle of responding to a humanitarian crisis, Al-Chalabi and the provincial leadership were focused on the political divide between Kurds and Sunni Arabs, and efforts to exploit it - highlighting the fear that ethnic tension will cause the situation in Mosul to worsen. END SUMMARY.  Compensation Payments Have Begun --------------------------------  2. (C/REL ACGU) PRT Leader met January 27 with the Ninewa Governor, Vice Governor Khasro Goran, other provincial officials, and Zuhair Al-Chalabi, the Director General in the Prime Minister's Office who handles emergency follow-up. Al-Chalabi said that they had already begun distributing martyr payments from the evening of January 26 to victims of the explosion, and were about to hold a press event to continue the distribution.  The payments were one million Iraqi Dinar (ID) for wounded persons and two million ID for families of those killed in the blast.  Al-Chalabi made clear that the Prime Minister was well aware of the importance of quick central government follow-up to the tragedy. He pointed out that the Prime Minister's senior official in charge of martyr payments had accompanied him to this meeting, a sign that the Prime Minister was serious about helping out in this crisis. He said that further emergency support would follow once the Cabinet officially declared Mosul a disaster area. Both Al-Chalabi and the Governor told PRT Leader that they intended to follow the model used after the August 14 bombings in Sinjar (ref a), and would set up a committee to administer reconstruction aid to the affected community. Both Al-Chalabi and the Governor also stressed that they intended to ensure that victims of other terrorist attacks in the province also received compensation due them.  Major General Wathiq, the previous Provincial Director of Police, was also at the meeting, demonstrating that he was back on the job as interim chief after the January 24 killing of his successor.  Curfew Lifted: Normalcy Returning -------------------------------  3. (C/REL ACGU) On January 26 Ninewa Governor Duraid Kashmoula lifted the full curfew imposed on Mosul after the massive explosion of January 23.  Shops and markets are open for business as usual.  More telling is the fact that the Governor, Vice Governor, and Prime Minister's Representative were planning to walk outside to the market after the meeting in order to demonstrate that conditions were returning to normal.   BAGHDAD 00000244  002 OF 003   Casualty Toll Increases as Relief Efforts Continue --------------------------------------------- -----  4. (C/REL AGCU) Vice Governor Goran said that the official casualty toll now stood at 38 dead and 234 wounded. (Note: Al Chalabi told us that they had only brought enough cash to cover the payments for the 38 dead and about 170 of the injured; they will provide compensation to the remaining victims shortly.)  The vast majority of the casualties were handled by the Iraqi hospital system.  The PRT, through USAID-funded International Medical Corps (IMC), provided extensive rapid response assistance to the hospitals.  In both a substantive and symbolic move on the evening of January 25, the Turkish Consulate General for Mosul arranged for emergency delivery of 13 tons of medical supplies as well as for the medical evacuation of six seriously wounded victims of the attack.  This was possible through close cooperation among the PRT, Turkish Consulate General, Coalition Forces (CF) and our Iraqi partners.  All Seem Well Aware of Political Stakes ---------------------------------------  5. (C/REL AGCU) When asked how the province was responding after the explosion, the Vice Governor said that this was not the worst attack that they have suffered, and it won't be the last.  All of the leaders present realized that the speed and size of the response to this crisis would be a measuring stick that the people of Ninewa would use to measure the effectiveness of the central and provincial governments. PRT Leader asked if the Provincial Council had any authority to reprogram money from the 2007 provincial capital budget for emergencies. The Governor said that such spending was not allowed. Al Chalabi added that the provincial government manages its ordinary budget, and that it was the responsibility of the central government to provide assistance in emergencies.  Great Sensitivity About "Kurdish Issue" in Provincial Rule --------------------------------------------- -------------  6. (C/REL AGCU) Al-Chalabi, the Governor and Vice Governor engaged in an animated defense of the Ninewa provincial government, citing criticism by Council of Representative (COR) members in Baghdad that the Provincial Council consisted almost entirely of Kurds.  In return, Al-Chalabi called the COR delegation that represented Ninewa useless, charging it did not play the role that other parliamentarians did in lobbying for their provinces.  The Vice Governor went through a detailed run-down of the ethnic make-up of the Provincial Council, stressing that there were relatively few ethnic Kurds represented. (NOTE: Regardless of the ethnic make-up of the Provincial Council, the Kurds hold overwhelming control over the Council, in addition to having Governor Kashmoula, a Sunni Arab, representing their interests. End Note.)  He also said that the provincial government should not be blamed for the result of the Sunni Arab boycott of the 2005 elections.  Al-Chalabi said that, in a democracy, this issue should be resolved at the ballot box, and those who oppose the current provincial government should not weaken its ability to govern, but instead wait for their turn in the next elections.  (Comment: It is telling that in the middle of responding to this crisis, these provincial leaders, along with the Prime Minister's advisor, were focused on the Kurdish face of the province, clearly a highly sensitive point in the Sunni Arab-majority Ninewa. End Comment.) PRT Leader emphasized that the best thing that the central government and province can do at this point is to provide immediate and effective aid to show that the government is looking after the people.  Media Campaign Continues ------------------------  7. (SBU) The Governor repeatedly condemned the attack as the work of Al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) and promised swift security and relief operations.  Governor told PRT Leader that many citizens already know the truth of what happened January 23 and more and more will learn every day.  (NOTE: However, according to a PRT staffer based in the city of Mosul, many citizens still believe that Iraqi security forces were somehow behind the blast.  She added that there was widespread fear and anticipation of a major security offensive in Mosul. End Note.)  PM Maliki called Mosul "the  BAGHDAD 00000244  003.2 OF 003   final fight."  The Minister of Defense (MOD) came to Mosul January 26 and at a press conference promised a "decisive end" to "terrorist activities."  Provincial Director Generals are quoted in the local media as saying essential services, such as water, have been restored to the affected area.  Turkey/U.S. Humanitarian Cooperation ------------------------------------  8. (SBU) USAID-funded IMC delivered badly needed medical supplies to local area hospitals.  MOH officials expressed deep gratitude for all the assistance.  In an innovative example of trilateral cooperation, barely 48 hours after the attack, Turkish Consulate General Mosul arranged for an elite Turkish relief team to fly to the Coalition base in Mosul in a plane loaded with replacement medical supplies, valued at about $125,000 according to the Consul General. The plane was also configured as an air ambulance.  Through the efforts of the Turkish Consulate General, the PRT, Coalition Forces, and Iraqi partners, six seriously wounded victims were transported from local hospitals to the CF base where they were flown to Turkey for medical treatment courtesy of the GOT.  Comment -------  9. (C/REL AGCU) The central GOI, along with the provincial government leadership, has so far responded quickly to the January 23 bombing.  The speed in which payments have been meted out and the public nature of the discussion show that the Iraqi officials recognize the stakes.  One key indicator of sustained engagement will be how quickly the GOI provides long-term reconstruction aid to the affected area. PRT will continue to work closely with the provincial government to ensure that future efforts to rebuild moves forward.  10. (C/REL AGCU) It is important to note that, even in the middle of responding to a humanitarian crisis, Al-Chalabi and the provincial leadership were focused on the political divide between Kurds and Sunni Arabs, and efforts to exploit it.  A lengthy discussion of the ineffectiveness of the Sunni members of the COR from Mosul, coupled with a long explanation from Goran (also the President of the Kurdistan Democratic Party in Ninewa) about the ethnic makeup of the Provincial Council, highlighted the fear that ethnic tensions will cause the situation in Mosul to worsen.  All actors in the January 27 meeting stressed the need to work together to avoid such an outcome.  The PRT will encourage such political reconciliation and cooperation in our ongoing outreach and meetings with all parties. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000249  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SECSTATE FOR USAID  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2018 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, EAID, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: MOSUL UNIVERSITY PRESIDENT PROPOSES BROAD TIES WITH PRT  REF: A. 06BAGHDAD 4504      B. 07BAGHDAD 2730      C. BAGHDAD 244  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1. (S/REL ACGU) Summary: Mosul University President Dr. Obay al-Dewachi told us he was open to broad cooperation with the PRT.  Although the university was a bastion of the Ba'athist system and is a known safe haven for terrorists, as one of the best universities in Iraq the PRT will begin immediately a cautious but broad and sustained engagement.  Support for its development as a vibrant and politically moderate institution could bring enormous benefits to the economy, civil society and political environment in northern Iraq. End Summary.  2. (SBU) Mosul University President Dr. Obay al-Dewachi told PRT Leader and staff January 22 that the university was open to broad cooperation with the PRT to help his institution recover from the many challenges it faced over the past five years.  He repeatedly invited the PRT Leader to visit the university, an offer which, for the last year, he had been reluctant to extend to any Americans.  He said the security situation at the university had improved and specifically identified the need for cooperation with the medical and engineering faculties, which he called the core of the university.  He noted that the university had prepared a former regime palace on a campus that offers excellent security for meetings.  3. (SBU) The 30,000 student university is the most important institution of higher education in Ninewa and one of the best universities in Iraq. It is also a university where Sunni Arabs in particular feel safe attending. Dr. Obay identified post-graduation employment for students as one of the most pressing issues, along with security.  The meeting was made possible through the good offices of Turkish Consul General Huseyin Botsali, who maintains good relations with Dr. Obay and the university generally.  The Dean of the College of Veterinary Medicine, Dr. Fouad Kasim Mohammad, also attended the luncheon.  The PRT will begin immediately a cautious but broad and sustained engagement with Mosul University since support for its development as a vibrant and politically moderate institution could bring enormous benefits to the economy, civil society and political environment in northern Iraq.  University Academics -    Continuing Despite the Challenges ------------------------------------  4. (U) Mosul University began in 1959 with the founding of the College of Medicine and was incorporated in 1967.  It consists of 22 faculties or colleges and 126 departments spanning the full range of humanities, sciences, and engineering.  Mosul University has several research centers, including one focused on the Mosul Dam.  The three main campuses are in eastern Mosul with the College of Medicine based separately in a teaching hospital.  Dr. Obay discussed plans for a new campus near Mosul Airport, close to Forward Operating Base Marez, on which the PRT is located.  CG Botsali said it may come under the Mosul University umbrella.  The 30,000 students pursue a mix of undergraduate, graduate and professional degrees.  The majority of the professoriate has doctorates and has studied regionally and internationally.  There are approximately 700 full professors and over 2,000 instructors.  5. (U) Dr. Obay (who speaks very good English and was educated in Europe, see BIONOTE REF B) was extremely focused on getting cooperation for the Medical and Engineering Colleges, which are the nexus of both the university's prestige and its contribution to building a new Iraq.  He said the university is trying to upgrade the computer and laboratory facilities of the two Colleges as well as the Departments of Chemistry and Physics.  Dr. Fouad said essential laboratory supplies such as glassware and cadavers are in critically short supply.  Access to current technical reference and research publications is poor university-wide. Electricity shortages limit teaching hours.  CG Botsali volunteered to have two large American-donated generators  BAGHDAD 00000249  002 OF 002   converted from natural gas to diesel.   Mosul University is regarded with great prestige and respect within the Iraqi academic community, especially the faculties of Medicine and Engineering.  Dr. Fouad talked about elements of normal life at the university such as athletic competitions and chess tournaments.  The university was also the site of a recent art exhibition by a prominent local artist.  University Politics -     Tangled and Potentially Dangerous -------------------------------------  6. (S/REL ACGU) The university was a bastion of the Ba'athist system and over the last four years it has become increasingly difficult for non-Sunni Arabs to study and work there.  Though all of the Kurdish and Yezidi students (REF B) and most of the faculty are no longer able to come on campus because of threats of violence, Dr. Obay claimed some Christian students still prefer Mosul University to universities in the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG). Kurdish political parties have claimed there is a vocal Wahabi minority among the students recruiting for radical Islamist activities.  The university is a known safe haven for terrorists who pose as and intimidate real students (REFTELs).  Military colleagues tell us the Department of Chemistry is actively assisting terrorism on a tactical level.  Nevertheless, Dr. Obay repeatedly insisted that there should be no place for politics at the university.  PRT/University Cooperation Ready to Move Forward --------------------------------------------- ---  7. (C) The PRT's Health and Education Section had already been working with Dr. Fouad to provide linkages with American universities.  (Bio Note: Dr. Fouad speaks fluent Arabic, Turkish and English.  His PhD is from the University of Missouri; his brother still lives there.) On a more immediate note, the PRT arranged for the donation and delivery of textbooks to the Veterinary and Nursing colleges.  Through one of USAID's implementing partners, the PRT is pioneering a program to partner with the Veterinary College (sensitive information).  The USAID partner is upgrading the College's computer labs and providing internet access while the College will provide veterinarians and students to assist in IRD programs across Ninewa province.  As the relationships develop, the PRT will move forward with a full range of engagements including through USAID, Public Diplomacy, QRF and ad-hoc associations with American academic institutions. Dr. Obay particularly praised the University of Hawaii's ongoing assistance to the College of Agriculture.  Comment -------  8. (S/REL ACGU) Dr. Obay has made such overtures before, but security concerns have previously overtaken events.  He is also not the most reliable interlocutor. During a January 27 meeting with Prime Minister's Advisor Zuhair Al-Chalabi and Ninewa Provincial Governor to discuss follow-up to the recent explosion in Mosul (ref c), Al-Chalabi said in a side conversation that Dr. Obay is "not cooperative" with the central government, and both he and the Governor alleged that he cooperates with terrorists and said he needs to be replaced. Despite the difficult environment, the PRT is now cautiously optimistic that a quiet and measured engagement strategy is worth the effort in order to help turn this vital institution into a positive force for change not only for Ninewa but for Sunni Arabs in Iraq.  We believe that the majority of the students and professors are sympathetic to an academically-focused, non-political vision for the university's future.  The security challenges are significant, but Mosul University is just too important to leave to terrorists and former Ba'athists  The Turkish assistance is greatly appreciated; at the invitation of the Turkish Consul General, the PRT may use the Turkish Consulate General as a meeting place for some future meetings, as a good neutral location. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000250  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2023 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: VP ADEL ON LTSR AND PENDING LEGISLATION  REF: BAGHDAD 224 (ADEL ON LTSR)  Classified By: PolCounselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary: Vice President Adel Abdel Mehdi told Political Counselor on January 28 that the GOI Political Committee for National Security (PCNS) discussed the GOI long-term strategic partnership (LTSR) negotiating framework during a January 26 meeting, agreeing that negotiations would be handled at the deputy minister level under supervision by Prime Minister Maliki and top-tier GOI officials with frequent PCNS consultation.  He noted Iraqi unease over recent American media reports of preliminary opposition to LTSR expressed by some members of the U.S. Congress.  On legislative issues, Adel predicted the 2008 budget would be passed after "useless delay" caused by Maliki; complained that progress on the Provincial Powers law has been slowed by unresolved disputes between Adel's Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq (ISCI) and Maliki's Dawa Party; and said fellow VP Tariq al-Hashemi had sent him a letter regarding the De-Baathification Law.  End Summary.  LTSR ----  2. (C) Adel characterized the January 26 PCNS as a productive meeting attended by all major political blocs and players except for the Sadrists, who are "boycotting" the PCNS (reftel), and former PM al-Jaffri.  The only topic discussed was the GOI long-term strategic partnership (LTSR) negotiating framework, with agreement that day-to-day negotiations would be led by the Deputy Foreign Minister and his team of deputy minister-level officials.  This team will be supervised by the Prime Minister, members of the Presidency Council, and Ministers.  The PCNS will be briefed and consulted regularly on developments.  A PCNS "secretariat" likely to be headed by senior KDP official Rawsch Shways will support this advisory function.  Adel stressed that all political parties will be encouraged to actively participate in this PCNS advisory role so that the agreement will gain CoR ratification and popular support. Adel said all party blocs present at the January 26 PCNS were positive about the LTSR.  He dismissed likely Sadrist opposition by stating that the GOI will never get 100 percent support for any project but will have to persuade the Iraqi people, the Sadrists, and the Iranians, that the agreement is in Iraq's interests and does not merely provide legal cover for a continued presence of foreign forces.  The PCNS did not discuss substantive LTSR issues.  3. (C) Adel once again praised S/I Satterfield's statements to the Arab media that the USG will not seek bases, adding that this helped dispel speculation and rumors among Iraqi politicians.  He said it would be useful if a more senior USG official would go on record with similar assurances.  Adel voiced concern over recent American media reports of preliminary opposition to LTSR expressed by some members of the U.S. Congress.  He said the GOI needs assurance that an agreement will reflect the will of the entire USG, not just part of it.  We noted our wish that the agreement process be handled with maximum transparency throughout.  Budget, Provincial Powers, De-Baath -----------------------------------  4. (C) Adel said budget discussions are "not mature" but predicted the CoR will eventually pass the budget "after more useless delay, and no one will be the winner."  He described the holdup as a "small game played by the Prime Minister," adding that "Maliki sent a budget to parliament and then conspired against it."  On the pending Provincial Powers bill, he noted unresolved disputes between his ISCI bloc and Maliki's Dawa Party over several items including the date upon which the enacted bill should take effect and the manner in which a provincial governor can be removed from office. In a separate January 27 meeting, senior Dawa CoR member Haidar al-Abadi told us the latter issue had been resolved in a "stormy" meeting between ISCI and Dawa, but the date of implementation issue was a new dispute that had not yet been bridged.  Adel said the ISCI view is that the law should take effect when published, like any other law, while Abadi told us Dawa favors a delayed implementation date effective upon seating of new provincial councils.  Both claim the Iraqi constitution is on their side.  5. (C) Adel said his office had not yet received a copy of the De-Baath law, and we related our understanding that the law was sent to him and the other two Presidency Council members on January 24, thus triggering the ten-day period (note: 15 day period according to an alternative legal reading) in which bills must be signed by the three Council members.  Adel said he would sign upon receipt and would endeavor to persuade VP Hashemi to follow suit.  He noted  BAGHDAD 00000250  002 OF 002   that Hashemi had sent him a letter outlining "comments" on the De-Baath law.  In a subsequent conversation with Hashemi, he indicated that while he favors returning the law to the CoR for amendments, he would sign if both President Talabani and VP Abdel Mehdi held to the view that returning the law to the CoR would create problems. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000251  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2023 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR USG SUPPORT OF ARAB PARLIAMENTARY UNION MEETING   Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (U) This is an action request.  See para 2.  2. (S) The Arab Parliamentary Union is scheduled to meet in Erbil, Iraq, on March 11-13.  During the Secretary's January 15 visit, ISCI CoR bloc leader Hummam Hammoudi asked for the USG's assistance in persuading the governments of Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia to allow delegations from each country to attend.  (Hammoudi claims that the parliaments are willing to send delegations, but that their respective governments are skittish about the optics of participating.)  ACTION REQUEST: Post requests that the Department consider sending instructions to Embassy Amman, Cairo and Riyadh encouraging their respective host governments to send delegations to the Erbil meeting. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000252  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  NEA/I: RSCHMIERER NEA/I:PM:TBETTS ISN/RA:KKESSLER S/I:KNUTT L/NPV:THISCH DOE: JSELLEN JS: SNORWOOD OSD: TBENNET  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2017 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, PARM, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: (C) TUWAITHA YELLOW CAKE BUYER UPDATE  REF: A. A. STATE 163968      B. B. BAGHDAD 4126      C. C. STATE 169324      D. D. BAGHDAD 2454      E. E. BAGHDAD 1787      F. F BAGHDAD 734      G. G. BAGHDAD 004227  Classified By: Economic Counselor Todd Schwartz, for Reasons 1.4 (B), (D) and (H)  1. (S) SUMMARY: On Jan 25, 2008, a DOE and MNF-I team met with Iraqi Minister of Science and Technology Raid Jahid (FAHMI) to discuss next steps for Iraq to begin contract negotiations with a qualified buyer for the Tuwaitha yellow cake. Although Minister Fahmi and team are not yet ready to meet buyers directly, the Minister agreed with Energy Attache Parks' suggestion that discussions could begin this coming Wednesday, January 30, 2008, with the potential buyers via telephone.  Parks agreed to arrange the calls with both known potential buyers, GE-Hitachi and AREVA.  Fahmi stated his Committee agreed that Paris would be an appropriate meeting place (he has a French passport) and offered to meet with potential buyers as soon as he has a better idea of the exact quantity and quality of the yellow cake, an estimate of its value and an understanding of the entire process to prepare and ship the material to a specific buyer. He must have this information and brief the Council of Ministers (COM). DOE offered to help accomplish each of the tasks necessary before direct negotiations begin. Next steps include a possible experts discussion on Tuesday January 29 regarding development of a cost estimate, and a meeting to review the entire process with the Minister's staff later next week. END SUMMARY.  Iraqi Requirements to Begin Negotiations ---------------------------------------- 2. (S) Minister of Science and Technology Fahmi hosted on Jan 25 a late night meeting in his quarters at the Al Rasheed Hotel. Parks opened discussion with a general question regarding the first meeting of the Minister with his Committee as the group appointed to manage the yellow cake sale.  The Minister responded that the first meeting had gone well, he had a second scheduled this coming week and he expected to move forward quickly.  Parks emphasized that the critical objective for the US was for Iraq to engage in negotiations as quickly as possible in order to finalize a contract with a buyer and allow the repackaged yellow cake to be delivered. While Fahmi agreed and understood the need to move quickly, he outlined the steps necessary to accomplish before he could enter into contract negotiations: 1) identify the potential buyers and seek a waiver if there are less than three; 2) know the exact quality and quantity of the yellow cake; 3) prepare an estimated value of the yellow cake to help Iraq in the negotiations; 4) understand the entire process the US has undertaken to repackage the yellow cake and to transport it from Tuwaitha to a buyer. On the first point, Parks recommended that Fahmi's committee start negotiations in parallel with preparing a request for waiver of the three bidder rule. Regarding the other points, Parks stated that he had a briefing for the Minister from the DOE Team at Tuwaitha providing an overview of the packing operations as well as an update on quantities and quality of the yellow cake. DOE was prepared to provide all the information it has from the 2004 assessment as well as current updates. Likewise, Boudreau noted that DOE is ready to work with MOST experts to develop a methodology for estimating the value of the material; however, DOE could not provide specific figures for Iraq to use in the negotiations. Fahmi was very interested in our experts working jointly on a methodology and suggested that he would brief his Committee and perhaps talks could begin on Tuesday, 29 January.  Parks agreed this was a good idea and noted that DOE had had extensive discussions with AREVA experts recently and believes that AREVA will engage.  Fahmi was pleased to hear this, especially as it might speed the waiver process to proceed even if there are not three bidders.  Buyers Phone Minister Fahmi? ---------------------------- 3. (C) Parks reiterated that the US needs MOST to enter into direct contract negotiations as soon as possible.  However, he asked the Minister if he would be willing to talk with potential buyers via phone Wednesday 30 January. After some discussion, Fahmi agreed he could accept the calls.  He specifically asked about the value estimate development and DOE reiterated that its experts could work with his experts immediately (Comment: At the Tuwaitha site the DOE Team leader and Iraqi Technical Observers have already begun discussing a methodology for estimating the potential value of the yellow cake. End Comment.) The Minister also asked how the potential buyers could make an offer without detailed knowledge of the material.  Boudreau answered that any offer would probably be a range of possible payment pending a final assessment of he material by the buyer in question. However, both known potential buyers had a significant amount of information from the 2004 assessment and DOE had spent significant time discussing technical issues with AREVA.  The DOE Team on-site is preparing updated information on both the quantity, quality and packaging that should better inform potential buyers.  At the end of the discussion, Fahmi again agreed to talk with the potential buyers via phone next Wednesday as a first step toward direct negotiations later in Paris.  Fahmi did not expect any visa problems, but would contact the Embassy if the other committee members needed assistance getting visas for France.  Negotiations ------------ 4. (S) Throughout the meeting Fahmi raised issues related to the actual negotiations and his discussions with the Council of Ministers.  Specifically, Fahmi noted the importance of his knowing the entire "process" for preparing and delivering the yellow cake to a buyer. He emphasized that it is very important for Iraq that the marketable yellow cake and the material that could be considered waste be sold as a package.  DOE assured him that in its discussions with potential buyers it had stressed this point as important to Iraq and the US.  Fahmi asked several times about "insurance" for the material during transportation. Parks addressed this issue in general and requested that DOD provide a more detailed answer. (Comment: Fahmi has brought this issue up in the last two meetings as a question he needs to be able to answer for his government. End Comment.) Fahmi stressed that he needed to have his team attend the negotiations and be knowledgeable of the materials so as to get the best deal for Iraq.  Parks reiterated that DOE is ready to serve as the technical advisor for Iraq if the Minister chooses and also noted that he had provided a list of law firms with experience in nuclear contracts that could assist the GOI with the negotiations. Parks provided the name of an attorney working in the Embassy as an advisor on procurement who could assist in seeking necessary waivers to Iraqi contract rules. Fahmi thanked Parks for the assistance and stated that he intended to contact the lawyer next week. Fahmi indicated that he didn't view the waivers to the contract rules as a problem, since the Deputy Minister of Finance, a member of his Committee, is handling that issue. Parks suggested that the US would like to have a representative at the table during negotiations with the buyer in order to discuss transport issues as well as provide any other details.  Fahmi understood the US request but reserved making a decision to a later date. (Comment: We expect he will need to brief his Committee. End Comment.)  5. (C) Regarding the internal Iraqi decision process to reach a final decision authorizing the US Military to move the yellow cake out of country, MNF-I representative Col Henderson asked the Minister if the authorization to move the material would come from the COM.  Fahmi agreed that the final step is receiving an authorization letter from the COM; however, they have already agreed to the sale and only need the particulars of the deal so they can review, approve it and issue the letter. Henderson also provided Fahmi a schematic with key decision points in the GOI to receive COM authorization and Fahmi agreed to have his staff review it. Brigadier General Wendel commented that the work on site at Tuwaitha was proceeding very well, right on time and the key goal for us now is to take advantage of that good work and move the material from the site to the aircraft and to the buyer.  This would maximize the benefits to both the US and Iraq.  Next Steps  6.(C) Fahmi and Parks agreed to communicate soon regarding the schedule for next week. DOE will plan to have an experts level discussion early in the week regarding cost estimates and a meeting later in the week to address outstanding issues. DOE will also work to arrange a telephone call from the potential buyers to Minister Fahmi on Wednesday 30 Jan 2008. Fahmi agreed that the US should attend a meeting with the full Iraqi Committee at some point in the next two weeks in order to maximize transparency on both sides.  7. (SBU) List of Attendees GOI Raid Jahid Fahmi, Iraqi Minister of Science and Technology  USG Edgar Parks, Energy Attache Brigadier General Kevin Wendel,Commander,20th Support Command Robert Boudreau, DOE/NNSA Col James Henderson, MNF-I Albert Walgreen, DOE  BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000253  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2018 TAGS: EAID, ECON, EFIN SUBJECT: SITREP 1: JAN 28 FIRE AT CENTRAL BANK OF IRAQ  Classified By: Economic Counselor Todd Schwartz  1. (C) This situation report includes information available as of 1600 Baghdad local time.  Around 0100 on January 28 a massive fire broke out in the Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) main building that rendered it unusable.  The fire, the source of which has yet to be determined, gutted almost the entire building, to include: 1) ground floor Accounting, 2) mezzanine floor Loans and Agreements, 3) first floor Research and Statistics Department, and Investments Department, 4) second floor Administration and Information Technology (IT), and 5) third floor Governor's Office.  The rooftop interbank payment system main rack of servers appears to be unharmed. However, with no electricity to the building the electronic fund transfer (EFT) system is inoperable.  The currency vaults in the basement of the bank reportedly are intact, but underwater from firefighting efforts.  These are three separate vaults that hold gold, US dollars, and Iraqi dinar.  2. (C) Initial on-site reports from from the IT floor reveal the Iraqi Central Bank Accounting System (ICBS) was destroyed.  Central Bank employees normally back up this system everyday to a CDRom, but it is unclear if this backup was stored outside the bank at the time of the fire.  During the on-site visit to the IT floor, a hard drive drum to the ICBS was discovered.  All paper files were destroyed in the fire, which includes all CBI debt documentation, research files, reconciliation documentation for the net international reserves required under Iraq's Standby Arrangement (SBA) with the IMF, all paper documentation for accounting transactions, and all CBI administrative documentation.  3. (C) The CBI has an annex next to its main building that houses the Banking Supervision, Anti-money Laundering, Foreign Exchange, and Currency Departments.  This annex was not affected by the fire and CBI Governor Sinan Al-Shabibi and other senior management have moved their operations to this annex as of today.  Dr. Shabibi is determined to start basic operations tomorrow, including foreign exchange auctions.  This annex also houses some Iraqi dinar in a vault that has not been affected by the fire.  Rafidain Bank across the street also has offered additional space to temporarily house displaced CBI staff.  4. (C) Treasury Attache has encouraged Dr. Shabibi to reach out for any help the US Mission in Iraq can offer.  CBI already has reached out to CBI consultants for assistance, and CETI plans to convene the major donors involved with the CBI--USAID, US Treasury, DOD, IMF, WB, etc.--to meet with Dr. Shabibi to discuss and coordinate recovery assistance to the CBI.  COMMENT: The CBI has been a relative success story for Iraq by meeting IMF SBA targets at the same time helping to rein in inflation with calibrated monetary policy.  Quick, targeted international assistance will be critical to support the CBI. END COMMENT. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000254  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2023 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: SENIOR DAWA OFFICIAL ON LTSR, SADRIST "GHOSTS," AND ELECTIONS  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (C) Summary: Senior Dawa Party CoR member Haidar al-Abadi told us January 27 that CoR ratification of any long-term strategic relationship (LTSR) agreement will likely turn on provisions governing legal immunity and the U.S. military's ability to arrest and detain Iraqi citizens.  He claimed the "mood of the country" had changed over the past year and that most Iraqis do not want foreign troops in Iraq. Characterizing Sadrist Trend officials and CoR members as "ghosts" who operate in constant fear of attracting Moqtada al-Sadr's ire, he said the Trend is in decline but still highly dangerous.  The affable UK-educated economist said his "gut feeling" indicates Moqtada will extend his militia freeze order beyond its scheduled late-February expiration, and claimed that Sadr receives funding from the governments of Iran and (somewhat less probably) Saudi Arabia.  Insisting that Dawa's electoral prospects will benefit greatly from the increased popularity of Maliki and his government, Abadi said Dawa is currently considering whether to enter into alliances in upcoming provincial elections.  He expressed serious doubt about Sunni sincerity toward national reconciliation, and predicted the Kurds would stall CoR passage of a hydrocarbons bill while they created "facts on the ground" with new oil and gas production pursuant to unilateral agreements with foreign companies.  He urged greater USG focus on moving displaced families back into their own homes, stating that the window of opportunity for re-settlement is brief and failure to address the issue will create problems for generations to come.  End Summary.  Get LTSR Right Or Get Out -------------------------  2. (C) Abadi emphasized that CoR approval of any bilateral security agreement will depend on several key issues: legal immunity for American personnel, and the  U.S. military's ability to arrest and detain Iraqi citizens.  For example, while he does not expect the USG to allow Iraqi courts to try American soldiers in cases involving the death of Iraqi citizens, Abadi will insist that each such case be accounted for under a "transparent American legal process" that could be attended by GOI representatives.  Similarly, he said he will be looking for U.S. military arrest/detention procedures that require detainee handover to the GOI within a fixed and relatively brief period of time.  Relating that Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani has called the LTSR negotiation a "national issue" around which Shia, Sunnis and Kurds must join together, Abadi said the "mood of the country" had changed over the past year and that most Iraqis no longer want foreign troops in Iraq.  Abadi urged the USG to understand that "national pride" is at stake for Iraqis, adding that we should be mindful that each GOI official who will negotiate the agreement and every single CoR member who will consider ratification has already endured at least one "humiliation" at checkpoints manned by U.S. soldiers.  If you don't get key LTSR details right, he cautioned, "even the Kurds will not support you being here."  Sadrists In Decline But Deadly ------------------------------  3. (C) Abadi claimed Sadrist Trend popularity has plunged in the past year for three main reasons.  First, Iraq's Shia were appalled by the August 2007 Jaysh al-Mehdi (JAM) attack on sacred Shia shrines in Karbala during an important religious festival.  Second, a steep reduction of Sunni-Shia carnage and the British pullback in Basrah have deprived the Trend of favorite rabble-rousing issues over which they once postured as protectors of Shia masses.  Third, Sadrist CoR members and officials are ineffective when operating within the political process because they have little or no authority to act or speak on the Trend's behalf, and are terrified of missteps that might attract Sadr's ire and result in their death.  Abadi laughingly referred to Sadrist CoR colleagues as "ghosts" who are prone to frequent 180 degree position shifts due to conflicting instructions from Sadr and his top lieutenants, adding that the Shia United Iraqi Alliance (UIA) CoR coalition is very happy the Sadrists withdrew from UIA ranks in October 2007.  4. (C) He said Moqtada's leadership style depends almost entirely on his ability to create fear within his organization and among the Iraqi public.  Echoing concerns we have heard from senior ISCI sources, Abadi asserted that Sadr's religious study in Qom may confer on him a cloak of new-found religious legitimacy and authority among the Shia masses and thus increase the Sadrist threat.  Moqtada is also successful in casting competition with other Shia organizations such as ISCI and Dawa as a class struggle between his impoverished followers and ISCI/Dawa elites.  BAGHDAD 00000254  002 OF 002   Abadi says he cautioned fellow Dawa member Prime Minister Maliki to be careful in GOI crackdowns on Sadrists in south-central Iraq in order to take this issue away from the Sadrists.  Abadi's "gut feeling" tells him Moqtada will extend his JAM freeze order beyond its scheduled late-February expiration, but only if he feels firmly in control of the organization.  Abadi claimed Sadr receives funding from the Saudi and Iranian governments, but believes Tehran decided to rein in Moqtada last year after unrelated requests by Maliki, who complained about the impact of JAM operations on Iraq's security, and ISCI, which complained about JAM assassination of ISCI/Badr southern provincial governors.  Abadi asserted that Tehran wants the U.S. to stay in Iraq "in order to make you weak and keep you distracted."   Provincial Elections --------------------  5. (C) Claiming that the Maliki government has grown markedly in strength and public popularity over the past six months, Abadi predicted the Dawa Party would reap the benefits in upcoming but unscheduled provincial elections.  He said Dawa would take up the issue of electoral coalition formation on a province-by-province basis, adding that some sort of broad Shia alliance in Baghdad is likely.  He ruled out an electoral partnership with the Sadrist Trend, and prognosticated that the Sadrists are headed for a dismal showing on election day, even in Sadr City ("but only if there are free and fair elections, if not free and fair anything is possible").  He divulged that ISCI officials had voiced concerns to Dawa about Sadrist shenanigans within the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) and proposed the two parties work together to either clean out the IHEC or form some sort of new commission.  Abadi said Dawa has yet to conclude the IHEC is incapable of delivering a free and fair election and is studying the issue, adding that he told ISCI officials to keep their concerns about IHEC out of the media for fear that the Iraqi public may lose confidence in elections based on preliminary claims that may later be found to have no merit.  He said Dawa will press for an open-list electoral system.  Worried About IDPs, Skeptical of Sunni and Kurdish Agendas --------------------------------------------- -------------  6. (C) Chairman of the CoR Economic Committee, Abadi urged greater USG focus on moving displaced families back into their own homes, stating that the window of opportunity for re-settlement is brief and failure to address this issue now - when proof of home ownership and property value is still readily available - will make future resolution almost impossible, thus creating social tension and hatred that will persist for generations to come.  He expressed serious doubt about Sunni sincerity toward national reconciliation and the true aim of "Awakening" movements (he distinguished between "sincere" Anbar tribal movements and "opportunistic and Baathist ideological" movements such as the Islamic Army), but said his committee was working closely with the GOI on programs to employ or train Awakening members so that they would be absorbed into mainstream Iraqi society and "given hope for the future."  Abadi predicted the Kurds would delay CoR passage of a hydrocarbons bill while Masoud Barzani creates "facts on the ground" with new oil and gas production pursuant to unilateral agreements with foreign companies, and groused that the Kurds lose no opportunity to weaken the central government to strengthen their own interests. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000259  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: GOI MISHANDLES HIT AND RUN INCIDENT   Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia for reasons 1.4 ( b,d).  1. (C) Summary:  A January 15 traffic incident involving Iraqi Chief Justice Medhat,s Protective Security Detail (PSD) and an Iraqi Army (IA) checkpoint led to death and injury, with school children among the victims.  Iraqi authorities initially denied any involvement, claiming that a taxi had caused the accident, and only reluctantly admitted blame in the face of mounting press coverage and eyewitness accounts.  The GOI mishandling of this incident took place against a backdrop of continuing Iraqi sensitivities over PSD and government official accountability.  Medhat's PSD consists entirely of Iraqis; there are no ties between this accident and the USG.  End Summary.  Hit and Run -----------  2. (SBU) A January 15 Associated Press (AP) newswire reported that school children had been run over by a vehicle belonging to Judge Medhat's convoy during the panic that ensued after an exchange of gunfire between Judge Medhat's PSD and IA soldiers at a checkpoint.  Coalition Forces (CF) and an e-PRT member confirmed this account after speaking with eyewitnesses and family members of the victims.  3.  (SBU) According to witnesses, on January 15 at approximately 0750, a Ministry of Justice (MOJ) PSD convoy consisting of approximately eight vehicles was traveling west along Nassiri Street in the Karkh District of Baghdad.  IA checkpoint guards explained that this PSD drops off its principal regularly at a nearby television station and then proceeds west past Massara Elementary School.  One of the convoy vehicles appears to have lost control, possibly the result of excessive speed, and ran into a group of school children.  IA checkpoint guards attempted to detain the driver and a scuffle and gunfire broke out between the guards and the MOJ PSD.  4.  (SBU) CF and e-PRT team member arrived at the scene approximately four hours later and spoke with eyewitnesses, victims and their families.  In follow-up conversations, victims declared that they had yet to receive any formal apology from the GOI, although the Iraqi Police Investigator told CF that the Ministry of Education would send 250,000 Dinars (167 USD) to the families of the victims. Furthermore, interaction with the MOJ PSD reportedly left some victims' families feeling intimidated.  The Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) reports that one pedestrian was killed instantly and four were taken to hospital, where two reportedly died from their injuries.  The driver later turned himself in at an Iraqi Police station.  Background ----------  5. (SBU) Chief Justice Medhat al-Mahmoud is the head of the Iraqi judiciary.  He is the Chief Justice of the Federal Supreme Court, the Chief Judge of the Court of Cassation, and the President of the Higher Judicial Council (HJC).  It is in this last role that he is most important to the establishment of rule of law in Iraq, because the HJC manages the Iraqi judiciary's personnel, policies, and infrastructure (including nearly 100 courthouses).  Medhat has a core PSD group of 15, made up of personnel from MOI (Iraqi Police), HJC, and MOJ.  Nine members of this group have received some training from the US Marshal Service (USMS); the driver in question has not received this training.  This PSD protects Medhat at all times, including when he is inside the International Zone (IZ).  6.  Comment: (C) The initial incident appears to have been a tragic accident. However, the likely recklessness in driving, the PSD use of force against local law enforcement, and later public stonewalling by the MOJ highlight GOI shortcomings in their interactions with the local populace and attitude towards rule of law.  Locals feel that GOI convoys and PSD operate with wanton disregard for public safety. It remains unclear, for instance, why the PSD would travel with excessive speed on a route that regularly passes a school, especially after the principal has been dropped off.  When faced with a problem, GOI officials did not conduct themselves in the spirit of transparency and reconciliation, but rather by denying, obfuscating and even threatening.  It is worth noting that Karkh District,s central location has a high concentration of GOI institutions and officials; its citizens serve as a barometer of popular perception of the GOI.   The Embassy Rule of Law (ROL) Office and Baghdad PRT ROL report that Judge Medhat has since expressed great remorse for the incident and has offered reparations to the families of the victims via tribal mediation; e-PRT has not yet received confirmation of any compensation.  The e-PRT  BAGHDAD 00000259  002 OF 002   talked to one of the fathers of the victims who said he was offered an envelope of money this week, which he refused, but it was not through the district,s traditional leaders. Daily interactions such as this erode GOI credibility with constituents.  End Comment.  BUTENIS 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000261  SIPDIS  SBU SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAGR, PTER, POL, PINR SUBJECT: DHI QAR PRT: SHAYKH DECRIES ISLAMIC PARTIES, WANTS PRT HELP  1.  (SBU) The information in this cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly.  SIPDIS  2.  (SBU) This is a PRT Dhi Qar reporting cable.  3.  (SBU) Summary: On January 23 Dhi Qar IPAO met with Shaykh Alwan Hakim al-Hamaid.  Alwan claimed that his tribe has been ignored by the U.S. and the 'Islamic parties' that run the governorate.  A member of the Council of Southern Tribes, he asked for PRT project assistance and emphasized the need to provide employment opportunities for young men in his tribe. End Summary.  4.  (SBU) Shaykh Alwan said he was the official representative of the al-Rikab tribe and a member of the Council of Southern Tribes.  He claimed that the al-Rikab is one fo the bigger tribes in Iraq, stretching from Basrah to al-Qud.  The tribe, with approximately 250,000 members, is centered in Nasiriyah, with urban concentrations in Basrah and Baghdad.  5.  (SBU) Alwan complained that the political and economic situation in Dhi Qar is dominated by the 'Islamic parties,' including Da'wa, Office of the Matyr Sadr (OMS), and ISCI. He claimed that these parties have prevented the tribal shaykhs from participating in public life or benefiting from development projects.  According to Alwan, local politics are open to only shaykhs that "sign their life away to one of those parties" or enjoy close ties to Iran.  Alwan made it clear that he has no sympathy for any Islamic party and, as a result, finds himself without much of a public role.  6.  (SBU) Alwan claimed that the Rikab tribe has suffered from neglect under the current political system and in dire need of employment generation and economic development projects.  At present, he complained, the young men of the tribe have little or no employment opportunities and are provide a ready pool for recruiters from the Iraqi army and police as well as Islamic parties looking for additional gunmen.  He emphasized his desire to halt this phenomenon by providing better work opportunities.  7.  (SBU) Alwan asked for direct help from the PRT, saying that while the Rikab tribe has always supported the Americans it has received nothing in return. Alwan emphasized that the best projects for his region would be in the areas of agriculture, health and education.  High priorities include irrigation projects for tribal farmers, water purification plants, and assistance in wheat and date production. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000264  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2018 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: BATTLE FOR BAGHDAD PART 1: MAKING PROGRESS  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 4098 - NORTHWEST BAGHDAD RECONCILIATION      B. 07 BAGHDAD 3840 - SUNNI SUBURBS SEE SERVICES         SUPPORT      C. BAGHDAD 22 - SIGNS OF NORMALCY IN BAGHDAD      D. BAGHDAD 25 - SUNNI CHICKS IN BAGHDAD MARKETS      E. BAGHDAD 20 - DOURA MARKET REVIVES  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (C)  SUMMARY: As violence drops, community life rebounds, and markets revive, substantial improvements in the security environment in Baghdad have precipitated a shift in attitude among many Baghdad residents.  Locals seem buoyed by the fragile hope that the near future may be better than the recent past.  The speed and durability of progress toward a stable capital of Iraq depends in part on this popular perception of forward momentum, created largely by a decrease in violence.  Cables two and three in this three-part series on the battle for Baghdad will examine why recent progress, while significant and encouraging, still appears tenuous and reversible.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (U) This political section cable draws on information, analysis and anecdotes from post's local contacts, the Baghdad PRT, the Baghdad EPRTs, as well as MNF-I spot reports, surveys and polling.  ----------------------------------------- WHAT IS THE BATTLE FOR BAGHDAD ALL ABOUT? -----------------------------------------  3.  (C) Violence levels have become the measure and the hallmark of progress in the battle for Baghdad.  A variety of armed entities -- insurgents, terrorists, militias, foreign fighters, criminals -- still believe that they can achieve their aims by attacking civilians, security forces, government officials, infrastructure, services, professionals, and markets.  With so many different actors conducting attacks for various reasons, many Baghdad residents now appear to care less about the relative standing of one group vis-a-vis another and more about the level of violence itself.  4.  (C) For the Government of Iraq (GoI) and the Coalition, the battle for Baghdad has thus become an unremitting fight against the violent means employed by various individuals and groups seeking power in Iraq's capital city.  It is a battle against violence.  In order to win the battle, the GoI, with the support of the Coalition, must degrade the capacity of various violent groups to carry out attacks while simultaneously enhancing the allure of non-violent paths to power -- paths that run through Baghdad's new political institutions and its traditional social and economic structures.  There are signs of progress on all of these fronts as 2008 begins to unfold.  --------------------------------------- VIOLENCE IN BAGHDAD DROPS SIGNIFICANTLY ---------------------------------------  5.  (U) Violent attacks in Baghdad have decreased dramatically since June 2007.  According to MNF-I statistics, the province has experienced an 81 percent decline in total attacks on Coalition Forces (CF), Iraqi Security Forces (ISF), infrastructure, and civilians -- including attacks by improvised explosive devices (IEDs), mines, snipers, ambushes, grenades, other small arms fire, mortars, and rockets.  During the same period, MNF-I cites a 74 percent decline in the number of civilians killed, and a 60 percent decline in civilians wounded -- as part of an overall decrease of 62 percent in attacks on civilians.  MNF-I also reports a 78 percent drop in what MNF-I deems "ethno-sectarian" civilian deaths since June 2007, as well as a 56 percent decline in high-profile attacks.  --------------------------------------------- ---- INCHING TOWARD POLITICAL UNITY AT THE LOCAL LEVEL --------------------------------------------- ----  6.  (SBU) Some of this security progress has filtered into old and new institutions at the local level.  Cross-sectarian reconciliation meetings have taken place in some of Baghdad's strife-torn districts and qadas, including Rashid, 9 Nissan, Mansour, Mahmoudiya, Taji, and Abu Ghraib.  In some areas, regular reconciliation events have assumed a quasi-institutional status as a peaceful mechanism for cross-sectarian dialogue and political jockeying (reftel A). Many tribal leaders -- Sunni and Shia -- have mobilized participation in these engagements, and encouraged membership in "Concerned Local Citizen" groups that bolster neighborhood protection.  Leaders from Taji, Mada'in and Mahmoudiya qadas  BAGHDAD 00000264  002 OF 002   met with Directors General from service Ministries in the first meetings of the Rural Joint Planning Commission, held between November and January; these meetings represent a notable stride forward in efforts by the Coalition and Baghdad PRT to connect the Shia-dominated central government to the predominantly Sunni outlying areas of Baghdad province (reftel B).  PRToffs have also noted smaller signs of unity in Baghdad's neighborhoods.  Locals report, for instance, an increase in the number of inter-marriages -- in mid-December, 70 inter-sectarian couples participated in a mass public wedding in Baghdad.  --------------------------------------------- - PARTYING LIKE IT'S 2008 -- SOCIAL LIFE REVIVES --------------------------------------------- -  7.  (SBU) Baghdad residents have resumed what they describe as "normal" public outings and social engagements much more frequently than they did as recently as September 2007 (reftel C).  Interviews, surveys and polls reveal that Baghdad residents now feel far safer in their neighborhoods and homes than they did before the troop surge in Baghdad. "Exactly this time last year, I received a death threat," a resident of the area along Haifa Street told poloff. Compared to a year ago, he said, "Haifa Street is like heaven."  Families have also demonstrated their confidence in Baghdad's security by venturing out in increasingly large numbers to visit public places, such as parks and the city zoo.  Crowds bustle in traditional urban centers, including Abu Nuwas Street in Rusafa and the upscale markets of Karada.  Local residents reported that Eid celebrations felt freer and safer than did the same celebrations last year.  Some recent public events have even continued after dark, an extremely uncommon practice which did not occur even after the national soccer team won the Asia Cup on July 29, 2007. Many Baghdadis celebrated New Year's Eve, for instance, at midnight -- in public.  Delighted to be driving at night, one contact called poloff from his car to report that he was seeing his dashboard lights "for the first time in two years."  --------------------------------------------- ------- MORE TO BUY, MORE TO SPEND -- BAGHDAD MARKETS REVIVE --------------------------------------------- -------  8.  (SBU) Night driving is one among several factors contributing to a gradual increase in economic activity in Baghdad, according to post, PRT, and EPRT interlocutors. Since they feel safer traveling after dark, local workers claim that productivity has increased because workload, instead of daylight hours, dictates the amount of time they spend at the office.  They can also travel to restaurants and shops that have recently managed to remain open in the evening.  This increasing freedom of movement has enabled producers to transport more goods and services to their consumers.  There are signs that Baghdad's rural agricultural centers have benefited from this improvement by sending more produce to large urban markets (reftel D).  As goods and customers arrive in increasing numbers, both traditional and contemporary shopping centers have palpably revived throughout Baghdad province (reftel E).  Militias reportedly have a reduced presence in and around these markets, and the number of mass casualty attacks on shopping areas has significantly decreased.  Shoppers appear to have more disposable income than previously, in large part because, according to residents, a gradual increase in "hours of power" from the national electrical grid has reduced the cost of operating their residential generators -- a major expense.  ----------------------------- BUT THE VIOLENCE CONTINUES... -----------------------------  9. (SBU) Despite this substantial and encouraging progress, high levels of violence still plague the residents of Baghdad.  Insurgents, Al Qaeda in Iraq, and Shia militias are still carrying out attacks against the GoI, the Iraqi people, and Coalition Forces.  Septels examine the potential for a slowing or reversal of recent improvements in the security environment. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000265  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PINS, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: BATTLE FOR BAGHDAD PART 2: IT'S NOT OVER  REF: BAGHDAD 264 - BATTLE FOR BAGHDAD: MAKING PROGRESS  BAGHDAD 00000265  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b,d).  1.  (C) SUMMARY: Despite a substantially improved security environment in Baghdad, local residents continue to stress that the battle for Baghdad is not yet won.  Most importantly, they assert that the Government of Iraq (GoI) and the Coalition have not achieved irreversible momentum toward the establishment of a stable and secure capital city in Iraq.  Baghdad residents regularly express fear that the remarkable recent military progress may slow or even reverse because a government that many describe as weak, ineffective, and corrupt is still struggling to demonstrate the competence and impartiality required to earn broad popular support.  In fact, many Baghdad residents do not believe the GoI is winning the battle for Baghdad; they believe that the Coalition is winning it.  In surveys, interviews, spot reports and meetings with poloffs, PRToffs, and EPRToffs, Baghdad residents often credit Coalition Forces (CF) rather than Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) for security gains, and credit the USG rather than the GoI for economic development. This lack of public confidence, rooted in a reality of persistent GoI under performance, is impeding forward momentum.  Cable three in this three-part series on the battle for Baghdad will examine crucial steps that the GoI can take in order to sustain and accelerate hard-won gains. END SUMMARY.  2.  (U) This political section cable draws on information, analysis and anecdotes from post's local contacts, the Baghdad PRT, the Baghdad EPRTs, as well as MNF-I spot reports, surveys and polling.  ---------------------------------------- THE ENEMY IS STILL WAGING WAR IN BAGHDAD ----------------------------------------  3.  (C) Despite a sharp decline in attacks (reftel A - part one), the violence in Baghdad still far exceeds violence in the vast majority of world capitals, both in its political nature and its quantifiable extent.  The enemies of Iraq -- including Al Qaeda in Iraq (AQI), insurgents, militias, government officials who support these groups, and criminals who profit from them -- continue to wage war against the GoI, the Iraqi people, and Coalition Forces.  Sectarian and politically-motivated displacements, murders, and kidnapping still plague the citizens of Baghdad.  Many of the militants conducting violent attacks are members of organized entities with an explicit political agenda to undermine or overthrow the GoI, and with sufficient popular support -- explicit or tacit -- to persist in killing, wounding, threatening, and displacing civilians and security forces in Baghdad.  Most of these violent attacks still do not make the local or international news, as they remain commonplace in Baghdad; post learns about many unreported acts of violence through EPRToffs and local contacts.  Nor do many attacks receive attention from the Iraqi Security Forces, who lack either the will or the capacity to investigate the majority of violent incidents that occur in Baghdad.  --------------------------------------------- ---- ENDURING IMPACT OF VIOLENCE SLOWS PROGRESS TOWARD UNITY --------------------------------------------- ----  4. (S) Although the number of attacks and displacements has trended significantly downward since June, the enduring reality and perception of danger continue to touch every neighborhood and hundreds of thousands of families in Baghdad.  The scale and extent of the past violence, despite its recent lull, continues to diminish the willingness of many citizens to risk trusting individual members of the groups they blame for the pain and loss they have experienced.  Among the estimated total of over 7,000 civilians killed in Baghdad between February and November 2007, MNF-I analysts judge that more than 4,100 of those deaths resulted from ethno-sectarian conflict.  Violent attacks wounded about 4,800 civilians in Baghdad during the same period.  5.  (C) Buried among the statistics and stories about on-going violence is its psychological impact on Baghdad's population.  A widespread paranoia about kidnapping still prevents many residents from venturing far from home, and continues to instill fear among those who move around Baghdad that the wrong dress, comportment, or name might increase their vulnerability to abduction.  This phobia is rooted in reality: among all the major declining attack statistics in Baghdad, kidnapping has diminished at the slowest rate -- an 18 percent decrease between June and December, according to MNF-I statistics.  Grappling with the daily terror of possible abduction, a resident of Zayuna neighborhood in 9  BAGHDAD 00000265  002.2 OF 003   Nissan district recently told poloff, "I want to drive to work -- a 20-minute trip -- without fear.  Baghdad is not there yet."  (NOTE: On January 24, the Iraqi Ministry of Health publicly announced their estimate that approximately one third of the Iraqi population suffers from psychological trauma as a result of violence.  END NOTE.)  ------------------------------------------- MOBILITY STILL LIMITED, FOSTERING SECTARIAN LOCAL INSTITUTIONS -------------------------------------------  6.  (C) When fear began impeding movement in Baghdad, paralysis paradoxically became a stimulus for entrepreneurs to create locally-rooted, single-sect institutions -- both public and private.  Hospitals, clinics, pharmacies, banks, restaurants, and even mechanics in various Baghdad neighborhoods have reportedly begun to serve, by design or by accident, only one major sect or the other.  These institutions parallel Baghdad's sect-based mosques, many of which have ceased functioning in neighborhoods where the sect that they represent happens to be in the minority.  For instance, on the Shia-dominated eastern side of Baghdad -- in Karada, Rusafa, and 9 Nissan -- 28 of 60 Sunni mosques remain closed.  These mosques do not serve their communities because the Sunni population has been displaced, or because the remaining Sunnis fear their mosques may be the target of Shia militias or AQI.  7.  (S) As a result of these sectarian dynamics, Baghdad has witnessed the creation of many homogenous neighborhoods separated from one another by de facto "green lines." Residents who seek to venture far from home must first master their sectarian geography well enough to identify which neighborhoods remain dangerous to which groups.  When asked if the battle is over in Baghdad, one local replied, "No -- I can't go everywhere in Baghdad -- so it's not over."  Indeed, when asked if Baghdad is safer now than it was six or even three months ago, Baghdad residents invariably say yes; but when asked if Baghdad is safe and secure, the same locals, without exception, say no.  Many cite the continuing restrictions on their freedom of movement that persist despite security gains as one of the most significant indicators that Iraq's enemies continue to divide Baghdad. Mobility has significantly improved, but fear continues to confine many Baghdadis to discrete areas of the province.  --------------------------------------------- --- CITY RESIDENTS WORRY THAT INCOMPETENT, SECTARIAN GOI AND ISF COULD SLOW SURGE MOMENTUM --------------------------------------------- ---  8.  (C) When asked what sort of trends or events might slow or reverse recent security gains, Baghdad interlocutors most frequently cite the withdrawal of Coalition Forces.  Local interlocutors do not/not appear to feel anxiety about the coming Coalition drawdown due to any affection for foreign soldiers; rather, Iraqi citizens of all sects and faiths, across Baghdad province, express contempt for the failings they perceive in their own government and security forces. Local Iraqi concerns about their government's performance provide a sobering perspective on the capacity of Iraqi political leaders to earn and sustain the confidence of constituents as they assume a larger role in 2008.  A denizen of Sadr City summarized for poloff a common local view of the security situation: "It is very fragile.  It seems the Americans are responsible for a lot of the progress.  But they didn't defeat Al Qaeda.  They didn't defeat JAM."  If Coalition Forces withdraw, he said, "the extremists will return."  9.  (C) In province-wide spot reports, interviews and meetings with post and PRTs, locals consistently describe several reasons for the success of the Baghdad Security Plan: The presence of more American troops; the decision by local Sunni leaders to turn against AQI and form Concerned Local Citizen (CLC) groups; CF detention of high-level JAM leaders; Muqtadr Al Sadr's 'freeze' order instructing JAM to halt attacks for six months; joint CF-ISF patrols; and increased understanding of local culture among CF soldiers.  Locals do not cite ISF effectiveness as a major factor in the improvement of security in Baghdad.  In fact, most of post's local interlocutors say that they believe CF perform in a more professional and non-sectarian manner than do their own compatriots in the ISF.  (NOTE: Even as residents continue to register these complaints about ISF, MNF-I polls conducted in Baghdad with over 5,000 respondents (CSI, Corps, and CorpsI polls) signal a strong upward trend since September 2007 in overall public trust of the Iraqi Army and the Iraqi Police. END NOTE.)  10.  (C) Local residents in Baghdad, where the Coalition and the GoI have concentrated the highest troop levels, sometimes  BAGHDAD 00000265  003 OF 003   credit Coalition Forces with the successes of high-performing units in the Iraqi Security Forces.  They often report, for example, that guards at Baghdad's ubiquitous checkpoints have performed more professionally thanks to continuous CF monitoring.  Some Sunnis who responded favorably to a December survey about the Coalition role in joint security patrols praised Coalition Forces for "keep(ing) terrorists and the Iraqi Security Forces away from them (the Sunnis)." Some EPRT team leaders have also perceived the crucial stabilizing role that CF play in Baghdad's strife-torn communities.  The EPRT covering Rashid district described the strategically significant neighborhood of Saydiyah as a stark example of senior, sectarian officials in the GoI manipulating one branch of the ISF -- the National Police -- for partisan gains.  Only the presence of Coalition Forces has thus far stabilized a delicate balance in Saydiyah.  11.  (C) Locals express particular contempt for national leaders and members of the Council of Representatives (CoR), but they also reserve a measure of bile for provincial and local leaders.  Many locals describe the national government as distant, sectarian, corrupt, self-serving and ineffective; the provincial/citywide government as party-dominated, sectarian, and incapable of delivering essential services; and local government as militia-controlled or invisible. Again, the Coalition sometimes benefits from popular disaffection with Iraqi leaders: A resident of Rusafa recently noted, "People credit Americans for the improvements in their communities -- they think our political leaders won't think of the people.  They (CoR members) went on the Hajj instead of taking care of critical issues."  12.  (C) NOTE: Some local interlocutors describe rampant criticism of public officials as a product of Iraqis' extremely high expectations of their government, which many believe has the duty and potential to solve all public problems.  Locals have described their delight, since 2003, at the unprecedented opportunity to rail against the government's failures to fulfill all of their needs.  Whereas it remains risky to criticize local militant leaders, locals enjoy complaining about the GoI with impunity.  END NOTE. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000266  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2018 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PINS, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: BATTLE FOR BAGHDAD PART 3: KEEPING MOMENTUM  REF: A. BAGHDAD 264 - BATTLE FOR BAGHDAD PART 1: MAKING         PROGRESS      B. BAGHDAD 265 - BATTLE FOR BAGHDAD PART 2: IT'S         NOT OVER      C. 07 BAGHDAD 3531 - SURGE IMPROVES SECURITY      D. 07 BAGHDAD 3540 - EXPLOITING SURGE THROUGH         SERVICES      E. 07 BAGHDAD 3545 - BUILDING GOI CAPACITY TO         DELIVER SERVICES      F. 07 BAGHDAD 3885 - DISPLACED PERSONS RETURNING HOME      G. BAGHDAD 197 - IOM REPORTS ON IRAQI IDPS  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b,d).  1.  (C) SUMMARY: Many Baghdad residents have warned Mission officers that the enemies of Iraq may regain the initiative in Baghdad if the Government of Iraq (GoI) fails to develop and implement coherent policies for a number of key issues. These issues include the future of Concerned Local Citizen groups; the assassinations of mid-level GoI officials; high unemployment; Muqtadr Al-Sadr's "freeze" order which halted Jaysh Al-Mahdi (JAM) attacks; the equity, effectiveness, and security of service delivery; and the possibility that displaced persons may return to Baghdad in large numbers. Despite a raft of efforts and initiatives to support GoI policy formation and implementation in these areas, the Coalition is pressing against the limits of its ability to shape political outcomes.  Unless the Shia-led Iraqi Security Forces can build a critical mass of public trust, they will struggle to succeed as Coalition Forces draw down.  Coalition efforts will continue and expand, but ultimately Baghdad's largest sect must decide the fate of Iraq's capital -- Sunnis can prolong the battle for Baghdad, but only the Shia can end it.  This cable is the third in a three-part series on the status of the battle for Baghdad (reftels A and B).  END SUMMARY.  2.  (U) This political section cable draws on information, analysis and anecdotes from post's local contacts, the Baghdad PRT, the Baghdad EPRTs, as well as MNF-I spot reports, surveys and polling.  --------------------------------------------- --------- GOI MISMANAGEMENT OF CLCs COULD REVERSE SECURITY GAINS --------------------------------------------- ---------  3.  (C) The future of the approximately 27,000 (mainly Sunni) men who have joined Concerned Local Citizen groups figures high among anxieties expressed by Baghdadis.  Sunni Sheikhs and local leaders worry that the GoI will not permit a sufficient number of CLCs to enter the ISF or other government employment; they also worry that if large numbers of CLCs do enter the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF), the GoI will treat them as second class citizens, by paying them a lower wage than their Shia counterparts and refusing to allow them to serve in their own Sunni or mixed communities.  Some Sunni residents have also begun to accuse the GoI of tacitly supporting the recent assassinations of CLC leaders, merely by failing to prevent them.  For their part, Shia leaders -- at the local and national level -- worry that the CLCs contain, at worst, unreformed insurgents and AQI members and, at best, former insurgents and terrorists susceptible to recidivism if the GoI does not address their needs, most notably for employment.  4.  (C) Residents of all sects fear that the CLCs possess the power, if they turn against the GoI, to escalate the violence in Baghdad and reverse recent security gains.  Locals in the Diyala neighborhood of 9 Nissan (aka New Baghdad) district and the Salman Pak area in Mada'in qada have already expressed concern about the loyalty of CLCs in their area, and tensions have flared between CLCs and the ISF in the contentious neighborhoods of Ameriya and Doura.  --------------------------------------------- --- ASSASSINATIONS OF MID-LEVEL OFFICIALS HAMPER GOI --------------------------------------------- ---  5.  (S) A slow, grinding campaign of terror against mid-level officials and technocrats in Baghdad continues to hamper the effectiveness of the GoI by providing key managers a powerful reason to avoid implementing measures to improve efficiency or reduce corruption.  Baghdad's mid-ranking officials -- at the national, provincial, and local level -- continue to suffer from assassinations and threats at a rising rate, even as the number of all other violent attacks trends downward, according to MNF-I intel analysts.  Since April 2006, MNF-I reports that over 900 assassination "events" have targeted GoI officials -- including assassinations, kidnappings, attempted assassinations, and credible threats of assassination.  The majority of those targeted since April 2006 -- 63 percent -- are mid-level officials and technocrats.  Militants target officials in the middle ranks  BAGHDAD 00000266  002 OF 004   far more often than they do higher-level officials, who were victims in only 8 percent of the 900 reported events.  And Baghdad officials have suffered more attacks than have officials in the rest of Iraq's provinces put together, enduring 58 percent of all reported attacks against GoI officials nationwide since April 2006.  --------------------------------------------- -------- AN END TO THE SADR 'FREEZE' COULD CAUSE MAJOR SETBACK --------------------------------------------- --------  6.  (S) When asked what missteps Shia groups might take that could "re-radicalize" Sunni groups, Sunnis in Baghdad often refer to a renewed campaign of marauding attacks orchestrated by JAM.  The JAM freeze, by all local accounts, has made a major contribution to stability in Baghdad.  When asked what events might trigger the end of the freeze, locals mentioned the explosion by AQI of a large vehicle-born improvised explosive device (VBIED) in Sadr City, and they point to the potential for conflicts between JAM and Badr to spiral out of control in Karbala, Najaf, or other southern cities.  They also referred to the perception common among Sadrists that CF continue to kill and detain legitimate JAM members.  JAM and the Sadrists -- through their spokesmen and through Shia imams in mosques in JAM-controlled areas of Baghdad -- continually express concern that the Coalition has gone too far in its support of CLCs.  As one resident of Sadr City told poloff, "Some feel the U.S. is supporting mainly Sunni awakenings."  (NOTE: MNF-I intel analysts report that JAM Special Groups have begun targeting CLC leaders, paralleling the efforts of AQI.  END NOTE.)  7.  (C) Baghdadis from all sects fear the end of the freeze. Many look to the GoI to find a way to encourage Muqtadr Al-Sadr to continue and prolong his ceasefire, but feel that Prime Minister Maliki has not made any concerted public effort to do so.  Fairly or unfairly, many locals believe that Maliki is passively awaiting Sadr's decision, despite the grave consequences for Iraq's capital -- and the country as a whole -- if Sadr ends his freeze.  --------------------------------------------- - UNEMPLOYMENT STILL PROVIDES A POOL OF RECRUITS FOR MILITANTS --------------------------------------------- -  8.  (C) Many of Baghdad's denizens express anxiety about how high unemployment rates contribute to sectarian violence.  In recent meetings and surveys, they have emphasized three main economic problems -- over-reliance on fuels, high unemployment rates, and rising inflation -- but mainly worry that if legitimate enterprises do not find employment for restless young men, than the extremists will fill the gap. They also report that much of the increase in economic activity stems from the re-opening of shops that had closed down due to the violence.  According to post's local contacts, few new shops are opening.  People are also clamoring for more manufacturing and large-scale businesses -- and expecting the government to provide these.  9.  (C) At the same time, inflation has reportedly affected rent, food, and fuel prices.  Price increases suggest a resurgence of economic activity, but some Baghdadis believe excessive transportation costs have also contributed; the security situation still makes it expensive and risky to transport goods through some areas.  Locals also claim that Baghdad's limited economic recovery has been patchy so far, with some areas remaining stagnant, particularly Sunni and mixed neighborhoods such as the Jihad neighborhood of west Rashid district; Zafaraniya and Diyala neighborhoods of eastern Karada district; and the Ameriya and Ghazaliya neighborhoods of Mansour district.  Even residents in areas with historically wealthy and educated populations, such as Palestine Street, complain of a lack of jobs and low pay.  --------------------------------------------- ------- GOI FAILURE TO DELIVER AND SECURE ESSENTIAL SERVICES ALIENATES ALL CONSTITUENTS, BUT ESPECIALLY SUNNIS --------------------------------------------- -------  10.  (C) The GoI's continuing inability to provide essential services to all of Baghdad's neighborhoods undermines its popular support and allows its illegitimate rivals -- local militants -- to sustain some popular legitimacy and to accrue much-needed revenue (reftels C - E).  When asked what matters most to Baghdadis, a resident from 9 Nissan district told poloff, "All the time we're thinking about the same things -- fuel, power, water -- easy things, silly things."  Services including trash collection, sewers, water, and electricity are often markedly inferior in Sunni or mixed neighborhoods such as Adhamiya, southern Ghazaliya, Ameriya, Ghadier, Diyala, Qadria, and Zafaraniya; and in qadas such as Taji and Abu Ghraib.  BAGHDAD 00000266  003 OF 004    11.  (C) Inside the Zafaraniyah neighborhood, locals report a startling contrast between the services provided to a block (Mulhalla 953) that is predominantly Sunni, and those provided to the adjacent block (Mulhalla 954), which is predominantly Shia.  The Sunni block lacks a working sewer, potable water, water pressure, and daily trash pick up.  In the adjacent Shia block, the sewer works, the pump works, the water is potable, and the Amanat collects trash every day. (NOTE: Both blocks receive about the same amount of electricity.  END NOTE.)  Many Sunni and Shia residents of Baghdad report that such blatant inequalities may, cumulatively over time, precipitate a violent backlash against the GoI.  --------------------------------------------- ----- WAVE OF RETURNING IDPs COULD CRASH INTO SOME AREAS --------------------------------------------- -----  12.  (C) Internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees have begun returning to Baghdad in small numbers, raising alarm among some locals and GoI officials that an increasing rate of return could disrupt many Baghdad neighborhoods which only recently stabilized (reftels F and G).  According to local sources, mostly Shia have thus far returned, and they have returned mostly to Shia-dominated areas.  Fewer Sunni have returned, and few returnees appear to have reclaimed their homes in mixed areas.  Nonetheless, if the security situation continues to improve, the number of returnees may surge, and so might the rate of return.  The GoI, however, lacks a comprehensive policy to prevent the conflicts that might erupt following a large and rapid influx of IDPs and refugees.  GoI policy must clarify and communicate the role of the ISF in resolving local disputes, many of which will inevitably turn violent, and the legal alternatives available for people who find squatters in their homes -- and for those who "sold" their homes under duress.  -------------------------------------------- COALITION AS "ADVISOR" AND "PROD" IN BAGHDAD --------------------------------------------  13.  (C) Coalition efforts are under way to persuade, prod, and advise GoI officials to address each of the trends and potential events described above that might impede forward momentum in Baghdad.  With regard to protecting GoI mid-level officials, officers in MNF-I Strategic Operations, with input from the Embassy's political, economic, and political-military sections, are working to educate, support, and enhance GoI efforts to protect their own officials. Embassy, the Baghdad PRT, and MNF-I are engaging energetically with the GoI -- at various levels -- to help Iraqi officials improve service delivery, and to devise plans to address the employment of CLCs and the possible return of large numbers of IDPs and refugees.  As to the Sadr freeze order, Embassy, PRTs, EPRTs and MNF-I continue to engage Sadrists at the local level, and at every opportunity, to persuade them to seek power through political engagement instead of violent intimidation.  With full recognition that the Iraqi government and private sector will lead and sustain economic development in their own country, the PRT and EPRTs, in close cooperation with Mission elements including USAID, help to increase employment opportunities by providing short-term employment, micro-grants, training, and other forms of economic stimulus throughout Baghdad, while the Brinkley Task Force works to revive major State-Owned Enterprises and the senior consultants and advisors at ITAO work every day to build GoI capacity at the ministry level. Inter-agency anti-corruption efforts are also pressing forward.  14.  (C) Training, monitoring, and collaboration with Iraqi Security Forces also continue apace.  The number of violent attacks in Baghdad could not have decreased so substantially and so quickly without some successful efforts and sacrifices by Iraqi Security Forces.  Many residents, however, perceive and experience -- and report -- that Iraqi Security Forces continue to behave in a blatantly sectarian manner.  Some sectarian behavior remains explicit and clearly perceptible, but the Coalition often misses more nuanced gestures of discrimination and disrespect that take place, for instance, at checkpoints -- such as the extortion of small bribes, unprofessional inspections of vehicles, and veiled threats. Among the many problems cited by locals, popular perceptions of ISF partiality do more to undermine trust in the ISF than possibly any other factor.  Unless they can build and maintain a critical mass of public trust, ISF will struggle to succeed as Coalition Forces draw down.  Sectarian prejudice by the Iraqi Security Forces may well prove the biggest hurdle for the GoI as it seeks to win over the population it is charged to secure.  --------------------------------------------- ------------  BAGHDAD 00000266  004 OF 004   BAGHDAD'S SUNNIS LOST THE WAR, BUT CAN PROLONG THE BATTLE --------------------------------------------- ------------  15.  (C) As Coalition Forces draw down in 2008, the two largest sects in Baghdad will have an even freer hand in shaping the fate of Iraq's capital.  The Sunni minority will not likely win back their pre-war stranglehold on Baghdad's institutions.  While the Sunnis have lost the war, they can still prolong the battle for political and security control of Baghdad.  If a large number of tribal and local leaders turn the CLC groups they lead against ISF and CF, or re-forge alliances with AQI or irreconcilable insurgent cells, they can substantially prolong the bloodshed in Baghdad.  Sunni groups can also play a spoiler role in Baghdad's political institutions.  This role could entail boycotting Baghdad's next provincial elections, and generally playing the victim instead of figuring out how to make the most of the new Sunni reality in Iraq, which is characterized by a level of political influence that more closely aligns to their population and resources.  (NOTE: In a recent example of the intransigence that still characterizes the political approach of many Sunni leaders in Baghdad, a group of Sheikhs claiming to represent CLC leaders from around Baghdad province told poloff January 24 that Sunnis, not Shia, represent the majority of Iraq's population; they also said that they would not fully engage in the political process until the Council of Representatives re-writes the Constitution.  END NOTE.)  --------------------------------------------- ----------- CONCLUSION: ONLY THE SHIA CAN END THE BATTLE FOR BAGHDAD --------------------------------------------- -----------  16.  (C) While Sunnis can prolong the battle for Baghdad, only Baghdad's Shia majority has the power to end it.  Three Shia political parties -- Dawa, Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq (ISCI), and the Sadrists -- lead the central government and Baghdad's major provincial and city institutions, including the Governor's office, the Provincial Council, and the Amanat.  They also dominate the Iraqi Security Forces in Baghdad.  Despite their powerful position, these groups have not yet communicated to members of the Sunni minority in Baghdad -- through policies, services support, hiring practices, consultations, or rhetoric -- that they are welcome to play a substantial role in the public institutions of a Shia-dominated city, and that Sunnis can benefit more substantially from participation in the political process than from violent opposition to it.  17.  (C) Barring a series of statements and actions that clearly convey this message, a best case scenario in 2008 would involve a political tussle between the Sadrists and ISCI to appeal to Sunni "swing" voters in Baghdad -- and to voters in other minority groups, such as the Fayli Kurds, Assyrians, and Yezidis -- for support in provincial elections.  In this scenario, ISCI and the Sadrists would recognize that they can most effectively control Baghdad's provincial and municipal institutions by attracting the votes of minority groups.  Ideally, a Shia party seeking to appeal to minority voters might even propose a plan to police and, ultimately, disband Shia militias.  18.  (C) For the Shia parties to adopt such an approach, they must first overcome the paranoia and insecurity that have held back Baghdad's Shia leaders in the past.  In the worst case scenario, Shia political parties will tighten their sect's grip on the levers of power in Baghdad, by means both legal and illegal, ensuring not necessarily that their sect remains predominant, but that their sect-based political parties do so.  Most likely, the Shia political parties, and the officials who owe their allegiance to these parties, will not actively court or engage the Sunni population during 2008.  They appear set to continue, however, to improve the coordination, professionalism and discipline of the Shia-dominated service ministries and security forces.  These actions, of course, ultimately benefit Baghdad's Shia and Sunni populations, but may not prove sufficient to create the widespread local support required for the GoI to end the violent conflict plaguing Iraq's capital city. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000267  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/26/2017 TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PREL, PTER, PHUM, SY, IZ SUBJECT: OPERATIONS IN MOSUL DOMINATE JANUARY 27 MCNS DISCUSSIONS;  PRISONS CONDITIONS, AIRPORT SECURITY, AND MOSUL DAM ALSO DISCUSSED  REF: A. A) BAGHDAD 00244      B. B) BAGHDAD 00175  Classified By: CDA Patricia Butenis for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  Summary -------  1. (S REL MNF-I) Following brief remarks from MOD on Army escorts for fuel deliveries, Prime Minister Maliki moved the discussion from the scheduled topics to the situation in Ninewa province, especially in Mosul (ref. A).  MOD painted a picture of disorganized security forces in Mosul and outlined steps taken and to be taken to confront terrorists there.  He emphasized the need for a centralized command to coordinate efforts to re-establish complete control of Mosul and defeat the terrorists in what he called the final battlefield.  The MCNS agreed that a Crisis Action Cell (CAC) meeting, led by the PM, should be convened in a few days in Mosul to formulate a coordinated response.  (Note:  following the meeting, it was agreed that the meeting in Mosul will be this Saturday, February 2. End Note.)  On other topics, the MOJ reported on steps to be taken to improve prison conditions and the National Security Advisor (NSA) outlined issues of airport security at the Baghdad International Airport (BIAP) and Mosul's airport.  Regarding threats to the Mosul Dam, the PM reminded the MCNS not to be alarmist.  End Summary.  Confronting Mosul's Terrorist -----------------------------  2. (S REL MNF-I) Responding to the PM's request, MOD Abdul Qadr presented a short video clip of the destruction in Mosul resulting from last week,s bomb attacks.  Somewhat animated, he characterized the situation as out of control, with many different forces at work and no proper coordination and deployment of Iraqi Security Forces (ISF).  He underlined the need for full support to the Ninewa Operations Command commander who would have the authority over all Iraqi security forces in the city.  He said the security forces patrol the streets during the day, but at night the streets are controlled by terrorists and insurgent forces.  He admitted that the Ninewa Operations Command had improved in the last few days, but called for the replacement of the MOI's Provincial Director of Police and commander of the Iraqi Army's 2nd Division.  Maliki noted that the people's lack of confidence in the security forces had to be reversed and that there were areas of Ninewa outside the city of Mosul that also were not secured.  Success requires restoring the people's confidence in the ISF, he added.  He also suggested the use of anti-terrorism forces and air support.  3. (S REL MNF-I) MNF-I Commanding General (CG) David Petraeus concurred with most of MOD's assessment, noting that MNF-I was supporting MOD's initial response.  In particular, additional US Special Operation Forces and a mechanized battalion had been deployed to Mosul from Baghdad as part of the immediate response.  He underlined the importance of consulting with the Commander of the Ninewa Operational Command, General Riyahd, to determine what additional resources he needed.  Responding to the PM, he said that the shift of forces from Baghdad to Mosul must be carefully considered before being undertaken as those of the 2 IA Division had already returned to Mosul. He also agreed with the PM that areas of Ninewa outside of Mosul were not secured, noting supply lines for terrorists through Ninewa must be eliminated.  4. (S REL MNF-I) The PM suggested that a CAC meet in Ninewa so that it could get a first-hand assessment and coordinate with local commanders in planning a response to terrorist activity there.  The CG concurred.  Chief of Armed Forces General Babakir Shawkt noted that the battle in Ninewa would likely be the last battle with Al Qaeda.  He said the second Division of the IA was not weak, but had been under extreme pressure.  Its commander was not to blame, he added.  MOD disagreed, citing again the need for a good commander.  CG reminded the group of the importance of sending help now to ISF in Mosul and consulting with Gen. Riyahd to identify his needs.  5. (S REL MNF-I) NSA Muwaffaq Rubaie underlined the importance of good intelligence to support operations.  He called for a command center to coordinate the intelligence of military and civilian services to unify targeting for the ISF.  Iraqi National Intelligence Service (INIS) agreed  BAGHDAD 00000267  002 OF 003   with the need for an intelligence coordination center. Rubaie also noted the need for increased coordination with the KRG - some areas of responsibility in the north overlap.  He bemoaned the absenteeism in MOI forces in Mosul, stating that only 15 percent showed up for work while the rest collected a salary that ended in the hands of the terrorists.  The Minister of State for National Security, Shirwan al-Waeli, stressed the need for the local population to rise up against the terrorists. He also suggested that many former police and soldiers could be brought into the ISF or formed into popular groups like in Anbar province to replace those not doing their jobs.  The CG noted that creating such forces would take money. PM Maliki said funding was not an issue - funds will be made available.  The Minister of Justice (MOJ) agreed with the need to get rid of those policemen not doing their job and to recruit replacements.  6. (S REL MNF-I) The Deputy Director of INIS summarized the discussion, stressing the need for coordination of efforts, cutting off supplies at the border, involving tribal and local leaders in the fight against the terrorists, and using the media to gain support and valuable intelligence from the local people.  INIS added that a tip line for people to call in to the services should be established.  7. (S REL MNF-I) Summing up, the PM designated NSA Rubaie to set the date and time for a CAC to travel to Ninewa to make an assessment and prepare recommendations on next steps.  Syrian Connection -----------------  8. (S REL MNF-I) Several speakers, including the PM, noted that the terrorists in Mosul and elsewhere in Ninewa had no trouble with re-supply from Syria.  They complained that the border with Syria is wide open, referring to it as nothing more than a simple fence that a child could breach.  Maliki and others insisted that resolution of the security situation in Ninewa and Mosul will require Syrian action against foreign terrorists and their lines of communication.  Mosul Dam ---------  9. (S REL MNF-I) NSA Rubaie listed several reports being prepared on several security issues. Among these were: prevention of riots in Baghdad, coordination of intelligence with the KRG, improved telecommunications in Baghdad, avoidance of the Mosul Dam's collapse, and protection of the Mosul Dam from terrorist attack.  The PM advised the MCNS members to avoid becoming alarmist about the Mosul Dam - steps had been taken already to prevent a catastrophic failure.  MOD added that ISF was protecting the dam already.  Gen. Babakir noted that the bridge over the dam needed refurbishment, but for the time being, heavy vehicles, including MNF-I vehicles, must avoid using the bridge.  CG agreed.  Prison Conditions -----------------  10. (C) The MOJ reported to the MCNS on steps his ministry was taking to address failings in the prison system that the Ministry of Human Rights had identified.  He noted that many of the prison administrative staff were incompetent, facilities were overcrowded, some prisons were in effect controlled by militias or even terrorists.  In response, the prison reform committee had made numerous suggestions. Already terrorists were being separated from other prisoners, new guards were being trained, the administrative structure of prison leadership was being changed to empower qualified specialists to provide oversight.  It will not be easy, but efforts at reform are serious.  The PM noted the new facilities would also help.  Airport and Port Security -------------------------  11. (S REL MNF-I) Rubaie raised the issue of security and airports and seaports, noting that multiple ministries were involved.  He proposed postponing discussion until all parties involved could be gathered, noting the absence of the Minister of Transportation (MOT).  MSNSA Waeli, in his role as Acting MOT, said that the need for international certification of the airports required the GOI to conform to international standards.  PM insisted that regardless of  BAGHDAD 00000267  003 OF 003   the need to meet international standards, one ministry must be responsible for security at airports.  Was it MOI he asked?  Waeli rejoined that the airport must have its own security authority.  Bids had been put out for security at BIAP as well as Mosul.  He noted that the Facilities Protective Service (FPS) was corrupt.  PM noted FPS was always trouble and mused who could be sued for having started the FPS.  Rubaie closed the topic by noting that a review of security at the Mosul airport would be part of the assessment of security in Mosul.  12. (S REL MNF-I) Closing the meeting, MNSTC-I presented a brief report on its renovation and refurbishment of the Mosul airport terminal and control tower.  It stressed the usefulness of the funds spent on Mosul's airport, which had allowed its first commercial flights since 1993 to take place in December 2007 in support of Hajj pilgrims.  The presentation underlined the need for the GOI to get security right at the Mosul airport so that this new infrastructure asset could continue to contribute to economic development. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000269  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: CHALABI VIEWS ON THE PITFALLS OF DE-BA'ATH  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires, a.i. Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary: In a meeting with PolCouns on January 24, Dr. Ahmed Chalabi, the current Commissioner of the Higher National De-Ba'athification Committee and the Chair of the PM's Essential Services Committee, shared his views on the passage of the Law of Accountability and Justice.  While noting some positive aspects of the new law, he cautioned against its increased scope and its potential to undo what he defended as positive reconciliation work that the HNDBC accomplished under his leadership.  Post continues to believe that meaningful implementation of the law, which did not codify necessary procedures, will rely heavily on the actions the GoI takes before the law is put into effect.  While Chalabi's views can be seen as self-serving, he draws on a strong base of knowledge of the de-Ba'athification process. He also believes the ultimate impact of the law will depend heavily on how the government and the new commission implement the law.  We will seek opportunities to engage the PM and other senior officials to highlight the need for proactive GOI efforts in shaping positive implementation of the law.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- Chalabi's views on Accountability and Justice ---------------------------------------------  2. (C) Dr. Chalabi noted that the Law of Accountability and Justice (LAJ) was positive in two aspects.  First, he stated that the change of name from the Higher National De-Ba'athification Commission (HNDBC) to the Higher National Commission of Accountability and Justice (HNCAJ) was beneficial to all parties.  Second, he was enthusiastic about the clause that gives pensions to those members of the Shu'aba level, although he was quick to point out the HNDBC tried to give pensions as often as they were able to those who already applied for them.  3. (C) "Every other aspect of the law," Dr. Chalabi commented, "is harsher to the Ba'athists."  He quoted the clause that expands the scope of the commission to "purge organizations of the government sector, mixed sector, civil society, and Iraqi society of the Ba'ath party system in any form." (Article 3, second part)  He noted the law provides that rulings of the HNDBC remain valid if they do not contradict the new law, which was particularly worrisome (Article 20) with regard to the continuing validity of previously granted exemptions.  He cautioned that there was significant potential for the new commission to begin a game of "political football" by overturning previous decisions to further political aims.  4. (C) As cause for his concern, he pointed to the 7000 employees of the Ministry of Interior who in his view will face loss of their jobs due to their former membership in the Ba'ath party (Article 6, sixth part).  He also was critical of the clause that rids Ba'athists of the rank firqa from positions of Director General or higher (Article 6, second part).  For example, the HNDBC had previously issued numerous exemptions (including eight of the top eleven current Iraqi generals) to key officials of the rank firqa.  He said it was possible that those exemptions will be terminated once the law goes into effect.  In response to questioning about the validity of this point of view, Chalabi opined that the new chairperson had discretion to allow former exemptions to stand, without consultation from another body such as the Council of Ministers, but was not bound to do so.  (Comment: According to Post's interpretation of the law, the Council of Ministers, through coordination with the HNCAJ, could step in and allow the individuals to return to their jobs with approval of the CoR (Article 12).  Otherwise, an appropriate entity, including the individual, his ministry, or the provincial council, would have to contest the termination within 30 days (Article 15).  End Comment.)  5. (C) On the topic of the ratification of the LAJ, Chalabi said that it would be a huge mistake for VP Hashimi to veto the law; if returned to the CoR, the law might never emerge again.  He commented that it had been extremely difficult to get the UIA to consider the law at all.  He characterized Sistani and his aides as "violently against it," and singled out Sistani spokesman al-Najafi as particularly strong in his opposition.  Noting that only 111 representatives voted in favor, he reiterated that it would be unwise for the Presidency Council not to sign the law.  6. (C) Chalabi agreed that how the LAJ is implemented is critical.  Due to the vague outline of procedures within the law, its implementation is heavily dependent on who becomes chairman of the HNCAJ.  He commented that the CoR would appoint the chairman, and stressed the need for someone with the right intentions who was strong and balanced to lead the  BAGHDAD 00000269  002 OF 002   commission.  Post's interpretation of the LAJ is that the Council of Ministers appoints seven commissioners, who are confirmed by a simple majority of the CoR.  The commissioners then elect a chairman from among themselves, who is confirmed by an absolute majority of the CoR (Article 2, fourth and sixth parts).  7. (C) When asked how many former Ba'athists the LAJ and the Unified Pension law would affect, Chalabi doubted that many additional members at the rank of firqa would apply for pension benefits, since they already had that opportunity under the HNDBC.  He estimated that about half (about 2000) of those at the shu'aba level would apply for pensions; the rest would not because, to do so, they must face the associated difficulties of returning to Iraq.  --------------------------------------------- - Comment: The time crunch in the implementation --------------------------------------------- -  8. (C) Post assesses that much of the positive gain for reconciliation represented by passage of the LAJ will be lost if the GoI allows the law to be published without considering a number of implementation issues and alleviating them by issuing implementing regulations and ensuring the appointment to the commission of well-regarded, non-partisan figures.  If the GoI does not exercise appropriate leadership, the chairperson of the HNCAJ will have significant discretion in establishing bylaws and implementing regulations.  9. (C) However, there is a timeline written into the law that goes into effect upon its publication in the official gazette.  Naming a chairperson for the HNCAJ will require the appointment of the seven commissioners and the subsequent confirmation and approval of one of them as chair by an absolute majority of the CoR.  This chairperson has 30 days from the LAJ's publication (not his appointment) to issue bylaws to regulate its activities (Article 27).  It is not clear what will occur if either the CoR is unable to confirm a chairman before that 30-day window lapses, or if the chairman does not issue these bylaws.  10. (C) The law does not clearly spell out the process for a former Ba'athist to apply for either a pension or reinstatement into employment, something they must do within the first 60 (or 90, if out of the country) days from the date of publication in the official gazette (Article 7). Likewise, the law does not clearly spell out what will happen to those individuals who receive de-Ba'athification orders after the 90-day window.  Also, since there is a 30-day deadline to file an appeal, it is not clear what will happen to those who received de-Ba'athification orders prior to the enactment of the law.  The as yet unwritten implementing regulations are therefore of great importance to the prospects of the law facilitating the reinstatement of former Ba'athists. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000278  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2018 TAGS: EAID, ECON, EFIN SUBJECT: SITREP 2: OPERATIONS RESUME AT THE CENTRAL BANK OF IRAQ POST-FIRE  Classified By: Economic Counselor Todd Schwartz  1. (SBU) The Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) has resumed operations following the January 28 fire by moving a skeleton staff to two separate buildings within the CBI complex, and the staff has already reconstituted its data center in a new building.  The core banking system has been made operational with the Iraqi Commercial Banking System (ICBS) recovered from a disc drive.  The CBI executed 18 transactions on January 29 through parts of its electronic funds transfer (EFT) system.  The Swift system--needed to execute transactions with banks outside of Iraq--is fully operational.  2. (SBU) On January 30 Treasury Attache inspected both the main USD and Iraqi dinar vaults, and found no evidence of an attempted break-in.  Water seepage into the vaults was minimal and no currency was spoiled.  Monetary operations have proceeded uninterrupted, with a CBI Director General confirming to a Task Force for Business Stability Operations technical consultant two foreign currency actions have been held since the fire, with 129 USD million sold on January 29 and 121 USD million sold on January 30.  These amounts are not uncharacteristic of the rates of sales over this month. A Ministry of Finance (MoF) Treasury Bill auction scheduled for today did not take place because the MoF elected to postpone it.  The CBI is positioned to receive two Iraqi dinar currency shipments from London later this week, and a badly needed currency shipment was successfully made to Diyala province on January 28  3. (SBU) TREASaTT plans to address the coordination of technical assistance to the CBI during his weekly Thursday Budget Execution Meeting held in Embassy.  Econoff also has received confirmation the CBI is working closely with the IMF to minimize the impact of the fire on meeting its Standby Arrangement.  4. (S) The Ministry of Interior (MoI) investigation into the causes of the fire is proceeding, and MoI officials plan an announcement by the weekend.  Both the FBI and ATF are assisting their efforts. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000280  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR NEA/I - JDAVIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: FM ZEBARAI ON NEIGHBORS PROCESS; SFA FRAMEWORK; IRAN VISIT; REFUGEE MONEY FOR JORDAN  REF: A. REF. (A) 07 STATE 149971      B. REF. (B) 07 BAGHDAD 4085  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for Reasons 1.4(d/b)  1.  (C)  SUMMARY.  In a January 29 meeting, Foreign Minister Zebari told PolCounselor he expected a complete round of Neighbors Working Group meetings to take place in February and a Baghdad PrepCon (level to be determined) to be held in March.  He said another top MFA priority was to appoint career diplomats to fill ambassadorial positions in Riyadh, Damascus and Cairo.  Zebari reported that the ministry's team was ready for Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA) negotiations but was worried that negotiations could become as difficult as those for the SPD and the UNSCR renewal.  He agreed that the timing of Iranian President Ahmedinejad's proposed March visit was undesirable and said he would speak to President Talabani about alternatives.  Zebari said he would return to the Cabinet in an effort to gain approval to release the GOI's $8 million pledge to UNHCR in Jordan.  END SUMMARY.  Neighbors ---------  2.  (C)  Zebari confirmed that the MFA was working with UNAMI to establish a support mechanism and said his goal was to hold a full round of working group meetings in February and a "senior level" PrepCon in Baghdad in March.  He mentioned that the MFA had already contacted participating countries, but not all had responded.  Zebari admitted he had toyed with the idea of a "Neighbor's only" Foreign Ministers PrepCon in Baghdad, but conceded that security concerns probably foreclosed the issue.  He noted Deputy Foreign Minister Labeeb Abbawi was handling Neighbors matters and assured us they were a top priority.  Strategic Framework Agreement -----------------------------  3.  (C)  Without providing names, Zebari said MFA's SFA team was complete (NOTE: Post understands Deputy Foreign Minister Mohammad Hamoud will lead the team, although we have also heard unconfirmed reports that Director for Multilateral Affairs Ambassador Srood Najib may also be involved.  Post will continue to inquire and advise septel.  END NOTE.) Zebari indicated he was already in touch with National Security Advisor Mowaffuq Rubaie, but worried that the SFA negotiations could prove as difficult as those for the SPD and the UNSCR renewal.  PolCounselor cautioned that the USG would not accept a repeat performance of the previous negotiations and underscored that the entire GOI was aware of this.  He noted increased US domestic interest in the SFA process and said that the guiding idea behind the agreement was to provide a framework for normal bilateral relations between Iraq and the U.S.  He described some recent articles in the U.S. media as "unhelpful," and assured Zebari they did not reflect administration thinking.  Iranian President Ahmedinejad's Visit to Baghdad --------------------------------------------- ---  4.  (C)  Zebari confided that the GOI had "killed an Ahmedinejad visit 2 or 3 times previously" and that he pleaded with President Talabani not to give the Iranians a date.  PolCounselor said the proposed March 21 date (per media accounts) came at a bad time for Iraq and for the U.S. Zebari agreed the timing was inappropriate and said he would speak to President Talabani about alternatives.  Iraqi Consulates in Detroit and Los Angeles -------------------------------------------  5.  (C)  Zebari was delighted to hear the Department had agreed to the GOI request to open consulates in Detroit and Los Angeles (ref A).  He informed us that the Governments of Germany, Canada and Syria had agreed to Iraqi consulates in Frankfurt, Montreal and Aleppo, respectively.  Zebari did not mention what, if any, reciprocal consideration the GOI would provide.  Previously Zebari indicated the SARG might be interested in establishing a consulate in Mosul, an issue he discussed with SARG interlocutors during his December trip to Damascus (ref B).  Ambassadors -----------  6.  (C)  Zebari volunteered that Ambassadorial appointments had been the main issue of that day's Cabinet meeting.  He deplored the sectarian credentials of many of the candidates  BAGHDAD 00000280  002 OF 002   and dismissed them as professionally unsuited for their proposed positions.  Compounding the problem, he said, no women, Christians or Turkmen were among those being considered.  Zebari remarked that Iraq now had 75 diplomatic missions and one of his principle goals was to push ministry careerist, not political appointees, into the growing number of slots abroad.  Zebari said Ambassadorial nominations for missions in Riyadh, Kuwait and Cairo were his top priority. (NOTE:  The MFA can nominate, without Cabinet approval, Ambassador-rank candidates to fill Chief-of-Mission slots; nominees still require CoR approval.  END NOTE.)  He added that the previous week, after a year of stalling, the Cabinet had approved a new Iraqi Foreign Service bill that Zebari said would provide the "legal framework" for Iraq to meet its growing diplomatic commitments.  Refugee Pledge --------------  7.  (C)  PolCounselor expressed dismay that transfer of Iraq's USD 8 million refugee pledge to Jordan was gridlocked and said the GOI had to come up with a solution.  Zebari, who described the entire episode as a "big personal embarrassment," said he would have to secure Iraqi Cabinet approval to do this and did not appear optimistic at the prospect.  PolCounselor said it was particularly important to close this issue before UNHCR High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres' upcoming visit to the region.  Kitchen Cabinet, Central Bank Fire, Arab-League-Sponsored Reconciliation Conference --------------------------------------------- --  8.  (C)  Zebari continued that the Central Bank of Iraq fire had been the previous day's "Kitchen Cabinet" (PM, DPM, MFA, MOD, Planning Finance, Electricity, Oil and Interior) main topic.  The debacle, which Zebari noted was the latest in a series of suspicious fires, "undermined people's confidence in the GOI" and was due to the "negligence of ministers."  He recommended urgent action to shore up public confidence and regretted Ahmed Chalabi's rapid arrival on the scene, noting it fueled rumors already swirling around the fire.  Zebari also mentioned he expected a delegation under Arab League (AL) Deputy Secretary General Ahmed Ben Hilli to visit Baghdad in the coming week to discuss an Iraqi reconciliation conference to be held under AL auspices. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000284  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2018 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, EAID, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: MOSUL UNIVERSITY PRESIDENT PROPOSES BROAD TIES WITH PRT  REF: A. 06BAGHDAD 4504      B. 07BAGHDAD 2730      C. BAGHDAD 244  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1. (S/REL ACGU) Summary: Mosul University President Dr. Obay al-Dewachi told us he was open to broad cooperation with the PRT.  Although the university was a bastion of the Ba'athist system and is a known safe haven for terrorists, as one of the best universities in Iraq the PRT will begin immediately a cautious but broad and sustained engagement.  Support for its development as a vibrant and politically moderate institution could bring enormous benefits to the economy, civil society and political environment in northern Iraq. End Summary.  2. (SBU) Mosul University President Dr. Obay al-Dewachi told PRT Leader and staff January 22 that the university was open to broad cooperation with the PRT to help his institution recover from the many challenges it faced over the past five years.  He repeatedly invited the PRT Leader to visit the university, an offer which, for the last year, he had been reluctant to extend to any Americans.  He said the security situation at the university had improved and specifically identified the need for cooperation with the medical and engineering faculties, which he called the core of the university.  He noted that the university had prepared a former regime palace on a campus that offers excellent security for meetings.  3. (SBU) The 30,000 student university is the most important institution of higher education in Ninewa and one of the best universities in Iraq. It is also a university where Sunni Arabs in particular feel safe attending. Dr. Obay identified post-graduation employment for students as one of the most pressing issues, along with security.  The meeting was made possible through the good offices of Turkish Consul General Huseyin Botsali, who maintains good relations with Dr. Obay and the university generally.  The Dean of the College of Veterinary Medicine, Dr. Fouad Kasim Mohammad, also attended the luncheon.  The PRT will begin immediately a cautious but broad and sustained engagement with Mosul University since support for its development as a vibrant and politically moderate institution could bring enormous benefits to the economy, civil society and political environment in northern Iraq.  University Academics -    Continuing Despite the Challenges ------------------------------------  4. (U) Mosul University began in 1959 with the founding of the College of Medicine and was incorporated in 1967.  It consists of 22 faculties or colleges and 126 departments spanning the full range of humanities, sciences, and engineering.  Mosul University has several research centers, including one focused on the Mosul Dam.  The three main campuses are in eastern Mosul with the College of Medicine based separately in a teaching hospital.  Dr. Obay discussed plans for a new campus near Mosul Airport, close to Forward Operating Base Marez, on which the PRT is located.  CG Botsali said it may come under the Mosul University umbrella.  The 30,000 students pursue a mix of undergraduate, graduate and professional degrees.  The majority of the professoriate has doctorates and has studied regionally and internationally.  There are approximately 700 full professors and over 2,000 instructors.  5. (U) Dr. Obay (who speaks very good English and was educated in Europe, see BIONOTE REF B) was extremely focused on getting cooperation for the Medical and Engineering Colleges, which are the nexus of both the university's prestige and its contribution to building a new Iraq.  He said the university is trying to upgrade the computer and laboratory facilities of the two Colleges as well as the Departments of Chemistry and Physics.  Dr. Fouad said essential laboratory supplies such as glassware and cadavers are in critically short supply.  Access to current technical reference and research publications is poor university-wide. Electricity shortages limit teaching hours.  CG Botsali volunteered to have two large American-donated generators converted from natural gas to diesel.   Mosul University is regarded with great prestige and respect within the Iraqi  BAGHDAD 00000284  002 OF 002   academic community, especially the faculties of Medicine and Engineering.  Dr. Fouad talked about elements of normal life at the university such as athletic competitions and chess tournaments.  The university was also the site of a recent art exhibition by a prominent local artist.  University Politics -     Tangled and Potentially Dangerous -------------------------------------  6. (S/REL ACGU) The university was a bastion of the Ba'athist system and over the last four years it has become increasingly difficult for non-Sunni Arabs to study and work there.  Though all of the Kurdish and Yezidi students (REF B) and most of the faculty are no longer able to come on campus because of threats of violence, Dr. Obay claimed some Christian students still prefer Mosul University to universities in the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG). Kurdish political parties have claimed there is a vocal Wahabi minority among the students recruiting for radical Islamist activities.  The university is a known safe haven for terrorists who pose as and intimidate real students (REFTELs).  Military colleagues tell us the Department of Chemistry is actively assisting terrorism on a tactical level.  Nevertheless, Dr. Obay repeatedly insisted that there should be no place for politics at the university.  PRT/University Cooperation Ready to Move Forward --------------------------------------------- ---  7. (C) The PRT's Health and Education Section had already been working with Dr. Fouad to provide linkages with American universities.  (Bio Note: Dr. Fouad speaks fluent Arabic, Turkish and English.  His PhD is from the University of Missouri; his brother still lives there.) On a more immediate note, the PRT arranged for the donation and delivery of textbooks to the Veterinary and Nursing colleges.  Through one of USAID's implementing partners, the PRT is pioneering a program to partner with the Veterinary College (sensitive information).  The USAID partner is upgrading the College's computer labs and providing internet access while the College will provide veterinarians and students to assist in IRD programs across Ninewa province.  As the relationships develop, the PRT will move forward with a full range of engagements including through USAID, Public Diplomacy, QRF and ad-hoc associations with American academic institutions. Dr. Obay particularly praised the University of Hawaii's ongoing assistance to the College of Agriculture.  Comment -------  8. (S/REL ACGU) Dr. Obay has made such overtures before, but security concerns have previously overtaken events.  He is also not the most reliable interlocutor. During a January 27 meeting with Prime Minister's Advisor Zuhair Al-Chalabi and Ninewa Provincial Governor to discuss follow-up to the recent explosion in Mosul (ref c), Al-Chalabi said in a side conversation that Dr. Obay is "not cooperative" with the central government, and both he and the Governor alleged that he cooperates with terrorists and said he needs to be replaced. Despite the difficult environment, the PRT is now cautiously optimistic that a quiet and measured engagement strategy is worth the effort in order to help turn this vital institution into a positive force for change not only for Ninewa but for Sunni Arabs in Iraq.  We believe that the majority of the students and professors are sympathetic to an academically-focused, non-political vision for the university's future.  The security challenges are significant, but Mosul University is just too important to leave to terrorists and former Ba'athists  The Turkish assistance is greatly appreciated; at the invitation of the Turkish Consul General, the PRT may use the Turkish Consulate General as a meeting place for some future meetings, as a good neutral location. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000288  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2018 TAGS: PREL, PINS, PINR, PROV SUBJECT: IRAQI PARLIAMENT SPEAKER MASHADANI ON PROVINCIAL POWERS, BUDGET, OTHER ISSUES  Classified By: PolCouns Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b/d)  1.  (C) Summary:  COR Speaker Mashadani told us on January 30 that he expects the Provincial Powers law to pass the CoR on February 4.  He does not agree with those arguing that a date for elections should be in the law but does believe that elections should be held as soon as possible, hopefully within this year.  The debate on 17 percent versus 13 percent for the KRG is a serious obstacle to budget passage. Mashadani liberally criticized the Kurds for acting only in the interests of their region.  The Speaker said that the Iraqi negotiators on a bilateral strategic framework agreement should be from the GOI, with the MFA in the lead. He disagreed with those who want to put political party representatives (i.e. CoR bloc leaders) in the mix, saying that they would go in with their own agendas.  End Summary.  2.  (U) Political Counselor met with Council of Representatives (CoR) Speaker Mahmoud Mashadani on January 30 at his Baghdad residence.  Mashadani aide Alex Terchanian along with Poloff and Political Specialist also participated.   3.  (C) Mashadani said he is giving the Provincial Powers law priority over the budget.  He is confident that it will pass on Monday (February 4).  All of the debate comes down to the fact that ISCI wants more authority for the provinces while Dawa wants a stronger federal government.  Fadhila, short sightedly,  only cares about the role of the current Basra governor.  IIP's position on the debate over decentralization has been weak, and Mashadani claimed he had to exert his own authority to give the Sunni Arab view.  He declared that he has given enough time to the members to sort out their differences and so now he wants a final reading with amendments getting an up or down vote from the CoR.  4.  (C) Mashadani said that some want to set a date for elections in the Provincial Powers law.  He does not agree but does think that elections should be held this year.  He spoke at some length about his efforts to get the Elections Commission moving and ready for elections.  PolCouns urged him to press the IHEC to move forward on preparations for elections, but Mashadani said the commission had to act on its own initiative, otherwise it would appear as though it was being influenced.  Large numbers of Iraqis did not participate in 2005 provincial elections and it's time they had the chance to do so.  Many political groups won't get the people's support because of their leaders' behavior, Mashadani predicted, and elections would produce new leadership.  He declared that a "closed list" electoral system would not be acceptable to Iraqis.  Tawafuq, for instance, is not trusted by the public because the people did not know for whom they were voting.  Mashadani went on to criticize efforts by PM Maliki's office and others to influence the IHEC and vowed to stand in the way of such interference.  He singled out the PM's chief of staff as behind efforts to interfere with the electoral commission, stating that he acts "as if he were working for Saddam Hussein".  5.  (C) On the budget, Mashadani said key leaders have not resolved their differences.  KRG President Massoud Barzani is insisting on 17 percent for the Kurdish region, but PM Al-Maliki only wants to give 13 percent, undercutting the budget his government was asking the CoR to approve. According to Mashadani, the PM wants the COR to take on Barzani's demand by reducing the percentage.  The Kurds have threatened to have President Talabani veto the budget if the amount is reduced.  Warming to the theme of blaming the Kurds, Mashadani advocated passing the budget over the objections of the Kurdish bloc, forcing Talabani to use a veto.  Then it will be obvious to all who is responsible for holding up the work of government.  He charged that the Kurds in the COR are completely under the thumb of Talabani and Barzani, so even if they think differently they are too scared to stand up for what they believe.  He hinted darkly at continued oppressive means used by the KRG to keep people in line.  They are not acting like Iraqis, Mashadani stated. Second Deputy Speaker Tayfour and the Kurdish delegates just want to get what they can for Kurdistan and go home.  The Peshmerga debate illustrates this attitude.  It is unacceptable that they want the federal government to pay for forces entirely under KRG control.  6.  (C)  Regarding the January 26 PCNS meeting at which Maliki briefed CoR leaders on the framework for GOI LTSR talks with the U.S., Mashadani said VP Hashimi and PM Maliki favored including political party representatives in the negotations.  Mahsadani thought this a bad idea, since they would pull the Iraqi side in various directions.  By his account, others at the discussion agreed with him.  The talks should be in the hands of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,  BAGHDAD 00000288  002 OF 002   supported by the Ministries of Planning and Defense, Mashadani said.  The PM is ultimately responsible for coming up with a draft agreement, passing it to the PCNS, and then sending it to the CoR.  Mashadani was interested in what would happen to such an agreement in the U.S., given the election year and frequent statements from candidates calling for troop withdrawal from Iraq.  He said Iraqis would want to see that the U.S. Congress, and in particular Democratic party leaders, approved the terms of a bilateral agreement with Iraq.  PolCouns told him it was normal in such negotiations for the administration to brief appropriate Congressional committees on a regular basis, but bilateral agreements such as that currently envisioned with Iraq did not trigger U.S. constitutional requirements for Congressional ratification. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000289  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, ECON, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: KURDS AND ARABS TAKING STEPS TOWARD POLITICAL RECONCILIATION  REF: A. BAGHDAD 244      B. BAGHDAD 200  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1. (C/REL ACGU) Summary: Provincial Vice Governor and President of the Ninewa Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) Khasro Goran told PRT Leader January 21 that the Kurdish parties had made strides with the Arab Sunni parties in Ninewa Province in working together toward political reconciliation.  Goran opined that the De-Ba'athification law would have little effect in Ninewa unless there were economic reforms and growth in the province. Senior members of both the KDP and the Sunni Arab-dominated Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) have been involved in interparty talks that have taken place in Erbil over the past several months. In the wake of the January 23 massive explosion in Mosul (reftels), the provincial leadership is clearly all the more focused on the imperative to avoid a further ethnic rift in this strategic region of Iraq, and to move toward long-term reconciliation. End Summary.  Kurds and Arab Sunnis Coming Together Politically --------------------------------------------- ----  2. (C/REL ACGU) Ninewa Vice Governor and Ninewa branch KDP President Khasro Goran told PRT Leader January 21 that the Kurdish Parties and the Arab Sunni Parties had been moving toward political reconciliation in the province.  The Kurdish parties were easier to work with, since they were united together with one voice.  The Sunni parties were more difficult to identify, since no one party represented all Sunnis, nor had a strong following in any one place.  Goran said he had trouble identifying who the Sunni leadership was, since anyone could claim to be a Sheikh and anyone could claim to represent a large population of Sunnis.  He said he had been attempting to meet with anyone and everyone over the past few weeks in an effort to identify and work with them to find a political common ground.  KDP-IIP Talks Bearing Fruit ---------------------------  3. (C) Goran spoke highly of the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) Chairman Dr. Mohammed Shakir, and stated that the KDP and the IIP had recently signed an agreement on points of common ground in the province (Note: this is part of a larger agreement between the IIP and the Kurdish parties to cooperate at the national level.  End note).  Goran asserted that the KDP and IIP would continue to work together to bring the Arab Sunni voice back to the provincial leadership.  In a separate meeting, Shakir told PRTOff the same, stressing the need for political reconciliation.  During a January 20 Provincial Council (PC) meeting, IIP PC member Hasan said that for the first time since 2004, he believes the Kurds are willing to work with the Sunni Arabs.  DeBa'athification Needs to Come with Economic Growth --------------------------------------------- -------  4. (C) Responding to PRT Leader's question on the new De-Ba'athification legislation, Goran stated that, in order to make a difference, De-Ba'athification needed to come hand in hand with economic development.  Former generals and other high level leaders in the former Ba'athist regime would engage in business and entrepreneurial ventures, and would not need to be in their old positions in the army or government, if the economic and security situation improved. Further, Goran stated that many of the people in the current provincial government were former Ba'athists, but that was not a problem (Note: Ninewa did not undergo a large scale purge of mid and lower-level civil servants who were Ba'ath members.  End note).  He said that in the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) former officials with links to the Saddam regime have become successful businessmen and left their pasts behind because of the economic opportunities.  Comment -------  5. (C) The movement of the KDP and the IIP toward real political reconciliation is promising in a province where the majority of the population (60-70 percent Arab Sunni) has little or no voice in provincial politics due to a partial boycott of the previous elections.  If free and fair provincial elections were held tomorrow, the IIP would  BAGHDAD 00000289  002 OF 002   probably have a major voice in selecting Ninewa's new governor but it would still need the KDP's support in a new PC to govern effectively. Goran is right that Arab Sunnis in the province do not have one or two leaders who speak for the majority of their community, which is one of the main obstacles to structuring effective negotiations on political reconciliation between the Kurds and the Arab Sunnis. In the wake of the January 23 massive explosion in Mosul (reftels), the provincial leadership wants to avoid a further ethnic rift, and move toward reconciliation. PRT will continue to monitor and promote cooperation and communication among all the political parties in the province to promote effective political reconciliation across the broad spectrum of parties. BUTENIS 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000290  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PREL, IZ, REL UK SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - January 29  BAGHDAD 00000290  001.2 OF 003   1. SUMMARY: At this week's regularly held Provision of Services Committee meeting, the committee met for 2.5 hours to discuss issues ranging from trash collection privatization and re-opening previously closed streets to electrical supply for pumping stations and service problems in specific qadas. The meeting followed its typically "ombudsmen" format. For the first time, the Mayor and Deputy Mayor attended. Other first time attendees included the Bagdhad Municipality Director and the DG of Baghdad Water Resources. The Ministries of Oil, Trade, Electricity, Defense and Health attended. The Baghdad Operations Command, National Security Advisor, Iraqi Red Crescent and the Joint Planning Commission also sent representatives. END SUMMARY.  - - - - - - - - - - Meeting Highlights - - - - - - - - - -  2. The Committee, despite some reservations, decided to write a letter to the Prime Minister and/or the General Secretariat to suspend the bond/mortgage requirement now imposed upon prospective garbage truck drivers. There is a shortage of drivers due to this requirement. Advocates say that it prevents trucks from being stolen or used as VBIEDs and that it ensures that the drivers are Iraqi and not foreigners living illegally in Iraq. However, the Amanat argues that this requirement has resulted in garbage accumulation.  3. Deputy Mayor Naiem displayed a map of Baghdad, highlighting streets that should be re-opened because of improved security. He also thought this would spur economic activities and lessen traffic congestion. The Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) maintained that these security measures are in fact what have improved the situation and removing them prematurely could expose Iraqis to violence again.  MND-B Deputy Commanding General, Brigadier General Milano, agreed on the need to strike the right balance and offered to work with the BOC and Mayor to open strategic streets, balancing security with measures to improve the quality of life for Baghdadis.  4. Senior Deputy Minister of Electricity, Mr. Ra'ad, discussed for a second time the threat that the ministry's employees face. He complained that despite extra efforts to improve electricity to the suburb of Sabi' Al Bor, the continued threats to engineers at Taji detrimentally impact electricity to Sabi' Al Bor. The MoE again pled for the BOC's assistance with this matter and Dr. Chalabi suggested that a specific, written request be addressed to the BOC. Also in terms of electricity, Dr. Chalabi discussed his recent visit to Doura and noted that several transformers were inoperable. Chalabi tasked the MoE to write a letter to Major General Hammond, the Commanding General of MND-B, to detail the electricity problems in the Doura area and ask him to repair transformers in muhallas 822 and 840. (Note: BG Milano, representing MND-B, did not offer to repair the transformers. He commented that it was the Government of Iraq's responsibility. End Note)  5. The committee discussed the condition of the irrigation canals, noting that the city is currently witnessing significant amounts of standing water because many of the canals are clogged. The DG of Baghdad Water Resources said a plan is underway to clear these obstructed channels, but work will be slow due to equipment shortages. Chalabi requested that a letter be sent to the Ministry of Water Resources detailing the problem and possible solutions.  6. Dr. Khamis, the Ministry of Health (MoH) representative discussed his recent visit to Abu Ghraib's hospital. He noted staff and supplies shortages, decrepit building conditions and unacceptable treatment of the doctors by the Muthanna Brigade. Dr. Chalabi requested a formal report be sent to the committee as well as the MoH.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - Husseiniya Tops the Agenda - - - - - - - - - - - - -  7. Deputy ITAO Director General Snyder delivered a report on the Husseiniya sewerage system. He shared the details of the United States Government (USG) involvement in the project over the past two years, having developed a plan to treat and collect water. The USG estimates that the project would cost $210 million and take 18-24 months to complete. The US can not construct the project due to funding priorities. Deputy Mayor Naiem suggested that a project, based upon Iraqi engineers' designs from 1990, be implemented. The Baghdad Municipality Director said that several studies were launched in 2006 and 2007, some of which are still ongoing to address sewerage in Husseiniya. He said it will cost approximately 17 billion dinars to address sewerage issues in the area. Chalabi then suggested that the Baghdad Sewerage Director be invited to next week's meeting for further discussion.  - - - - - - - - - - - The Amanat is Up Next - - - - - - - - - - -  8. A follow-on to last week's meeting regarding privatization of trash collection in Baghdad happened next. Previous attempts to  BAGHDAD 00000290  002 OF 003   privatize trash collection repeatedly were unsuccessful because there are few qualified Iraqi contractors with this area of expertise. The Amanat has since encouraged Iraqis to become affiliated with international companies in order to contract out this local task. The Mayor noted that a $180 million joint private/public recycling venture was ongoing. Another recycling plant is expected to come on-line at the end of 2008. The Mayor also reported that the city has contracted to build a factory that would convert recyclables into plastic bags. The shortage of garbage truck drivers was also discussed and the committee decided to write a letter to the Prime Minister asking him to waive the mortgage/bond requirement.  9. Deputy Mayor Naiem then used a large map to discuss the possibility of re-opening streets throughout the city of Baghdad. He specifically mentioned Abu Niwas Street, the Passport office area and Adimiyah. The BOC noted that the security measures currently in place are to be credited for security improvements in those areas. Any changes should be carefully considered so as to not compromise safety. MND-B, the BOC and the Amanat are to further discuss this issue.  10. The DG of Baghdad Water Resources discussed the current blockage in the irrigation canals. He said they are currently creating a plan to clear the canals, but any progress on work would be slow because they only have about 50% of needed equipment. The Amanat offered some additional drills in the short-term, but Chalabi emphasized that this problem also needed a long-term solution, particularly given its impact on agribusiness and employment. Therefore the DG is to send a letter to the Ministry of Water Resources.  - - - - - - Electricity - - - - - -  11. The MoE and the DG of Baghdad Water discussed the electricity needs for 52 main pumping stations. In addition to secure lines to the pumping stations, fuel for the back-up generators is needed. The Senior Deputy Minister to MoE suggested that the Amanat develop contingency plans and the MoE will provide contingency power, but will not be responsible for the costs. He also stated that the locality should be responsible for interdictions and other related violations.  12. A brief report was delivered on the 10 amp meter project; the smart meter bid is out. There are 900,000 electricity customers in Bagdhad, but only 60,000 are using the 10 amp meters. According to the MoE, Sadr City has rejected using the meters. (Note: The purpose of the meter is to limit household use to 10 amps. The trade off would be more reliable electricity in return for accepting the cap on usage. End Note)  13. Then Mr. Ra'ad discussed threats and intimidation on MoE staff which prohibits load shed compliance. (Note: The committee discussed this issue previously and a recommendation was made to involve the BOC. The BOC said they would protect the power stations, but needed a list of authorized personnel for those stations. End Note) He cited Sabi' Al Bor as a victim of this, noting that continued threats to MoE personnel in Taji prevents Sabi' Al Bor from getting its "fair" share. Dr. Chalabi suggested that a formal letter be sent to the BOC regarding this issue.  14. Finally, Dr. Chalabi discussed downed transformers in Doura, in muhallas 822 and 840. Those stations, according to the MoE, will be operable again if and when the industrial Doura power station comes on-line. This is expected to happen in approximately one month. Nonetheless, Chalabi will seek further assistance from MND-B.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Service Needs in Mada'in and Abu Ghraib - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  15. Representatives from Mada'in mentioned security concerns in this eastern qada, stating that the area had been an insurgent safe haven. The Baghdad Municipality Director said that the area has not been safe enough for him to visit. Complaints were made against the BOC's supposed lack of coordination with the Wasit police. The BOC stated that the "Ministry of Interior (MoI) had nothing to do with it." Representatives from Mada'in then asked for increased military presence and possibly even an operation to root out insurgents. Chalabi reminded the committee that its charge does not include security, only the provision of services.  16. Dr. Khamis, the MoH representative detailed his recent visit to the Abu Ghraib hospital. He said conditions were deplorable. The roofs in the surgery rooms were leaking, doctors and other staff were scare as was medical supplies and equipment. The staff that was there had not received any training in decades. Also compounding problem for the doctors was the Muthanna Brigade's treatment of them. According to Dr. Khamis, the brigade is harassing the doctors. Committee members noted other complaints about the brigade's behavior. The MoD is expected to address the concerns with the brigade.  BAGHDAD 00000290  003 OF 003    - - - - - - - Other Topics - - - - - - -  17. As the meeting was coming to an end, several concerns were raised regarding the return of formerly displaced persons. Houriyah and Sabi' Al Bor were discussed. Chalabi stated that over 1,700 people have returned to Sabi' Al Bor from Houriyah, but others have since re-settled illegally in Houriyah. According to Dr. Chalabi, he had a recent meeting with General Abhoud who stated that neighborhoods need to be prioritized in terms of resettling displaced Iraqis. He said that the Ministry of Displacement and Migration is not capable of handling all the issues associated with returning families alone. They need more resources, including staff, money and expertise.  18. NSA representative, Mr. Sayid, reported on Project Clean Delivery; kerosene rations were delivered to Hindi in the test run and were to start in 2 muhallahs each in Amariyah, Gaziliayah and Khark. The Iraqi Red Crescent offered their assistance in whatever was needed and the meeting concluded following the Monsour Municipal Officer's claim that municipal crews were being mistreated by 1st and 2nd lieutenants in the Iraqi Army. Chalabi told the Municipal Officer to give a detailed report and memo to the BOC.  Butenis 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000291  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2018 TAGS: PINS, PGOV, MOPS, PTER, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: PROGRESS IN TRANSFER OF IRAQ SECURITY  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 2508  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1. (C) Summary:  The fourth quarterly meeting of the High Level Working Group held January 24 to discuss the Joint Committee for Accelerating the Transfer of Iraq Security indicated progress.  Consistent Iraqi themes were to reduce the number of supporting committees either through closure or consolidation and to accelerate the process.  Of the nine committees, 4 were rated as complete, with the remaining committees on track and proceeding adequately.  The atmosphere in the meeting was collegial and cooperative.  End Summary.  2. (U) The fourth meeting of the High Level Working Group took place on January 24.  The group was chaired by National Security Advisor Mowafaq al Rubaie.  Minister of Defense Abdul Qadir al Mufriji was present at the beginning of the meeting.  Minister of Interior Bolani was not present, but sent his deputy instead.  Ambassador Ryan Crocker and MNF-I Commanding General David Petraeus attended.  Several television cameras were also present at the beginning of meeting to record the opening statements.  Opening Statements ------------------  3. (U) In his opening remarks, Rubaie noted the increased self-reliance of Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and stated that Iraq needs to build administrative and logistic abilities. Rubaie boasted of the high degree of proficiency of Iraqi counterterrorism (CT) and special operations forces (ISOF).  4. (U) The Minister of Defense said that Iraqi units will be ready to perform in conflict areas by April 2009.  His ministry is coordinating with Multinational Force-Iraq (MNF-I) so that ISF units can take the place of MNF-I units, thereby allowing the withdrawal of the MNF-I units.  However, the ISF is still dependent on external sources for logistics and maintenance, and Iraq will focus on improving logistics systems in 2008.  5. (U) GEN Petraeus acknowledged that a surge of over one hundred thousand Iraqis coincided with the Coalition surge. He emphasized that Iraqis were fighting and dying for their country, suffering casualties three times those sustained by Coalition Forces and noted that Iraqis have taken over security in many, but not all, parts of the country.  As examples of Iraqi forces providing security for the population, GEN Petraeus cited the successful Iraqi planning and execution that went into security during the Ashura pilgrimage and noted the rapid response of ISF to recent violence in Basra and Nasiriya, including reinforcement from Baghdad.  As reductions in Coalition Forces are possible based on conditions on the ground, Iraqi Forces will have to continue to step up and shoulder more of the burden of security in their country.  6. (U) The Deputy Minister of Interior remarked that MOI number of personnel, weapons, equipment, and training had made a qualitative leap in the past year.  He summarized the MOI budget plan for 2008 and noted that the ministry's budget was not as high as the MOI desired.  Process:  Issues and Recommendations ------------------------------------  7. (U) Following the opening remarks, the representative of the HLWG Secretariat read the issues and recommendations of the 9 committees.  Discussion of each recommendation was brief, and there was general consensus.  A summary of key issues and recommendations follows:  Committee 1.   Train and Equip MOI ----------------------------------  8. (U) Issues: - Lack of equipping requirements' definition and distribution system are impacting Iraqi Police (IP) ability to provide security. - Training capacity is inadequate to keep pace with force generation and a training backlog of approximately 136,000 personnel exists.  9. (U) Recommendations: - MoI establish process to define provincial equipping requirements and distribute accordingly. - MoI accelerate increase of institutional training capacity and expand officer generation programs.  Committee 2.  BAGHDAD 00000291  002 OF 003   Develop Ministerial Capacity to Achieve Security Self-Reliance --------------------------------------------- -----------------  10. (U) Issue:  None.  11. (U) Recommendation:  Close this committee.  Committee 3.  Develop National Intelligence System --------------------------------------------- -----  12. (U) Issues: - No intelligence law exists. - Intelligence and National Security Law was not passed. - National Security Policy Regulation and Coordination Law (NSPRCL) is working through legislative process, but a de facto system that mirrors the NSPRCL is working.  13. (U) Recommendations: - National Security Advisor to push draft NSPRCL through Council of Ministers to Council of Representatives at the earliest opportunity.  Committee 4.  Improve Security Coordination -------------------------------------------  14. (C) Issue:  Successful cooperation between MNF-I and GoI led to solutions to Security Coordination issues.  Those solutions, however, have not been institutionalized due to the absence of a formal GOI National Security Architecture. GEN Petraeus reminded the group that a number of issues hinge on getting the National Security Architecture straight.  He offered to have the MNF-I staff assist MoI and MoD to present structural recommendations to the Prime Minister.  15. (U) Recommendation:  Declare Security Coordination Committee's work complete and close the committee; consolidate this issue into the National Security Architecture Committee.   Committee 5.  Develop National Security Architecture --------------------------------------------- -------  16. (U) Issue:  National Security Architecture has not been approved by MCNS.  17. (U) Recommendation: PM Directive granting interim approval of National Security Architecture while the NSPRCL and Ministry of National Security Law work through legislative process.  Committee 6.  Transfer of Provinces to Iraqi Control --------------------------------------------- -------  18. (U) Issue:  Processes are mature and functioning properly.  19. (U) Recommendation:  Close this committee.  Committee 7. Transfer of Operational Control to Iraqi Army Divisions --------------------------------------------- ----------  20. (C) Issue:  Acceleration objectives complete; 10 of 10 IA Divisions are OPCON to the GoI (Note:  11th, 12th, and 14th IA Divisions are standing up under Iraqi command and are not under the OPCON provision).  In a discussion that flowed from the issue of transferring provinces to Iraqi control, Rubaie pushed for a more rapid transfer of operational control of the IA divisions in Anbar, Qadisiyah, Wasit, and Babil Provinces than planned.  GEN Petraeus countered that the GoI and MNF-I had agreed that the transfer of control would be predicated on the achievement of Operational Readiness Assessment level 2.  He observed that to achieve that level of readiness, the Iraqi Security Forces would require equipment, training, and officers.  Rubaie suggested that earlier dates might alleviate the problem.  GEN Petraeus responded that accelerated work will be necessary to achieve the conditions for the transfer of operational control. Rubaie acknowledged GEN Petraeus' point.  21. (U) Recommendation:  Close this committee.  Committee 8.  Develop Counter-Terrorism Capacity --------------------------------------------- ---  22. (U) Issues: - Counter-Terrorism Law has not passed; Counter-Terrorism budget is not approved. - Memorandum of Agreement with MoD is not in place for Combat Service Support (CSS), equipment, logistics, and administrative functions. - Helicopters, pilots, and aircrews are not ready for Advanced Counter-Terrorism Training scheduled for August 2008.  BAGHDAD 00000291  003 OF 003    23. (U) Recommendations: - GoI pass Counter-Terrorism Law (currently under review by the Shura); subsequently approve Counter-Terrorism budget. - Implement PM Directive 40/15 Jan 08, tasking MoD to meet Counter-Terrorism Bureau needs; continue administrative, financial and logistical support; and develop an annual MoA for 2008. - Implement PM Directive 39/15 Jan 08, to ensure execution of Mi-17 modification and availability of resources for crew training, in order to allow for the execution of CT-specific training as soon as possible.  Committee 9.  Train and Equip Ministry of Defense --------------------------------------------- ----  24. (U) Issues: - Misalignment between resources and force generation strategy - Fragile Maintenance system  25. (U) Recommendations: - Improve system to scrub FMS Letters of Request to ensure MoD procures only what is necessary for force generation - Execute pending FMS cases to ensure equipment is available when units are generated - Endorse increased MNF-I/JHQ engagement to grow JHQ operational capability - Increase number of mechanics  "It's always easy when there's progress." -----------------------------------------  26. (C) The atmosphere was cordial, and Rubaie seemed upbeat and positive.  After the conclusion of the meeting, Rubaie turned to the Ambassador and GEN Petraeus and commented on this session of the HLWG, "That was easy." BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000293  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2023 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: BLUEBLOOD SHIA CLERIC COMMENTS ON "BACKWARD" SADRISTS AND SISTANI'S FEARS AND FRUSTRATIONS  REF: 08 JAN 08 BAGHDAD O/I (SELF-PROCLAIMED SISTANI      EMISSARIES)  BAGHDAD 00000293  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (C) Summary: Scion of a prominent Najafi clerical family and related to both Grand Ayatollah Sistani and Moqtada al-Sadr, Emad Klanter told us January 30 that bumbling Iraqi politicians fail to make progress of any sort but actively encourage a public perception of "American Occupation" through statements to vernacular media.  He predicted Sadr would extend his JAM militia freeze order beyond February, and advised that we can change the "backward" Sadrists and contain their movement but only if we adopt a more balanced approach to their arch-enemy ISCI.  Klanter pleaded for USG pressure on the GOI and political blocs to hold early provincial elections under an "open list" system, adding that no one but the Sadrists and Sistani are eager for elections. He claimed that his maternal uncle Sistani is alarmed by the degree of Iranian penetration in Iraq and is frustrated by his lack of indirect contact with the USG.  Klanter warned that only Sistani and the Marja'iyyah can stand up to Iran and Shia extremism, adding that if the USG does not strengthen Sistani, "Iran will devour Iraq."  End Summary.  "Our Brains Are In Our Eyes" ----------------------------  2. (C) Son of a respected Najafi Ayatollah, nephew to Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, related by marriage to Muqtada al-Sadr, and bearing a faint resemblance to the actor Robert De Niro, Klanter is a direct descendant of the Prophet Muhammad but was not wearing the traditional Shia Sayyid's garb of black turban and cloak during our meeting at the IZ villa of Saad Jabr, a Saddam-era exile opposition financier and son of Iraq's first Shia Prime Minister.  Claiming he had recently met with Prime Minister Maliki, Klanter bemoaned the ineffectuality of Iraq's political leaders and warned that the gap between these leaders and the Iraqi people is growing wider by the day.  He stated that while Maliki might be able to entice Iraqiyyah and Tawafuq to rejoin his government, neither ISCI nor the Kurds want anything beyond superficial changes to the status quo.  When we informed him that USG patience is wearing thin with the pace of Iraqi political process, Klanter appeared incredulous that the U.S. would even consider scaling-down in Iraq "because you destroyed a regime and now you bear the responsibility to build up a replacement.  If you leave there is a 100 percent certainty of civil war, which might happen anyway even if you don't leave."  Swinging his arms into an abbreviated "Gator Chomp" type of gesture, he said that if the U.S, leaves "Iran will swallow us whole."  3. (C) Small wonder that the Iraqi people feel as though they are living under "American Occupation," Klanter maintained, because Iraqi politicians - Shia, Sunni, and Kurds alike - routinely use terms like "occupation" and "occupiers" when referring to the USG presence in Iraq during interviews with local media.  The forty-something Shia cleric, who told us he teaches religious classes in Najaf's traditional Shia seminary (Hawzah) and also operates a media-oriented NGO, defied us to name one Iraqi politician who has ever referred to Americans as "friends" in local or Pan-Arab media.  When Iraqi politicians talk to Sistani and the Marja'iyyah, he continued, "they blame you for all of Iraq's problems, even their own failure to deliver public services."  He chided the USG for dealing exclusively with Iraq's political class and ignoring contact with the Iraqi people.  Employing an Iraqi proverb that says "our brains are in our eyes", Klanter exclaimed that Iraqis find it almost impossible to believe news reports that the USG has spent billions of dollars in Iraq "since we don't see any buildings or hospitals or structures that you have built here."  He chuckled softly when we replied that the important thing is for the Iraqi people to see the GOI constructing buildings and other structures for their benefit.  Sadrist Insights and Elections ------------------------------  3. (C) Klanter, whose two brothers are reportedly married to sisters of Moqtada al-Sadr and who claims to maintain good relations with many senior Sadrists, said that Sadr will most likely extend the freeze on his Jaysh al-Mehdi militia beyond its scheduled expiration at the end of February. Characterizing the education level and mentality of most Sadrists as "backward, almost like they are from a cave," Klanter told us the USG can contain such people and change their thinking by "sending them to the U.S. and exposing them to new ideas."  In reply to our rejoinder that we seek cordial relations with Sadrists who wish to participate  BAGHDAD 00000293  002 OF 002   peacefully in Iraq's democratic future, Klanter replied that "they hear you say this but then they look at your unbalanced relationship with ISCI and they don't believe your words." Klanter added gratuitously that, in his opinion, ISCI is more dangerous than the Sadrists because it is fronting for Iran. Conceding that some part of Sadr's movement is allied with Iran, he said Moqtada remains popular because "even though he is in Iran, we hear that he is constantly quarreling with the Iranians."  Jabr chimed in that the USG has unwittingly driven Sadr into Tehran's arms.  4. (C) Klanter pleaded for USG pressure on the GOI and political blocs to hold early provincial elections: such pressure will be needed, he claimed, since no one but the Sadrists and Grand Ayatollah Sistani are eager for elections.  Characterizing the 2005 "closed list" electoral system as a failure, Klanter also urged us to push for an "open list" system.  He said the Sadrists can live with either an open or closed list system "because they know they have a very loyal base of popular support and they realize they will not be able to attract other voters beyond that base."  "Even though I am a man of religion," Klanter asserted, "I don't support religious political parties because they have been shown to be a complete failure in Iraq and in Iran."  Frustrated Sistani Wants More Indirect USG Contact --------------------------------------------- -----  5. (C) Repeating many of the points he made during a January 8 meeting and which he claimed were conveyed to him directly by Sistani (Ref A), Klanter said Sistani's greatest fear is the degree of Iranian penetration in Iraq.  He claimed that Sistani is in possession of detailed Iranian plans to dominate Iraq's political, economic, and religious institutions.  Klanter added that Sistani wants to know what the USG is planning to do about this (we note that we have heard unsubstantiated reports that Klanter may have ties to Iranian intelligence and is held at something like arm's length by his maternal uncle Sistani).  He said Sistani is now more open to indirect contact with the USG than ever before and is frustrated that previous emissaries were not reliable: we pointed out to Klanter that Fouad Ajami and Ahmad Chalabi, two claimed "emissaries" who Klanter cited by name, are not carrying messages for the USG.  He said Sistani's failure to hear from the Americans is leading the Grand Ayatollah to think that there might actually be some merit to a circulating Iraqi public conspiracy theory that the USG and Tehran have done a deal over Iraq.  Klanter ended the meeting by warning that only Sistani and the Marja'iyyah can stand up to Iran and Shia extremism, adding that if the USG does not support Sistani, "Iran will devour Iraq."   BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000295  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PBTS, IR, IZ, KU SUBJECT: IRAN-IRAQ BORDER NEGOTIATIONS TO RESUME IN FEBRUARY  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 3481 B. 07 BAGHDAD 3159  BAGHDAD 00000295  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: ACTING POL-MIL COUNSELOR KAREN H. SASAHARA, REASONS 1.4( B) AND (D)  1. (S/NF) SUMMARY: At a January 28 meeting with Acting PolMil Counselor, Iraqi MFA Under Secretary Mohammad Hamoud discussed GOI preparations for a further round of bilateral talks with Iran regarding their shared border.  He indicated talks would take place on February 19, since negotiations planned for January had been cancelled at the request of Iran, citing the Ashura holiday.  While repeatedly referring to the Iranians as "difficult" to deal with, Hamoud revealed that in September of last year Iranian FM Mottaki had told him that Iran agreed that the course of the Shatt al Arab (SAA) should be returned to the state it was in when the Iran-Iraq border had been demarcated under the 1975 Algiers Accord.  2. (S/NF) Redirecting the watercourse and demarcating the border as agreed under the Algiers Accord would fulfill the key Iraqi objective of keeping its offshore oil terminals in Iraqi waters and as far from the border as possible.  Iraq,s delegation will utilize a survey of the SAA completed by Basrah University last year as a basis for discussion with the Iranians.  In addition to the course of the river and demarcation of the border, Iraq,s other goals for the negotiation will include agreement on removal of wrecks obstructing navigation and remediation of mines, both of which are largely leftover from the Iran-Iraq war.  Hamoud explained that the GOI was not planning to approach Kuwait regarding disputes about their maritime border around Umm Qasr in the near future, as they did not want to jeopardize otherwise improving relations.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------------------------- NEGOTIATIONS TO TAKE PLACE IN FEBRUARY --------------------------------------  3. (S/NF) Acting PolMil Counselor, joined by the NAVCENT LNO to MNF-I and an MNF-I legal officer, met with Iraqi MFA Under Secretary Mohammad Hamoud January 28 to discuss GOI  SIPDIS preparations for a further round of bilateral talks with Iran regarding their shared border.  Hamoud, head of delegation for Iraq, related that negotiations planned for January had been cancelled at the request of Iran, citing the Ashura holiday.  These talks had now been rescheduled for February 19.  The Iraqi delegation will include intelligence, military, and port officials, among others.  Iraq,s goals for the negotiation were a resolution of the riverine border running through the Shatt al-Arab (SAA), agreement on removal of the many wrecks obstructing navigation, and remediation of mines emplaced during the Iran-Iraq war.  Hamoud, explained that removal of the wrecks will also require legal notice to the owners.  ----------------------------------- ALGIERS ACCORD AS A BASIS FOR TALKS -----------------------------------  4. (S/NF) President Talabani,s public repudiation (rhetorical, not legal) of the 1975 Algiers Accord (hereinafter "the Accord"), which delineated the Iran-Iraq border, had drawn a strong Iranian reaction and made his job more difficult, confided Hamoud.  However, while Iraq would avoid acknowledging the Accord, the GOI would agree to use its delineation of the border as this was seen to be in Iraq,s interest.  The border as established under the Accord would provide a greater buffer between Iraq,s offshore oil facilities and the Iranian border than might be the case if the line were redrawn today, since the course of the SAA had shifted westward, especially near its mouth.  Hamoud displayed a chart drawn up based on a 2007 survey of the SAA conducted by Basrah University, graphically detailing this shift which was as much as 1.7 kilometers from its course in 1975.  --------------------------------------- IRAN AMENABLE TO SHIFTING COURSE OF SAA ---------------------------------------  5. (S/NF) While repeatedly referring to the Iranians as "difficult" to deal with, Hamoud revealed that in September of last year Iranian FM Mottaki had told him that Iran agreed that the course of the SAA should be returned to the course  BAGHDAD 00000295  002.2 OF 002   it followed when the Iran-Iraq border had been demarcated under the Accord.  The border would then be defined by the thalweg as formalized in the Accord.  Iraq had considerable leverage because in some locations the course of the river now completely flowed through Iraqi territory, allowing Iraq to close the river to Iranian navigation in those locations if it so desired.  The costs of redirecting the SAA would be split evenly between the parties, according to Hamoud.  While Iran preferred to activate the permanent joint committee referred to in the Accord, Iraq would seek a less formal mechanism to work out implementation of any final agreement. Hamoud foresaw that negotiations could take as long as one year.  When asked about implementation of the agreement between border officials reached in August (reftel), Hamoud replied that while the Iranians "say yes" to such coordination, they don,t seem willing to put it into practice.  --------------------------------------------- --- KUWAIT BORDER IN DISPUTE, BUT A LOWER PRIORITY --------------------------------------------- ---  6. (S/NF) Hamoud explained that the GOI was not planning to approach Kuwait regarding disputes about their maritime border around Umm Qasr in the near future, as they did not want to jeopardize otherwise improving relations.  Iraq did not recognize the maritime border with Kuwait established by UNSCR 833, which follows the midline of the Khawr Abd Allah waterway, and instead claimed the entire waterway.  However, the GOI saw the issues on the Kuwaiti border as less important than those with Iran, and Hamoud was optimistic that a resolution could be worked out with Kuwait at an appropriate time.  7. (S/NF) COMMENT:  Our discussion with Hamoud confirms a maturation of the GOI position regarding the status of the Algiers Accord since the first round of these bilateral talks (reftel).  While the Algiers Accord "brand" remains anathema due to its association with Saddam, the GOI now agrees to its delineation of the border, removing a major point of contention with Iran.  President Talabani,s public "repudiation" of the Algiers Accord in December appears to have been walked back, at least in substance, making a successful round of talks with Iran more likely.  END COMMENT. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000296  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: SADRIST SWEEP OF SOUTH NOT A GIVEN  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires, a.i. Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) This is a joint Baghdad POL - ePRT, PRT, and REO reporting cable.  2.  (C) Summary: Contrary to popular opinion, it is not a foregone conclusion that the Sadrist Trend will sweep the southern governorates in the next round of provincial elections.  Numerous PRT engagements suggest that the reduction in Coalition Forces (CF) presence and continuing militia violence have decreased the appeal of the Sadrist narrative and threatened Sadr's popularity.  Sadr's freeze declaration and attempts to expand into service delivery are attempts to remake the Sadr Trend and Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) into legitimate political organizations.  However, continuing battles with Badr, the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and CF have weakened JAM's street presence and have limited its ability to co-opt existing service delivery mechanisms outside of Baghdad.  Lacking control of official government institutions in many areas, unable to deliver services, saddled with a deserved reputation for violence, and struggling to adapt their message to a diminished Coalition presence, Sadr and his followers may struggle to gain a significant number of seats in the next round of provincial elections.  ISCI's election prospects will be reported septel.  End Summary.  Police, Badr, and CF Persecution --------------------------------  3.  (C) Though the conventional wisdom holds that the Sadrist Trend will emerge as the big winner in the southern governorates during the next round of provincial elections, such a victory is not a foregone conclusion.  There are several reasons to believe that OMS/JAM may face a surprisingly difficult electoral battle.  For example, in several provinces JAM is on the defensive.  ISF commanders in Dhi Qar, Babil, Karbala, Wasit, Diwaniyah and Muthanna have repeatedly targeted OMS offices and JAM members.  Only in Maysan does JAM essentially control the security services, while in Basrah the police commander is politically neutral but hampered by JAM infiltration of the police force.  Some of what JAM perceives as ISF persecution is legitimate response to JAM violence, yet there is little question that, where possible, Badr uses the IP to weaken its primary opponent.  Despite nominally adhering to a public cease-fire, Badr militia units have also attacked JAM elements directly. Finally, CF have continued interdiction and arrest operations in some areas of the south.  The cumulative effect of these operations has weakened OMS/JAM's structural and administrative base and hindered the Sadrist Trend,s ability to expand into humanitarian charities and service delivery.  Public and Tribal Resentment ----------------------------  4.  (C) Numerous contacts indicate a shift in public perception against religious parties due to the inefficiency, corruption, and violence linked to religious parties and their militias.  This shift also reflects growing public resentment towards Iran's support of militias and political parties, particularly outside of Karbala and Najaf.  A Sadrist government in Maysan and Sadrist mayor in al-Kut will be judged on their development and governance performance. Meanwhile, the public reputation of Sadrists throughout the south will continue to suffer due to JAM-associated violence, including the unrest in Karbala during the Shabiniyah pilgrimage in August 2007 and the assassinations of public officials.  For Sadr and JAM, this general shift is compounded by the declining power of an anti-coalition narrative.  The diminishing CF presence in the south and continuing violence between Iraqis has shifted responsibility to Iraqi institutions and parties.  As a movement founded on opposition to the coalition, this shift directly threatens JAM's base of support.  5.  (C) This public backlash extends to the south's tribes. JAM recruits from populations of unemployed young men in urban areas.  Many of these men have tribal ties, and their involvement in militia activity has subsequently pulled the tribes into violent conflict, costing lives and resources. In response, many sheikhs are taking steps against JAM.  In Muthanna, tribal leaders forced JAM members to pay blood debts at 10 times the normal rate or face expulsion from the province.  The resulting financial burdens incurred on tribes with JAM members caused tribes to withdraw their support for any tribal member belonging to JAM.  Similarly, the Karbala Tribal Council ruled that paying of a blood debt is no longer required for the killing of a tribal member associated with a militia after JAM repeatedly violated an agreement signed with tribal leaders not to kill tribal members.   BAGHDAD 00000296  002 OF 002   6.  (C) Established parties such as ISCI, Da'wa and Fadhilah have the advantage of being able to counter anti-religious party sentiment by using their control of government institutions to distribute goods, money and services to voters before an election.  The Sadrists lack real political control outside of Wasit and Maysan and are correspondingly less able to use official largesse to guarantee votes. Instead, JAM is likely to rely on voter intimidation in areas where it maintains a formidable street presence, particularly Wasit, Basrah, and Maysan.  Failure in service delivery ---------------------------  7.  (C) Part of JAM's popular support in Baghdad stems from its involvement in service delivery.  Despite its best efforts, JAM has been largely unable to duplicate this model in the southern governorates.  JAM lacks the organizational structure and knowledge base to effectively distribute resources across the south, even in Basrah.  Similarly, constant battles with CF, ISF and Badr have weakened JAM,s street presence and prevented it from co-opting existing delivery mechanisms.  In Babil, attempts to expand into service delivery have lagged due to continued pressure from the security forces, a normalizing fuel market, and lowered demand for ice during winter months.  There are no reported efforts by JAM of any significance in other southern governorates.  Comment: Political futures of OMS/JAM -------------------------------------  8.  (C) Comment:  The Sadrist Trend,s struggle to maintain its powerbase in the south raises several possible political futures for OMS/JAM.  One is that the Sadrist movement will continue to fracture, with mainstream elements distancing themselves from JAM and Iran while emphasizing a "core" Sadrist message of Iraqi nationalism and opposition to foreign intervention.  The second is that public dissatisfaction with religious parties will create a third space for independent and more secular candidates able to capitalize on public disenchantment with religious parties. Finally, there remains a chance that OMS/JAM will overcome their current challenges and increase their political power through a combination of populism, intimidation, and social welfare.  The degree to which any of these trends emerge will depend largely on local factors and vary widely from province to province.  However, it remains doubtful that any single Shi'a party, be it Sadr or ISCI, will sweep the southern elections.  End Comment. BUTENIS 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000297  SIPDIS  SBU SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ SUBJECT: PRT MAYSAN: MAYSAN'S TRIBAL LANDSCAPE  1.  (U) The material in this cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly.  SIPDIS  2.  (U) This is a PRT Maysan reporting cable.  3.  (SBU) Summary: Maysan,s tribal landscape is primarily made up of five tribal confederations and over thirty tribal organizations.  The Bani Lam, the Albu Muhammad, and the az-Zairaj are the most prominent tribal confederations and each provincial region features a number of notable tribal organizations.  End Summary.  Tribal Structure ----------------  4.  (SBU) Maysan,s tribal landscape is primarily made up of five tribal confederations (qabeela) and over thirty tribal organizations ('ashira).  The most basic unit of Iraqi tribal structure is the extended family (khams or bayt).  A number of extended families can form a clan (fakhdh) and a group of clans can form a tribal organization.  Finally, a group of tribal organizations can form a confederation.  Tribal authority ----------------  5. (SBU) The authority of tribal leaders, called shaykhs (plural shuyukh) historically stemmed both from personal influence and largesse as well as from nobility and lineage. In theory, especially among Shi'a tribes, leadership is confined to one lineage.  In practice, though, authority often turns out to be a function of the success of a leader in defending the tribal patrimony and resolving and managing conflict.  The heart of the tribal system is theoretically a fairly democratic process of consultation in the tribal council and, in some cases, the ability of members to challenge the shaykh.  Likewise, tribal confederations by their very nature are voluntary alignments from which each tribe is free to secede at will.  Historically, tribal alliances were not hard and fast, but the tribal system supplied the people with a needed identity and sense of security and a blueprint for the resolution of conflicts. Finally, the tribal system in much of the Shi,a Arab south is somewhat different from that of the Sunni Arab center-north, in that southern tribes are reportedly more fragmented: the tribal shaykh often shares leadership with sayyids (descendents of the Prophet ) plural: sadah) and the  ulama (learned religious leaderhip).  The Confederations ------------------  6.  (SBU) The Bani Lam, Albu Muhammad, and az-Zairaj are the most significant confederations.  The Bani Lam is a pastoral confederation that migrated from the lower Tigris into Persian territory (now Iran).  The Iranian province of Ilam to the northeast of Maysan shares the name of the founder of the Iraqi section of the tribe.  The Albu Muhammad reportedly descend from the Zubayd  Azza tribe (located north of Baghdad in provinces like Diyala) and is made up of both settled cultivators (fallah) and the Ma,dan.  The az-Zairaj traditionally cultivated rice along the branches of the Tigris in the southwestern corner of the province.  Areas of influence ------------------  7.  (SBU) The Maysan confederations are the Bani Lam, the Albu Muhammad, the az-Zairaj, the al-Muntafiq, and the Ka'ab.  Historically, the Bani Lam,s area of influence stretched from northern Maysan to al- Amara and covers the following regions:  Ali al-Gharbi and al- Amara.  The Albu Muhammad are influential south of al- Amara in the following regions: al- Amara, al-Majjar al-Kabeer (MAK), Qal,at Salih, and al-Kahla.  Al- Amara was established during the Ottoman period at the boundary between the Bani Lam and the Albu Muhammad.  The az-Zairaj groupings are primarily found in the al-Maymona region and the al-Muntafiq (mostly in Dhi Qar) and Ka'ab (mostly in Iran) reach into the southwestern and southeastern corners of the provinces respectively.  Notable tribes --------------  8.  (SBU) Each of the major Maysan confederations consists of several tribal organizations.  In the  Ali al-Gharbi region, the as-Suwaid reside along the border with Iran.  The as-Sa'adi tribe also reside along the border near the at-Teeb border crossing.  The Albu Darraj, the al-Bahadil, the al-Gharrawi, the al-Mussawi, and the at-Tameem reside in the al- Amara region.  The al-Ba'azun, the al-Issa, and the ash-Shaghanba are in al-Maymona.  The al-Fartus and the Albu  BAGHDAD 00000297  002 OF 002   'Ali are located in al-Majjar al-Kabeer (MAK).  The al-Faraijat and the Albu Bakhait straddle MAK and Qal,at Salih.  In addition to these two cross-regional sub-tribes, in Qal,at Salih there are the Bani Malik, the at-Turaba, the al-Aanza, the ash-Shamus, the al-Hedrea, the Albu Ghanam, and the an-Nawafil.  These final two tribes in addition to the Albu Bukhait make up what is known as the Shadda or a region in southeastern Maysan that traditionally contained a &large and unruly8 portion of the Albu Muhammad.  Finally, al-Kahla is home to the remainder of the as-Sudan.  This is not an exhaustive list of the sub-tribes present in each region, but represents some of the more significant tribes.  Moreover, many of these tribes can be found in other regions of the province, particularly in the urban centers of al- Amara and MAK.  9.  (SBU) Comment: Maysan is a relatively opaque province, but PRT efforts continue to shed light on the overall social and political environment in the province.  In discussions regarding the social and political structure of Maysan, tribal affiliation has taken a backseat to religio-political association, but tribes maintain an important place in Maysan society and may prove to wield significant social, if not political, influence.  The PRT will continue to develop a more comprehensive understanding of Maysan,s tribes in order to facilitate broader engagement with the people of Maysan. END COMMENT. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000298  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2018 TAGS: MOPS, PHUM, PREL, PTER, ICRC, IZ SUBJECT: SUCCESSFUL ICRC VISIT TO CAMP BUCCA  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 3996 B. 07 BAGHDAD 3748 C. 07      BAGHDAD 3480 D. 07 BAGHDAD 3003  Classified By: ACTING POL-MIL COUNSELOR KAREN H. SASAHARA, REASONS 1.4( B) AND (D)  1. (C) An ICRC inspection team visited the MNF-I Theater Internment Facility at Camp Bucca January 8-28.  This trip, the first major ICRC inspection of Camp Bucca since November 2006, came after several months of high-level pressure on the ICRC, including direct requests from Ambassador Crocker and MNF-I Commanding General Petraeus.  ICRC inspectors expressed appreciation for the openness of Camp staff and said that they gained a great appreciation for the operation through widespread interaction with MNF-I personnel at Bucca. Tension within the detainee population, an issue during the previous inspection, is no longer an issue despite its doubling in size in the last year to the current level of approximately 20,000.  2. (C) The inspection assessed Camp Bucca under the standards of Geneva IV (the relevant Geneva Convention which covers the protection of civilians in armed conflict).  There were no allegations of abuse, misbehavior or mistreatment against any U.S. personnel, a major achievement given the size of the facility.  The ICRC felt the three allegations of misbehavior or mistreatment made against Iraqi Corrections Officers during their inspection were taken seriously and investigated appropriately by MNF-I.  Minor issues for resolution such as the number of hours of access to toilets, amount of clothing, and thickness of blankets available to some detainees were addressed during the inspection or are being worked on by MNF-I.  MNF-I is taking under consideration the perceived shortcomings of the Modular Detainee Housing Units.  3. (C) Future ICRC visits to Camp Bucca are expected to take place every 3-4 months, and logistical planning to support them is already underway. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000299  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/01/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: ARTICLE 140: WHERE ARE WE NOW?  REF: A. BAGHDAD 244 (MOSUL BLAST)      B. BAGHDAD 225 (SA AND KURD COR)      C. BAGHDAD 205 (ANBAR BORDER CONCERNS)      D. BAGHDAD 203 (UNAMI SRSG)      E. BAGHDAD 127 AND PREVIOUS (KIRKUK BOYCOTT)      F. BAGHDAD 107 ("NATIONAL PROJECT")      G. BAGHDAD 66 (KURDS-MALIKI)      H. 07 BAGHDAD 4199 (KURDS-MALIKI)      I. 07 BAGHDAD 3956 (ABDEL MEHDI ON REFERENDUM)      J. 07 BAGHDAD 3924 (BARHAM SALIH ON REFERENDUM)  Classified By: Senior Adviser David Pearce for Reasons 1.4 (B) AND (D)  1. (C) Summary: The issue of Article 140 and the status of Kirkuk and the disputed territories is solidly in the middle of the national debate, although there are significant disagreements on all sides in terms of addressing this complex problem.  A fair, transparent and agreed resolution to the issues involved is fundamental to good relations between Kurds and the rest of Iraq. In December the 3 plus 1 and KRG President Masoud Barzani agreed to invite the United Nations to provide technical assistance and make progress towards establishing a process for resolution within six months.  Along with UNAMI, we will continue our strong engagement in several key areas: technical, technical/political, national political and security.  End Summary.  Technically, What is Article 140? ---------------------------------  2. (C) Article 140 of the Iraqi Constitution directs the GOI to resolve Kirkuk and other disputed territories via a mechanism outlined in Article 58 of the Transitional Administrative Law.  It calls for determining the will of citizens of disputed areas through "normalization," census, and referendum to be held by December 31, 2007.  PM Maliki appointed a high committee in August 2006 to make recommendations on Article 140 implementation.  The Committee has been developing a process for adjudicating restitution and compensation packages for persons forcibly resettled or deported during the Saddam era who wish to return to their homes/property or be resettled in provinces of origin.  It has also been addressing property claims issues, in conjunction with the Commission for the Resolution of Real Property Disputes (CRRPD).  This process is ongoing, but it has far to go.  3. (C) Article 140 also requires the agreed revision of boundary changes made in the Saddam era.  The Iraqi Government and its Presidency Council is to make recommendations to the Council of Representatives.  The PM's high committee submitted a set of boundary adjustment recommendations to the Prime Minister on December 31.  But, if members of the Presidency Council cannot agree unanimously on these recommendations, they are to appoint a neutral arbitrator.  If they cannot agree on an arbitrator, they are to request the United Nations to appoint one.  Practically and Politically, Article 140 is about the Future of Iraq ---------------------------------------  4. (C) The lapse of the December 31, 2007 deadline for a referendum on the status of Kirkuk and the disputed territories caused more than just the specter of a constitutional question -- it forced a fresh look at the Article 140 process as a key part of national political accommodation.  Deputy Prime Minister Barham Saleh told us in December it was the "hardest issue in Iraq" (ref J). Resolution is key to Kurdish-Arab relations.  Establishing an agreed process on 140 could facilitate progress on other key legislation important to reconciliation, such as provincial powers, elections and hydrocarbons -- and vice versa.  5. (C) By contrast, the lack of resolution feeds the insurgency, as Al-Qaeda and affiliated terrorists trade on Arab fears of Kurdish encroachment. The January 23 blast that leveled an entire city block in Mosul, killing at least 38 and wounding hundreds, is but one recent example.  Even in the midst of responding to a humanitarian crisis, GOI and provincial leaders were focused on the political divide between Kurds and Sunni Arabs, and efforts to exploit it (ref A).  6. (C) Over the past four years the Kurds have methodically extended their political and security influence well beyond the old Green Line farther into the adjoining governorates of Ninewa, Kirkuk/Tameem, Salah al-Din, and Diyala. Central government authority was weak or absent in 2003, and the Kurds moved Pesh Merga and Asayesh intelligence forces into  BAGHDAD 00000299  002 OF 004   Kirkuk and other adjoining areas.  In 2005 the Sunnis boycotted provincial elections, and the Kurds assertively stepped in.  The result was Kurdish political dominance on the Provincial Councils of Ninewa and Kirkuk, and strong representation in the governorates like Diyala and Salah al-Din.  7. (C)  The perception of Kurdish overreach, matched with the perception of complicity by a Shia-dominated GOI and an acquiescent coalition, bred Arab/Turkmen/minority resentment. This has been expertly exploited by AQI and other groups to fuel the insurgency, and it has undermined the Kurds' own case with other Iraqi groups for redress of grievances. Consequently, hard as the complex of Article 140 issues is, leaving them to fester could undermine the security and stability of a lengthy swath of disputed districts that extend from the Iraq-Turkey-Syria triborder area in the northwest, southeast to below Mosul and Kirkuk, and then down the Jabal Hamrin ridgeline to the hills of the Iran-Iraq border in Mandali, just east and north of Baghdad.  8. (C)  Even pro-implementation Article 140 high committee chairman (and Minister of Science and Technology) Raid Fahmi (Iraqqiya, Sunni Arab) told us the Kurds need to counteract their image of being "very greedy" in terms of Kirkuk. The failure to address the issue causes government instability as well.  The lack of progress triggered political realignment in 2006 when the Kurdish political parties played a significant role in bringing down the al-Jafari government -- due to the perception he had cut a deal with Turkey not to move on Article 140 implementation.  The very same issue -- failure to move on 140 -- again played a large part in the Kurds' threat to bring down the Maliki government this past December (refs G and H).  Enter UN Technical Assistance -----------------------------  9. (C) On the positive side, after U.S. and UN engagement with Iraqi leaders, in mid-December the Presidency Council, the  Prime Minister and Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Massoud Barzani reached tacit agreement on a six-month delay in implementation and welcomed UMAMI technical assistance to find a way forward.  Although not legally necessary, the Kurdish National Assembly (KNA) voted on December 26 to approve a six-month extension in implementation, providing the Kurdish leadership with needed political cover.  (Note: This six-month timeframe should not be viewed as replacing a December 31 deadline with a June 30 deadline for a referendum.  UNAMI describes the timeframe as intended to demonstrate its willingness to start the process and produce results as quickly as possible.  UNAMI considers that it is not bound by any deadlines, other than those in UN Security Council resolutions, and it does not interpret this as a new deadline for Article 140 or a referendum.  End Note.)  In fact, a referendum may or may not ultimately be necessary to resolving Article 140 issues;  many Iraqi leaders are talking about a political agreement as preferable (refs I and J).  Even the KDP, while pressing for a resolution of the issues within six months, has privately dropped insistence on a referendum.  Political Dialogue Increasing -----------------------------  10. (C) Although supporting radically different political positions on the issue, reinvigorated political dialogue has since begun.  The so-called "National Project" announced on January 13 is one example, wherein some mostly Sunni Council of Representatives (COR) members touted a new coalition that is widely viewed as anti-Kurdish (ref F).   Increased rhetoric against Article 140 by Sunni Arab and Turkmen politicians is making some Kurds nervous (ref B),  but such political discussion, even if ugly, represents the beginning of national engagement on an issue fundamental to a national political accommodation.  Progress Locally in Kirkuk --------------------------  11. (C) In another encouraging development on the local level, Sunni Arab members of the Kirkuk Provincial Council (PC) ended their year-long boycott and returned to the PC in December (ref E).  Negotiations to bring about conditions for the Turkmen bloc to return have yet to show similar progress, and the Turkmen -- backed up by Turkey -- have complained via letter and demarche to the UNSGY about UNAMI's role in promoting political agreement among the blocs on an additional six months to find a way forward on Article 140. Kurdish bloc willingness to make concessions in Kirkuk to end the boycott illustrates that the Kurds understand that they  BAGHDAD 00000299  003 OF 004   have overreached in forcing their territorial aims and now need to address legitimate grievances, both in Kirkuk and in other disputed territories, such as Ninewa.  Some Reject Article 140    But It Should Not be Ignored -------------------------------  12. (C) At the same time, Sunni Arabs, Turkmen and some minorities reject not only Kurdish territorial moves, but in some cases the legitimacy of Article 140 itself.  They posit that constitutional reform of Article 140 must be completed before addressing disputed territories, including Kirkuk. Some argue that the article itself expired after the December 31 deadline passed and it is no longer valid.   According to press reports, two non-Kurdish members of the Article 140 high committee resigned over claims the article has expired. The CoR's constitutional reform committee referred the article to the Federal Supreme Court in early January to get an opinion on its constitutionality.  The likelihood is that Article 140 will be either validated or extended, because this narrow legal issue is really a political one. Politically the Kurds will not let it go away and the Maliki government needs the Kurds to survive.  13. (C) Regardless of its constitutional status, the issues that Article 140 (and TAL 58) was intended to address will remain central to Iraq's national political dialogue.  At the same time, they are unlikely to be adequately covered by simply following the normalization-census-referendum sequence laid out in TAL 58 step-by-step.  Putting any resolution in place will require a series of political deals along all of the affected areas from the Syrian border to Mandali.  As Senior Advisor noted to several Kurdish CoR members on January 22, "Article 140 is more than a referendum, or a deadline, or even settling the future status of Kirkuk. Article 140 is about defining the relations between the Kurds and the rest of Iraq" (ref B).  Boundary Changes Recommendation Submitted to PM --------------------------------------------- --  14. (C) In an effort to show some action before the expiration of the December 31, 2007 constitutional deadline, the  Article 140 high committee submitted -- on December 31 -- recommendations to the Prime Minister on proposed boundary changes in the north, south and near Baghdad.  Committee chairman Raid Fahmi characterized the recommendations as a technical rolling back of boundary changes that Saddam Hussein made for political reasons.  The recommendations clearly reflect Shia and Kurdish druthers rather than Sunni Arab.  For example, one most notable effect of the recommendations would be to restore the pre-Baath boundaries of Kirkuk Province (which was halved in size and renamed Tameem by various Baath-era decrees) by reattaching Kurdish-majority regions now in neighboring provinces. Another key recommendation is to move the vast Nukhayb district bordering Saudi Arabia from Anbar province to Karbala province, an idea that has already engendered loud protests by Anbaris (ref C).  However, as Fahmi admits, the report should be viewed as a trigger for political action and not as the likely end result.  The proposed changes must still go to the Presidency Council (including through Vice President Hashimi) for political agreement, followed by the CoR.  For now, they sit in the PM's office, and there is no expectation that they will be forwarded anytime soon.  For them to move, a comprehensive political agreement will be required.  And the current package addresses key Kurdish and Shia concerns, but not those of the Sunnis, e.g. in Ninewa.  Way Forward on Four Tracks --------------------------  15. (C) Moving towards a fair, transparent and agreed resolution will require continued active engagement by the U.S., UN and others.  Given the complexity of the issues involved, UNAMI appears to intend, as a general rule, to start with the least difficult issues, in the hope of showing some initial progress, and then move gradually to the more difficult things, keeping the toughest ones, i.e. Kirkuk, for last. Working on technical matters on the front end will also allow time for political discussion.  16. (C)  The issues can be divided into four main tracks:  -- Technical: The Article 140 high committee and the GOI have advanced some aspects of normalization, such as compensation of returning Wafadin.  Other areas, such as the resolution of property disputes, are woefully behind.   Progress can and should be accelerated.  To clear the backlog, the Prime Minister's Office will need to address staff and resource  BAGHDAD 00000299  004 OF 004   issues at the Commission on Resolution of Real Property Disputes (CRRPD).  To assist with this, UNAMI is also looking for an expert to advise the CRRPD.  -- Technical/Political: As previewed by SRSG Staffan De Mistura (ref D), UNAMI is using its expanded mandate in UNSCR 1770 to assist with resolving disputed internal boundaries. It is currently identifying several disputed areas for in-depth assessment using a wide set of criteria to complement electoral constituency mapping (using the 2005 election results).  Such criteria include, but are not limited to, population demographics, topography, natural resources, strategic assets, cultural heritage, trade and economic interests and historical boundaries.  UNAMI believes that such assessment will help shape the final political compromises that will be required by all stakeholders for a new boundary to be drawn that will be seen as legitimate and therefore contribute to Iraq's long-term stability.  -- National Political: Progress on Article 140 issues will help, and be helped by, progress on other aspects of national political accommodation, such as elections, provincial powers, hydrocarbons and revenue distribution.  A political deal on Article 140, and particularly the status of Kirkuk, may ultimately hinge on how well all of these issues come together.  For example, codifying national sharing of oil revenues could help alleviate concerns about the political loyalty and ties of an expanded KRG.  The requisite consensus will need to involve not only the 3 plus 1 leadership (Presidency Council and Prime Minister) and KRG President Barzani but also fair consideration of the rights of other key stakeholders, such as the Turkmen, Christians, Yazidis, and other minorities.  -- Security: At all stages, there will be a direct interlock between continued progress on security and the ability and incentive of Iraqi politicians to achieve political progress on the difficult issues inherent in Article 140.  Standing up Iraqi Army and Iraqi Police units that are viewed as neutral will be increasingly important in disputed areas.  It will be particularly key in localities where the Pesh Merga and Asayesh have overreached and where their presence may need to be rolled back in the context of an overall political accord.  Accordingly, local policing, Sahwa movements and continued coalition/ISF operations against AQI and the insurgency will be an essential prerequisite for political progress, whether in Kirkuk or other disputed areas around the country. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000300  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: DOWN BUT HARDLY OUT: ISCI 2008 ELECTION PROSPECTS  REF: A. HILLAH 000007      B. HILLAH 000174      C. HILLAH 000006      D. BAGHDAD 00230  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1.  (U) This is a joint southern PRT, REO, ePRT and Baghdad POL reporting cable.  2.  (C) Summary: Public opinion is turning against the religious parties, including Da'wa, ISCI, and the Sadr Trend, throughout the south.  This reflects widespread disappointment with the performance and corruption of the provincial governments, a backlash against violence linked to Shi'a militias, and the perception that the religious parties are beholden to Iran.  ISCI also risks losing further popular support for its outspoken stance on regions formation. However, the political realities of Iraq will likely prevent this shift in public opinion from translating into real political change in the south.  Although ISCI will struggle to maintain its current level of political control, the religious parties are likely to maintain their dominance of provincial politics.  The election prospects of the Sadr Trend will be reported septel.  End Summary.  ISCI's current political strength ---------------------------------  3.  (C) ISCI emerged as the clear winner in the 2005 provincial elections and is the dominant political party of the south.  ISCI currently holds a majority of seats in Babil, Diwaniyah, Karbala, and Najaf and a significant number of seats in Dhi Qar and Muthanna.  Five governors (Babil, Diwaniyah, Muthanna, Najaf, Dhi Qar) are also ISCI members. However, ISCI will struggle to maintain this current level of political power due to a public backlash against religious parties arising from discontent with the provincial and national government, its ties to the Badr Corps and Iran, and its outspoken advocacy of a nine-governorate region in the south.  Discontent with provincial, national government --------------------------------------------- --  4.  (C) Corruption and poor governance are seen by many southern Iraqis as the single greatest problems facing the country.  Most provincial governments are run and staffed by people with little administrative or budgetary experience, and the public frequently complains of government failures in service delivery, job creation, and economic development.  As the party with the most political power in the south, ISCI stands to lose the most from this public discontent.  Even in governorates controlled by other parties, ISCI could still suffer a backlash due to its close association with the national government.  The single exception to these challenges is probably ISCI's spiritual and political capital of Najaf.  Najaf Governor Asad al-Ta'ie (ISCI) has the support of the ISCI-controlled PC and is regarded as an able politician.  Ties to Badr, Iran ------------------  5.  (C) With some exceptions Badr has been able to integrate itself into the police forces, and in many southern governorates Badr is synonymous with the IP.  Muthanna provides a good example: ISCI PC Chair Abdul Hussein al-Dhalami is also the chief commander of the local Badr corps.  Badr members are also present in various security organs, including the Criminal Investigative Unit (CIU), the TSU, and the Mustafa Groups (district-level tribal shock  SIPDIS troops led by IP commanders).  However, links to Badr could hurt ISCI candidates in other governorates.  Despite the success of "Operation Lion's Leap," contacts in Diwaniyah have expressed concern over Badr's growing influence and recent procurement of T-72 tanks from unknown sources (reftel A).  In Babil, public perception of an ISCI/Badr link in the assassination of IP Chief Gen. Qais has increased public protests against the governor as well as ISCI/Badr and benefited their political opponents (reftel B).  Finally, ISCI is widely perceived as the Iraqi party most beholden to Iran, and this perception could hurt its electoral chances among nationalist voters in the south.  Region Formation ----------------  6.  (C) The upcoming debate over regions formation could also impact ISCI's electoral chances.  (Note: The 2006 Regions Formation Law goes into effect in April 2008.  End Note.) ISCI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim has repeatedly and publicly  BAGHDAD 00000300  002 OF 002   called for the formation of a nine-governorate region in the south.  In a recent meeting with the Babil governor and PC members, Hakim told them to "do whatever is possible" to secure the two-thirds vote in the PC necessary for region formation (reftel C).  We do not know but assume similar meetings have taken place between Hakim and ISCI provincial leaders in other governorates.  There is not a large degree of popular or political support for a nine-governorate region.  Contacts indicate that Basrah, Maysan, and Dhi Qar are considering forming their own region, while the Sadrists consider "federalism" to be a malign American concept and oppose regions formation as a first step to partition. Continuing to back the nine-governorate region could cost ISCI further popular support, particularly if the debate over regions formation becomes especially acrimonious or violent.  ISCI responds -------------  7.  (C) ISCI leadership is already taking steps to address the challenges outlined above.  ISCI leaders, including Mohammed al-Mawla, have called for a public education campaign on regions formation and repeatedly denied they wish to "impose" federalism on Iraq.  ISCI renamed both itself (taking out the "revolution" from Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq) and the Badr Organization (instead of the more martial Badr Corps) to emphasize its transition from a spiritual and military resistance movement into an established political party.  ISCI is also courting the Sunni tribal movement Sahwa al-Iraq (SAI) in the hopes of finding a Sunni ally to refute accusations of sectarianism or ties to Iran (reftel D).  Until now these actions do not appear to have succeeded in altering the public's perception of ISCI.  Impact of Iraq's political realities ------------------------------------  8.  (C) Iraq's political realities will likely blunt the impact of the decrease in popular support for religious parties.  First, independent candidates lack the organizational strength and name recognition of the religious parties.  Second, the current government is responsible for drafting the elections law.  It remains to be seen whether the government will acquiesce to any open-list system that could threaten their power base.  Third, ISCI/Badr will use its control over government institutions and religious endowments to shore up support before the election.  Finally, Badr gunmen will likely intimidate both voters and opposition candidates in the run-up to any elections.  Comment: Significant Change Unlikely ------------------------------------  9.  (C) Comment: Absent the sudden emergence of strong independent parties, the political realities of southern politics will likely blunt the impact of the public turn against ISCI and other religious parties.  Although the political balance of the south might shift slightly, the religious parties are likely to maintain their dominance of provincial politics.  It remains unlikely that any one Shi'a party -- including ISCI or the Sadr Trend -- will sweep the south.  End Comment. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000307  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/01/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: ZEBARI URGES INCREMENTAL ACTION ON 140; COMPLAINS OF TURKISH MEDDLING  Classified By: Classified by Special Adviser David Pearce for Reasons 1 .4(d/b)  1.  SUMMARY.  (C)  In a short January 31 meeting, Foreign Minister Zebari told Special Adviser Pearce that to create momentum that would facilitate resolution in areas with more complex problems, the USG and UNAMI should focus their Article 140-related work on disputed territories where the issues were more "clear cut."  Pearce argued that solving technical issues and mustering adequate political will were the only way to move forward across the spectrum of Article 140 topics.  Zebari described UNAMI,s proposals as "workable" and agreed that all parties should downplay deadlines and emphasize implementation progress.  Without being specific, Zebari hinted the Turks were trying to interfere with the 140 process but conceded that they had never raised the issue with him.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C)  Zebari opened by relating to Special Adviser David Pearce and Political Counselor Matthew Tueller that Massoud Barzani was "so upset" by reports the Prime Minister had dissolved the Article 140 committee that he had instructed Zebari to "pack his bags" if they proved correct.  Zebari claimed that Barzani had gotten "the wrong end of the story" and calmed his nephew down by explaining that the Prime Minister had merely postponed a committee hearing about disputed territories in Southern governorates.  Zebari volunteered that President Talabani was in Erbil urging his (PUK) people "to take it easy" on the 140 issue, particularly in light of some recent media comment that 140 was "dead." Zebari assessed that the six-month postponement was "a good thing" which did not at all signal the Article 140 process was dead.  Both agreed that at this stage it would be best if parties downplayed deadlines and stressed implementation progress.  3.  (C)  Zebari noted he had recently spoken to SYGSR Staffan de Mistura who suggested that passing national hydrocarbon legislation would make resolving Article 140 issues easier. Zebari characterized de Mistura's 140 proposals as "workable" and Special Adviser Pearce stressed that the USG "strongly" supported UNAMI and de Mistura's work.  The Secretary's December 18 visit to Kirkuk, Pearce continued, had been intended to signal the USG's commitment to finding a solution to disputed territories issues.  Pearce explained that the Secretary was originally scheduled to visit Anbar, but that  SIPDIS Embassy Baghdad argued successfully that Article 140's importance compelled her visit to Kirkuk.  4.  (C)  Zebari maintained that the USG and UNAMI would be best served to deal first with "clear cut" disputed territories like Makhmur, and Akraa and by so doing create adequate momentum to tackle areas with more complex issues. Pearce countered this "low hanging fruit" argument by saying that in order to proceed, the parties had to address fundamental technical and political questions.  On the technical side, Pearce said that, for example, the parties had to create practical property claim compensation mechanisms and clearly define what boundaries were disputed. He added that UNAMI had specific expertise to assist with many technical issues.  Pearce also stressed that the Article 140 Committee had to include more Sunnis to dispel perceptions of an imbalance favoring Kurdish and Shi'a interests.  5.  (C)  On the political front, Pearce acknowledged that the need to deal with Southern disputed territories made the Kirkuk question more complex, because it threatened at any moment to disrupt the sequence of events in the North.  Once the technical issues were in order and the facts were no longer in dispute, Pearce said the decision of "what went where" would be political, perhaps taken at the Presidency Council-level.  Pearce stressed that it was up to the political leaders ultimately to decide "what were the trade-offs."  6.  (C)  Without being specific, Zebari also said that the Turks were "making noise" about the Article 140 process. Under no circumstances, he continued, should the Government of Turkey be allowed to intervene in these "most sensitive" issues.  It was extremely important, he groused, to avoid even the "appearance" of Turkish meddling.  However, to the Political Counselor's direct question, Zebari conceded that the Turks had "never" raised Article 140 directly with him. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000308  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/01/2018 TAGS: PGOV, MOPS, IZ SUBJECT: PRT WASIT: PROVINCIAL COUNCIL CHAIR AIRS SECURITY CONCERNS  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d).  1. (U) This is a PRT Wasit reporting cable.  2. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Summary: In a 29 Jan meeting with PRT Team Leader (TL), Provincial Council (PC) Chairman Mohammad Hassan Jabir expressed fear that potential Sadrist election victories and the advent of Provincial Iraqi Control (PIC) in Wasit would bring about ineffective government and increased militia activity.  The Chairman described the Office of the Martyr Sadr (OMS) political leadership and Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM) as comprising a seamless organization and recommended actions against JAM strongholds prior to Wasit,s expected transition to PIC status in April.  He expressed concerns about the leadership of the IP force and Iraqi SWAT.  End summary.  3. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Jabir recently met with Sayid Sattar, head of the Wasit OMS office.  Jabir said that while OMS political leaders claim to want stability in Wasit, "the opposite is true."   He said JAM "was disorganized earlier," but now, "with Iranian support, they are getting more organized."  He warned that, though the ceasefire holds, JAM is only "sleeping," and using the time to refit, train and plan.  Specifically referring to the planned April assumption of security responsibilities by the Wasit government, Jabir warned that the transfer would spark a resurgence in JAM activity.  4.  (S//REL USA, ACGU) Jabir supports three immediate measures to weaken JAM.  The first would be the establishment of an operations base for the Iraqi SWAT unit, led by Lt. Aziz Latif Abd-al-Sadah Al Ammarah, in al Anwar, a renowned JAM stronghold in al Kut. (Note: Jabir lives in Anwar. End note.).  Jabir said that JAM strongly will oppose the move, but that it would be a first step in asserting IP control over a string of JAM infested neighborhoods south of the Tigris.  Second, Jabir recommends execution of an IP operation to clear Zweejiyat, another JAM-dominated neighborhood.  Jabir said that Wasit Governor Latif al-Turfa supports the operations in Anwar and Zweejiyat.  Finally, Jabir (a former psychology professor at Wasit University and head of the Wasit Census Committee) said he conducted a "secret" study indicating that up to sixty percent of Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM) members would cease participation in militia activities if offered employment elsewhere.  Jabir meant to illustrate the tenuous hold JAM has on its membership and the potential to undercut JAM strength by robust economic development.  5. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Jabir,s proposed police actions would be led by IP Chief MG Hannin, and include LT Aziz.  However, Jabir expressed concerns about both leaders.  With regard to Hannin, he said many citizens view him as no more effective then his predecessor, and that this has hurt CF credibility because of the widespread belief that Hannin became IP Chief because of CF support.  (Note: CF and the PRT strongly supported Hannin,s candidacy at the provincial and national levels. End note.).  6.  (S//REL USA, ACGU) Jabir also is concerned over increasingly negative popular perceptions of Aziz and his unit.  While praising Aziz,s effectiveness at pursuing militia, he said Aziz and his men alienate citizens by "using their power for personal gain."  He alleged that Aziz,s unit demands bribes from the families of detained men in return for prompt release, demands bribes from smugglers in return for safe passage, and engages in outright theft from shops and homes.  Compounding the problem, he said, is the popular view that SWAT "takes orders from the Americans," thus implicating CF in Aziz,s actions.  Jabir suggested that these actions and effects offset Aziz,s value as a militia fighter and actually strengthen JAM in Wasit.  7.  (S//REL USA, ACGU) Jabir offered a dim view of Wasit,s political future at the hands of the Sadrists.  He refused to accept any delineation between the Sadrist political organization and militia wing, stating that "those who control the Sadrist Trend are not political people."  He described a wary relationship between OMS and JAM, with each monitoring the other, and he predicted heightened violence in the run-up to elections.  Jabir mentioned that he had met Muqtada al Sadr and that he had recently refused an invitation from OMS officials to join them, scoffing at their promise to effect positive change and characterizing them as uneducated, inexperienced leaders who would likely prove incompetent in administering the provincial government.  "OMS may have the votes, but they don't have the capable people," he said.  Nevertheless, OMS and JAM are striving to cast themselves as legitimate political leaders, first by criticizing the performance of current officials at the  BAGHDAD 00000308  002 OF 002   national and provincial levels, and, second, by operating a shadow government in certain areas in order to bolster OMS claims that it could provide better services than those currently in power.  Jabir lamented that GoI and Ministry unresponsiveness to provincial needs had left provincial officials vulnerable to public criticism.  "Provincial officials will suffer the political fallout from national-level incompetence, he predicted.   Jabir summed up that PIC and provincial elections would likely give JAM and OMS the upper hand, leading Wasit to "become like Maysan."  8. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Comment:  As provincial elections loom and provincial officials grow apprehensive about their political vulnerability, we expect more conversations in a similar vein, alerting us to the dangers of OMS and urging support for police action against JAM strongholds.  Our challenge will be to distinguish those warnings that are motivated by political self-interest from those that represent genuine security concerns.  The operations described by Jabir, if undertaken, may raise the level of political violence even at this early stage in the election process.  This may entangle IP Chief MG Hannin in the power struggle between Wasit's political factions.  End comment.  9. (S//REL USA, ACGU).  Bio notes: Mohammad Hassan Jabir, is an independent PC council member, and three-time PC Chairman, elected in 2005 to the PC on List 221 (indirectly supported by Grand Ayatollah Sistani).  A USAID implementer rated Jabir highly for his performance as PC Chair and the PRT itself considers him a smart, astute legislative leader.  He has led the Wasit Data Collection (Census) Committee and the Board for Drafting the Provincial Development Strategy;  more than any other PC member, Jabir grasps the need for collecting provincial data, assessing needs, and drafting plans.  Born in 1966, he is married with two children.  He has a Masters Degree in Psychology, taught at Al Kut University prior to his election, and still lectures part time.  He reportedly is not on good terms with Wasit Governor Latif al-Turfa. End bio notes. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000317  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2018 TAGS: PREF, PREL, IZ, TU SUBJECT: MAKHMOUR REFUGEE CAMP:  BREAKING THE LOGJAM  REF: ANKARA 00158  Classified By: CDA Patricia A. Butenis.  Reasons 1.4 (b) & (d).    Bringing the Parties Together -----------------------------------  1. (C)  Post believes that there now exists an opportunity to make progress on the closure of Makhmour refugee camp, given a more positive attitude by the GOI, and what appears to be political breathing space in Ankara.  Post read with great interest Ref A on the probability of closing Makhmour refugee camp, and appreciated the detailed insights into GOT thinking.   We understand that security concerns expressed by the GOT and UNHCR must be addressed if we are going to make any progress on closure of the camp.  2. (C) Unexpectedly, FM Zebari told Ambassador and MNF-I CG Petraeus January 20 that he would sponsor a conference on the Makhmour refugee camp issue at a venue to be determined. Such a conference would bring together the parties with an eye toward breaking the logjam blocking resumption of progress on closing the camp.  MFA U/S Dr. Mohammad Hamoud told us January 28 that he will contact Turkish Ambassador to Iraq Derya Kanbay to discuss with him later that day the idea of the conference  Renewed UNHCR Involvement --------------------------------------  3. (C)  We have raised with SRSG Staffan de Mistura the need to have UNHCR re-engage on the Makhmour issue, including establishing a permanent presence at the camp.  US Mission Geneva followed up directly with UNHCR HQ. Concurrently, S/I Satterfield pressed GOT officials during his January 18 meetings to work towards closing the camp.   In order to consolidate these bilateral diplomatic efforts, the parties must meet face-to-face.  4. (C) Based on recent readouts of diplomatic engagements with UNHCR headquarters staff and with the GOT in Turkey over the past two weeks, it appears the UNHCR remains reluctant to place permanent staff at the camp, citing security concerns. Similarly, the Turks believe (ref A) that improved security around the camp might help establish the true &civilian8 nature of the camp.  This proposed conference is an opportunity for the parties to develop solutions to these obstacles.  5. (C)  In the run-up to the conference, we must continue to press UNHCR to re-engage.  We understand opportunities to do so include the visit of UNUSYG Sir David Vaness to Iraq in early February and the visit of UNHCR Commissioner Antonio Guterres to Baghdad February 16.  Bringing Ankara Back to the Table -----------------------------------------  6. (C)  In tandem with approaches to UNHCR, we must persuade the GOT to be constructive as well.  Turkey,s participation in a conference like that proposed by MFA could permit the GOT to air with UNHCR and the GOI its concerns about the true nature of the refugee camp (e.g., GOT claims it is a PKK safehaven), and doubts that the residents are free to express their true desires regarding repatriation.  Specifically, the GOT might be encouraged to share information or intelligence on PKK individuals or actions connected to the camp. Likewise the GOT can also encourage the UNHCR to establish a permanent presence in the camp that would enable them to better monitor camp life.  Finally, Turkey could clarify for UNHCR that it indeed does not oppose residents returning to Turkey, a point of apparent disconnect between the GOT and UNHCR.  Post is interested in the security plan mentioned in ref A and would appreciate details of the plan.  MNF-I is aware of the GOT stated preference for Coalition Forces presence around the camp, but is not situated to implement such a measure.  GOI Re-engagement a Welcome Change --------------------------------------------- -------  7. (C) The GOI offer to host the conference sends a signal to Ankara that Iraq is willing to play an active role in the resolution of this issue.  We should encourage this GOI initiative that could degrade the PKK presence in the north, improve relations with Turkey, and establish a new area of positive GOI-UN engagement.  8. (C)  Post would appreciate Embassy Ankara alerting the GOT to Iraqi MFA U/S Hamoud,s message and encourage GOT participation in a conference on Makhmour refugee camp.  We will keep Embassy Ankara apprised of developments on the proposed conference.  BAGHDAD 00000317  002 OF 002         BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000333  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS UPDATE PART 2:  REF: A. BAGHDAD 221      B. BAGHDAD 197      C. BAGHDAD 131      D. BAGHDAD 190      E. BAGHDAD 203      F. 2007 BAGHDAD 3459  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for Reasons 1.4(b) and (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  We believe Iraq will have the technical capability to conduct credible, nationwide provincial elections in early fall of 2008.  However several political obstacles must be overcome over the next seven months, including the passage of a well-crafted elections law, a start to resolution of internal boundary disputes, and overcoming potential political party weaknesses and obstructions.  We continue to work on technical training and capacity building in order to ensure GOI readiness once an election date is set.  We hope that the result of these efforts will be credible, nationwide elections that reflect the will of the Iraqi people.  This is the second in a series of cables describing the process and preparations, both technical and political, needed to hold provincial elections.  End Summary.  2.  (U) This cable draws from conversations with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), the International Foundation for Election Systems (IFES), and the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) board of commissioners.  3.  (C) Many Iraqis, particularly those in areas that feel cheated by the results of the January 2005 provincial elections, are eager for elections as soon as possible, and the Iraqi leadership has indicated it understands the need for local elections by early fall of 2008.  The first hurdle to overcome is passage of the provincial powers legislation, which appears to be imminent.  Next is the passage of an election law, which would have to happen no later than June 1, 2008 for elections to occur in early fall of 2008.  We believe this is possible due to the momentum we are now seeing in the CoR with regard to passing other benchmark legislation such as the Accountability and Justice Law (de-Ba'athification) and the anticipated passage of provincial powers legislation.  ROLLING OR NATIONWIDE ELECTIONS? --------------------------------  4.  (C) The idea of conducting rolling provincial elections has been floated by both the USG and GOI.  This is driven by concern that provinces like Anbar and Ninewa, where low voter turnout in 2005 resulted in provincial councils that do not reflect the ethnic or religious makeup of the province. Expediting elections in these provinces will give them their delayed buy-in to the political process by electing new provincial councils that are more representative and inclusive of all relevant political parties and movements in the province.  This would, for example, harness the &awakening8 movements in those regions, transforming them into political parties.  The fear is that nationwide elections could not be held soon enough to satisfy the yearnings of the Sunni groups in Anbar and Ninewa for political participation, thereby increasing their sense of political disenfranchisement and possibly compelling them to work against the GOI and Coalition interests.  (Note: Anbar has been temporarily placated by the addition of eight non-voting seats on the provincial council to accommodate members of its Sahwah (Awakening) movement.)  5.  (C) Once a number of logistical issues are addressed (ref A), elections could be held in all provinces.  One of the dangers in holding elections only in certain provinces is the risk that the USG could be seen as favoring one political group (e.g. Sunnis) over another.  Reporting from the PRTs indicates provincial elections are desired throughout Iraq, even in provinces with high voter turnout in 2005.  There are also logistical challenges to holding rolling elections, such as how to minimize voter fraud.  This is easier to do when all provinces are voting on the same day.  Therefore we believe that same-day nationwide provincial elections will hold the most credibility among the Iraqi people.  POLITICAL OBSTACLES -------------------  6.  (C) There are three main political obstacles to overcome before credible provincial elections can be held: 1) passage of an election law that clarifies voter eligibility, voting arrangements for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees, and type of elections (e.g. constituency-based, open or closed list); 2) resolution of internal boundary  BAGHDAD 00000333  002 OF 004   disputes; and 3) objections by political parties.  ELECTION LAW ------------  7.  (C) The election law must define who is eligible to vote.  In addition to determining voting age, the law will have to tackle two hot political issues -- residency requirements and how internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees will vote.  A lengthy residency requirement (more than six months residency in the province) could potentially disenfranchise IDPs and refugees, and an even longer residency requirement could be a factor in settling Article 140 issues.  And of course the more than two million Iraqi refugees in Syria and Jordan are not currently resident in any province.  An election law will have to clarify whether IDPs vote for the provincial council in the province where they currently live, or for the provincial council in the province they came from, or be given a choice between the two.  And if they vote for the council in the province they came from, then the question becomes whether they have to return to their home province to vote, or whether they can vote for their home province at their local polling place.  8.  (C) Most IDPs would prefer to vote for the provincial council of their home province.  They hope to return home some day and would like a say in the governance of that province (ref B) .  However mass migration of returning IDPs has the potential to cause social disruption and increased violence, and so forcing them to return home to vote puts them at great risk.  UNAMI is researching ways for IDPs to receive ballots from their home province without the logistical nightmare of requiring that all provincial council ballots be available at over 6,000 polling places.  One thought is to provide two to three polling places per province exclusively for IDP voting.  For refugees, the question is how to get ballots to them in Syria and Jordan, and elsewhere.  In 2005, refugees did not vote in provincial elections, only nationwide elections.  In fact, only 300,000 ballots were cast by out-of-country voters, according to the International Elections Advisory Team (IEAT).  Refugee voting is further complicated because out-of-county-voters most likely have only national identification cards and would have difficulty proving ties to a specific province.  IEAT has commented that allowing out-of-country voters to vote in local elections is not the prevailing practice.  9.  (C) In addition to voter eligibility, the decision of whether there will be an open or closed-list system will also need to be determined by the elections law.  The 2005 elections were held under a closed-list system ) voters voted for the party and party leaders decided who got the seats the party won.  PRT reporting has indicated that voters want an open-list system for provincial elections (refs C and D).  The logistical issue with an open-list system is the length and complexity of the ballot.  If 30 seats are available on a provincial council, then each party would list 30 candidates on the ballot.  This leads to a very long ballot, which increases the amount of time each voter will need to make a selection, thus affecting the hours a polling location is open and the security needed.  High rates of illiteracy in some areas complicate the process of holding open list elections.  In addition, the requirement for female representation must be addressed.  The Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) has expressed particular concern about implementing the arrangement, outlined in an early draft of the election law, requiring that thirty percent of candidates selected by each voter be female.  Entire ballots would be invalidated if the voter did not choose enough women.  Other countries with quotas for female representation use other arrangements to achieve this goal, including reserved seats.  We believe these issues can be overcome, and that an open-list system is important to establish accountability of the elected officials.  10.  (C) On January 30, we heard from Dr. Fadhel Khadum, Legal Advisor to the Prime Minister, that a draft election law is with the Shura Council for review, and that the Shura should be finished with it in about a week.  INTERNAL BOUNDARY DISPUTES --------------------------  11.  (C) At first glance, resolution of provincial boundary disputes throughout Iraq would seem to be the prerequisite for provincial elections.  However, since all boundary disputes cannot be resolved before provincial elections, we believe it is better to hold elections using the current boundaries (as was done in 2005), with remaining boundary issues to be resolved after the elections.  As part of its expanded mandate, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is focusing facilitating the process for resolution of these internal boundary disputes (ref E).  BAGHDAD 00000333  003 OF 004   Staffan de Mistura, the Special Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG), has decided to focus on the  SIPDIS least-contentious areas at first to build confidence.  He believes that progress can be made before the June 30 deadline of the Article 140 extension. De Mistura believes that signs of progress will encourage other regions to trust that a political solution can be had.  POLITICAL PARTY OBSTRUCTION ---------------------------  12.  (C) Some political parties that currently hold power in the provincial councils are likely to lose heavily in the next round of elections.  This leads to a lack of political incentive on the part of some parties to push for elections. One manifestation of political party obstruction we have observed is the attempt by ISCI and Dawa politicians to discredit IHEC, claiming without specific substantiation that it has become politicized (ref E and F).  Both the Embassy and UNAMI have heard these accusations, including from Council of Representatives (CoR) members, but when pressed for specifics, the officials claim that their actual concerns are with the Governorate Electoral Offices (GEOs), and the affiliations of the GEO managers. (Note:  The CoR members from each province are responsible for nominating candidates for GEO managers, and we are seeing that some of the CoR members, who were the engineers of the alleged politicization are now the sources of some of the complaints.  End Note)  We are, however, seeing signs from the provinces calling for elections due to dissatisfaction with the current provincial and national governments (refs C and D).  CONTINUED ELECTIONS PREPARATIONS UNDERWAY -----------------------------------------  13.  (C) We continue to provide technical assistance for elections to Iraq through USAID- and DRL-funded programs. USAID, through its implementing partner International Foundation for Election Systems (IFES), is working with IHEC to prepare a draft voter registry.  The list for the Public Distribution System (PDS ) the nationwide food ration distribution system) has been converted to a voter registry, and IHEC is awaiting the enactment of an election law to begin vetting the list at the provincial level (ref A).  IFES is also preparing a technical assistance team to provide guidance on how to draft elections legislation, if it is requested by the GOI.  (Note:  IHEC has requested that this assistance be provided to drafters of the law, but we have yet to determine whether the drafters themselves or the members of the CoR also want this assistance.  End Note)  14.  (C) DRL, through its implementing partners International Republican Institute (IRI) and National Democratic Institute (NDI), is providing capacity building training to government officials, political parties, and civil society organizations to help them become more effective in advocacy, networking, caucus development, and organizational management.  These programs will strengthen both the individual political players and their respective organizations, ensuring a degree of increased political maturity as Iraq heads into its next round of democratic elections.  15.  (C) UNAMI continues to provide technical assistance to the GOI and IHEC on election day preparations, including staffing, polling locations, and security.  In terms of election day security, the entire country could be placed under a curfew, as was done in 2005, to reduce violence and voter fraud.  People will not be able to travel, other than to vote; shops will be closed; and a vehicular ban will go into effect to prevent the possibility of car bombs at polling places.  The need for these actions has been generally accepted by the GOI and the international community based on security concerns.  The Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) along with MNF-I will provide security ) the ISF will secure the first ring (polling locations) and the second ring (town), while MNF-I will patrol the third ring (areas of the province outside of towns and villages).  16.  (C) Concerns have also been raised about the lack of budget appropriations for provincial elections.  The CoR originally allocated money in IHEC,s 2007 operating budget for provincial elections.  Because elections did not occur, the money was taken back by the CoR.  However, IHEC is not worried about money being available for elections.  Chief Election Officer Kareem Al-Tamimi explained that once an election law defines the type of election (open versus closed list), that will determine the costs IHEC will incur to hold the elections, and then IHEC will draw up a budget and present it to the CoR for funding.  Kareem had no concerns that the CoR would not provide the needed money.  COMMENT -------  BAGHDAD 00000333  004 OF 004    17.  (C) Although the political parties in power have little motivation to call for elections and have been delaying many of these decisions for months, there now appears to be enough political momentum and public dissatisfaction with the current government to force movement on the issue.  However, without a strong push from the U.S. and other international partners, it is not likely that provincial elections will take place this year.  We believe it is possible to overcome the remaining obstacles and hold free and credible Iraqi provincial elections in early fall of 2008.  While rolling elections are technically feasible and should not be ruled out, our assessment is that same-day nationwide provincial elections will have the most credibility with the Iraqi people and that should therefore be our initial objective. Dissatisfaction in places like Anbar and Ninewa can probably be controlled if it becomes clear within the next few months that nationwide elections will be held before the end of the year.  End Comment. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000342  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2018 TAGS: ECON, IZ, PGOV SUBJECT: IRAQ EXECUTIVE STEERING COMMITTEE - FEBRUARY 1  REF: BAGHDAD 177  1.  (C) Summary.  Prime Minister Maliki chaired the Baghdad Security Plan (Fardh al Qanoon ) FAQ) Iraq Executive Steering Committee (I-ESC) on 1st February.  The meeting included much discussion of the role that that the decentralization and the private sector can play in Iraq's development - including a proposal to privatize Baghdad's garbage collection and the need to allow individual ministries to import fuel products; an update on kerosene distribution that included claims of systemic Ministry of Oil corruption; and an update that a forthcoming revised executive order will stipulate that the Ministry of Displaced Persons remains the lead of the inter-agency coordinating committee for returning displaced persons. End Summary  ---------------------------- Project Clean Delivery ---------------------------- 2.  (C) Saeed Jabour, Secretary of the I-ESC and a member of the Office of the National Security Advisor, briefed an update of the expansion of the new initiative to improve efficiency and remove militia involvement in the distribution of kerosene in Baghdad (Project Clean Delivery -- reftel). Jabour informed the body that the initiative was implemented in the Ghazaliya and Beladiyat neighborhoods and that the increased monitoring associated with the initiative ensured that ration allocations were received at the GoI stipulated price.  Jabour also noted that the initiative was uncovering systemic corruption in the Ministry of Oil and that local militias had assassinated two Neighborhood Advisory Council members because of these Council members' involvement with the initiative, which immediately took revenue away from local militants.  Each of the Minister of Defense, Essential Services Chair Chalabi, the Provincial Council chairman and the Deputy Inspector General from the Ministry of Oil praised the initiat ive.  --------------------------------------------- --------------- Maliki Urges Immediate Improvement in Services --------------------------------------------- --------------- 3.  (C) Referencing pictures of dilapidated schools shown at the 7 Dec I-ESC, PM Maliki called for immediate action to ensure that all of Baghdad's schools have windows and functioning bathrooms.  PM Maliki also asked the Mayor to "take pressure off" of the Ministry of Education in school refurbishment and asked if the Mayor needed additional funds to do so.  The Mayor stated that it is not the responsibility of the Amanat, but that it would assist with the work.  4.  (C) The Deputy Minister of Electricity provided a brief summary of Iraq's electricity challenges that highlighted the need to increase generation capacity and Provincial adherence to the national distribution plan.  The Deputy Minister also stated that a lack of heating fuel for homes is currently causing an increased burden on the electricity grid.  5.  (C) Stating that "everything" in the effort to improve Iraq is based on electricity and fuel, PM Maliki asked that all Provinces have a regular supply of 12 hours of power by June.  The Deputy Minister stated that although the MoE has plans to bring on line several generators and is continually attempting to repair power lines interdicted by terrorists, he would not be able to commit to such an increase.  ----------------------------------------- Petraeus Notes Loss of Electricity ----------------------------------------- 6.  (C) CG Petraeus distributed a hand out that showed that Baghdad is currently loosing approximately 2 hours of power per day, increasing to 4 hours this Spring, due to a lack of sufficient Diesel Fuel needed to avail generator capacity. Furthermore, the CG stated that Iraq will need an additional 1.5 million L/day (2.8 million L/day total) by April to utilize generators coming on line and reminded IESC members of the difficulties in procuring diesel from Kuwait last summer.  7.  (C) In response to comments from Essential Services Chair Ahmed Chalabi that the GoI must allow individual ministries to bypass the Ministry of Oil's marketing arm (SOMO), which is the sole entity authorized to import fuel products, CG Petraeus praised Chalabi's spirit of ingenuity and strenuously noted that Iraq must overcome its centralized bureaucracy if it is to successfully develop.  As evidence, CG noted that electricity supplies from Turkey are currently halted due to a cumbersome payment process requiring agreement and joint signatures from the Ministry of Electricity and the Deputy Prime Minister's Office. (Comment: the implementing regulations for the Fuel Import Liberalization Law do allow private imports of refined products, but only by private companies for retail sale to  BAGHDAD 00000342  002 OF 002   the local market.  End comment.)  8.  (C) PM Maliki stated that he would suggest to the Cabinet that any Ministry should be able to import directly.  The Governor of Baghdad noted that this would necessitate quickly acquiring dollars at the Central Bank, which is itself problematic.  Continuing his attacks on centralized bureaucracy, CG Petraeus also noted that it is "insane" that the GoI only allows the Trade Bank of Iraq to offer Letters of Credit and urged that private banks be allowed this right.  PM Maliki stated that he was open to this idea and that he would instruct the Economics Committee to consider the issue.  (Comment: Private sector solutions are frequent themes of Chalabi and CG Petraeus at the IESC.  Maliki seems genuinely supportive of an increased private sector in current GoI activities, but seems to lack the ability to fully understand and/or execute the policy reforms that such increases would require.  For example, Maliki sometimes notes that he previously supported private companies being allowed to import fuel, but that  none were interested given that the world market price for fuel products is in excess of GoI mandated prices.  Maliki has never followed up these comments with the obvious observation that the GoI should end its fuel price controls. Neither the Ministry of Finance nor the Ministry of Trade regularly attends the IESC. End  Comment.)  ------------------------------------------- Privatization of Baghdad's Garbage ------------------------------------------- 9.  (C) The Mayor of Baghdad stated that Baghdad's ever present garbage problem could be improved by: 1) increasing recycling; 2) the Amanat being granted access to 500 allegedly unused trucks belonging to the Ministry of Interior and 3) accepting a proposal from an Iraqi company that has worked in Bahrain to collect Baghdad's garbage at no expense provided that they be given exclusive rights to the refuse for 15-20 years.  (Comment:  No further details were given about the Bahraini's proposal.  While the scrap iron present in many of the rubble heaps in Baghdad is valuable, it is unknown if such an agreement makes economic sense for common garbage in general.  End Comment).  PM Maliki stated that any company that would take Baghdad's garbage can have it and said that he would ask the Economic Committee to consider the proposal.  --------------------------------------- Revised IDP EO Expected Soon --------------------------------------- 10.  (C) Provincial Chair Mueen stated that returning Displaced People (IDPs) remains a problem and asked that the Governor be given the responsibility of the "non-functioning" IDP Committee.  PM Maliki stated that the Minister of Displaced Persons leads this committee but that the Governor is a member of it.  PM Maliki went on to explain that problems in the original executive order establishing the committee were being rectified by the National Security Advisor's Office and that the new order would be sent soon. Maliki also stated that it is essential that this committee begin its work as soon as possible.  ------------------------------------------- Chalabi Sits Next to Prime Minister ------------------------------------------- 11.  (C)  Comment. Dr. Chalabi sat next to PM Maliki, inserting himself in the seat normally occupied by NSA Rubaie.  At every previous IESC he attended, Chalabi sat at least four seats down on the right of the table.  As Chalabi's relative influence has increased sense being named Essential Services Chair, he continues to take a more prominent role in the meeting. End Comment. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000343  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2018 TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PREL, PTER, EINV, ENGR, KU, TU, IZ SUBJECT: CHARGE AND CG MEET PM TO DISCUSS MOSUL SECURITY, CLCS, AND COUNTER-TERRORISM  REF: BAGHDAD 00267  Classified By: CDA Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.5 b and d.  Summary -------  1. (C) MNF-I Commanding General (CG) David Petraeus and CDA Patricia Butenis met Thursday, January 31, 2008 with Prime Minister Maliki.  In a cordial and relaxed hour-long meeting, they discussed security operations in Mosul, Turkish cut-off of electricity deliveries, implications for current GOI personnel of the Accountability and Justice Law, counter-terrorism operations against Shia religious fanatics  in southern Iraq, CG's upcoming trip to Kuwait, support for Concerned Local Citizen (CLC) groups, and fighting corruption to attract foreign investment.  End Summary.  Electricity Cuts ----------------  2. (S) Appearing tired and harried, Maliki arrived 25 minutes late to the regularly scheduled meeting.  He opened with complaints about the Turkish government not delivering electricity to northern Iraq, a serious matter given the weather in the mountainous north of the country.  He reported that he had contacted the GOT with no results, noting that Iraq pays for the electricity - it is not a charity case.  He blamed a Turkish Department of Energy deputy minister for the problem.  CG noted that he had spoken to Turkish military counterparts.  Turning to the Charge, CG raised possibility that the Secretary might contact her Turkish counterpart to resolve the impasse. (Note:  Embassy is working with Embassy Ankara to resolve the problem via intervention with the relevant Turkish ministries.  End Note.)  Maliki expressed thanks for any U.S. efforts with Turkey to resume electricity sales to Iraq.  Leadership and Laws -------------------  3. (S) CG applauded the PM,s demonstration of the "full range of emotions" to his Ministers of Oil and Electricity, observing that hispersonal intervention and prodding of his subordinates demonstrated leadership.  Maliki responded that he had also canceled the contracts committee as it did nothing, wasted resources, and delayed contracts being signed for necessary projects.  CG offered that it was now an opportune time for the PM to use his influence to move the Provincial Powers, Budget, and other laws forward. Smiling, Maliki suggested we have to be careful with passing laws, noting that if the Justice and Accountability (De-Baath)law is not implemented properly, the Iraqi Army (IA) and Police (IP), as well as the Iraqi National Intelligence Service, could lose their best people due to their former Baath Party connections.  He complained that the Council of Representatives (COR) does not pay attention to the consequences of the laws it passes.  CG noted the importance of a "Spirit of Reconciliation" to inform the implementation of the Accountability and Justice Law, agreeing that four of ISF's best generals (the commanders of the Baghdad and Basrah Operational Commands, the commander of the National Police, and the Director of the Counter-Terrorist Bureau) could face dismissal under the De-Baath law.  Mosul -----  4. (S) CG briefed the PM on plans for their Saturday, February 1, trip to Mosul, as previewed at last week's MCNS meeting (reftel).  Maliki expressed dissatisfaction with Governor Kashmoula and a desire to exclude him from meetings concerning the security situation in Mosul, calling him dishonorable and blaming him for the decline in Mosul's security situation.  CG argued for the importance of the involvement of the Governor, noting the Governor's participation in meetings led by the PM would demonstrate to the people the strength of the National Government.  CG said that Kashmoula,s support to the is critical, as he controls much of the services sector needed after combat operations end in various neighborhoods. (NOTE:  Governor Kashmoula participated in the meeting in Mosul and was relatively constructive.  End Note.) Switching topics, Maliki praised operation commander Major General Riyahd, noting that he would be promoting him to Lieutenant General and reaffirming his command of all security forces in Mosul.  He also noted that the ISF would conduct  BAGHDAD 00000343  002 OF 003   anti-terrorist operations when the GOI and MNF-I officials were meeting in Mosul. CG welcomed both items, advising Maliki to use the media to get the message out to the Moslawi on the GOI's efforts.  Southern Iraq -------------  5. (S) Maliki raised the importance of having specially-trained counter-terrorism (CT) forces in each IA division.  He would fund the CT forces with a supplement from the Ministry of Finance if the COR continued to deny them their separate funding allocation.  CG noted that MNF-I was training SWAT teams in many provinces, including Diwaniyah, to which he recently traveled and where he had had very positive meetings with provincial leaders.  There was real concern that the Army of Heaven cult group would try to re-group.  That said, CG stated that action against militias and Jaysh al-Mahdi Special Groups was the priority in the south.  Maliki offered that there is another cult forming in Basra and that the Basra Operations Center was investigating.  CG noted that the U.S. supports Iraqi Special Forces there, and that the UK was providing UAV and other support.  Kuwait ------  6. (S)  CG told Maliki of his plans to travel to Kuwait where he will raise clearing wrecks from the channel to Um Qasr, re-opening a border crossing, and border security in general.  Maliki welcomed this news, noting that the GOK is helpful, but some Kuwaitis, even some related to members of the royal family (NFI) funnel money to terrorists.  He observed that it was members of the Parliament and companies that were the problem, not the GOK.  He asked that the CG raise the issue of diesel deliveries, which he said are still not occurring though promised, complaining that 160 fuel delivery trucks were being held back.  CG said he would check on it, but thought that the diesel was flowing. (NOTE:  The diesel is flowing, at about 55% of the desired level.  End Note.)  Job Fund/CLCs -------------  7. (S) Responding to the PM's question, the CG summarized points of a joint Ambassador-CG letter presented to the PM that described construction and other job training opportunities to be funded with $1 billion in GOI funds. CG then segued the conversation into the critical importance of GOI support for the CLCs, in particular training and educational opportunities for them.  He noted that the United States has already committed 150 million dollars to the CLCs and the GOI had agreed previously to match this investment.  PM acknowledged the importance of vocational training and education for the CLC members since only 20 percent could be incorporated into the ISF.  He also observed that many are not attracted to low-skilled construction-site jobs, but want training to be carpenters, mechanics, etc.  A literacy program would be most useful too.  (Note:  Maliki observed that a literacy program was the only positive legacy of Saddam's rule.  End Note.)  CG concurred with training and educational ideas, recommending that the PM push the relevant Ministers of Labor and Social Affairs, Education, and Higher Education to act now and use the funds they already have available in their budgets.  Corruption/Investment ---------------------  8. (S) Bringing the meeting towards closure, Maliki stated that the GOI wants large oil companies (IOCs - Integrated Oil Companies) to invest in Iraq, observing that good, well-established companies, unlike the small ones that have come in over the last year, do not bribe or behave in a corrupt manner.  He complained that they did not come to Iraq because of the delays in contracting that bred corruption.  CG noted that U.S. companies know such acts are illegal under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.  PM's Health -----------  9. (C) In response to Charge's question, Maliki said that he needs rest, but observed that he cannot rest when he sees on the morning news over breakfast that the snows from Syria and Jordan will soon fall on his people in northern Iraq who have had their electricity cut off.  He asked rhetorically, "how will they stay warm?"  BAGHDAD 00000343  003 OF 003   BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000347  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PINR, EAID, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: WEST MOSUL SHEIKHS EXPRESS DISSATISFACTION WITH PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1. (C/REL ACGU) Summary:  Sheikhs from west Mosul, an area of the city where terrorists are entrenched, told PRTOff and military representatives January 30 that only through provincial elections would the city see progress.  The current provincial government focused only on small repair projects that showed substandard work through a contracting process that did not involve Mosul-based firms, but rather firms from the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG).  This system was allegedly by design and intended to enrich the Kurds and disengage the Arab Sunnis.  End Summary.  West Mosul Needs Support and Provincial Elections --------------------------------------------- ----  2. (C/REL ACGU) A group of Sheikhs based in the western area of Mosul told PRTOff and Third Armored Cavalry Regiment representatives January 30 that the Ninewa Provincial Government was completely corrupt and did not represent the people, only the interests of the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG).  This criticism was not limited to Governor Kashmoula ) who is widely unpopular - but extended to the Provincial Council as well.  The Sheikhs made repeated appeals for provincial elections, saying that without elections, "West Mosul cannot move forward."  The team was accompanied by Iraqi Army Commanders, including the Ninewa Operations Command (NOC) Commander LTG Riyadh, and Zuhair Muhsin Abdul Aziz al Aaraji, the Mayor of Mosul.  West Mosul Has No Faith in the Government -----------------------------------------  3. (C/REL ACGU) Mayor Zuhair, along with several Sheikhs, stated that the limited scope of reconstruction projects in the province gave the citizens of West Mosul, who are primarily Sunni Arabs, little faith that the capacity of local government was increasing.  Most projects were limited to refurbishment and repair.  Conversely, what was needed was large-scale, high-impact projects, such as hospitals, schools, and major road repair.  (Note: Recently, Governor Kashmoula told the PRT that he has held a meeting with tribal Sheikhs in the city to hear their complaints and find a way to solve them.)  Contracting Process is a Problem --------------------------------  4. (C/REL ACGU) The practice of awarding contracts by the provincial government for work in Mosul to outside bidders, specifically bidders from the KRG, was a source of discontent among the Sheikhs.  One Sheikh stated that the companies that executed the contracts did not understand the problems pertinent to Mosul.  He also stated that the contractors did very poor work because they did not live in Mosul. Essentially, the Sheikhs alleged that the budget allocated from Baghdad to the provincial government was being used to enrich the provincial council and bidders from the KRG, but not the citizens of Mosul.  (Note: PRT hears often from the provincial government that they cannot always find Mosul-based firms that are willing to execute the contracts given the current security environment.  The Governor has told the PRT many times that the Sheikhs simply want the contracts so they can skim off the top and enrich themselves -- the allegations seem to go both ways.)  5. (C/REL ACGU) Comment:  The Sheikhs of West Mosul are clearly completely dissatisfied with Governor Kashmoula and the Provincial Council. While these Sheikhs vary in terms of their actual political influence as well as their commitment to the national (as opposed to their personal) interest, they are an important element in a strategically vital area of one of Iraq's most strategic cities. The call for provincial elections was the foremost concern of the Iraqis in the meeting -- and allowing an outlet for Sunni Arabs, the majority in Ninewa, to regain the political representation they missed by boycotting the last election.  Of note is the fact that the Governor himself met recently with tribal Sheikhs in the city of Mosul, perhaps a sign that the provincial government is aware of their complaints and is at least trying to look like it has an interest in solving them.  End Comment. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000348  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: PRT MAYSAN: MAYSAN'S TRIBES SEEK POLITICAL ROLE  REF: A. MX-GBR-J2X-FHT-20564      B. MX-GBR-J2X-FHT-071003      C. MX-GBR-J2X-FHT-20363      D. MX-GBR-J2X-FHT-20296  BAGHDAD 00000348  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia for reasons 1.4 ( b,d).  1.  (U) This is a PRT Maysan reporting cable.  2. (SBU) Summary: Tribal members in Maysan are asserting their political relevance by occupying key positions and creating independent advocacy groups.  Members of several local tribes, including the Bani Malik, the al-Fartusi, and the al-Gharrawi, occupy prominent roles in local political parties and militias.  Tribal members are also establishing groups to pressure the provincial government, including the Maysan Nobles, Council, the National Front for the Salvation of the South, and the Maysan Tribal Council.   Tribal leaders and tribal relationships are also being used by political leaders to assist in maintaining security.  End Summary.  Politically prominent tribes ----------------------------  3.  (SBU) Bani Malik: According to the uncle of Deputy Governor Rafa,a abd Al-Jabbar, the Bani Malik tribe is influential in the government.  Governor Adhil Mhoder Radhi Al-Maliki and a number of other government officials are reportedly from this tribe.  4.  (S) al-Fartusi: The Fartusi tribe are marsh Arabs who have settled in and around al-Adel, a town south of the capitol.  There are reportedly 20,000 Maysanis who claim this tribal affiliation and thirteen branches.  The leader is Shaykh  Ali Hassan Sajar al-Fartusi, chair of the Maysan Tribal Council.  Members of the tribe hold positions of power in Majjar al-Kabir (MAK), al-Kahir, and al-Adel.  Members of the tribe have are also affiliated with anti-coalition militant groups and have been targets of operations in the past.  Shaykh  Abd al-Jamal al-Fartusi (aka Hajj Hassan  Ali al-Fartusi, aka Hassan  Ali Mizal al-Fartusi) has been reported as the leader of Harakat Islamiyya fil  Iraq (reftel A).  Members of the tribe, including  Abd al-Jamal, were also targets in OP JORDAN (reftel B).  5.  (S) al-Gharrawis: A number of members of the al-Gharrawi tribe are linked to the Office of the Martyr Sadr (OMS) and Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM).  According to British sources, Shaykh Ghali Abid  Ali al-Gharrawi from the Abu Romana District in al- Amara led ten other shaykhs in brokering the withdrawal of JAM from the streets of the capital following Operation Dorado in March 2006.  As of 2004, Shaykh Muhammad al-Gharrawi was reportedly a moderating influence in OMS. Shaykh Haydar al-Gharrawi, aka Abu Ahmed, is a reported JAM Company Commander in the Husayn District of al- Amara (reftel C).  Maysan Nobles' Council ----------------------  6. (SBU) In 2006, Kareem Mahood al-Muhammadawi, aka Abu Hatim, a member of the an-Nawafil tribe of the Albu Muhammad confederation, established the Maysan Nobles, Council (sometimes referred to as the VIP Council).  Abu Hatim was elected General Secretary and the inaugural meeting took place on 30 March 2006.  The reported membership was anywhere between 800-1000 with an Executive Committee of 105.  Thirty seats were allocated to key tribal leaders, thirty for two representatives of each of the 15 districts of Maysan, and the remainder distributed around various groups including technocrats, academics, women and ethnic minorities.  Abu Hatim defined the council as a lobbying group for people who are poorly represented by the Provincial Council (PC), putting pressure on the Governor and the PC to perform, and in due course, putting forward candidates for provincial elections.  He stressed that the group was not a political party, but an independent grouping of people who intend to promote technocrats as well as tribal elders to seats on the PC.  7.  (SBU) In July 2006, a delegation from the Maysan Nobles, Council and additional tribal leaders marched to the PC, where in a three-and-a-half hour heated discussion, they demanded immediate improvements in the security situation. They expressed as their preference that this should be delivered through the legitimate apparatus of the government, but threatened that if the PC and ISF were unable to perform, the tribes would intervene.  A further conference was scheduled for 15 July 2006, which was expected to incorporate militia leaders as well as tribes, politicians, and security chiefs, and which was intended to deliver a consensus behind a new security plan for Maysan, focused on curtailing militia/criminal activities.  There are conflicting reports regarding why the conference was delayed past the set date  BAGHDAD 00000348  002.2 OF 003   and it is unclear whether it actually occurred.  Abu Hatim blamed the PC for politicizing the conference and causing the delay.  Others claimed the delay was a result of disagreements between the tribes  National Front for the Salvation of the South ---------------------------------------------  8.  (S/NF) The National Front for the Salvation of the South is another group that has reportedly been started by Abu Hatim.  According to separate reporting the group,s expressed aim is to combat Iranian influence and militia activity.  Maysan Tribal Council ---------------------  9.  (SBU) Based upon reports of its activities, the Maysan Tribal Council seems to be the formal voice for the province,s tribal community.  The tribal council is reportedly allied with the councils from Basra and Thi Qar.  10.  (SBU) On 18 December 2007, six days after a car bomb was detonated in the center of al- Amara, more than 500 tribal members gathered for a conference in the Sports and Youth center of the city.  Most of the tribal members were from Maysan with some tribal representation from al-Basra and al-Kut provinces.  The conference was held under the banner &Security and Construction Are the Two Essential Pillars for Maysan Prosperity8.  The conference was led by the chair of the Maysan Tribal Council, Shaykh Muhammad Hasan Sajar Al-Fartusi, and included a speech by the head of the Provincial Council,s Security Committee Abd al-Lateef (Abu Ahmed) at-Tameemi.  The gathering offered tribal members an opportunity to express their views on a variety of issues and resulted in the issuance of a number of declarations and demands, including commitment to national unity and recognition of federalism as a way to save Iraq from partition; a timetable for the withdrawal of foreign forces; a rejection of armed and illegal groups, including security companies, the MEK, and the PKK; and recognition of the active role of as-Sistani and the "honorable" stance taken by Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim after the explosions.  Keeping the Peace -----------------  11.  (SBU) Tribal leaders and tribal relationships are also being tapped by political leaders to assist in maintaining security.  In May 2005, two JAM fighters reportedly bombed al-Manar Engineering Company which belonged to members of the Ka,ab tribe.  The tribe,s leadership was infuriated and went directly to the attacker,s families who then agreed to pay a significant sum in damages and banish the two men from the town.  Shortly thereafter, the town,s leading tribal shaykhs agreed to punish any militia member who attacked a tribe or its property.  The leaders announced that any attackers would lose the right to call themselves by the name of the tribe and be rejected by his tribe.  In 2006, homicides during the first five  months of the year had declined by 71 percent as compared with the previous five months.  12.  (SBU) In March 2006, 11 shaykhs helped broker a cease fire between the Iraqi Army and JAM following OPERATION DORADO.  The group included leadership from the Albu Darraj, the al-Mussawi, the al-Gharrawi, and the Albu Muhammad.  The shaykhs had made an agreement with the Governor and PC during the previous month that fighting would cease.  The shaykhs helped broker the ceasefire to demonstrate that, despite the outbreak of violence, they did indeed exercise full control over their constituencies.  During a 27 December 2007 PRT meeting with the Maysanis, the PRDC Chairman Mohan Mahi ash-Shabib relayed that an individual was interfering with the construction of the $14.7M USG-funded surgical hospital being built in al- Amara.  The Chairman noted that the individual,s tribal leader was contacted and that the individual was &embarrassed8 in front of his tribe.  OMS opposition --------------  13.  (S) As tribal members and their leadership step forward they also put themselves as risk from the local militias.  A recent report claimed that OMS/JAM was investigating tribes that had allegedly signed an agreement to fight any person or group supported by Iran (reftel D).  14.  (S) COMMENT.  Despite the fact that the Governor and the young technocrats on the PC seem to officially ignore the tribes, tribal leaders are making moves to assert their political influence.  It is important to understand the form that these developments are taking as it will help craft the PRT,s engagement with tribally-based organizations and their leadership.  The PRT is aggressively seeking to expand our  BAGHDAD 00000348  003.2 OF 003   contacts with tribal leaders in Maysan. END COMMENT. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000351  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2018 TAGS: EAGR, PINR, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: DHI QAR: OFFICE OF THE MARTYR SADR TELLS PRT TO MOVE OFF BASE  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d)  1.  This is a PRT Dhi Qar reporting cable.  2.  (SBU) Summary:  January 30, Dhi Qar PRT met with Sheikh Haider Ali Ghizi, the head of the Office of the Martyr Sadr (OMS) in Nassiriyah.  Ghizi mirrored PRT views that training should be a "top priority" for the province.  Ghizi called for the PRT relocate off of the Tallil Base to Nassiriyah and promised OMS "protection."  He made a distinction between the PRT and the coalition "occupiers" and provided assurances that the PRT would not be molested.  End Summary.  3.  (SBU) January 30, the Bilingual/Bicultural Advisor (BBA) and the head of the Aegis security unit for the Dhi Qar PRT met with Sheikh Haider Ali Ghizi, the head of the OMS in Nassiriyah/Dhi Qar at a restaurant in Nassiriyah.  PRT requested the meeting in order to determine OMS perception of PRT activities.  OMS serves as the political front for the Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM) group headed by Muqtadar al Sadr.  4.  (SBU) Ghizi began by stating that the recent attack on an Army Corps of Engineers (GRS) survey team, which resulted in the death of an Aegis guard, was a "mistake."  (Note: Ghizi did not confirm that the attack was carried out by JAM, but this was assumed in his statement. End Note)  Ghizi emphasized the OMS is a cultural and political organization, not involved in "military activity," and declared that there should be no attacks on civilians such as the survey team in Dhi Qar, Ghizi.  5.  (SBU) Ghizi expressed concern over the level of government provided services in Nassiriyah, and the OMS desire to help.  PRT member briefed Ghizi about on-going projects with the goal of developing the province's economic capacity in order to achieve self-sufficiency.  PRT member highlighted agricultural sector projects and date production, as a historical component of the local economy.  Ghizi expressed reservations, claiming that such projects were not a "high priority," since Iraq could fund its own economic development with oil funds.  Ghizi suggested that what Iraqis lack is the understanding of how to manage its oil resources efficiently; which is why education should be its first priority.  Ghizi complained that Iraq's leaders were too concerned with the government sector in order to placate "people in the government".  Ghizi characterized government employees as "unprofessional" lacking the requisite skills to manage state enterprises.  Ghizi advocated merit based hiring and recruiting with greater focus on recent qualified college graduates.  6.  (SBU) Ghizi appeared genuinely interested in further contact with the PRT.  He invited the BBA to his home, assuring that as his guest, Ghizi would be held accountable "if anything happened to someone on the PRT."  Furthermore, it was suggested that the PRT move from the Tallil base and into Nassiriyah, because as long as the PRT is located on the base, it would be confused with the "occupiers."  He claimed that the OMS would ensure that a PRT in Nassiriyah would be protected.  While Ghizi declared the occupation unacceptable and justified resistance, he made no mention of violence. Ghizi concluded with an open invitation to Nassiriyah with no fear for security.  Ghizi even offered an OMS car at the BBA's disposal.  7.  (SBU) Biographic Note:  Ghizi is in his mid-thirties.  He sports a full beard, which is already graying.  He cannot walk without the aid of crutches.  He said that he was very interested in what the PRT could do to assist the handicapped of Nassiriyah, since he was handicapped himself.  Ghizi stated that he was not handicapped from birth but did not divulge how he became disabled.  8.  (SBU) Comment:  Ghizi made it clear that if the PRT and Aegis were seen as part of the "occupation" they would be considered as valid targets by the militia, including PRT and Aegis members traveling with US military call signs.  OMS however, is satisfied with PRT activities in the province and expressed some interest in further discussions.  The Director of OMS stressed that he did not want to see "reconstruction projects" implemented as they had been in the past.  As an example, Ghizi cited coalition built schools and public health centers, which he claims have only served in making a few individuals wealthy. The OMS believes that PRT can best contribute by facilitating intellectual capacity not infrastructure, "the minds of the Iraqi people -- these are what need to be built, not more buildings."  Ghizi concluded with a promise to speak to his people so as to ensure that "everyone knows that the PRT and Aegis are good people who are to have all the freedom they want". BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000353  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: DIWANIYAH PRT: GOVERNOR REACHES OUT TO PRT  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d)  This is a Diwaniyah PRT reporting cable.  1.  (C) Summary:  During a January 30 meeting with PRToffs, Diwaniyah Governor Al-Khudari stressed that he wants to improve cooperation between his government, coalition forces and the PRT and would like to see more private, particularly U.S., investment in the province.  He focused on the needs of his province and his views on economic revival and reconstruction.  End Summary  2.  (C) On January 30, PRT Team Leader (as well as former PRT Leader who was along to make introductions) and PRToffs traveled to Diwaniyah for the MND CS change-of-command ceremony for newly arrived Major-General Andrej Malinowski. The next day, we met with Al-Khudari, the Governor of Qadisiyah.  --------------------------- A Question of Honor ---------------------------  3.  (C) The meeting began with the Governor visibly upset that the event could not take place in his office, as originally agreed.  Comment:  The Governor would not allow a security sweep of the government building in Diwaniyah, but agreed to meet in MND CS Headquarters conference room at Camp Echo.  As the host, the Governor said that he could not allow U.S. security to sweep the government building; &It,s about dignity and respect.8  End Comment.  4.  (C) The Governor, who has not enjoyed a warm relationship with coalition forces, welcomed Major-General Andrej Malinowski, the new MND CS commander.  Although previously there had been &some difficulties,8 the Governor emphasized to Malinowski that he wants a good relationship and wishes to cooperate with coalition forces.  He added that he also invites Polish companies to invest in Diwaniyah and mentioned that he would soon visit the Polish Ambassador in Baghdad.  5.  (C) Al-Khudari extended again an invitation for Ambassador Crocker to visit Diwaniyah and stressed that he is willing to visit the Ambassador in Baghdad.  --------------------------------------------- Focus on Economic Development ---------------------------------------------  6.  (C) The Governor also invited U.S. companies to invest in Diwaniyah.  He said that Diwaniyah suffers from electricity outages, a lack of water stations, substandard housing, and fuel shortages.  &We need assistance with these projects.8  7.  (C) Al-Khudari recognizes that small projects alone will not allow Diwaniyah to prosper.  U.S. and GOI aid alone is not enough to help Diwaniyah recover but rather private foreign company investment is required.  8.  (C) Comment:  Despite the rocky beginning, the meeting, which included the PRDC chief and three members of his engineering team, is evidence that the Governor is reaching out and wants to be able to show that he is trying to develop Diwaniyah,s economy.  He appears to genuinely want more cooperation and will make the necessary concessions in order to host future meetings at the Governorate.  Consistent with his emphasis on cooperation, he did not mention the tribally organized Agricultural Union,s distribution of seeds and fertilizer, which he considers illegal under Iraqi law and a potential power base for his political opponents in the province.  End Comment. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000354  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2018 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: BAGHDAD PC CHAIRMAN FIGHTS TO STAY ON TOP  REF: A. BAGHDAD 2039      B. BAGHDAD 2040      C. BAGHDAD 2044      D. BAGHDAD 1645  Classified By: Baghdad PRT Team Leader Andrew A. Passen for reasons 1.4  (b,d).  1. (U) This is a Baghdad PRT reporting cable.  2. (C) Summary.  The Chairman of the Baghdad Provincial Council, Mueen al-Khademy (ISCI/Badr) is working overtime to shore up his position in the increasingly uncertain environment of provincial politics in Baghdad.  Chairman Mueen must prepare for provincial powers legislation that weakens the Provincial Council and strengthens the Governor's hand.  Mueen must fend off the encroachment of the national government into his province's business.  Mueen's grip over the city is in jeopardy as the Mayor, another ISCI/Badr strongman, anticipates future legislation granting the City of Baghdad more independence from the directives of the Provincial Council.  Mueen must strategize how his party will emerge victorious against the Sadrists in the next round of provincial elections and maintain ISCI/Badr control over provincial government.  A crafty politician, Chairman Mueen is working every angle to make sure he, the body he chairs, and the party he leads stay at the helm of Baghdad.  His recent behavior indicates that he sees the USG as a possible ally against the Governor, the Mayor, the national government and the Sadrists.  Mueen's challenges afford Baghdad PRT an opportunity to promote our own objective of improving GoI/USG coordination of essential service delivery in Baghdad.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- -- Chairman Mueen as architect of PC's power plays --------------------------------------------- --  3. (C) Chairman Mueen al-Khademy is the party leader of the ISCI/Badr coalition on the Baghdad Provincial Council (PC). He controls the votes of 28 of the 51 seats on that body through his strict enforcement of party discipline.  Upon election in 2005, the PC capitalized on CPA Order 71's (Local Government Powers) omission of language specific to Baghdad to consolidate power over a number of institutions governing Baghdad.  The PC seized direct control over the Amanat (City Hall), absorbed the Regional Council, the body responsible for administration of the outlying provincial communities, and reduced the authorities of the local councils in Baghdad's districts and neighborhoods (refs A,B,C).  With political support from his ISCI/Badr loyalists and the expanding institutional ability of the PC, Mueen made himself the dominant figure in Baghdad provincial politics.  --------------------------------------------- ---- His authority challenged by Governor's new powers --------------------------------------------- ----  4. (C) Mueen told us on January 25 that the draft provincial powers law currently before the Council of Representatives (CoR) will greatly strengthen the power of the Governor at the expense of the Provincial Council.  According to Mueen, the version of the law he was familiar with explicitly defines powers for the Governor but offers vague mandates for the Provincial Council which do not lend themselves well to enforcement.  The proposed law looks like a retrenchment among Iraqi political leaders who do not trust democracy, Mueen said.  5. (C) While Mueen may in fact bemoan the state of democratization in Iraq, it is likely his own political future that truly concerns him.  Governor Hussein al-Tahan is an ISCI/Badr colleague but has shown disdain for the Provincial Council in the past and told us that his office deserves more power because "this is where the real work gets done."  Mueen believes that in future conflicts between the PC Chairman and the Governor, the Governor will likely have the law on his side.  --------------------------------------------- ---------- He tells national leaders to stay out of 'his business' --------------------------------------------- ----------  6. (C) Immediately prior to the January 24 Joint Planning Commission (JPC) meeting between USG and GoI services institutions, Mueen tipped us off that there might be a "confrontation" at the meeting.  Mueen and other provincial leaders consistently criticized Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki throughout the past year for the creation of committees supporting Operation Fardh al-Qanoon (FAQ) (a.k.a. Baghdad Security Plan) that assigned major responsibilities to national GoI figures and minimized the input of Baghdad's provincial government.  Mueen used the platform of the JPC on  BAGHDAD 00000354  002 OF 003   January 24 to censure the national government for this neglect and stated that the JPC, currently managed in part through the office of former Deputy Prime Minister Salam al-Zobai, should be a function of the PC's Essential Services Committee.  Mueen made his case and set in motion the PC's future absorption of the JPC, winning a round against both the national government and the Mayor of Baghdad.  --------------------------------------------- - He wants to keep a grip on the City of Baghdad --------------------------------------------- -  7. (C) In 2005 the Baghdad Provincial Council declared the Baghdad City Council dissolved and forcibly removed its members from the Amanat.  Within a few months the PC installed one of its own, Saber al-Esawi (ISCI/Badr), as the new Mayor.  The PC justified its actions under CPA 71, claiming that the historical status of the Amanat as an arm of the national government was no longer valid.  The City of Baghdad looks likely to regain this special status when the Council of Representatives passes the law required to fulfill Article 124 of the Constitution.  The irony for Mueen is that the Mayor and other Amanat officials put in place by the PC are now major proponents of legislation making the Amanat more independent of provincial government and more closely connected to the national government, in line with pre-CPA Iraqi law.  Mueen must therefore strengthen his authority over the workings of the Amanat before a new law limits his power; by taking over the JPC he may be able to retain a degree of influence over the Amanat in lieu of direct legal authority.  His calculation may also include the fact that controlling the JPC also provides him access to and influence over USG resources that may bolster his position relative to his major challengers: the Mayor, the Governor, the national government and the Sadrists.  -------------------------------------------- He plays nice with USG to bolster his status --------------------------------------------  8. (C) On January 27, Mueen co-chaired a new forum called the Baghdad Provincial Executive Planning Session (BPEPS) with Baghdad PRT Team Leader Andy Passen and Multi-National Division - Baghdad (MND-B) Deputy Commanding General - Support (DCG/S) BG Milano.  The new forum is an outgrowth of the formerly Coalition-only executive planning session for the JPC.  The new bi-weekly meeting will bring together Baghdad's PC Chairman, Governor, Mayor and key Coalition reconstruction entities to discuss strategic political and services issues.  Mueen immediately seized the initiative to establish a secretariat for the forum responsible for setting the agenda and conducting follow-up to the meeting's decisions.  Mueen told us that he sees BPEPS as an opportunity for Baghdad's provincial leaders to take a greater role in supporting the Baghdad Security Plan.  Taking the lead on BPEPS also helps Mueen strengthen his position in relation to the Governor and Mayor in front of key USG leaders, who command considerable resources.  -------------------------------------------- Can he hold off the Sadrists in an election? --------------------------------------------  9. (C) Mueen's personal political future is also tied to his party's ability to fend off challengers in the next round of provincial elections; imminent passage of provincial powers legislation starts a countdown for this event.  Provincial politicians of all stripes believe that the Sadrists will win big in Baghdad's next election, perhaps even capturing an outright majority.  Notable Baghdad Sadrist Deputy Governor Qassim al-Duraji told us that his party is more organized than it was in 2005 and will no doubt perform well at the polls.  Baghdad PC's Da'wa party leader Mazin Makiya said that the next provincial election will see ISCI/Badr lose its dominant position to the Sadrists, a view held by many (ref D).  10. (C) Mueen acknowledged that ISCI/Badr will face a real challenge at the polls, but expressed confidence that the people of Baghdad will recognize all the hard work done by the current PC under his leadership and will turn out in support of his party.  Many PC members say that 'election season' is heating up in the province as parties busily prepare campaigns to reach out to Baghdad's voters.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Comment: Baghdad politics makes for strange bedfellows --------------------------------------------- ---------  11. (C) Comment.  Mueen's relationship with Baghdad PRT has ebbed and flowed as his personal standing and ISCI/Badr policy towards the USG shifted back and forth over the past three years.  The relationship is closest when Mueen has a  BAGHDAD 00000354  003 OF 003   specific need for our support or a shared objective with our policy.  A perfect storm may now be steering him closer to us.  Chairman Mueen faces unprecedented challenges to his position of authority within the province: he has personal, political, legislative and institutional rivals arrayed against him.  His relatively recent interest in joint USG/GoI forums such as the JPC and BPEPS seems to signal his need for our support in bolstering his position of authority amongst these rivals.  12. (C) Comment cont'd.  Mueen also makes a point of applauding USG efforts to reach out to various Sadrists, stating that this helps splinter the movement into rival groups.  Sadrists will have to choose sides between groups willing to support 'legitimate' government and those against it, according to Mueen.  It is clear that Mueen made these comments to indicate that our objective of supporting legitimate government is linked to his objective of preventing a Sadrist election victory.  He also implied that it may be in the USG's best interest to see a delay in provincial elections to prevent "the turmoil" that would undoubtedly occur in seating a new provincial government (the further implication being that this turmoil would be greater if the Sadrists emerged victorious).  For a number of reasons, Mueen finds it advantageous to strengthen his relationship with Baghdad PRT and the Coalition.  13. (C) Comment cont'd.  For a number of reasons, we also find this strategic partnership worthwhile.  If Mueen proves willing and able to harness the tension of the current environment and transform it into momentum on improving services -- which we believe will help to legitimize the GoI, satisfy the population, decrease terrorist financing, and diminish any remaining allure of militia groups -- then our objectives are indeed aligned.  And if Mueen brings a few Sadrists to the table who are willing to talk with us, then we all may be better off.  End comment. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000355  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  FOR USAID/ANE/IR NEA/I  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2018 TAGS: PARM, PGOG, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: JANUARY 2008 UPDATE ON IRAQ'S INTERNALLY DISPLACED PERSONS AND RETURNEES  REF: A. BAGHDAD 02737      B. BAGHDAD 03678      C. BAGHDAD 03885  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Patricia A. Butenis for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY:  The latest reports on Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) from the United Nations (U.N.) Cluster F and Iraqi Ministry of Displacement and Migration (MoDM) show an increase in the number of IDPs in the past 3 months.  This increase likely reflects a lag in data processing and a spike in registration of previous displacements rather than significant new displacement. Recent IDP and refugee returns have received considerable press coverage, but the number of returnees is minute in comparison to the 2.2 million who remain displaced (one million before February 2006 and 1.2 million displaced after that date according to the U.N.). Two Government of Iraq (GoI) plans to assist returns are unclear.  A new United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) 3-month pilot return project will assist 5,000 families.  To date, GoI efforts to support IDPs have been disorganized and lacking clear leadership. The USG through USAID has provided over $228 million USD to Iraq in support of vulnerable populations since 2003 through five implementing partners. END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- --------- U.N. and MoDM Reports Show Slight Increases in Iraqi IDPs --------------------------------------------- ---------  2.  (C) The U.S. Mission views the UN Cluster F IDP reporting as the most reliable data available in Iraq.  Cluster F draws on data provided by International Organization for Migration (IOM), and UN agencies as well as data from MoDM.  MoDM only counts GOI registered IDPs.  Since IDP registrations in Baghdad were halted in September, MoDM numbers are considered under-reported.  In 2007 the U.N. reported 198,428 families were displaced in Iraq between February 2006 and November 2007.  This is an increase of 24,447 families (or 149,824 individuals) since the last report was released in September 2007.  The UN data on Baghdad indicates 59,346 IDP families (30 percent of all displaced Iraqis) have been displaced since February 2006 and that there are more IDPs in Baghdad than any other province.  A MoDM report released 21 November 2007 stated there are 163,574 IDP families in Iraq, up from 151,350 families reported the previous month.  57,808 families (or 355,889 individuals) are currently located in Baghdad.  UN reporting supports this. The MoDM report indicates that most of the new registrations since the last report occurred in the provinces of Diyala, Baghdad and Karbala.  3. (C) Comment: An increase in the number of IDPs does not necessarily reflect only recent displacement.  In Baghdad, the increase of registered IDPs is probably a function of several factors, including some new displacement; improved data processing by the MoDM Karkh and Rusafa branch offices; and the announcement of several assistance programs for registered IDPs.  The potential for obtaining assistance likely prompted some previously unregistered IDPs to register. End comment.  --------------------------------------------- ------ Iraqi Red Crescent Society Shows a Decrease in IDP's --------------------------------------------- ------  4. (C) The Iraqi Red Crescent (IRC) IDP numbers are significantly higher (by 117,000 families) than those reported by the UN and MODM. The IRC report dated 27 December 2007 states that there were 344,236 IDP families as of the end of November 2007. Interagency analysis concludes that the main reason IRC counts are higher is that counting methodology changed in August 2007 to include IDPs displaced prior to February 2006.  The UN and MODM do not include pre-February 2006 displaced populations in their current reporting numbers. IRC maintains that their numbers are not inclusive of pre-February 2006 displacements and are reflective of post displaced populations only. We will continue to monitor this to bring clarity to the discrepancy in reporting numbers.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Baghdad IDPs and Returnees --------------------------------------------- ---------  5. (C) MoDM data, press reports, and local contacts indicate an increasing number of IDP returns to Baghdad.  An MoDM memo dated 13 December 2007 reports that 3,653 families have  BAGHDAD 00000355  002 OF 004   returned.  Of that total, about one-half returned to West Baghdad and the balance to East Baghdad since January 2007. There are 4,502 families in the process of completing paperwork to document their return to various parts of the country and most of that total (3,455) will return to Baghdad.  ------------------------------------------- GoI Introduces Two Plans to Address Returns -------------------------------------------  6. (C) There are currently two GoI-led plans to facilitate IDP and refugee returns, but neither plan has been coordinated with Iraqi, Coalition, or civil society (Non-Governmental Organization) stakeholders. Both plans are unclear in terms of practical implementation.  7. (C) Abd Al-Samd Rahman Sultan, Minister of Displacement and Migration, presented his ministry's returns plan in November.  That plan is more a set of guiding principles than clear action items.  The plan calls for voluntary returns, coordination, and rehabilitation of property, reintegration, and protection. MoDM says this plan will be used as a blueprint to facilitate and support returns.  However, the plan fails to address essential issues such as evicting squatters and security for returnees. The plan mentions that "various entities" should coordinate efforts to provide assistance to returnees, to include helping them find jobs and repairing their homes, without saying which entities should coordinate, and how or where resources will be made available.  Under this plan, the GoI is supposed to repair private and government property to accommodate returnees. The plan does not articulate who will carry out repairs or who will decide which properties are repaired and in which order of priority.  The plan indicates that returnees should be afforded protection but provides no details on the proposed role of Iraqi and Coalition Forces, the courts and other GoI entities.  ---------------------------------- BOC Plan Not Coordinated with MoDM ----------------------------------  8. (C) On 9 December, General Aboud Qanbar, Commanding General of the Baghdad Operations Command (BOC), presented a six point plan to facilitate the returns of IDPs and refugees to Baghdad.  In Baghdad the BOC commands the Iraqi army and National police and has an essential role in planning for returnees. The BOC plan includes roles for MoDM, the Baghdad Provincial Council, and Coalition Forces, none of whom were consulted before the plan was released. The initiative would use media campaigns to publicize locations for returnees to settle and would identify returnees, which could endanger these individuals. MoDM officials have said they do not concur with the BOC plan.  9. (C) The BOC plan includes the following points: 1) The BOC, in coordination with MNF-I, will identify areas safe for returns.  This information will be provided to the Baghdad Provincial Council (BPC) and MoDM, which will use the media to invite displaced families to return to those areas; 2) displaced citizens will register with the MoDM and indicate their desire to return to their homes; 3) MoDM will provide the BOC with the names and addresses of those who wish to return; 4) the BOC, in coordination with MNF-I, will inspect homes of potential returnees to determine if they are habitable; 5) MoDM and BPC, in coordination with the BOC and MNF-I, will announce the names of those citizens approved to return to their homes and provide a timetable for doing so; 6) the media will publicize returns and all administrative and security details will be coordinated among the BOC, the BPC, and MoDM. Comment:  IDP population breakout is approximately 63% Shia Muslim; 30% Sunni Muslim; 5% Christian and 2% Other.  10. (C) Comment: The plan does not lay out standards for how areas will be determined "safe". Publicizing returns could encourage attacks on returnees.  Most Sunni IDPs who have not already registered are reluctant to do so because they do not want to provide their personal information to the predominantly Shia Government or because the process is too time consuming.  Many Sunnis will be reluctant to advise MoDM that they want to return to their homes amid growing suspicion that the GoI is only interested in promoting Shia returns.  Finally, the plan states returnees should await permission to return to their homes, although Iraqi officials acknowledge that IDPs should be allowed to return on their own timetable.  None of the plans deal with potentially explosive issues such as evicting squatters, the possibility  BAGHDAD 00000355  003 OF 004   of renewed sectarian tension as now homogeneous neighborhoods attempt to reintegrate multiple sects, compensation for damaged or destroyed property, competing property claims, and increased demand for already strained services.  End Comment.  --------------------------------------------- ------ UN Introduces Rapid Response Plan and SRSG staffing --------------------------------------------- ------  11. (C) UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) have developed a rapid response plan for returnees that will target the most vulnerable returnees while improving registration and needs assessment mechanisms.  The $11 million dollar plan is a 3-month pilot project that will be limited to providing immediate assistance to just 5,000 returnee families. The U.N. plans on issuing an appeal for $200 million dollars in funding in February 2008 to continue the program beyond the 3 month pilot period.  12. (C)  We have supported the SRSG efforts to increase UN staffing based in Iraq, in part to address the IDP/Refugee/Returnee issues.  This plan on returnees is a positive step. However, the U.N. does not currently have sufficient local or international staff on the ground to effectively oversee a large-scale returnee program.  We are encouraged by recent dialogue with the U.N. that they will seek to increase staff in Iraq in the near future. The UN appeal will seek additional resources from the USG to fund the same activities USAID currently funds.  ----------- USG Efforts -----------  13. (C) Since 2003, USAID has provided over $228 million USD to Iraq in support of vulnerable populations. USAID/OFDA continues to provide humanitarian relief and assistance to IDPs and returnees through its five implementing partners: International Organization for Migration, International Medical Corps, Mercy Corps, Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development, and International Relief and Development. USAID leads the interagency effort in Iraq on vulnerable populations.  A draft strategy to assist Iraq to respond to on-going displacement challenges is in the process. Since December, the interagency team as well as partners and international organizations have engaged MoDM to strengthen their ability to address the current challenges.  ---------------------------------- MoDM Needs A Mandate and Resources ---------------------------------- 14. (C) The MODM has never received clear authority to direct GOI IDP policy, nor the resources.  In November 2007, Ambassador Crocker and General Petreaus wrote Prime Minister Maliki urging the GoI to adopt a unified, government-led approach to address challenges posed by IDPs and returnees. In the absence of legislation, an Executive Order (EO) was drafted by the National Security Advisor and MODM for the Prime Minister's signature to address the Crocker/Petreaus letter. However, there is progress on both the legislative and policy fronts.  The Basic Law will establish MODM as the ministry responsible for addressing and providing services to IDPS and Refugees in Iraq. On January 22, 2008 the Council of Ministers (CoM) approved the law and it is now with the Council of Representatives (COR) for the first of three readings. We anticipate that this process will take several months. The National Policy which defines the day to day operations of MODM has been drafted by MODM with assistance from UNHCR. The National Policy has gone through several re-drafts and is currently back with MODM. Until the Basic Law and the National Policy are approved, the EO (once signed) will to be the document that provides the framework and mandate for MODM.  15. (C)The GOI must substantially increase MoDM's 2008 budget to enable it to increase administrative capacity and offer compensation to service ministries, NGO's and private companies that implement its plans, policies and projects. MoDM's 2007 budget was only $6 million despite the ministry's significant responsibilities and there is no clarity on the 2008 budget  --------------------- Disorganized Response ---------------------  16. (C) GoI efforts to assist IDPs and returnees have been disorganized, reactive, and plagued by administrative shortcomings and allegations of corruption.  Rather than  BAGHDAD 00000355  004 OF 004   encouraging a unified MoDM-led effort to address the considerable challenges posed by IDPs, the GoI has allowed other entities such as Dr. Ahmed Chalabi's Services Committee and the BOC create committees and weigh in on IDPs/Returnee issues in an ad hoc manner.  While providing limited resources to MoDM in 2007, the GOI has provided the Iraqi Red Crescent Society (another group that wants to be in the lead on IDPs) with about $60 million in 2007. The U.S. initiative to build MoDM capacity (funded by the State Department's Bureau for Population, Refugees and Migration (PRM) and implemented by IOM) ended in December 2007. IOM provided technical training in IDP registrations for MODM, development of software to register IDPs, and infrastructure support to MODM branch offices. The results of that initiative are still being assessed.  To strengthen the skills of MODM's civil service corps, USAID's Tatweer program will develop a capacity building program in coordination with MODM leadership.  The first meeting between MODM and Tatweer will take place in early February 2008.  --------------------------- GOI Funding Support to IDPs ---------------------------  17. (C) GoI initiatives to provide monetary support to IDPs have been disorganized. In October 2006, a first initiative of one-time payments of 100,000 Iraqi Dinar (about $80.00 USD) was planned for 15,000 displaced families in Baghdad. In the past year, less than 10,000 families received payments.  18. (C) In the spring of 2007, a second initiative to make one-time payments of one million Iraqi Dinars (about $800.00 USD) for displaced families who return to their homes in Baghdad was launched.  Funding for 5,000 returning families was provided by the COM and distributed through the Governor's office in cooperation with the BPC and MoDM. However, only 4,000 families (mostly Shia) received this payment.  Baghdad Governor Hussein Ali Tahan has reportedly announced that the rest of the payments in this allocation will go to Sunni families.  Payments have been halted for about 3 months due to allegations of corruption.  It remains unclear if the COM will allocate more funds to provide payments to displaced families returning to Baghdad.  19. (C) The third initiative is a 6-month temporary salary of 150,000 Iraqi Dinars per month (for a total of 900,000 Iraqi dinars, or about USD 735) for about 140,000 IDP families who registered their displacement between March 2006 and July 1, 2007. MoDM states 56,000 Baghdad families will receive the salary in three lump sums. The first payment is still being distributed. MoDM officials say they are not sure when the second and third payments will be made.  ---------- Next Steps ---------- 20. (C) There are encouraging developments these past two weeks that the GOI is now focused on addressing IDP, Refugee and Returnee legislative and policy priorities. We will continue dialogue with the GOI at all levels to advance gains that have been made. Strengthening MoDM to address the challenges ahead will remain a priority. Finally, as security improves in Baghdad, monitoring of neighborhoods to assess services where large populations of IDPS are located will need to be addressed. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000357  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2018 TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, PREL, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS ON PERSONAL PROTECTIVE SERVICES: STATUS REPORT UPDATE #3  REF: A. A. 07 BAGHDAD 03668      B. B. 07 BAGHDAD 03764      C. C. 07 BAGHDAD 03767      D. D. 07 BAGHDAD 04001      E. E. 08 BAGHDAD 00248  Classified By: Patricia Butenis, Charge, for reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d)    ------- Summary -------  1. (C) This cable is the third update of Embassy Baghdad,s implementation of the relevant eighteen recommendations of the Secretary,s Panel on Protective Services.  The following recommendations have been implemented by Post (reftel D):  A. (C) Kennedy Recommendation 12 - Joint Review Board B. (C) Kennedy Recommendation 17- Direct RSO Engagement with GOI Police and Security Officials; C. (C) Kennedy Recommendation 18 - RSO Response Team Facilitation to Embassy Claims Program.  2. (C) Embassy Baghdad has made significant progress on recommendations 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, and 16 as outlined in this cable. Recommendations 1, 2, 3, 6, 7 and 15 require Department action.  3. (C) This cable also provides an update on the Department of State-Department of Defense Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) on private security companies, proposed Iraqi legislation concerning Coalition Provisional Authority Order 17, and Embassy and Blackwater condolence payments in connection with the September 16 incident. End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Recommendation 2 - DOD and DOS Discussions with GOI on New Regulatory Framework for USG Private Security Contractors --------------------------------------------- ---------  4.  (C) STATUS: ONGOING. The legal status of DOD contractors, including private security contractors, will be part of the negotiations between the USG and the GOI on a Status of Forces (SOFA) agreement expected to begin this month.  The Department of State will seek to obtain similar agreement on immunities and related issues for DOS contractors separately.  --------------------------------------------- Kennedy Recommendation 4 ) Recommendation for Continued Contract Services of Blackwater ---------------------------------------------  5. (C) STATUS: ONGOING.  FBI investigation of the September 16 incident has not concluded. However, the Blackwater contract expires in May 2008 and a decision on renewal may have to be made before the FBI investigation concludes.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Kennedy Recommendation 5 - RSO to be provided with DS Agents Staffing to Accompany PPS Movements --------------------------------------------- ---------  6. (C) STATUS: NEAR COMPLETION.  Assistant Regional Security Officers (ARSOs) and TDY DS Special Agents (SAs) are assigned to command each Chief of Mission (COM) Personal Security Detail (PSD) operating in the Baghdad area under the WPPS contract. Fifty-two Special Agent positions and positions related to the oversight of all DOS Private Security Contractors (PSCs) in Iraq have been requested (reftel E) to include RSO coverage of non-RSO Chief of Mission (COM) PSD movements and coverage outside Baghdad.  In late March, the first group of approximately 12 new Special Agents will arrive after completing training.  This first group will be assigned to Regional Embassy Offices (REOs) and the Regional and Provincial Reconstruction Teams where DS has PSD responsibilities.  In the short term, Post continues to maintain a staffing increase for this requirement through the use of DS TDY personnel.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Kennedy Recommendation 8 - Revisions to the Embassy Rules For the Use of Force --------------------------------------------- ---------  7. (C) STATUS: COMPLETED.  The Baghdad Mission Firearms Policy has been revised and issued.  The Rules for the Use of Force have been modified to make the language consistent with the common principles outlined in the DOS-DOD MOA.  8. (C) To reduce the number of lethal force incidents, Post has procured 24 Dazzlers.  A Dazzler is a non-lethal light-emitting weapon designed for use against perceived vehicle threats as part of the graduated force response.  On  February 20, instructors will initiate training to all PSD teams on its proper application.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Kennedy Recommendation 9 - Video Recording Equipment in Vehicles and Recording of Radio Communications --------------------------------------------- ---------  9.  (C) STATUS: ONGOING/NEAR IMPLEMENTATION: DS Security Engineering Officers (SEOs) are installing the approved Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) system into PSD vehicles in Baghdad.  Each COM motorcade traveling into the Red Zone now has at least one vehicle with a camera system installed. A second installation team is arriving this week to continue the installation.  The entire project is scheduled to continue through the spring with the short term goal of having at least two vehicles in every motorcade operating with cameras.  Nearly 400 COM vehicles throughout Iraq will have cameras installed upon the completion of the project. Initial experience with the cameras has been very positive.  10.  (C) IRM procured, built and tested a system that can simultaneously record 32 radio channels.  The system is in the delivery stage.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Kennedy Recommendation 10 - Vehicle Identification Numbering System --------------------------------------------- ---------  11.  (C) STATUS: NO CHANGE.  RSO has engaged MNF-I on this issue and reviewed the operational security (OPSEC) concerns with respect to readable vehicle number signage.  It is the collective assessment of the Embassy and MNF-I that a vehicle numbering system is only viable if all USG PSDs adopt the same numbering scheme and non-USG PSDs also agree to voluntarily adopt the same system.  MNF-I is not inclined to support a numbering system solely for US Embassy Baghdad PSCs as it may offer enemy forces the ability to identify them as such and bring greater risk to COM movements.  Post recommends that this recommendation be reconsidered in light of the extensive communications and de-confliction measures that have been put into effect by RSO, MNF-I, and MNC-I which are proving to be effective.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Kennedy Recommendation 11 - Investigations and RSO Response Unit --------------------------------------------- ---------  12. (C) STATUS: ONGOING/NEAR COMPLETION.  RSO has established a Force Investigation Unit (FIU) consisting of a dedicated FIU supervisor and ARSO. The FIU currently draws upon other RSO personnel as needed.  The PSD Serious Incident Investigation Handbook is in the DS approval process.  RSO has requested Special Agent and contract investigator resources to fully staff this unit to 14 persons.  The FIU will be responsible for the investigation of all serious incidents involving DOS-affiliated PSCs to include Tier I and Tier II private security contractors.  Position descriptions have been written and funding is being pursued. The first meeting of the Embassy and MNFI Joint Incident Review Board will be conducted on February 12.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Kennedy Recommendation 13 - RSO AND MNF-I Procedures for Coordination, Liaison, and Operational De-confliction --------------------------------------------- ---------  13.  (C) STATUS: AWAITING RSO LNO TO THE Multinational Corps ) Iraq (MNC-I)Joint Operations Center (JOC).  RSO, MNF-I and MNC-I have developed commonly agreed operational procedures, liaison coordination and exchange of information, and a process for swift resolution of issues of mutual interest. RSO participates in the MNF-I Strategic Operations daily briefing and presents data on planned COM protective missions for the next 24 hours. An MNC-I liaison officer (LNO) was added to the RSO TOC and has been fully integrated into the RSO TOC's operations. The LNO provides enhanced visibility to MNC-I on PSD movements outside the IZ and serves as the focal point for coordination and situational awareness between RSO and battle space owners in Baghdad.  An RSO LNO has been identified and will be assigned to the MNC-I Joint Operations Center to enhance coordination between the Embassy and MNC-I.  ------------------------------------------ Kennedy Recommendation 14 ) PRC 152 Radios ------------------------------------------  14. (C) The procurement of additional communication capabilities is underway, with the arrival of the Harris PRC 152 handheld radio system expected by the end of February. These radios give PSDs the ability to contact military units  directly in the field to de-conflict issues or request medical evacuation and quick reaction forces.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Kennedy Recommendation 16 - GOI-US Joint Commission Working Group on PSC Licensing and Transparency --------------------------------------------- ---------  15.  (C) STATUS: ONGOING. The Embassy, represented by the RSO, and the Multinational Forces ) Iraq (MNF-I), represented by the Chief of the Contractor Policy and Oversight Division (CPOD), continue to hold regular joint working group meetings with the Chief, Private Security Regulatory Division, Ministry of Interior, and his staff to address topics of mutual concern.  Four meetings have been held to date.  --------------------------------------------- -------- Completion of Negotiations on the DOS-DOD MOA on PSCs --------------------------------------------- --------  16. (C) The Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) on private security companies, negotiated by the Embassy and MNF-I, was signed by the Deputies for State and Defense on December 5, 2007.  ------------------------------------ Embassy Condolence Payments Continue ------------------------------------  17.  (C) On November 26, 2007, the Deputy Chief of Mission, Acting RSO, and Acting Embassy Legal Adviser made condolence payments to one Iraqi who had been injured and to the widow and brother of an Iraqi who had been killed in the September 16 incident.  All claimants accepted the payments.  In addition, the Iraqi who suffered an injury informed the DCM that he had been punished for his absence at work when he was recovering from his injury.  The DCM apologized and offered to write a letter to his employer explaining the cause of his absence, which was provided to the claimant at a later date.  18.  (C) On December 27, 2007, the Deputy Chief of Mission, RSO, and Acting Embassy Legal Adviser made condolence payments to three Iraqis who had been injured and the widow of an Iraqi who had been killed in the incident.  All claimants accepted the payments.  The Embassy is continuing to work to obtain contact information for all of the potential claimants from the September 16 incident and plans to make additional payments in the future as it locates those claimants. To date, the Embassy has paid 132,500 dollars to claimants: 40,000 dollars to the families of 4 killed, 65,000 dollars to 13 injured, and 27,500 dollars to 11 claimants for vehicle damage.  ------------------------------ Blackwater Condolence Payments ------------------------------  19. (C) On January 18, 2007, the DCM and RSO met with Blackwater representatives and were briefed on Blackwater,s intentions to make condolence payments to the victims of the September 16 Nisur Square incident and to obtain an operating license from the Ministry of Interior. In a change from Blackwater's previous position, the representatives said that Blackwater has hired a number of Iraqi attorneys, including one who has had significant experience dealing with MNFI on Iraqi claims cases, to work with local courts on payment issues and plans to follow procedures for payments as determined by local laws and regulations. Blackwater has set aside "a generous pot" of money for these payments and the Iraqi attorneys will be contacting survivors and relatives of the deceased. Representatives said that they intended to make payments to all claimants, including those with lawsuits pending in the United States, largely because they did not expect those lawsuits to be successful. They also said that they would take into account the specific requests and circumstances of the claimants where possible.  20. (C) Blackwater is also moving ahead with efforts to obtain an operating license from the Ministry of Interior (MOI), and said that through their lawyers' communications with the MOI they were told that Prime Minister Maliki would approve the licensing of Blackwater if condolence payments are made.  They have received this same assurance from members of the Ministry of Interior responsible for licensing.  21. (C) The DCM told Blackwater that the Embassy believed it was morally correct for Blackwater to make condolence payments.  She also indicated that while the Embassy welcomes this action by Blackwater, it will not have any effect on the DOS/Embassy decision on whether to retain Blackwater, and that in regards to the MOI licensing issue, under no circumstances could the Embassy approve of or in any way be  part of a bribery effort. The Blackwater representatives indicated that they understood and that the process would be straightforward and transparent.  22. (C) In follow-up communications with Blackwater, RSO provided a list of all known victims and their available contact information. As of January 31, Blackwater's Iraqi attorneys had been able to contact family members of 6 of the deceased victims, and 12 of the victims that had suffered injuries and/or property damage.  They continue to reach out to the additional victims (about 20 more) and have enlisted the help of the Iraqi Police to locate the victims for which there is no contact information (Note: Blackwater has agreed to provide the Embassy with contact information for any victims they are able to locate but for which the Embassy did not have contact information or were not able to locate. The Embassy will make its own payments to any additional victims that it is able to locate in this manner. End Note.) Blackwater said that on February 1, 2008, their Iraqi attorneys would begin to meet with each of the victims to express their sympathy and to interview them to subsequently craft an individual condolence payment amount for each victim.  On average, Blackwater said it expects they will pay at least twice as much as what the Embassy paid and substantially more for victims or families that were more significantly impacted by the incident.  As an example, he cited a family that lost their bread winner, a man who was already supporting the families of four of his brothers whom had been killed as a result of sectarian violence.  ----------------- CPA 17 Draft Law ---------------- 23. (C) There has been no change in the status of the draft law to repeal CPA Order 17.  The Council of Ministers approved a draft law and voted to send it to the Council of Representatives, but to date the draft has not yet been transmitted to the CoR.  Once submitted, the law could pass in as little as one to two weeks given existing procedures. There has not, however, been much discussion on this draft law in recent weeks.  We have engaged the GOI in an effort to prevent the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs from submitting the proposed legislation to the CoR.  In meetings with and in letters to GOI officials, we have highlighted the steps that the Embassy has taken to implement the Kennedy Report recommendations, the Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of State and Department of Defense on USG PSDs that was recently signed, and the ongoing FBI investigation into the September 16 incident. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000358  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/03/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, EFIN, EAID, EAGR, IR SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COMPACT WITH IRAQ: BAGHDAD PROGRESS  REF: A. REF: A) BAGHDAD SBU OI JANUARY 28      B. B) FROWICK/TOMASZEWICZ EMAIL FEB. 3      C. 2008  BAGHDAD 00000358  001.2 OF 004   Classified By: CETI - Todd Schwartz, Acting. Reason 1.5 (b), (d)  1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  Both the GOI and UNAMI are working to enhance the prospects of meeting the benchmarks outlined in the International Compact with Iraq (ICI).  The GOI is building the size and capacity of the small ICI secretariat, and has embarked upon a serious effort to pull together its draft of the ICI annual report.  SRSG Staffan de Mistura convened donors for a series of meetings organized around ICI thematic working groups (TWG) January 31 - February 2, to discuss donor and GOI progress against ICI benchmarks during its first year, and to prepare a parallel donor report. UNAMI sees debt relief as a key commitment of donors, and an important incentive for Iraq to buy in fully to the ICI process. End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ----------- ICI Secretariat Growing, Preparing Annual ICI Assessment --------------------------------------------- -----------  2. (C)  In meetings on January 26 and 28 Econoffs learned that the ICI secretariat has brought on additional staff, opened its office, and has one of four planned EC-funded technical advisors in place.  We met January 26 with Dhia Mahdi--advisor to former Deputy Prime Minister Salam al Zubaie--who has been asked by Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih take administrative charge of the TWGs and bring greater coherence and action to the them.  (COMMENT: Dhia is favorably known to the Embassy and should be an effective ICI staffer. He has previously served on the ICI secretariat task force.  It also is a welcome development to see Dr. Barham broaden senior Iraqi ICI administration among Iraq's ethnicities. END COMMENT)  Dhia told Econoffs that his responsibility to manage all six (plus) of the TWGs is too much for a single person, and he plans to focus first on managing just the energy and human development TWGs.  He expressed concern that the TWG members in several cases do not represent the breadth of Iraqi ministerial stakeholders, pointing specifically to the political reform TWG, which is staffed exclusively by members of the National Security Council (please protect).  Dhia told Econoffs that DPM Salih had already initiated the process of drafting the Iraqi one year status report on ICI implementation by sending letters to line ministries requesting data, and a follow up package detailing a timeline for drafting, discussion, and finalizing the Iraqi report. (Note: Emailed this to NEA/I/ECON ) Ref B).  3. (C)  On January 28 Econoffs met with ICI Secretariat Head Dr. Hadi Hussein and his deputy Mohammed Qaradaghi, and saw the new ICI offices that had been set up in January in a trailer outside DPM Salih,s offices.  The ICI offices had secretarial and functioning IT support.  While the ICI  SIPDIS Secretariat had planned to set up its office in the joint  SIPDIS Iraqi-US Freedom Towers complex, this plan fell apart in January when getting office space in the building was not possible.  (COMMENT: Due to security, the EC-funded technical advisors likely will remain at the Freedom Towers and will not be co-located with the ICI Secretariat, which hinders communication. END COMMENT)  Qaradaghi explained that the ICI continues to build its staff, and has hired a database manager in addition to al Zubaie and other administrative support personnel.  He told us that DPM Salih had already begun convening TWGs to prepare for drafting the annual report.  In response to econoff's question about key minsterial staff missing from the membership list of most TWGs, Qaradaghi said the TWG membership had been decided by the ICI Executive Committee and could only be modified by that entity.  (NOTE: UNAMI told us later that they had sat in on some of these sessions, which were well attended by GOI ministries and appeared to be reporting well on ICI benchmark performance, however UNAMI,s hope is that the TWGs "move beyond reporting to planning." END NOTE.)  --------------------------------------------- -------------- UN Convenes Donors to Coordinate a One-Year Status Report --------------------------------------------- --------------  4. (U)  UNAMI convened a series of Development Partner meetings corresponding with the ICI TWGs from January 31 through February 2.  Donors met in configurations that focused on thematic issues of the ICI which will be assessed in the upcoming annual review in April.  UNAMI,s purpose was to coordinate donor comments on both Iraqi and donor performance over the last year against ICI benchmarks, and to suggest possible new benchmarks for the next period.  UNAMI  BAGHDAD 00000358  002.2 OF 004   proposes that donors pull together a parallel donor report to be discussed with Iraqi counterparts in joint Iraqi-Donor TWGs beginning in late February.  The USG was represented by Embassy Econ, Treasury, USAID, ITAO and Agriculture attache. Other donors included the EC, DFID, Australian Embassy, Japanese Embassy, Danish Embassy, Dutch Ambassador, Italian Embassy, German Ambassador, French Ambassador (note: who didn,t speak), the Canadian International Development Agency, UNDP and OECD.  These donors met in different groupings over the three days to discuss progress on ICI benchmarks relating to the Energy Sector Reforms, Governance and Institution Building, Public Resource Management, Economic Reforms, Human Development, and Agriculture Reforms.  5. (SBU)  UN SRSG Staffan de Mistura opened the event noting that there has been a series of international reports on Iraq coming from the IMF, SIGIR and others noting some improvements in Iraq, that there is a sense now of greater security, and there are some economic improvements.  He said that an Iraqi political "surge" is possible if we keep up the pressure, and in this context it is important for the ICI to show some real movement.  De Mistura believed we have an opening to deepen the effectiveness of the ICI as a GOI-donor coordination mechanism ) and said that his conversations with PM Maliki and DPM Salih convince him that they too want to see the ICI succeed, and are serious about supporting the ICI secretariat.  De Mistura said that the IRFFI will now focus on ICI, and that many/most projects should be co-financed as a signal of Iraqi ownership.  The Iraqis had asked the UN for financing to support the expansion of the ICI secretariat, but this is not something the UN will do. From the donors, part, movement on debt relief would also constitute a strong signal to the Iraqis that the ICI process is bearing fruit. 6. (SBU)  De Mistura touched on Article 140, which he described as "the mother of all issues."  He believed that solving the hydrocarbons legislation first would help open the way to eventually solving 140.  The "good news," he said, was that hydrocarbons issues are all business--not disputes of religion or ideology--so reasonable and practical solutions can be found.  De Mistura concluded by asked donors to "look at your work as developing momentum for the ICI to push the GOI into a political, legislative, and economic surge of its own."  7. (SBU)  In his opening remarks UNAMI Deputy Guy Siri said that since the last Baghdad Coordinating Group in December UNAMI had supported DPM Salih,s preparation of the timetable for the annual report and neared completion of the ICI Medium Term Financial Framework database.  Siri echoed de Mistura,s comment that UNAMI financial support for the ICI secretariat is a "no-no."  Siri asked donors to press the GOI to fully fund the ICI secretariat, making a special appropriation if need be.  Donors could contribute by generating further movement on debt relief.  Siri noted that UN Special Advisor Ibrahim Gambari will travel to the Gulf region in early March to discuss relief of Iraqi debt still carried by Gulf countries, and said that Maliki had given Gambari a letter to convey to the Kuwaitis supporting the mission and indicating that if there is debt relief from the Gulf countries the GOI will pledge to spend equivalent funds in the Sunni areas of Iraq.  8. (SBU)   UNAMI ICI Advisor Yahia Said asked donors to support further Iraqi buy-in to the ICI as a policy planning tool.  He perceived that the GOI was moving on ICI benchmarks and recently had begun to build capacity of the ICI secretariat, but institutionalizing these advances remained  SIPDIS our next big challenge.  Iraqi planning and policy decisions taken outside the ICI framework (such as the recent amendment to the salary laws by the Finance Ministry) were problematic as they limit the scope of ICI discussion of overall reforms. Said urged donors to encourage the GOI to develop inter-ministerial coordination and planning, and said that the GOI doesn,t yet fully appreciate the potential power of the Policy Planning Unit of the ICI.  Said concluded by hoping that the donor side would make progress on debt relief, the GOI would make progress on ICI benchmarks, and together we would enter into a "virtuous cycle."  ---------------------------- DEVELOPMENT PARTNER MEETINGS ----------------------------  9. (SBU)  Donors met in six sessions from January 31 through February 2, focusing on the following TWG themes.  Follows is a brief synopsis of over 18 hours of conversations:  --  ENERGY:  Discussion focused on the three USG (and ICI) priorities: a) an integrated GOI energy strategy; b) improved  BAGHDAD 00000358  003.2 OF 004   capacity in the relevant ministries, and; c) helping Iraq achieve an &energy balance8 (e.g. by capturing flared gas for productive use).  All participants noted a severe lack of coordination between the Ministry of Oil (MOO) and the Ministry of Electricity.  The USDel will take the lead in coordinating the energy portion of the parallel donor report.  --  GOVERNANCE:   DFID briefed on its capacity building in the Council of Ministers Secretariat (COMSEC) and noted that there had been some improvements in COMSEC operations.  DFID is also working with COMSEC on planning, and noted COMSEC intends to set up an inter-ministry cell with 20 ministry representatives who will help develop a national strategic plan.  Donors questioned whether this plan would be linked to the National Development Strategy, which the Ministry of Planning and Development Coordination (MOPDC) was refining, and which informed the ICI.  Yahia Said was concerned that the proliferation of planning cells was not in fact inked to the ICI,s Policy and Planning Unit.  Donors identified legislation and the Council of Representatives as areas where further coordination, and further technical assistance, would be useful. DFID will have the lead on this portion of the parallel report.  --  PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT:  This session began with discussion of Iraqi buy-in to the ICI, and debt relief. UNAMI asked for an update from the USG on proposed action to move this forward.  DFID briefed on its work with the MOPDC and MOF on intra-governmental fiscal relations. USAID said the Mission Director had recently signed a MOU with the MOF to re-start the Financial Management Information System (FMIS). MOF will take over the FMIS by September, 2008.  In the meantime, USAID has begun a pilot tracking system at the provincial level.  USAID also briefed on its programs with the Finance Committee of the COR, and with the MOF,s statistical agency (COSIT) to enhance data collection and analysis supporting the Consumer Price Index and GDP figures. Finally, USAID is working on a census of public employees, which will begin in late spring.  The World Bank will take the lead for this portion of the parallel report.   --  ECONOMIC REFORMS:  UNAMI proposed that the OECD Baghdad representative chair the economic reform TWG.  The OECD rep said he was focusing on supporting the National Investment Commission, following the work of USAID, and implementation of the Investment Law.  OECD will also work on anti-corruption -- and is looking for partners in that effort ) with a focus on public procurement.  DFID briefed on its efforts to enhance investment in the Basrah area by setting up the Basrah Investment Commission, the Basrah Investment Promotion Association, and the Basrah Development Fund, which are mutually reinforcing.  Donors believed that this structure was a good pilot for the rest of Iraq.  The EC rep expressed concern that Iraq,s WTO accession appeared to be stalled.  Italy has a 400 million euro soft loan program ) the first 100 million of which would be in the agricultural sector and would provide SME lending through state owned banks, in a "structured fashion to both increase bank capacity and support the private sector."  USAID noted that, although there was much to be done, WTO accession was not stalled, that the first Working Party had had its questions answered, and that the GOI was waiting to hear back from it. USAID also briefed on its extensive SME and micro-financing programs.  UNAMI said the ICI secretariat was planning an investment "road show."  The Dutch were promoting private sector investment in the KRG as a "gateway to Iraq."  Japan was focusing on business exchanges outside Iraq, but found it difficult to identify Iraqi businessmen and suggested the ICI address impediments to business-to-business exchanges.  OECD will take the lead for this portion of the parallel report.  --  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND SECURITY: UNAMI conceded that this theme was very broad, and donors were doing lots of things that would not be captured in the ICI benchmarks.  Siri said UNAMI is trying to beef up its presence in Baghdad, and move from coordinating projects to helping shape strategies and programs.  He said UNAMI expects to have several senior level policy coordination advisors in different sectors, including the human development issues, and had already refurbished its offices to house them.  Donors discussed investments and capacity building programs in health and education, social safety net reform including the public distribution system, the question of a national ID card (which Siri suggested could become a new ICI benchmark), housing, and environmental remediation/water and sanitation. UNDP will take the lead for this portion of the parallel report.  --  AGRICULTURE:  The Danish Embassy noted that Danish programs are shifting from work in the south to capacity  BAGHDAD 00000358  004.2 OF 004   building in the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA).  The Australian Embassy indicated the agriculture sector will be the likely main focus of assistance under the new GOA.  USAID briefed on its INMA program, saying that the focus is on developing a value chain in three areas (livestock, dates, and annual horticulture) and capacity building at MoA. Donors agreed that this sector presented great opportunities for private sector and employment growth, yet required a competent government to regulate safety and phytosanitary issues, especially if Iraq is to export food.  It was not clear whether the GOI bureaucracy was ready to shift from its command orientation.  If we are to get the GOI to begin sharing the cost burden of reforms under the ICI, we will need to continue capacity building efforts at the MoA and among the private commodity organizations.  Donors agreed that short term leaseholding was also a constraint to financing of agricultural development.  The Danish Embassy will take the lead for this portion of the parallel report.  ------- COMMENT -------  10. (C)  In Ref A we reported Siri's comment that some in the UN secretariat are not convinced that the ICI is working as well as UNAMI has been reporting.  The reinvigorated push on ICI in the run up to its one year anniversary, driven by de Mistura, appears to be as much an effort to manage the UN as it is to ensure that the GOI takes it on fully.  Despite UNAMI's assurances that the GOI is increasingly positive on the ICI, we continue to hear skepticism from contacts in the GOI -- Planning Ministry official Faik al-Rasoul's recent comments on ICI at the Naples IRRF meeting are but one example.  In addition, Prime Minister Maliki has yet to appoint someone from his office to become more involved with the ICI at the Secretariat-level.  This may account for UNAMI having pressed repeatedly the point that debt relief is of great importance to generate further Iraqi buy-in to the ICI. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000360  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: PRT-WASIT; MEETING WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SADRIST TREND IN WASIT   CANCEL THIS CABLE BAGHDAD 360...BOTH SECTIONS 01 & 02 DUE TO A SECURITY MISMATCH. A CORRETED COPY WILL BE TRANSMITTEDBEARING A NEW MRN 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000363  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2023 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: QASSIM DAOUD ON POSSIBLE ALLIANCE TO END ALL ALLIANCES (AND MALIKI'S POLITICAL CAREER)  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (C) Summary: Shia Independent CoR member Qassim Daoud told us February 5 that he has had several meetings in recent days with senior ISCI leaders about the formation of a "National Front" CoR grouping that would alter Iraq's current political landscape and end the government of Prime Minister al-Maliki.  Describing the new alliance as a "beautiful basket of parties" that bridges ethno-sectarian divides, Qassim said it would contain ISCI, the two main Kurdish parties, the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP), Iraqiyyah, Qassim's "Solidarity Bloc" of ten Shia independents, and possibly Saleh al-Mutlaq's National Dialogue Front.  ISCI, Iraqqiyah, and IIP sources either confirmed ongoing talks regarding formation of a new grouping or were sufficiently cagey to suggest that such talks are indeed underway.  In the same breath, however, Qassim said his "Solidarity Bloc" had rejected ISCI overtures of a provincial electoral partnership because the Iraqi public is turning away from Islamist politics.  Concerned about Sadrist control of the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC), Qassim is preparing a lawsuit against IHEC that will ask a court to order dissolution of the current IHEC leadership team.  End Summary.  Beautiful Basket Means Farewell to Nuri? ----------------------------------------  2. (C) Qassim confided that he has had four meetings in the past week with ISCI's Abdel Aziz al-Hakim, Adel Abdel Mehdi, and other senior officials about formation of a "National Front" that would include ISCI, Qassim's Solidarity Bloc, the two major Kurdish parties, Iraqiyyah, IIP, and possibly Saleh al-Mutlaq's National Dialogue Front.  Fielding a line-up of approximately 157 CoR members, the "National Front" (a "beautiful basket of parties," Qassim gushed) would be able to establish a quorum and simple majority on any issue before the CoR.  Qassim emphasized that the Dawa Party would not be welcome to join the "National Front," and he predicted with clearly evident glee that an early item of "Front" business would be removal of Maliki through a no-confidence vote, with current Vice President Adel Abdel Mehdi as replacement Prime Minister.  3. (C) Senior Hakim aide Haitham al-Husseini confirmed that Hakim has been shopping ideas about a new political order in recent meetings with Ayad Allawi, Tareq al-Hashimi and other heavyweights, but Haitham was guardedly cagey when asked about specifics of a new alliance.  Iraqiyyah contacts also acknowledged preliminary rumblings regarding a new alliance. IIP contacts have been across-the-board reluctant to engage in any in-depth discussion over the purported alliance. Nevertheless, reading between the lines and listening to reports from more talkative contacts, there is clearly a great deal of positioning going on behind the scenes amongst the groups.  One contact posited that ISCI, the Kurds, and IIP essentially agreed to work together to ensure the legal formation of three distinct regions - Shia, Kurdish, and Sunni - with Hashimi leading the latter.  The MOU signed between the IIP and the two main Kurdish parties last December was ample evidence to critics that the two groups had yet again sold out Iraqi national interests in lieu of their own private agendas.  Hashimi continues in his recent public statements to downplay that agreement and conduct damage control among his Sunni compatriots.  Hashimi,s recent public engagements with Shia leaders, Grand Ayatollah Sistani last Autumn and the Hakims more recently, also feed rampant rumors of behind the scenes positioning.  4. (C) Declaring that "we'll leave Maliki and Jaffri behind, along with Adnan Dulaymi, Khalaf al-Alayan, the Sadrists and the other troublemakers," Qassim predicted a likely Dawa counterpunch that would jettison Maliki and replace him with former Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaffri, who would rely on the Sadrist Trend as his chief base of political and popular support and thus be obliged to make concessions to the Sadrists.  As is his wont, Qassim was withering in his criticism of the Maliki government, characterizing the Prime Minister as "an idiot" and his cabinet ministers as "wild animals," and repeatedly implored the USG to abandon support for Maliki.  Maliki's hostile relations with his neighbor Qassim make the famously tense Maliki-Hashimi relationship look like a lovefest by comparison, and it has degenerated to the point that Maliki blocked road access to Qassim's house by installing a t-wall that forces Qassim to transit a parking lot controlled by the PM's security detail in order to reach his own home.  We noticed that the obstructing t-wall has been painted with a garish mural since our last visit, a sure sign that it is there to stay.  Provincial Elections, Sadrists Mock IHEC Lawsuit --------------------------------------------- ---  BAGHDAD 00000363  002 OF 002    5. (C)  While Qassim maintained that he and his independent bloc would be pleased to join the "National Front" under ISCI's leadership, he said he flatly rejected ISCI overtures to enter into a provincial election partnership because he thinks the Iraqi electorate is disgusted with all Islamist political parties, particularly Shia religious parties like ISCI and Dawa, and is eager for a non-sectarian alternative. He continued that Grand Ayatollah Sistani is similarly disenchanted with Shia religious parties, and has already sent word to ISCI's Hakim and others that they may not use his name or photo in election campaigns, as they did in 2005 polling.  Qassim claimed that the religious parties - including the Sadrists - are well aware of their diminished popularity in south-central Iraq and will turn their militias loose during the campaign and polling in order to preserve their dominance through threats, intimidation, and violence. Qassim confided that he may have trouble recruiting independent candidates to contest elections for fear of assassination by thugs affiliated with rival contestants. Concerned about Sadrist control of the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC), Qassim is preparing a lawsuit against IHEC that will ask a court to order dissolution of the current IHEC leadership team.  When he warned several Sadrist CoR members about the impending lawsuit, he related, they burst out laughing in reply. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000364  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, TU, IZ SUBJECT: BARZANI: NO PEACE, NO STABILITY WITHOUT ARTICLE 140  REF: A. BAGHDAD 66      B. BAGHDAD 299  Classified By: Senior Adviser David Pearce for Reasons 1.4 (b,d)  Summary -------  1. (S) Masood Barzani February 4 warned that external and internal pressures were aligning to stall the Constitution's Article 140 process for resolving the status of Kirkuk and other disputed territories.  The Kurds would not accept this.  If Article 140 was dead, the KRG President said, the Constitution was dead.  He sketched for Senior Adviser Pearce a bleak vision of Turkey-Iran-Syria cooperation against the KRG on the one hand, and, on the other, of his erstwhile Iraqi Arab allies stalling on 140 and reneging on long-standing political commitments.  He said the effort to deprive the Kurds of their rights had been the cause of instability in Iraq since the 1920s, and it would be so again if this continued.  The continuing Turkish airstrikes had gone on too long and exceeded all limits.  He felt they were aimed not only at the PKK but at pressuring the KRG, and he vowed not to respond under the pressure of bombardment. Senior Adviser said the PKK was carrying out terror attacks against a U.S. friend and ally, and we supported action against it.  But we also had made plain to Ankara this should be part of a comprehensive approach that also included political, economic, and social elements.  Senior Adviser reminded Barzani there were also positive forces working to address the Article 140 issues -- including an active and capable UN envoy, and strong US support for those efforts. Barzani said the UN was taking too much time.  Senior Adviser said the UN was getting to work, and being properly careful. But the real issue was that any lasting resolution would depend on an underlying political agreement.  What was needed now was for Barzani and other political stakeholders to reach out to each other and discuss the tradeoffs that will be required.  Worth noting is that, despite the KRG president's extended rant on domestic perfidy and neighbors' meddling, he was also at pains to transmit readiness for political compromise.  If the spirit of the Constitution were upheld by others, he said, meaning a good faith effort on Article 140, then the Kurds were still prepared to make "sacrifices" for the sake of Iraq.  End Summary.   Barzani Complains of Anti-Kurdish Machinations     and Wonders about UNAMI's Plans --------------------------------------------- -  2. (C) Senior Adviser Pearce met February 4 in Salah al-Din with Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Masood Barzani to review Article 140 issues.  The meeting took place at Barzani's request.  Accompanying Pearce were RRT Erbil IPAO Auden McKernan and Poloffs Cathy Westley and John Walsh.  Accompanying Barzani were Kurdistan National Assembly (KNA) Speaker Kemal Kirkuki, KRG Minister for Extra-Regional Affairs Mohammed Ihsan, Barzani Chief of Staff Fouad Hussein and KNA representatives Sardar Hakim (PUK) and Deler Muhand Sharif (Communist Party).  At the end of the meeting, Barzani and Pearce met one on one and continued the discussion alone in Arabic.  3. (S) Barzani led off with his concern about the status of Article 140.  The Kurds had shown flexibility in agreeing to United Nations Assistance Mission to Iraq (UNAMI) assistance; the Kurdish National Assembly in December had agreed to a six-month extension of Article 140 implementation.  Since then, Barzani complained, two Article 140 High Committee members have resigned.  And Prime Minister Maliki is creating obstacles.  For example, Maliki instructed the Constitutional Review Committee to refer Article 140 to the Federal Supreme Court to determine its validity.  This was not acceptable.  The Turkmen held a conference to declare Article 140 dead.  "If Article 140 is dead, the Constitution is dead," Barzani said flatly.  4. (S) Barzani asked about UNAMI's plan.  One out of six months have passed, he said, and there is no plan, no timeline.   At the rate they're going, it could take 30 years.  If so, the Kurds will have no commitment to Iraq, to the Constitution, to anything.  Senior Adviser responded that the UN was getting to work, and being properly careful, but it was not a matter of six months anyway.  It was a matter of using the coming months to get in place a process that could really lead to resolution.  And for any solution to last, it will have to hinge on an underlying political agreement. That means minimum buy-in from all the major communities. What was needed now was for Barzani and other political stakeholders to reach out to each other -- to people both in and out of government -- and discuss the tradeoffs that will be required.  That means direct contact and discussions.  And  BAGHDAD 00000364  002 OF 003   it means thinking about what they will do to accommodate others' interests.  5. (S) Barzani said the Kurds welcomed a constitutional solution, referendum, normalization, letting the people of the areas concerned decide.  They did not want to see the issue take "other routes".  They were ready to return to historical documents, including Ottoman ones.  They knew other nationalities were involved, and he reiterated his pledge that minority rights would be fully respected.  But to impose a solution outside the constitution was not acceptable.  There was a conspiracy against the Kurds on this issue, to gain time.  And, Barzani asserted, there was a lack of commitment from the GOI.  The conspiracy extends outside of Iraq, too.  Turkey, Iran and Syria have agreed on a plan to delay and spoil Article 140 progress.  This was not just "analysis", he said, it was "information".  And the consequences of GOI inaction on Article 140, he warned, would "not be good."   Senior Advisor Notes UN and U.S. Commitment -------------------------------------------  6. (S) Senior Advisor said the future of Kurd-Arab relations would remain an essential issue to address regardless of what the Article 140 Committee did or what any judicial review said.  He suggested that Barzani stay focused and not fall into the trap of unproductive debates on parliamentary maneuvers or legalisms.  He noted that there were strong forces in play to help the matter toward resolution.  There was an active and dynamic UN representative on the ground working the issue.  UNAMI's strategy is in fact the opposite of no movement; UNAMI is moving towards a process that will demonstrate along the way that progress is happening.  The U.S. supported that effort.  The U.S side is committed to addressing the substance, not because it was doing the Kurds or anyone else a favor, but because failure to do so would help the AQI and the insurgency in the north and continue to stall national political accommodation.   Depending on 140 Developments, the Kurds Can    Leave the GOI or Sacrifice for Iraq --------------------------------------------  7. (S) Since the founding of Iraq as a modern state in the 1920s, Barzani said, the Kurds had not allowed the Iraqi state to rest in peace, because they had been deprived of their rights.  They had been allies in the overthrow of the previous regime.  They had worked hard to make this government a success.  They would not now accept their political partners reneging on political agreements and ignoring the Constitution.  He felt a "kind of dictatorship" was emerging in Baghdad.  The Prime Minister had surrounded himself with advisers who were creating problems.  It was as though he had won election all by himself, without the support of others.  If Baghdad now thinks it can cheat, evade, force, or get support from Iran, Turkey or the Arabs to gain time for Article 140 not to be implemented, then the Kurds will not allow this country to rest in peace.  They will leave the government, and there will be no stability in Iraq.  On the other hand, if the GOI commits to the Constitution, "we're ready to give sacrifices for the sake of Iraq."  The KRG leader said that "we know we will not get everything (in the process), but it needs to be enough for our people to accept it," Barzani said.  8. (S) Senior Adviser said he chose to focus on Barzani's last point.  He did not doubt the KRG president could cause problems for the government if he chose to do so.  He was one of the most powerful men in the country.  But the better course would be to help create conditions for political agreement on Article 140 that excluded none of the major stakeholders -- not the Kurds, not the Sunni, not the Shia. "You have the power to fix things and the ability to play a central role in establishing the stability and security this country needs," Senior Adviser said.  Minimum buy-in from all sides would be necessary.  It would require some give and take, he noted, and more meetings and contacts.  There had not been enough of that yet.  9. (S) Barzani agreed that focus needs to be on the big picture, but he said the Kurds' opponents are using the details against them, so the Kurds must respond with details.  Barzani said his main focus was not Kurd-Arab, his problem was with the government.  The Prime Minister thinks Barzani is trying to remove him.  But Barzani is interested in Iraq's stability.  He and President Talabani had sent a memo to the PM suggesting some corrections, and the PM had responded "unwisely".  Barzani repeated his displeasure with the negative Arab reaction to Article 140.  PM Maliki had tried to "stab us in the back."  He and his anti-Kurd allies should  BAGHDAD 00000364  003 OF 003   not think they have succeeded in hoodwinking the Kurds; they think they are safe and that time is on their side.  If this continues, the KRG president said, we will indeed try to remove him.   Turkish Strikes Have Exceeded All Limits ----------------------------------------  10. (S) In a separate one-on-one conversation, Barzani told Senior Adviser that the reason he was angry with PM Maliki was because Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan had allegedly told Maliki that Turkey was going to attack "the Kurds" and Maliki had said he agreed.  (Comment: Barzani appeared to believe that Turkey intended, and Maliki understood, something more than targeting the PKK, i.e. pressuring the KRG.  End comment).  This was not just "analysis," Barzani asserted, it was based on information.  Barzani said the Arabs (Sunni and Shia alike) viewed the Kurds as being in a weak position. They see the balance of power shifting against the Kurds and so calculate that it is in their interest to play for time.  11. (S) A Kurdish delegation was set to visit Baghdad to discuss oil and other outstanding issues, Barzani noted.  But there would be no decision for them to go until there was a yes or no on the budget question, i.e., whether the KRG receive 17% of the budget or a lower percentage.  Senior Adviser reminded Barzani that he, and other political leaders, had an important responsibility, and that responsibility was to do what was necessary to make the government work.  12. (S) Also during the one-on-one, Barzani said vehemently that he would not be responsive to Turkish bombing.  "The Turks have exceeded all limits," he said.  It had gone on too long, these were violations of Iraq's sovereignty and it was inhuman.   Barzani said he did not want nor did he support the PKK, but this was a Turkish attack on Kurdistan.  The Kurds had exercised restraint, but the bombing had to stop. If it continued, the KRG may have no aircraft, but they would not shut up.  He would say on television that the attacks were occurring, and with U.S. support.  And Turkish forces were on KRG territory.  They would have to leave.  13. (S) Senior Adviser repeated that this was a time when Barzani should think very carefully about the statements he made.  What was needed now were statements from leaders that helped, not statements that made things worse.  What Barzani said was closely monitored, and it counted for a great deal, for good or for ill.  Senior Adviser said the PKK is a terrorist organization, it is engaged in attacks on a friend and ally of the United States, and the U.S. supports action against them.   But the U.S. has also made plain to the GOT our view that the approach to the problem must be comprehensive.  And in fact, the U.S. assessed that that approach had gained acceptance in both the GOT and TGS leaderships.  Senior Adviser also noted the KRG pressures on the PKK, and said repeatedly that arrests would help. Barzani acknowledged that the U.S. considered the PKK a terrorist organization but he would go no further himself than terming them a "problem organization."  Barzani said several times he did not support the PKK and asserted they could not come to the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) area. Makhmour was not under KRG control, it was under the UNHCR. In any case, the answer to the PKK issue was not military, Barzani argued, it was political. For three to four years, the PKK had been prepared to engage in a political process.   Comment -------  14. (S) Barzani asked for this meeting to discuss Article 140 in a macro sense, i.e. in terms of the Kurds' relations with the rest of Iraq, not to exchange views on micro details of implementation.   While he was concerned about the UN's immediate plans, the big issues for him were GOI intentions and neighborly meddling.  He was not in a mood to be bulldozed, whether by his allegedly double-dealing political partners or by neighbors he views as opposed to a process that will legitimize the confines of a Kurdish autonomous region.  PM Maliki came in for particular venom.  But Barzani was also at pains to transmit that he was prepared for political compromise, provided there is also a good-faith effort by others to proceed with addressing the Article 140 issues. BUTENIS 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000367  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: PRT-WASIT; MEETING WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SADRIST TREND IN WASIT  REF: FRAGO 053 TO MND-C OPORD 08-001  BAGHDAD 00000367  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Classified by: PRT Team Leader Wade Weems for reasons 1. 4 (b, d).  This is a PRT-Wasit reporting cable.  1. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Summary.  On Jan 31 at FOB Delta PRT Team Leader (TL) met two Sadrist Trend representatives: Ahmed Hasan Ebrah, Deputy Chairman of the Wasit Provincial Council (PC), and Ahmed Khazaim, Chairman of Al Kut City Council.  Ebrah (1) relayed a message from Sadrist Trend leadership in Najaf and stressed their awareness of the meeting, (2) expressed the desire to forge a new relationship with the US, (3) emphasized Sadrist nationalist credentials, and (4) requested, as a gesture of good faith, the release of prisoners as well as USG intervention to reform IP tactics and operations in al Kut.  End summary.  2. (S//REL USA, ACGU) At the outset, Ebrah said he had received authorization for the meeting from Najaf and that the "office manager" of Sayid Muqtada had instructed him to "make a good start" with the PRT.  The official statement from Najaf, read by Ebrah, began, "We are looking for a new page in our relations with America."  Ebrah opened by declaring that "Sadrists fight injustice, are Iraqis from well-known tribes, and have no relationship with other countries or organizations.  We are poor but proud people and loyal to our country."  Ebrah claimed that miscommunication between the Sadrists and the Coalition had "started before 2003, when the opposition outside Iraq did not inform the Americans of the Sadrist opposition inside Iraq." Miscommunication continues today, he claimed, because Iraqis "close to you" continue to pass false information.  Since Moqtada al Sadr,s ceasefire order, Ebrah said, "we have been listening for an American response," he added.  3. (S//REL USA, ACGU) PRT Team Leader stated that the USG does not object to the peaceful pursuit of political goals by a political movement, but opposes any organization that resorts to violence as a political tool, intimidates Iraqi citizens, or foments chaos for political gain.  While expressing agreement with these principles, Ebrah and Khazaim, when pressed, admitted that "we know we have people out of control who claim to be Sadrists" but asserted they report  violations, to their headquarters.  They observed that the ceasefire had exposed divisions in their organization.  Both men refused to comment on the future of the ceasefire, only saying that it was "up to the Sayid."  4. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Ebrah expressed the immediate need for provincial elections and acknowledged that Sadrists anticipate significant gains, perhaps a PC majority.  He reminded us that while the Sadrists sat out the 2005 election, they had succeeded in winning every al Kut District Council seat only a few months later.  (Note: The three Sadrist PC members defected from other parties to the Sadrists after the 2005 election.  Ebrah defected from Fadilah.  End note).  Despite prospects for increased power, Sadrists do not aspire to dominate provincial politics, but instead seek to be part of a multi-party government, Ebrah insisted.  As if to support his avowed preference for power-sharing, Ebrah suggested abolition of local councils because "Sadrists would dominate government at that level," and he praised the politically-independent PC Chairman Mohammed Hasan Jabir.  (Note: Jabir rejected recent invitations to join the Sadrist Trend and, in a recent meeting with the PRT, advocated aggressive police action against Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM) in al Kut.  End note.)  Though Sadrists expect political success, "powerful forces are against them," for example, "all election workers in the southern provinces are controlled by opposing political parties."  Ebrah appealed for assurances that the next elections would be fair.  5. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Ebrah expressed reservations about PRT priorities, saying "Democracy is not understood by poor, uneducated and unemployed people and does not matter to those struggling to survive.  Instead, people want basic services and improved infrastructure."  Following a well-worn rhetorical line, Ebrah cited the British-built al Kut dam as the sort of progress Iraqis need to see, but he claimed that thus far there was no evidence of US or GoI investment in Wasit.  The current government has failed to provide for the people, Ebrah said, strongly agreeing with a suggestion that the present provincial government and DGs were corrupt and self-dealing.  As for the national government, he continued, "we don't care about Ministries, we care about the people, and we can serve them without (Ministry positions)."  6. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Ebrah stated that the "Head Office in Najaf" would authorize future meetings with "senior people"  BAGHDAD 00000367  002.2 OF 002   upon satisfaction of two conditions:  prisoner release and a change in IP tactics.  (Note: Ebrah said OMS officials would meet only with US civilians, not CF. End Note)  Ebrah provided a list of fifty detainees and asked for their release.  The PRT outlined release program requirements and agreed to submit the request to CF.  Ebrah then spoke at length about tactics employed by the IP during Wasit operations.  He commented that US forces "treat prisoners as humans," and that "when CF raid a house, nothing is stolen." Citing his own experience in CF custody (a case of mistaken identity, he explained), "there are no beatings, and without evidence, detainees are released." Ebrah contrasted CF tactics with the alleged brutal IP treatment of citizens and prisoners, actions which the IP claim take place under US instructions.  (Note.  Ebrah supported the nomination of MG Hannin as IP Chief, despite official OMS opposition, but said he has not seen American support for the Chief since Hannin assumed the office.  End note.)  7. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Fortuitously, the PRT received the OMS-requested prisoner release just as Third Infantry Division (3ID) issued directions to compile prisoner release requests as part of a reconciliation program.  That program seeks to: (1) facilitate engagement between local leaders and CF; (2) ensure local leaders assume responsibility for post-release conduct; and (3) empower local leaders by creating visible results from their leadership efforts. Sixteen of the names on the OMS list also appear on 3ID,s list of release candidates.  PRT is working closely with 214 FB to vet these names and assess their eligibility for release.  As releases are approved, PRT will use this leverage to arrange successive meetings with OMS representatives.  8. (S//REL USA, ACGU) Comment: The OMS representatives pitched themselves as Iraq,s "true patriots," with a nationalist streak that makes them resistant to the influence of foreign nations, namely Iran.  We will take advantage of the 3ID planned release program in the context of the OMS prisoner release requests in order to build PRT credibility with the OMS and prepare future engagements, aiming at a more senior cadre. BUTENIS 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000371  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/08/2018 TAGS: ASEC, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: PRT MAYSAN: GENERAL MEHDI ANGLES TO BE NEXT POLICE CHIEF   Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia, Reasons 1.4(b,d)  1. (C) On 01 February 2008, the Maysan PRT met with Major General Mehdi al-Gharrawi at his Baghdad residence.  Mehdi, a former commander of the Public Order Brigade in Fallujah, hails originally from Maysan province and also has a home in al-'Amara.  Discussion focused on security in Maysan, notably the challenge of access to the province for the PRT and its US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) partners to monitor projects.  Mehdi revealed that he was slated to become the new Chief of Police in Maysan.  He relayed that he had been chosen by a Ministry of Interior nomination committee and approval by the Minister of the Interior and the Prime Minister was pending.  Although the Minister of Interior was out of the country, Mehdi felt confident he would turn his attention to the matter upon his return.  A decision to replace the current Chief of Police, General 'Ali Waham, could be made as soon as March 2008.  Gen Mehdi requested USG support to influence the Minister of Interior and the Prime Minister in favor of his appointment.  2. (C) The PRT clarified that neither the PRT nor the Embassy would be able to influence such a decision.  Nevertheless, if General Mehdi were Chief of Police in Maysan province, the PRT would have relationships with key officials in both the Iraqi Army and the Iraqi Police, thus significantly enhancing opportunities for access to the province.  Although the PRT continues to engage with the Governor on security, much of any security plan developed by the PRT and Department of State security personnel will hinge on the use of the Iraqi Army and the police force in Maysan.  Mehdi claimed that if he were Chief of Police he would "give the PRT the key to the province in order to do reconstruction projects."  3. (C) In related discussions, General Mehdi stated that the Maysan police force is circa 12,000 strong.  Asked how many also adhered to Jaysh al-Mehdi, Mehdi replied there were approximately 1,000 members.  Asked about the anticipated challenges of the post, Mehdi referred to his time as a commander in Fallujah, a difficult position where he had nonetheless proved successful.  However, he did request assistance should he become the new Maysan Chief of Police. Mehdi emphasized the need for training and equipment, specifically vehicles, for Maysan police.  With respect to training, he wants to approximately 400 police trained by CPAT or another agency in either al-Kut or an-Nassiriyah.  4. (C) Comment:  In his encounters with the PRT, General Mehdi takes pains to demonstrate his influence and connections in Maysan.  In the course of a February 1 meeting, Mehdi made a phone call to Maysan Governor Adhil Mhoder Radhi al-Maliki.  After Mehdi left a message, the Governor promptly returned the phone call, at which point Mehdi made known to the Governor the presence of PRT members at his home, prompting the Governor to reiterate his outstanding invitation for the PRT to visit Maysan.  The Governor did not make mention of a proposed visit to Tallil AB to hammer out the details of the security plan for a PRT visit to Mayan.  5. (C) Comment Ct'd  The PRT phone conversation with the Governor took place though the PRT's bilingual, bicultural advisor (BBA) who is also a Sayyid -- a descendant of the Prophet.  When the PRT BBA first introduced himself to the Governor as a Sayyid, the Governor asked what a Sayyid was doing working for Americans.  The PRT BBA then asked if the Governor had not heard about the fatwa of the marjia ('Ali al-Sistani) determining that it was permissible to work for American civilian organizations focused on reconstruction. The Governor laughed and said "Okay".  End Comment.   CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000375  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2017 TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PREL, PTER, SY, IZ SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 3 MCNS EXAMINES SECURITY IN MOSUL AND BAGHDAD, JUSTICE REFORM,  INTEL PRIORITIES, AND BAGHDAD AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT,  REF: BAGHDAD 00297  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  Summary -------  1. (S REL AS UK) Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki opened the meeting by outlining the agenda and asking for a report from MOD on the security situation in Mosul and the outcome of the Crisis Action Cell (CAD) held in Mosul on Saturday, February 2.  The MCNS also discussed reform of the administration of justice, a system for identifying intelligence priorities, and received a briefing on developing an economic zone at the Baghdad International Airport (BIAP).  End Summary.  Mosul CAC Meeting -----------------  2. (S REL AS UK) Defense Minister (MOD) Abdul Qadir reported that the PM traveled to Mosul on February 2 to chair the CAC meeting there to formulate a response to AQI in Ninewa province, in particular Mosul.  (Note:  This CAC included MNC-I commander LTG Ray Odierno, Iraqi Commander of Ground Forces Gen. Babakir Shawkt, MOD, and Ninewa Operations Commander LTG Riyadh, among others.  End Note.) LTG Riyadh hosted the meeting at the Mosul Command Center. The CAC agreed that security must be re-established in Ninewa/Mosul.  Operational command was clarified at the meeting as well as coordination processes with MNF-I.  They also discussed likely responses of AQI.  All agreed that the police in Mosul needed to be re-habilitated and re-organized, more recruits were needed, and more and better training was required.  Iraqi National Intelligence Service director added that intelligence resources in Ninewa/Mosul must be coordinated.  He also noted the need to activate the courts and build new prisons.  Justice Reform --------------  3. (S REL AS UK) The MOJ reported that about 14 thousand detainees have been released from detention. This represents about one-third of 43 thousand detainees case to be resolved.  An additional six thousand have their cased before the court; the remainder have yet to be reviewed.  He noted that an amnesty law would speed up the process of releasing detainees.  4. (S REL AS UK) The General Prosecutor (GP, Attorney General equivalent) noted that the Rule of Law council last met on January 30.  This inter-ministerial group investigated the status of detainees and looked at the situation of juvenile and women's detention facilities.  A need for more such facilities was identified.  He noted that the GOI had received some detainees from MNF-I custody.  Responding to PM's question, the GP said that the problem of intakes from Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) was being resolved by direct liaison with MOD and MOI.  PM acknowledged the work of the group, expressing hope that the innocent would be released soon.  GP responded that most of those not guilty of a specific crime had already been released.  Baghdad Joint Security Stations (JSS) -------------------------------------  5. (S REL AS UK) MOD outlined the development and use of JSSs, which combine MNF-I, Iraqi Army, and Iraqi police forces, in Baghdad.  Their presence within neighborhoods of Baghdad, where they interact directly with the people, providing security and patrolling, gathering ground-level intelligence, and securing GOI facilities underpinned the decline of violence in Baghdad.  Thirty four new JSS would be started, using local police stations or available empty buildings.  Some centers to provide services and store equipment would also be established.  This is a short-term measure until the security situation improves, at which time the police stations will revert to their role as local security centers.  The Baghdad Operations Center commander noted that the JSS had increased popular trust, were collecting valuable intelligence, and providing security for the delivery of municipal services.  He clarified that there are 39 now, seven more to be established soon, and further sites to be determined as the situation requires.  Priorities of Intelligence Resources(PIR) -----------------------------------------  BAGHDAD 00000375  002 OF 002    6. (S REL AS UK) National Security Advisor (NSA) Muwaffaq Rubaie presented a briefing paper prepared for the MCNS to review concerning the intel priorities of the intel services of Iraq.  He asked the members of the MCNS to review the document carefully and provide feedback to his office.  Following sharp questions from the PM on the document and some of its recommendations, Rubaie stressed that this document was to spark discussion and review of priorities - it was not the finished list of intel priorities.  Such a list should be endorsed next week, he suggested.  7. (S REL AS UK) INIS quickly criticized the document, noting that it left out mention of AQI and money flows to AQI, AQI shell companies.  He then quickly listed major topics regarding armed groups that had not be included.  PM added that Baathist should be a sub-topic of armed groups. Rubaie pointed out that many of these points had already been incorporated in his version, but asked everyone to review the document and send him comments.  Not relenting, MOD criticized the document for ignoring organized crime, fanatical cults, and influence of neighbors.  MFA chimed in that the document presented said nothing of institutional corruption.  PM suggested the anti-corruption agencies should handle that, not the intel services.  After further discussion on the proper role of MOI, INIS, and the anti-corruption agencies, it was agreed that how intel on corruption can be passed to the competent prosecutorial authorities must be clarified.  Finally, the DCG asked Rubaie to confirm that the working document circulated for comment include reference to armed groups.  Rubaie agreed.  BIAP's Economic Empowerment ---------------------------  8. (S REL AS UK) The Director of Foreign Investment presented a PowerPoint briefing on steps taken and to be taken to modernize the airport and create a business and conference center there.  The former Iraqi Airways building is nearly ready to be used again as an office complex, and a small businessmen's hotel is also nearing completion.  A business center and conference center are under construction. A five-star hotel and small mall are planned.  The director made the point that some way to facilitate secured movement to and from the airport and business center will have to be developed.  9. (S REL AS UK)  He also noted that the Ministry of Transportation, which oversees both the Civil Aviation Authority and the Airport Authority, must compel those two authorities to cooperate - their failure to work together impeded efforts to develop a world-standard airport and adjoining business/conference center.  PM agreed that a world-standard airport and facilities for businessmen was essential to fostering economic security in Iraq and told the Investment Director to provide him with a list of requirements.  The Director promised it within a week.  10. (S REL AS UK)PM wrapped up the meeting with the suggestion that the GOI should look at reconfiguring the International Zone (aka Green Zone) of Baghdad to facilitate the movement of all government office buildings there and embassies.  NSA replied it has been under study and will soon provide an update on the studies. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000376  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  OSD FOR SECRETARY GATES FROM AMB CROCKER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/08/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MOPS, MARR, IZ SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SECRETARY GATES VISIT TO IRAQ  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 03922  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C Crocker for reasons 1.4(b) and (d).   1. (S) Mr. Secretary:  Since your visit in December (reftel), we have seen further progress on security:  CLCs, now renamed the Sons of Iraq, continue to flourish; and the Iraqi people's confidence in the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) is increasing, evidenced by greater commercial activity in urban areas.  ISF, both Army and Police, are showing greater professionalism, often leading - and taking casualties - in the fight against AQI and illegal armed groups.  Northern Iraq continues to be problematic and Turkish air strikes are beginning to play into tensions between the Kurdish leaders and the leadership in Baghdad.   On the political front, PM Maliki has shown staying power, though his health creates real concern. Many of the cabinet seats vacated by party walk-outs remain empty.  Maliki has recently indicated plans to shuffle, shrink, and rationalize his cabinet, which would be a real improvement if he carries it off.  There has been some movement on key legislation, including passage of a de-baathification law, but the budget remains caught in a dispute over the share of national revenue for the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG).  The recent revival of the three-plus-one power sharing mechanism by President Talabani is a hopeful sign, especially as we begin LTSR/SOFA negotiations that the three-plus-one will oversee.  It would be helpful for you to praise this inclusive approach as well as to press Maliki to aim for a timely - not later than June 2008 - agreement, emphasizing that its conclusion will put our relationship on a more normal - and more mature - footing.  GOVERNMENT WOES ------------------------  2. (S) Of the 36 cabinet seats within the Maliki government, many remain empty due to walk-outs by the Sunni Tawafuq bloc and the Sadrist, Iraqiya, and Fadilah blocs.  All remain deeply suspicious of Maliki and his backers. Talks have just started with Tawafuq to return to government, and a group of technocratic nominees may be sent to the Parliament soon to replace the other parties.  With the Shia and Kurdish alliance keeping the government afloat, Maliki has had little incentive to be flexible or conciliatory.  In the wake of the security surge, however, political conditions have altered just enough to perhaps allow for a new coalition of parties and ministers led by Maliki, pursuing a less sectarian agenda.  The litmus test will be this coalition's ability to achieve passage of benchmark legislation and meaningful reconciliation.   3. (S) Progress on the legislative agenda is a mixed picture:  The Justice and Accountability Law (de-Baathification) was passed by the Council of Representatives (COR) and approved February 3 by the Presidency Council. Maliki has expressed legitimate concerns that the law, if implemented in a draconian way, would require him to fire some of his better police and military commanders due to their former ties to the Baath Party.  To address this, we are encouraging "selective implementation" rather than what would likely be a lengthy and contentious effort to amend the new law.  We are hopeful the Provincial Powers Law will come to a final vote this week.  Passage of the elections law and hydrocarbons legislation will present formidable challenges over the coming months.  SECURITY --------  4. (S) A major factor in security gains over the past few months has been the work of the "Concerned Local Citizens" now numbering about 85,000 and renamed "Sons of Iraq" (SoI).  As only about 20 percent of SoI personnel will be able to obtain permanent security-related careers in the ISF; therefore the Embassy and MNF-I are working to knit together employment and training programs so the others develop employment skills.  These programs currently include USAID's Community Stabilization Program (CSP), a pilot Community Service Corps (CSC) program (funded with CERP) and the DoD/GOI Joint Technical Education Reintegration Program.  5. (S) PM Maliki's recent announcement of re-hiring some former Ba'ath party cadres in recognition of their efforts to battle AQI and his efforts to pass a general amnesty  BAGHDAD 00000376  002 OF 002   law, now under debate in the COR, are both positive developments.  But the government is going to need to do much more to gainfully occupy those who don't make the cut to join the security forces.  6. (S) The government's response to the security situation in Ninewa province will be a good measure of its capacity to deal with tough problems (with assistance).  PM Maliki traveled February 2 to Mosul to lead a Crisis Action Cell, a sign that he is feeling more confident as well as a welcome indicator of willingness to actually take responsibility for real security of the citizens.  RETURN OF REFUGEES ------------------  7. (S) As the security situation improves in the country, in particular in Baghdad, refugees who fled to Syria or Jordan have been returning.  Some have been helped by GOI programs to transport them to Iraq and provide initial subsistence funds to help them re-establish themselves in Iraq.  Data on how many have returned, and the motivation for returning, is spotty, but we do know that there is no plan for their resettlement.  The GOI will need to turn its attention to this problem quickly lest it contribute to ethnic tensions and retard reconstruction efforts.  LTSR/SOFA ---------  8. (S) We anticipate beginning LTSR/SOFA talks in the next two to three weeks. Ministry of Foreign Affairs professionals, with MOD and other ministries support, will lead the talks under the guidance of the revived three-plus-one, who with political party leader from the COR will form the steering board for negotiations.  As we begin negotiations, we must get across the message to Iraqi politicians and the public that the process will be transparent and the resulting agreement will recognize Ira's sovereignty and status as a partner with the United States.  During your conversations here, it would be useful to emphasize our sensitivity to Iraq's concerns and our desire to have an agreement that will satisfy both sides' needs.  Neighbors ---------  9. (S/NF) We are preparing for a further round of trilateral talks with Iran, currently slated for February 15.  Continuing Iranian support for militia activity will be a focus of our presentation.  The GOI has made representations of its own to Damascus on the foreign terrorist fighters issue, which our Charge there will follow-up shortly with a detailed briefing.  10. (S) The continuing air strikes by the Turks against KGK targets in northern Iraq have begun to have repercussions with implications for our agenda in Iraq.  Both GOI and KRG officials are impatient with a military campaign which they assess cannot alone solve the problem and with the absence of political or diplomatic initiatives from Ankara.  The Turks have offered some modest military cooperation which we hope the Iraqis will quickly accept.  However, it is now even more imperative that GOT leaders extend a formal invitation to President Talabani to visit Ankara and that they undertake a meaningful dialogue with the Iraqis, which includes KRG officials.  11. (U) I look forward to welcoming you to Baghdad.  Warm regards. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000377  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR Fadhil Jameel JAMEEL Noah Jam Barway   1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME: Fadhil Jameel JAMEEL Noah Jam Barway POSITION: Brigadier General, Iraqi Army DOB:  April 1, 1966 TYPE OF TRAINING:  NESA Senior Executive Seminar For Combating Terrorism TRAINING LOCATION: NESA Center for Strategic Studies, STE 4308, Washington, DC  20593 DATES OF TRAINING: March 1, 2008 to March 16, 2008  CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000378  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR HASAN   1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME: Hasan Ali Mohammed HASAN POSITION: Colonel, Iraqi Air Force DOB: December 20, 1965 TYPE OF TRAINING:  Language Training TRAINING LOCATION: Lackland AFB, San Antonio, Texas DATES OF TRAINING: March 20 2008 to January 2, 2009  CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000383  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR HASAN   1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME: Hasan Ali Mohammed HASAN POSITION: Colonel, Iraqi Air Force DOB: December 20, 1965 TYPE OF TRAINING:  Language Training TRAINING LOCATION: Lackland AFB, San Antonio, Texas DATES OF TRAINING: March 20 2008 to January 2, 2009  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000392  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NLD  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, KJUS, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: BAGHDAD JUDGES COMPLETE ANOTHER SUCCESSFUL PANEL TRYING TERRORISM CASES IN MOSUL  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 3572  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1. (SBU) Summary:  The Ninewa Major Crimes Court (MCC), which tries the most difficult terrorism and corruption cases, completed another successful panel in Mosul. With strong support from the PRT, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment and 1st Armored Division, senior Baghdad judges returned January 22 to Mosul and set to work on the most difficult cases, trying 28 cases charging 31 individuals with 37 separate crimes in seven days of trials, including the sensitive corruption trial of the former Ninewa Provincial Council Chairman Issa. A combined team that included Embassy Baghdad's Justice Attach and Rule of Law Section worked hard to assure the January panel made it to Mosul.  End Summary.  2. (S/REL ACGU) While the overall justice system in Ninewa functions more or less effectively, the traveling judges program again proved itself the only way to have effective adjudication of the most high-risk cases.  Because of specific threats against the judges, the judges insisted they would only come to Mosul if they could lodge at the PRT and use Coalition Force movement assets to the court. They had previously stayed at a housing compound next to the Provincial Governor's Residence, but feared even there they might not be safe.  While we believe the compound is very safe, we were determined to overcome their concerns.  With PRT hospitality and outstanding support from the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment and 1st Armored Division, the judges were able to carry out their work safely and with little interruption. (Note: PRT even converted one room into a temporary "law study" so the judges could prepare their cases without interruption.)  3. (SBU) This success highlights the pressing need to continue the program and to move ahead with plans for a secure judicial complex where MCC judges and their families can be insulated from the pressures and threats inherent in trying terrorism and corruption cases.  Background ----------  4. (C/REL ACGU) After the last traveling trial panel concluded in August 2007, Chief Justice (CJ) Medhat appointed local judges to take on the responsibilities of the MCC on the theory that the security situation in Mosul had improved enough to resume local control.  Whether out of fear of terrorist attack or sympathy with the terrorists and the former regime, or a combination, the MCC came to a standstill.   The Iraqi law enforcement community in Ninewa repeatedly told the PRT that justice was not being served.  5. (S/REL ACGU) In response to strong complaints of a broken MCC, from both Iraqis and Coalition, CJ Medhat sent an investigative commission to Mosul at the end of November. The commission's report severely criticized the conduct of the local judges, and the commission informally told the PRT upon the conclusion of their investigation that the local judges were compromised.  6. (C/REL ACGU) By January, it was clear resuming the traveling judges program was the only way to achieve justice for the most serious crimes committed in Ninewa. In December CJ Medhat issued an order to send another panel from Baghdad to Mosul.  The judges set to work immediately upon their arrival on January 22.  Trials began on January 23 and continued for seven days while 31 defendants were tried, resulting in: 10 acquittals; 5 death sentences; 10 life sentences (30 years or more); and 12 sentences to terms of years.  One critical high profile case resulted in 4 convictions and 8 year sentences for both a member of the Provincial Council and former Council Chairman Issa.  The visiting judges (strictly protect) privately confirmed to the PRT that several of the local judges expressed support for the prior regime and opposition to the new penalty schedule for acts of terrorism and other major crimes.  Comment -------  7. (C/REL ACGU) Mosul MCC will continue to need these traveling judges to ensure corruption and terrorist intimidation do not prevent the adjudication of the hundreds of terrorism cases which still need to be prepared for future  BAGHDAD 00000392  002 OF 002   trial.  At the same time, we are exploring options that will strengthen the rule of law in Ninewa, one of Iraq's most strategic provinces, and particularly Mosul, where terrorists remain entrenched. These options include:  -- Cleaning House Locally: There is a consensus among informed observers, both Iraqi and American, that the local judicial system is in desperate need of reform so that Baghdad will not need to send its own judges to handle the tough cases.  CJ Medhat is very methodical in his approach to reform; we believe that the continuing stream of negative reports from Mosul - including from the latest panel - could open the way for renewed advice to the Chief Justice that it is time to start cleaning house more thoroughly. He has already taken the step of putting in place new Investigative Judges in Mosul; the latest trial panel said their work was a marked improvement over that of their predecessors.  Getting the Chief Justice to proceed on a steady reform path to a new local court would be a tremendous benefit to the rule of law here.  -- Circuit Riding: The local MCC Panel has expressed an interest in participating in a program in which judges would go to Baghdad to backfill for a traveling panel from Baghdad or other Provinces.  This approach would build nationwide judicial capacity by putting Ninewa judges in a situation where they could practice without fear for their and their families' lives; gain a national perspective of the role of Major Crimes Court in the future of Iraq; and simultaneously allow the backlog of cases in Ninewa to be cleared.  -- Security for the Judicial System: The PRT is working with our military and Iraqi colleagues to solve the judicial security dilemma, but for the foreseeable future, judges from Baghdad are the only way ahead.  A secure judicial compound providing a secure environment to the judges and their families will be necessary until the security situation significantly improves. In the meantime, the judges toured several unused buildings on an Iraqi Army Base adjacent to the Coalition base in Mosul, which might be an excellent short-term site for the traveling judges, or even local judges, but many details still need to be worked out. We will continue to press for improved security conditions for local judges, even as we seek reform.  8. (SBU) The bottom-line is that the traveling judge program is still alive and taking on the toughest cases in Ninewa. We will continue to work hard for a variety of fixes, both short- and long-term, which will improve rule of law for citizens who desperately seek it.  CJ Medhat told Justice Attach this week that he intends to send another group of judges from Baghdad to Mosul when additional cases are ready for trial. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000395  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PINS, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: AQI USES WOMAN WITH DOWN'S SYNDROME TO ATTACK MARKET  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia for reasons 1.4 ( b,d).  1.  (C) SUMMARY: District Council chairmen in Baghdad told poloff February 2 that Al Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) detonated bombs in two popular markets on February 1 as part of a desperate bid for attention on the one year anniversary of the launch of the Baghdad Security Plan and the second anniversary of the bombing of the Samara Mosque.  These market bombings, which resulted in at least 29 deaths (including the two assailants), represent the most devastating mass casualty attacks in Baghdad since August 1, 2007, when three car bombs killed 80 people.  Coalition intelligence analysts and the Brigade (4/10 MTN) covering the districts where the attacks took place have revealed that both women bombers were patients in area mental hospitals.  One of the women almost certainly had Down's Syndrome and the other reportedly suffered from schizophrenia.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C) Former Rusafa District Council Chairman Jamal H. Khalaf told poloff February 2 that he believes Al Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) detonated bombs February 1 in two Baghdad markets out of desperation.  Shortly after the bombing, Khalaf said, he rushed to the scene in the Shorja pet market of the Rusafa district, where he saw a devastating spectacle of carnage. AQI is weaker now, he argued, and desperately needs attention.  (NOTE: Desperate or not, MNF-I STRATEFF notes, AQI continues to carry out mass attacks and targeted assassinations.  END NOTE.)  Karada District Council Chairman Mohammed Al Rubeiy argued February 2 that AQI conducted the attacks to mark the one year anniversary of the Baghdad Security Plan, and to commemorate the bombing of the Samara Mosque )- these two events, he noted, have anniversaries in early February.  While both district council members remained uncertain as to whether the suicide bombers had Down's Syndrome )- as local and international media have widely reported )- they agreed that the bombings have increased public contempt for AQI.  3.  (C) The Brigade (4/10 MTN) covering the Rusafa and 9 Nissan districts, where the attacks took place, took photographs of the female attackers which indicate that at least one had Down's Syndrome, and that she did not likely detonate the bomb located in her backpack.  (NOTE: MNC-I does not have evidence for the latter claim, and the Brigade was unable to conduct a DNA test to verify the former claim.  END NOTE.)  Officers in 4/10 note that the explosives in her backpack, which also contained ball bearings, detonated in the Souk Al Ghazil pet market in 9 Nissan district, killing 21 and wounding 30.  The second bombing, which took place 10 minutes later in the Shorja pet market, involved a suicide vest containing ball bearings of similar make to the ball bearings in the earlier explosion, and resulted in the death of 8 and the wounding of 23.  4.  (C) Media accounts appear to over-estimate the total number of casualties, with AP reporting that 99 were killed and AFP reporting 98 killed.  (NOTE: MNF-I bases its casualty estimates on the dead bodies that soldiers count at the scene of the bombing; their estimate does not include victims who later die of their injuries.  Khalaf told poloff that he has learned, in the aftermath of past mass casualty attacks in Baghdad's central urban areas, that more than 50 percent of Iraqis wounded during the bombing later die of their injuries.  END NOTE.)  5.  (S) Coalition intelligence sources have revealed that both women bombers were patients in area mental hospitals. The woman who did not appear to have Down's Syndrome reportedly suffered from schizophrenia, and local sources claim that AQI operatives convinced her that they would provide her with medication if she carried out their wishes.  6.  (U) COMMENT: In determining how to refer to the woman with Down's Syndrome who unwittingly carried out the attack on the market -- wearing a backpack that was remotely detoned by the true perpetrator and not knowing that death would be her lot --  post perceives a deficit in the vocabulary required to describe the moral abomination of this act. Describing her as an "assailant" or "attacker" fails to capture her true role as the involuntary agent of terrorists who used her life to take the lives of other innocent civilians.  END COMMENT. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000396  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  REL AUS, CAN, GBR, NLD  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, KJUS, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: BAGHDAD JUDGES COMPLETE ANOTHER SUCCESSFUL PANEL TRYING TERRORISM CASES IN MOSUL  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 3572  Classified By: NINEWA PRT LEADER JASON HYLAND: 1.4 (B) AND (D)  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1. (SBU) Summary:  The Ninewa Major Crimes Court (MCC), which tries the most difficult terrorism and corruption cases, completed another successful panel in Mosul. With strong support from the PRT, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment and 1st Armored Division, senior Baghdad judges returned January 22 to Mosul and set to work on the most difficult cases, trying 28 cases charging 31 individuals with 37 separate crimes in seven days of trials, including the sensitive corruption trial of the former Ninewa Provincial Council Chairman Issa. A combined team that included Embassy Baghdad's Justice Attach and Rule of Law Section worked hard to assure the January panel made it to Mosul.  End Summary.  2. (S/REL ACGU) While the overall justice system in Ninewa functions more or less effectively, the traveling judges program again proved itself the only way to have effective adjudication of the most high-risk cases.  Because of specific threats against the judges, the judges insisted they would only come to Mosul if they could lodge at the PRT and use Coalition Force movement assets to the court. They had previously stayed at a housing compound next to the Provincial Governor's Residence, but feared even there they might not be safe.  While we believe the compound is very safe, we were determined to overcome their concerns.  With PRT hospitality and outstanding support from the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment and 1st Armored Division, the judges were able to carry out their work safely and with little interruption. (Note: PRT even converted one room into a temporary "law study" so the judges could prepare their cases without interruption.)  3. (SBU) This success highlights the pressing need to continue the program and to move ahead with plans for a secure judicial complex where MCC judges and their families can be insulated from the pressures and threats inherent in trying terrorism and corruption cases.  Background ----------  4. (C/REL ACGU) After the last traveling trial panel concluded in August 2007, Chief Justice (CJ) Medhat appointed local judges to take on the responsibilities of the MCC on the theory that the security situation in Mosul had improved enough to resume local control.  Whether out of fear of terrorist attack or sympathy with the terrorists and the former regime, or a combination, the MCC came to a standstill.   The Iraqi law enforcement community in Ninewa repeatedly told the PRT that justice was not being served.  5. (S/REL ACGU) In response to strong complaints of a broken MCC, from both Iraqis and Coalition, CJ Medhat sent an investigative commission to Mosul at the end of November. The commission's report severely criticized the conduct of the local judges, and the commission informally told the PRT upon the conclusion of their investigation that the local judges were compromised.  6. (C/REL ACGU) By January, it was clear resuming the traveling judges program was the only way to achieve justice for the most serious crimes committed in Ninewa. In December CJ Medhat issued an order to send another panel from Baghdad to Mosul.  The judges set to work immediately upon their arrival on January 22.  Trials began on January 23 and continued for seven days while 31 defendants were tried, resulting in: 10 acquittals; 5 death sentences; 10 life sentences (30 years or more); and 12 sentences to terms of years.  One critical high profile case resulted in 4 convictions and 8 year sentences for both a member of the Provincial Council and former Council Chairman Issa.  The visiting judges (strictly protect) privately confirmed to the PRT that several of the local judges expressed support for the prior regime and opposition to the new penalty schedule for acts of terrorism and other major crimes.  Comment -------  7. (C/REL ACGU) Mosul MCC will continue to need these traveling judges to ensure corruption and terrorist intimidation do not prevent the adjudication of the hundreds of terrorism cases which still need to be prepared for future  BAGHDAD 00000396  002 OF 002   trial.  At the same time, we are exploring options that will strengthen the rule of law in Ninewa, one of Iraq's most strategic provinces, and particularly Mosul, where terrorists remain entrenched. These options include:  -- Cleaning House Locally: There is a consensus among informed observers, both Iraqi and American, that the local judicial system is in desperate need of reform so that Baghdad will not need to send its own judges to handle the tough cases.  CJ Medhat is very methodical in his approach to reform; we believe that the continuing stream of negative reports from Mosul - including from the latest panel - could open the way for renewed advice to the Chief Justice that it is time to start cleaning house more thoroughly. He has already taken the step of putting in place new Investigative Judges in Mosul; the latest trial panel said their work was a marked improvement over that of their predecessors.  Getting the Chief Justice to proceed on a steady reform path to a new local court would be a tremendous benefit to the rule of law here.  -- Circuit Riding: The local MCC Panel has expressed an interest in participating in a program in which judges would go to Baghdad to backfill for a traveling panel from Baghdad or other Provinces.  This approach would build nationwide judicial capacity by putting Ninewa judges in a situation where they could practice without fear for their and their families' lives; gain a national perspective of the role of Major Crimes Court in the future of Iraq; and simultaneously allow the backlog of cases in Ninewa to be cleared.  -- Security for the Judicial System: The PRT is working with our military and Iraqi colleagues to solve the judicial security dilemma, but for the foreseeable future, judges from Baghdad are the only way ahead.  A secure judicial compound providing a secure environment to the judges and their families will be necessary until the security situation significantly improves. In the meantime, the judges toured several unused buildings on an Iraqi Army Base adjacent to the Coalition base in Mosul, which might be an excellent short-term site for the traveling judges, or even local judges, but many details still need to be worked out. We will continue to press for improved security conditions for local judges, even as we seek reform.  8. (SBU) The bottom-line is that the traveling judge program is still alive and taking on the toughest cases in Ninewa. We will continue to work hard for a variety of fixes, both short- and long-term, which will improve rule of law for citizens who desperately seek it.  CJ Medhat told Justice Attach this week that he intends to send another group of judges from Baghdad to Mosul when additional cases are ready for trial. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000398  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PREL, IZ, REL UK SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - February 5  1. SUMMARY: ITAO Director and CFO met with Dr. Chalabi in advance of the Provision of Services Committee meeting to provide an overview of USG reconstruction funding. Immediately afterwards, the committee meeting commenced and members discussed water in Ghazaliya and Nahrawan, the Karkh water treatment plant and the Amanat's Cleaning Day. GRD and ITAO presented an update on the Husseiniya treatment plant and the JPC Chairman discussed recent changes to the JPC. END SUMMARY.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ITAO Provides an Overview of Reconstruction Funding - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  2. ITAO Director and CFO met with Dr. Chalabi in a private session to provide an overview of US reconstruction funding. They discussed Iraq Relief and Reconstruction Funds (IRRF), Economic Support Funds (ESF) and the Commanders Emergency Response Program (CERP). Dr. Chalabi was most interested in remaining funds. He discussed the need for a housing initiative, the rehabilitation of an electric station in Youssifiyah, improved irrigation channels and increased computer access for Baghdad University students. ITAO Director mentioned that there is a current program in place that has created an on-line library for university students. Dr. Chalabi thanked them for their time and expertise.  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - The Committee Discusses Water - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  3. Concerns over potable water and irrigation water shortages were expressed as well as inadequate sewerage treatment capabilities. Ghaziliya was used as an example of an obsolete sewerage network. According to the Deputy Mayor, the Amanat is having difficulties recruiting contractors to address these sewerage issues due to security concerns. FAQ spokesperson noted that the area was predominantly Sunni and therefore a Sunni contractor ought to be considered. The committee dismissed his comments. Chalabi wrapped up this issue - requesting the Deputy Mayor to submit a memo detailing needed equipment. He also tasked the JPC with drafting a memo to expedite trenching in Ghaziliya to address irrigation issues.  4. Water issues in Nahrawan were revisited. The Amanat offered to provide untreated water to the eastern qada, but insisted that any treatment would have to be done locally. MND-B offered to provide reverse osmosis capabilities.  Some committee members criticized the reverse osmosis machines, noting that they were complicated to use and expensive to maintain. The Iraqi Red Crescent volunteered to assist with maintenance.  5. The Amanat complained about power outages at the Karkh water treatment plant. A technical conversation ensued about generator ventilation. The Amanat offered to fix the generators with their expert repair team, the General Directorate of Generators. However, they noted that power problems will persist because of an outdated control system at the reservoir.  6. A representative from GRD and ITAO Senior Consultant to Water briefed the committee on the USG involvement in the Husseiniya sewerage treatment plant. Due to other funding priorities, the USG developed preliminary plans for a water collection and treatment plant in Husseiniya. The Amanat dismissed the plans because they were based on a lower population count than current residents. The USG retorted that they based the designs on the reality at the time. Current plans could be scaled up as necessary if in fact more residents live in the area. The Deputy Mayor maintains that he could fund the project, along with the Ministry of Public Works. The committee will send a memo to the Amanat to request that the Husseiniya project be started immediately.  - - - - - - - - - - - Other Topics, Briefly - - - - - - - - - - -  7. Dr. Chalabi excused himself towards the end of the meeting and Sr. Deputy Minister of Electricity chaired the remaining few minutes of the meeting. The JPC Chairman gave a status update on the JPC, noting that they were seeking an official link to the Government of Iraq in the form of an executive order. He also noted that the Provincial Council Chairman would likely chair future JPC meetings.   8. The Ministry of Defense commented that a letter had been sent from them and the Ministry of Interior to the Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) to request the BOC to implement changes that will prevent vehicles from parking illegally. Both the MoI and the MoD noted that illegal parking is a security risk as well as a traffic barrier.  Crocker 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000399  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PREL, APER, AMED, AMGT, IZ SUBJECT: US MISSION IN IRAQ IS SEEKING FDA EXPERT; HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER  1. SUMMARY: The US Mission in Iraq is currently seeking a food and drug safety expert and CFO health care administrator to fill two established ministerial capacity positions. These positions will serve as senior advisors to the Iraqi Ministry of Health (MoH) on strategic planning and implementation of food and drug safety guidelines and budget forecasting and execution. The personnel are needed immediately for a one year tour of duty. END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------------------- Need for Food and Drug Safety Expertise and CFO Health Care Administration -------------------------------------------  2. In light of recent security gains, engagement and capacity building opportunities with the Government of Iraq (GoI) have improved. This has provided new opportunities, particularly with ministries where our engagements have been limited.  The Ministry of Health is a prime example.  For that reason, Embassy Baghdad's current personnel complement of the Health Attache's office that includes a Health Attache, Deputy Health Attache, Senior Program Officer and two Medical Advisors shared with Multi National Forces-Iraq (MNF-I)needs to be enhanced.  3. The Health Attache's Office continues to focus on areas where Iraqi capacity is lacking.  The most important current needs are for a food and drug safety expert and chief financial officer.  4. The FDA expert's key focus will be the importation of foods and medicines, establishing protocols for inspections, testing and distribution. He/she will also serve as a senior advisor to the MoH and work to de-conflict current laws in Kimadia, Iraq's existing drug procurement system.  As the surge continues, it is critical that a food and drug safety expert come to Iraq to build the MoH's capacity and assist the Iraqis with food and drug safety and medicine procurement and distribution.  5. The Medical Financial Advisor will also report directly to the Health Attache.  He/she will work directly with the Ministry of Health in developing and implementing budget forecasting and execution, strategic planning for long term financial needs of MoH and improving MoH's ability to obligate and spend its capital budget.  This is a key element necessary to provide for a greater self sufficiency for GOI.   6. The Deputy Health Attache is expected to arrive in March. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) is identifying a public health expert to coordinate health endeavors between the embassy, Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) and embedded PRTS (ePRTs).  This will be a 6 month TDY.  Two civilian experts are being recruited for the healthcare administration and finance and emergency capacity and preparedness positions. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000400  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: ANBAR PROVINCIAL COUNCIL RECOMMENDS  LEGAL ACTION FOR ALLEGED THREATS OF POLITICAL VIOLENCE  REF: A) 07 BAGHDAD 4192 B) 07 BAGHDAD 4224 C) BAGHDAD      154  Classified By: PRT Anbar Team Leader James Soriano for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (U) This is a PRT Anbar reporting cable.  2. (C) Summary: The Anbar Provincial Council (PC) voted February 9 to recommend prosecuting two local figures, Hameed Al-Heiss and Sheikh Ali Hatim Suleiman, for allegedly threatening to use violence to loosen the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) grip on power in Anbar.  PC Chairman Abdulsalam said Heiss had crossed a red line by advocating violence in a Baghdad television interview on February 6.  The motion that passed recommended prosecution while opening discussions with Heiss.  The PC also voted to seek clarification of a statement made by one of Prime Minister Maliki's aides who was present at the Heiss, television interview, and who told the press that the PM could use "emergency law" to "dissolve the Anbar Provincial Council."  Meanwhile, Sheikh Ahmad Abu Risha, the leader of the Iraq Awakening Movement, is distancing himself from Heiss.   This gives Ahmad the advantage of taking the high ground while watching two local figures tear at the legitimacy of his political rivals in the IIP-dominated PC.  End Summary.  Emergency Council Meeting -------------------------  3. (C) The Anbar Provincial Council voted in an emergency meeting February 9 to recommend prosecuting two prominent local figures, Hameed Farhan Al-Heiss and Sheikh Ali Hatim Abdul-Rizk Suleiman, for allegedly threatening the use of violence against members of the ruling IIP in Anbar.  The decision to file a complaint was passed by 25 members of the IIP-dominated PC.  A PC secretary announced that 40 of the 49-member PC attended.  They were summoned by Chairman Abdulsalam Abdullah, who heads the IIP in the province. Heiss and Ali Hatim have long been critics of the IIP and its control of the Provincial Council.  Until recently, both were deputies of the Awakening Movement of Iraq, or Sahawa Al-Iraq (SAI).  Threat of Violence ------------------  4. (C) The Council meeting was in response to a February 6 television interview with al-Hurra TV station in which Heiss threatened to &take up arms8 and drive the IIP from Anbar in &30 days8 if it did not relinquish power.  Heiss alleged that the IIP was strengthening Al-Qaeda.  "We will resort to going to the streets and will impose a curfew," Heiss said. "We will have to use force to get them out of Anbar Province.  We will use weapons and treat them the way we treated Al-Qaeda.  We are against the existence of the Islamic Party and its leaders and supporters in Anbar Province."  Ali Hatim reportedly was not present at the time of Heiss, statement, and there is no apparent record of his making a public utterance for the use of violence.  Nonetheless, he telephoned an MNF-W interpreter on February 9, informing him that he stood by Heiss, comments.  Crossing a Red Line -------------------  5. (C) At the Council meeting, Abdulsalam roundly criticized Heiss, alleged threat, saying he had crossed a red line by directly advocating violence against the IIP, which had come to power legally through the election process.  "We are responsible for protecting the citizens of Anbar," he told PC members.  "We are also responsible for protecting the members of this Council.  If anything happens to a member of this Council as a result of what Hameed Al Heiss said, we will have failed in our duty."  6. (C) Abdulsalam believes that Heiss crossed a red line. "Whatever our political differences, we need to avoid violence in politics," he told us on the margins of the Council meeting.  Abdulsalam is genuinely concerned that Heiss, alleged threats could result in violence against some PC members.  7. (C) After the meeting, Abdulsalam emailed the PRT his correspondence to the Ramadi Investigative Court and to the Chief Prosecutor.  In those documents, he lodged a complaint against both Heiss and Ali Hatim on behalf of the Provincial Council.  He also emailed us a third letter addressed to the members of the Anbar Higher Committee ) a consultative and conflict resolution body established in December ) informing them of the PC's intention to take legal action (reftels).   BAGHDAD 00000400  002 OF 002   Provincial Council Hesitation -----------------------------  8. (C) Many PC members, including those from SAI, expressed support for a more cautious approach of behind-the-scenes discussions with Heiss with the aim of diffusing the situation.  "We don't know why Hameed Al Heiss said these things," Sheikh Walid Khalid Arraq albu Ali Jassim, an SAI member and a self-described friend of Heiss, told the Council.  "His comments might have been taken out of context.  We need to talk with him and find out more."  Nonetheless, Sheikh Walid condemned Heiss, apparent threat of violence. Claiming to speak on behalf of SAI leadership, Walid said that Sheikh Ahmad urged the Council to open discussions with Heiss.  Other PC members agreed.  9. (C) When Abdulsalam asked for a vote on prosecution, only 18 members agreed and the motion failed.  He then modified it to recommend prosecution while at the same time opening discussions with Heiss.  That motion passed with 25 votes.  Heiss and the SAI -----------------  10. (C) Meanwhile, SAI leader Sheikh Ahmad told us February 9 that he deplores Hameed Al Heiss, utterances, adding that he recently wrote to PM Maliki urging his office to shun Heiss, requests for meetings, and affirming that Heiss does not speak for SAI.  Heiss, relationship with both Ahmad, and his late brother, Sheikh Sattar Abu Risha, has long been rocky. Sattar was the co-founder with Heiss in 2006 of the Anbar Awakening Council, but he unilaterally abolished that organization last August ostensibly on grounds that Al-Qaeda had been defeated in Ramadi.  In reality, however, Sattar was piqued that Heiss had days earlier approached Maliki with a proposal to fill the Tawafuq Cabinet vacancies.  Sattar regarded Heiss, move as breaking ranks.  11. (C) When Ahmad took over the reins of SAI on the death of his brother last September, he sought to bring Heiss back into the SAI fold by appointing him a sort of security advisor.  By November that relationship foundered when Heiss and Ali Hatim made anti-Coalition statements in the press. That episode led to Ahmad's decision to break SAI's ties with Hameed Al Heiss and Ali Hatim.  What Does The PM Think? -----------------------  12. (C) The PC also voted to pursue a meeting with Prime Minister Maliki over comments made by one of his advisers, Sami al-Askari, who accompanied Heiss during the February 6 television interview.  According to Iraqi media reports, Al-Aaskari followed up Heiss, statements by adding that "emergency law authorizes Maliki to dissolve the Anbar Provincial Council."  PC Chairman Abdulsalam denied that claim, saying that the PM did not in fact have this authority.  "We need to ask the Prime Minister directly whether or not he thinks he has this power, and what he intends to do."  Comment -------  13. (C) The apparently overt threat of political violence is a new and dangerous development in Anbari politics.  Heiss appears to be working his connections with PM Maliki to advance his political interest.  The alleged threat of violence, combined with Sami al-Askari's statement, seems aimed at intimidating the IIP into some sort of power-sharing agreement with Heiss and Ali Hatim.  If this is the case, Abdulsalam's legal complaint might be a message to the GOI that he is dealing with the situation in the courts and that there is no need for it to intervene.  Meanwhile, SAI chief Sheikh Ahmad appears to be distancing himself from Heiss. Such a stance gives Ahmad the advantage of being able to take the high ground while watching two local political figures tear at the legitimacy of the IIP. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000401  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, ECON, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: PRT SALAH AD DIN: NEW PROVINCIAL RECONCILIATION COMMITTEE VOICES CONCERNS ABOUT NATIONAL RECONCILIATION EFFORTS  Classified By: PRT Salah ad Din Team Leader Steven Buckler for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.    (U) This is a PRT Tikrit, Salah ad Din cable.  2.    (C) Summary: During its inaugural meeting on February 6, members of the recently-formed 24-member Salah ad Din (SaD) Provincial Committee for the Promotion of National Reconciliation - the provincial-level equivalent of the GoI's Implementation and Follow up Committee for National Reconciliation (IFCNR) - raised their objections to the recently passed De-Baathification law and other pieces of the national reconciliation process.  Committee members expressed anger that provincial leaders' views on de-Baathification had been inadequately represented by SaD Council of Representative (CoR) members, and that the new law could potentially remove the Governor, Deputy Governor, and numerous police officers from their positions.  To curb memberships in insurgent groups, the Commander of SaD's Joint Communications Center called for developing an amnesty program to help former insurgents' reintegration into society.  Formed several days earlier, the Committee is comprised of a broad, geographic cross-section of SaD provincial leaders and has a mandate to provide guidance to the GoI's IFCNR on key pieces of the national reconciliation process.  End Summary.  3.    (C) Created in early February in response to a mandate from the GoI's Implementation and Follow up Committee for National Reconciliation (IFCNR), the Provincial Committee for the Promotion of National Reconciliation is charged with providing guidance to the GoI on key pieces of the national reconciliation process.  The Committee has 24 members and is co-chaired by SaD Tribal Support Council Chair Sheikh Khamis Jabara, Provincial Council (PC) member Yousif Suleiman, Dean of the Tikrit Law School Amer Ayaash, and Security and Tribal Affairs Leader Sheikh Khalid.  The remaining members are PC members, tribal sheikhs, and other government officials.  The Committee has divided its work by forming seven subcommittees:  Constitutional and Elections; Accountability and Justice; Abolished Institutions; Support Council; Displaced Persons; Supreme Judicial; and Tribal issues.  4.    (C) During the meeting, many committee members raised their concerns with the recently passed Accountability and Justice Law.  SaD PC member Suleiman noted that many Salah ad Din officials felt the law was unjust and severe, but said all must abide by the new provisions.  He said the reconciliation committee would use existing loopholes in the law to mitigate what they consider to be severe measures.  5.    (C) Dean of the Tikrit Law School Amer Ayaash criticized SaD Council of Representatives (CoR) members for not seeking more input from provincial leaders before the law was passed (Note:  Most SaD provincial officials have a low opinion of SaD CoR members who rarely visit Salah ad Din. End Note)  Dean Amer also chastised SaD PC Chair Sheik Rasheed Osman for inadequate efforts to represent Salah ad Din's views on de-Baathification to CoR representatives.  He noted that under the new law many provincial officials could potentially lose their jobs, including 450 SaD police officers, Governor Hamood, and Deputy Governor Abdulla.  6.    (C) Brigadier General Issa, Commander of SaD's Joint Communications Center, spoke forcefully for the need to provide amnesty for current insurgency members.  He cited Kirkuk's amnesty program as a success, which he argued has provided an opportunity for insurgents to give up their weapons, serve a two month probationary period, and maintain their full rights as citizens.  He asked for USG support to establish a similar program in Salah ad Din.  7.    (C) The Committee co-chairs requested that all subcommittees report back in one week with concrete and realistic proposals for actions that could be submitted to Baghdad.  The co-chairs also discussed the option of establishing reconciliation sub-committees in each of the province's cities.  8.    (C) Comment: Given its past history as the center of Saddam Hussein's power base and its own perception of playing a diminished role in the new Iraq, Salad ad Din has a great deal to gain from national reconciliation.  Provincial officials recognize this and are committed to communicating their views to Baghdad.  One surprising and positive note is the wide geographic representation on the Committee.  Full participation by tribal sheiks is further evidence that provincial officials are being inclusive in their work and recognize the role sheiks have to play.  While De-Baathification-related issues will naturally take center stage in Salah ad Din, the Province for the first time is  BAGHDAD 00000401  002 OF 002   showing real interest in communicating their views on "big picture" issues before the GoI.  However, the repeated requests from Committee members for PRT intervention and assistance indicate that provincial officials are still not confident in their ability to plead their case effectively to Baghdad. End Comment CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000402  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ECON, ENRG, EAID, SOCI, IZ SUBJECT:  PRT DIYALA: PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT INCREASINGLY RESPONSIVE TO CITIZENS' NEEDS  REF:  January 16, 24, and 30 Official/Informals  1.  (U) This is a PRT Diyala Reporting Cable.  2.  (SBU) Summary:  Security in Diyala Province has long adversely impacted the ability of the provincial government to provide services for its citizens.  Thanks to recent security improvements, both the provincial council and the executive branch are increasingly responsive to delivering services at the district level.  Governor Ra'ad has made it a priority to visit each Qada (district) to meet with residents and Nahiya (sub-district) representatives to discuss their needs and the current level of services.  Director generals, assistant governors, and one or two Provincial Council members usually accompany Governor Ra'ad on his Qada visits.  In the case of Balad Ruz, pressure from an engaged Governor and expertise provided by the PRT and the 431 ST Civil Affairs Battalion have translated into improved service delivery for electrical power and water.  End Summary  2.  (SBU) Summary:  Security in Diyala Province has long adversely impacted the ability of the provincial government to provide services for its citizens.  Thanks to recent security improvements, both the provincial council and the executive branch are increasingly responsive to delivering services at the district level.  Governor Ra'ad has made it a priority to visit each Qada (district) to meet with residents and Nahiya (sub-district) representatives to discuss their needs and the current level of services.  All director generals (DG) and assistant governors accompany Governor Ra'ad on these visits to respond to queries and complaints by Nahiya councilors and the general public. Additionally, one to two Provincial Council (PC) members usually travel with the Governor.  SERVICE DELIVERY IMPROVES IN BALAD RUZ --------------------------------------  3.  (U) Balad Ruz is one of Diyala's five Qadas (districts) located in the south.  This heavily-populated district, which shares a lengthy border with Iran, has suffered through lengthy fuel, water and electricity shortages since June 2007.  4.  (SBU) In late 2007, the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) completed construction of a large water treatment plant with the capacity to provide water to the entire district.  Governor Ra'ad opened the plant and promised to work with the Balad Ruz Qada Council to improve services to residents.  However, the water treatment plant operated for one hour before it was forced to close for lack of fuel.  5.  (U) During a January 16 PC meeting, Balad Ruz Council members complained about the lengthy fuel shortages and warned that Balad Ruz residents were prepared to protest and "take matters into their own hands" if the provincial government failed to end these shortages.  6.  (SBU) Meeting with the DG of Electricity, provincial government officials determined that the electricity shortage stemmed from a break in the lines outside Baqubah and could be easily repaired. However, due to the reluctance of the Iraqi Police (IP) and Iraqi Army (IA) to secure the area without additional Coalition assistance, the repairs had been delayed.  7.  (SBU) Pressured by the Provincial Council and the Governor, the Diyala Operations Center (DOC) arranged security forces to accompany repairs crews to visit the identified area and repair the damaged lines on January 24, 2008.  However, shortages continued following the repairs.  Working with the PRT Infrastructure Team, the DG of Electricity identified the need for five electrical transformers to provide adequate and a continuous power supply to Balad Ruz, and on January 30 full power was restored.  8.  (SBU) In late January, the DG of Water, working with the PRT and Cat A team members of the 431 ST Civil Affairs Battalion, was able to make needed repairs to the plant and provide enough fuel (approximately 90,000 liters) to bring the USACE water treatment plant back online.  9.  (SBU) Comment:  Both Governor Ra'ad and the Diyala Provincial Council continue to exhibit an improved capacity to utilize resources available to them, including PRT and CF expertise, and are becoming increasingly more service-oriented.  In particular, Governor Ra'ad has demonstrated his commitment to better service through his many trips to the Qadas to inquire how he and the provincial government can improve their performance and the standard of living for Diyala residents.  Iraqi Security Forces representatives have commented that improved service delivery is having a positive effect on the security environment as Diyala residents are more willing to work with IA and IP units. End Comment.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000409  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, EAID, IZ SUBJECT: GOI SEEKS LOCAL AND PROVINCIAL  SUPPORT FOR UNESCO-LED SAMARRA MOSQUE RECONSTRUCTION PROJECT  REF: 07 BAGHDAD 4127  Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Greg S. D'Elia for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  Summary -------  1.    (C) PM Reconstruction Advisor Haq al-Hakim told us on February 7 that the GOI expects reconstruction on the Shia Golden Mosque of Samarra to be in full swing by October or November 2008.  EmbOffs joined a delegation led by al-Hakim to Samarra in Salah ad Din (SaD) Province for February 6 meetings with the Samarra Technical Committee and Samarra Tribal Support Council.  Also traveling with the delegation were UNESCO Iraq Country Director Mohammed Djelid, three UNESCO engineers, representatives from the Sunni and Shia Endowments, a Samarra Tribes representative, the Turkish contractor hired to rebuild the mosque, and Iraqi journalists.  SaD Governor Hamood and Samarra Operations Command (SOC) Commander Major General (MG) Rasheed also met with the delegation and touted the many opportunities for urban renewal made possible by steady security gains in Samarra.  MG Rasheed assessed that the city was 90 percent secure, and that Samarra residents had thwarted insurgent efforts to ignite a religious civil war.  In separate meetings on February 7, al-Hakim discussed plans for providing security for construction workers, UNESCO representatives, and visiting media.  Al-Hakim told EmbOffs that he considered the meeting outcomes satisfactory.  In the course of the visit, Al-Hakim delivered a letter from the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) to Governor Hamood officially reinstating former Samarra Mayor Mahmoud Khalaf as Mayor of Samarra.  End Summary.  PM Advisor on Reconstruction Meets with Samarra Technical Committee and Tribal Support Council --------------------------------------------- ---------------  2.    (C) Prime Minister's Advisor on Reconstruction Haq al-Hakim led a delegation to Samarra in Salah ad Din (SaD) Province on February 6 to meet with members of the Samarra Technical Committee and the Samarra Tribal Support Council and survey the Shia Golden Mosque site.  UNESCO Iraq Country Director Mohammed Djelid, three UNESCO engineers, representatives from the Sunni and Shia Endowments, a Samarra Tribes representative, the Turkish contractor hired to rebuild the mosque, and Iraqi journalists were part of the delegation.  Governor Hamood and SOC Commander MG Rasheed met delegation members and accompanied them to the Golden Mosque, where they conducted a tour and discussed reconstruction plans and security arrangements with members of the Tribal Support Council.  SaD Governor: Reconstruction Will Help Promote National Reconciliation -----------------------------------------  3.    (SBU) Following the Mosque tour, the group adjourned to the Strategic Operations Center (SOC) in the nearby Samarra Green Zone.  SaD Governor Hamood, followed by MG Rasheed, UNESCO Iraq Country Director Djelid, and former Samarra Mayor Mahmoud Khalaf, addressed news reporters and MNF-I and USM-I representatives.  Governor Hamood recalled Samarra's "extraordinary situation" since 2004 when insurgents overran the city as well as the first bombing of the Shia Mosque in February 2006 that nearly ignited a religious civil war.  He said insurgents had been determined to finish the job in June 2007, but that the residents of this predominant Sunni city had thwarted their plans because they "have seen the goals of al-Qaeda (AQI) and the foreign influence."  Hamood concluded that the city's reconstruction efforts would help erase the city's recent "dark history" and thanked Coalition Forces (CF) for their assistance to rid the city of insurgents and improve the security situation.  UN Pledges Commitment to Reconstruction Efforts --------------------------------------------- --  4.    (SBU) UNESCO Iraq Country Director Mohammed Djelid pledged the UN's continuing support for reconstruction efforts, noting how important Samarra and the Golden Mosque reconstruction are to national reconciliation.  (Note: The UN - with a $4 million contribution from the EU - is financing 50 percent of the project valued at $16 million.  UNESCO has overall technical responsibility for the project. End Note). He said that despite delays in the start of the project due to ongoing security concerns, and the many challenges that lie ahead, the UN remained committed to the project and would closely track its progress.  He thanked the GoI and local sheikhs for their support of the project.   BAGHDAD 00000409  002 OF 003   MG Rasheed, Governor, and Former Mayor Tout Security Improvements and Hope for Economic Recovery --------------------------------------------- -------  5.    (SBU) Governor Hamood, MG Rasheed, and Mahmoud Khalaf, the former Mayor of Samarra who currently works with UNESCO, touted the opportunities the improved security environment present for urban renewal.  Mahmoud encouraged the group to focus on reopening Bank Street, the market area adjacent to the Mosque that was closed following the first bombing in February 2006.  Governor Hamood added that he has allocated funding in the 2008 budget to promote Samarra's economic recovery.  MG Rasheed said with Samarra 90 percent secure, now is the time to provide assistance to Samarra residents, who have been waiting three years for this project and other forms of assistance.  Al-Hakim Meets Separately with Tribal Sheikhs and Sunni and Shia Endowment Representatives In Closed Meeting --------------------------------------------- -----------------  6.    (SBU) Al-Hakim did not attend the initial meeting in the SOC, but met separately with the Sunni and Shia Endowment representatives and the tribal sheiks at a nearby location. MG Rasheed, Mahmoud Kalaf, Governor Hamood, and UNESCO Country Director Djelid eventually joined al-Hakim at the other meeting site for an Iraqi-only meeting.  Mahmoud Khalaf Reinstated as Mayor of Samarra ---------------------------------------------  7.    (C) Al-Hakim told us that during the visit, he delivered a letter from the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) to Governor Hamood officially reinstating Mahmoud Khalaf as Major of Samarra.  Al-Hakim said he was able to convince Governor Hamood to make the announcement to the Samarra Tribal Support Council.  Al-Hakim said the Council responded positively throwing their support behind PM Maliki's decision to reappoint Mahmoud, who had previously been forced by the Samarra City Council to resign after refusing to reside full-time in Samarra due to security concerns.  GoI Estimates Construction to Begin in October or November --------------------------------------------- -------------  8.    (C) Al-Hakim also told us that the GoI expects reconstruction to begin in October or November following the conclusion of the site survey and delivery of construction materials and equipment.  He said the three UNESCO engineers who traveled with the delegation to Samarra will remain on the ground for approximately one week to write an assessment and consider various proposals for erecting a tent that will cover the Mosque during reconstruction.  PolOff spoke with Turkish contractor Ilyas Islam Ogloo who said the UNESCO engineers would submit their technical report to the GoI following their visit.  The report is expected in one week. Al-Hakim said he would share a copy of the report with MNF-I and USM-I.  Security Remains Concern and Key to Reconstruction --------------------------------------------- -----  9.    (C) According to al-Hakim, due to time constraints the delegation's discussions only briefly touched on security arrangements for Samarra.  Al-Hakim said the GoI is still reviewing several proposals for securing the route from the Samarra Green Zone to the Mosque (approximately 900 meters) to ensure the safe transport of workers, UNESCO representatives, and media representatives covering the project.  He said the GoI has proposed to keep Bank Street, an area approximately 50 meters from the Mosque, open to traffic and business.  Al-Hakim said that the GOI would focus on Bank Street development as the first phase of general reconstruction in Samarra.  He emphasized that it was critical that the general economic recovery in this majority Sunni city must keep pace with the Shia Mosque's reconstruction in order to demonstrate GOI commitment to Samarra's overall economic development and national reconciliation.  Al-Hakim said that the GOI is considering a proposal to wall off the route from the Green Zone to the Mosque site using T-walls, but will ensure that enough space remains to allow pedestrian access to businesses along the route.  Security Volunteers Come Forward to Protect Mosque --------------------------------------------- -----  10.   (C) Al-Hakim said that the Ministry of Interior (MOI) has vetted a list of 276 volunteers to work in the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) in Samarra to provide security for Mosque reconstruction.  He said there is a second list of approximately 400-500 volunteers who still need to be vetted.  BAGHDAD 00000409  003 OF 003    He felt that overall local support for reconstruction is incrementally improving.  Increasing Media Interest Presents Security Dilemma --------------------------------------------- ------  11.   (C) Although pleased with the increasing media interest in reconstruction efforts in Samarra, al-Hakim said he has concerns about ensuring the media's safety when they travel to Samarra.  Afraid that media representatives present easy targets for insurgents, he asked EmbOffs for MNF-I assistance to transport media to and from Samarra.  He also told us that the media have approached him about holding a media event in Samarra in March after workers have erected the protective tent over the Mosque.  The February 6 meetings in Samarra drew extensive press coverage by both local Samarra and Baghdad media.  Both Governor Hamood and al-Hakim were interviewed.  Al-Hakim said that the event would be televised February 8, and that he would pass a copy of the footage to the Embassy.  Comment -------  (C) Al-Hakim expressed satisfaction with the results of the trip and said that it appeared the relationship between the GOI and provincial government is improving ever so slightly. He remains optimistic about the outcome in Samarra but still has reservations about the security environment and ensuring the safety of UNESCO experts, the Turkish contractor and workers, and visiting media who will be involved with or present when reconstruction goes into full swing.  Al-Hakim did appear reassured after speaking to CF Officers residing and working in the battle space.  CF officers also spoke with UNESCO Iraq Country Director Mohammed Djelid, who at first appeared alarmed by the high-level security presence, only to be reassured that security had greatly improved in the last six months.  A remaining concern for al-Hakim is the level of security along route Tampa between Baghdad and Samarra, which presents challenges for the movement of equipment and people.  He said he felt there is adequate security in Samarra to move forward with the project and thanked EmbOffs for continuing MNF-I and USM-I assistance and support of reconstruction efforts.  End Comment. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000410  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  NEAI: RSCHMIERER NEA/I: PM: TBETTS ISN/RA:KKESSLER S/I:KNUTT L/NPV:THISCH DOE: JSELLEN JS: SNORWOOD OSD: TBENNET  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2018 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, PARM, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: (S) TUWAITHA UPDATE: PREPARING FOR PARIS MEETINGS  REF: A. STATE 163968      B. BAGHDAD 4126      C. STATE 169324      D. BAGHDAD 2454      E. BAGHDAD 1787      F. BAGHDAD 734      G. BAGHDAD 004227      H. FOR REASONS 1.4 (B)      I. (D) AND (H)  Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR CHARLES RIES, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B), (D) AND (H)  1. (S) Summary: Energy Attach Parks and DOE/NNSA Representative Boudreau met with Minister of Science and Technology (MOST) Raid Jahid (FAHMI) on Tuesday evening, Feb 5, 2008, at the Al Rasheed Hotel. The key points included moving the material as quickly as possible after completing repackaging, preparing for meetings possible buyers in Paris next week, assuming liability during transportation of the material, and pre-staging the material from Tuwaitha to a point closer to the Baghdad Airport. Fahmi recognized that the key US goal is to transport the repackaged yellow cake to the buyer and thought contracting could be complete to support a move in March. He and his team are leaving for Paris Feb 8, pending visas. The full committee, including the mercurial Srood Najib representing MFA, will attend discussions with the three prospective buyers. AREVA will meet with the Iraqi team either Feb 12 or 13, GE Feb 14 and Cameco Feb 15. Fahmi wants only Iraqis in the actual negotiations but agreed that both a DOE technical representative and a DOD transport specialist should be valuable on the margins. Regarding Paris, Fahmi said he was not fully ready because there were two key, related unknowns: 1) what price range to expect in a bid; 2) how much the US was going to ask in cost share based on expected US costs for transportation. DOE responded that the updated quantity provided and the quality assessment with each type of material should allow MOST to closely gauge the expected price. The DOE Team included experts well versed in such assessments. On transportation costs and cost sharing, Parks agreed to provide a "ballpark" figure before Friday. Finalizing cost sharing required a decision on delivery place and time as well as consideration of the bids received. On liability, Fahmi  agreed in principle that the GOI would accept the risk of losing the yellow cake in transit. He also agreed to the US proposal to "pre-stage" the repackaged material near Baghdad Airport but needed to check with his experts and IRSRA (Iraqi Radioactive Source Regulatory Authority). Several times during the meeting, Fahmi spoke of the importance of having the right questions answered for the Council of Ministers (COM) to obtain their approval for the sale. End Summary   Confirms Meeting in Paris/Finalize Contract for March Movement  2. (S)  Fahmi met with Energy Attach Parks and DOE/NNSA Representative Boudreau Tuesday evening Feb 5 in his quarters at the Al Rasheed Hotel. The Minister confirmed that he and his Committee (eight total) will go to Paris on Friday, Feb 8, pending visas for other team members. Srood (NAJIB) will attend as both a member of the Committee and a representative of the MFA. The Prime Minister's legal counsel, Dr. (JAWAD), will also attend. Fahmi added that he was pleased with the phone calls he had had with GE and Cameco during which he agreed to meeting dates, 14 and 15 February respectively. Fahmi also plans to meet with AREVA. He asked for our help to arrange a phone call with the AREVA representative to ensure the meeting next week would be possible. DOE noted that AREVA would like the Minister to call them and provided him the contact name an number. Parks offered to arrange the call and Fahmi agreed, asking that it occur before he leaves for Paris. (Comment: Lower level call between MOST and AREVA on Feb 8 began dialogue. The Minister and AREVA counterpart are expected to talk on Monday Feb 11 via phone. End Comment) Fahmi stated he was willing to extend negotiations into a second week if necessary. DOE emphasized that the key goal is for him to complete the contract in order to keep up the momentum and move the repackaged material from Tuwaitha to a buyer by early March.  Fahmi said he understood and agreed the contract should be complete in March. Ready for the Negotiations?  3.(S) Parks asked if Fahmi felt prepared for the negotiations. Fahmi responded he was not fully prepared because there were two big unknowns. In order to know what price to ask for he needed an accurate value of the material. He asked how the US had determined its quality index for the specific material lines in the updated inventory. Boudreau replied that although there was subjectivity in the assessment, the DOE Team at Tuwaitha had experts with the training and experience to make those assessments and the information provided to the Minster was used by the US to form its own estimates. (Comment: Alex Riedy, the DOE Team leader on-site, was asked the same question the day before by the MOST technical lead, Dr. Ali (MAGEEB) observing the repackaging work. Boudreau's answer echoed Riedy discussion with Mageeb. End Comment) Fahmi identified the second unknown as the cost to the US to transport the material and the amount of the Iraqi cost share with the US. He needed to know the amount of cost share in order to determine the acceptability of a bid. His responsibility is to maximize the value of the sale to Iraq. Parks offered to provide a ball park figure of the total removal cost to the US but reminded Fahmi that Ambassador Ries had specifically stated that the cost share discussion should come late in the process, when Iraq knew how much would be received for the material from the buyer and the US could determine the total removal costs. At that point an appropriate cost share amount could be determined. Parks suggested that the Minister meet with Ambassador Ries and General Wendel to discuss both the cost share and transport issues. Fahmi agreed.   4. (C) Fahmi asked what information the buyers had received about the materials and what questions had they asked. He wanted to know what they knew going into the negotiations. Boudreau answered that most questions focused on the chemical composition of materials in specific lines in the inventory and the details of how each line was packed.  Each prospective buyer had received a copy of the 2004 inventory. The Minister suggested that Boudreau meet with Mohammed (AL SHARA'A), a member of the Committee and the Director General of the Monitoring at MOST, to discuss the issue in more detail.  Boudreau agreed and the meeting is scheduled for Thursday Feb 7.  5.(C) The Minister expressed concern over the falling price of yellow cake and the effect on the sale for Iraq -- maybe it would be better to wait.  Parks stated that the US strongly urged that the sale go forward as quickly as possible.  Boudreau added that DOE experts believed the down turn in prices could be short lived. Fahmi stated he had been told the same.   Staging and Waivers  6.(S) Regarding next steps, DOE raised the MNF-I concept to move up to 25% or more of the repackaged material from Tuwaitha to a location near Baghdad International Airport. Fahmi thought that it would not be a problem since the material was not leaving Iraq.  However, he would need to ask the relevant agencies such as IRSRA. Focusing on potential issues that could slow down the final decision by the Council of Ministers, Parks asked what, if any, problem Fahmi expected regarding the three bid waiver and the waiver of the law requiring full payment.  Fahmi responded that he did not expect a problem with either waiver when a contract benefiting Iraq was available to show to the Council of Ministers. The meeting closed with Fahmi commenting on the importance of preparing the sale in the right way so that the COM knows that the Committee made every effort to obtain the best value for Iraq.  Update  7. (S) Minister Fahmi had, in a January 12 discussion, provided insight into the GOI team handling the issue. His Committee had both a Deputy Minister of Industries and a senior official from the Finance Ministry.  These two individuals were added to ensure the negotiations accorded with Iraqi rules and regulations and therefore the deal reached would be acceptable to the Council of Ministers. Fahmi also noted that his Committee would sit with the former Tuwaitha Committee, chaired by Srood Najib, in order to obtain their advice, consider adding some of their number to Fahmi's Committee and listen to their recommendations as to obtaining legal and technical advisors.  Ries reminded Fahmi that the USG would be looking to negotiate a cost sharing of he yellow cake packaging and removal costs once the sales agreement was reached and the GOI knew the amount it was receiving from the Buyer.  Ries added that negotiations would include the determination whether or not the USG would help acquire substitute non-nuclear devises for the four removed irradiators. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000411  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PTER, EAID, SOCI, ECON, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: PRT EMERGENCY PLANNING EFFORTS BEAR FRUIT WITH PROVINCIAL INITIATIVE  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  Civic Leaders Working Together    for Emergency Preparedness ------------------------------  1. (U) After months of hard work to raise the profile of emergency preparedness among government officials in Ninewa, the PRT's efforts paid off January 23 when a large group of provincial and local officials, led by Provincial Governor Duraid Kashmoula, convened to outline the initial steps for an improved emergency action plan for Ninewa province. Thanks to USAID, the PRT has twice brought in a senior consultant on emergency preparedness to assess the situation in the province and to work with the Iraqi civil servants responsible in the event of a serious incident, such as a flood, a large-scale fire or a city-wide terrorist attack, and we have linked this with a requested ongoing program of support for the province in this critical area.  Governor Gives Full Support ---------------------------  2. (U) Governor Kashmoula publicly empowered the provincial fire chief, BG Mohammad Suleiman, to lead the effort to create a comprehensive emergency action plan.  Over 50 officials, including all the Mayors in the Tigris river valley, district police chiefs, relevant Provincial Directors General, and the Ninewa Civil Defense Director, attended the January 23 meeting and took an active participatory role in forward planning.  At the meeting, the Governor also pledged his strong support for emergency planning in the province.  Table-Top Exercise in February ------------------------------  3. (U) The meeting concluded with an agreement to conduct a formal "table-top exercise" in February with all important stakeholders.  The committee also agreed to meet on a monthly basis to address emergency planning and civil defense needs for Ninewa.  Comment -------  4. (U) It is promising that provincial officials across agency lines have taken this first vital step in meeting the key provincial goal of a strong emergency management plan. The PRT will continue to work closely with the committee to improve on its plan, and will provide the technical expertise needed to move the plan forward, including by improving the early-warning system of an imminent threat to the population.  The PRT will continue to help the committee put in a place a sound, workable plan that will really make a difference in the event of a major emergency. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000422  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2018 TAGS: IZ, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PINS, PNAT, PTER SUBJECT: MALIKI CABINET APPROVES MOSUL CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS  Classified By: Classified by Ambassador Ryan Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1. (S) SUMMARY: On February 7, Prime Minister Maliki convened a cabinet-level Crisis Action Cell (CAC) to review the concept of operations for the upcoming campaign against al-Qaeda (AQI) in Ninewa province. Major General Riyadh, Commander of the Ninewa Operations, briefed a three-phased plan that called for securing access routes into Mosul, implementing district-by-district clearing operations against AQI starting from the city center, and developing a sustained reconstruction effort emphasizing renewal of basic governmental services. The Cabinet approved the concept of operations, but asked that the detailed strategic plan include specific timelines, increased emphasis on the police and judiciary, and operations to secure the border checkpoint at Rabiah. During the meeting, the senior Iraqi leadership demonstrated a clear understanding of counterinsurgency fundamentals by their questions and critiques. The presence of Vice-President Hashimi--who has strongly criticized Maliki in the past--also sent a strong signal that Iraqis are uniting against a dangerous foe. This Iraqi-led major operation--with Coalition Forces in a support role--will provide significant insights into ISF capabilities. END SUMMARY.  Maliki Sets the Stage ---------------------  2. (S) Prime Minister Maliki convened a cabinet-level CAC on February 7 to review the concept of operations for the upcoming campaign against AQI in Ninewa province. In addition to his senior security cabinet members, the Prime Minister invited Vice President Hashimi, Governor Kashmoula of Ninewa Province, and senior MNF-I commanders to attend and critique the plan. Maliki conducted the two-hour meeting in an organized, direct fashion yet allowed the cabinet and military commanders broad leeway in critiquing the concept of operations and its consequences.  3. (S) Maliki opened the CAC by defining the strategic goal for the Mosul operation--"eliminate AQI influence in Ninawa province". He instructed his cabinet and military commanders to use the lessons learned from the ongoing Baghdad campaign and apply them to Mosul. Maliki laid out the process by which the cabinet would do strategic planning for the operation and how the CAC discussion would proceed. He then invited General Riyadh to present his concept of operations.  Mosul Concept of Operations ---------------------------  4. (S) Riyadh began with an assessment of the AQI threat to Ninewa province citing the most significant potential targets as Mosul Dam, Tigris River bridges, the Christian community, and government and social infrastructure. To counter this threat, he described his three-phase concept of operations:  -- Phase I: Continue current and extensive military reconnaissance of Ninewa province while redeploying military forces around the city of Mosul. Strictly control access into and out of Mosul using eleven checkpoints--some yet to be built--on major access routes into the city.  Block, secure, or eliminate all other access routes. Starting from the center of Mosul, secure individual city districts by disrupting ongoing AQI operations, clearing out AQI operatives, controlling the area with robust 24/7 ISF deployment, and retaining each district with security and basic services.  Police will maintain responsibility for security in the city center. The Second Iraqi Army (IA) Division will control the outer districts of the city, check points into the city, and the eastern part of the province.  -- Phase II: Reinforce strategic positions on the east side of the province with Second Iraqi Army (IA) Division and in the west--from Tall Afar to the border--with the Third IA Division. Police emergency brigades (note: similar to National Police, end note) and civilian police will assist these army units. Improve infrastructure/border security and continue ongoing reconstruction.  -- Phase III: Make Iraqi Police (IP) primarily responsible for community security; renew IA focus on external threats. Concentrate other government ministries on completion of reconstruction and delivery of services. Extend the process throughout Ninewa province until AQI-influence is eliminated.  Timelines ---------  BAGHDAD 00000422  002 OF 003    5. (S) When pressed by the cabinet for actual phase dates, General Riyadh insisted they should be "conditions-based" without regard to a calendar. Later in the meeting, under pressure from MinDef Abdel Qadr and Vice President Hashimi, Riyadh relented slightly and described Phase I as starting immediately and continuing roughly until the middle of May, Phase II lasting until the end of July, and Phase III continuing from August onwards. But Riyadh insisted these dates were only estimates and not cast in stone.  Securing the Border -------------------  6. (S) After Riyadh finished his formal briefing, Maliki asked Interior Minister (IntMin) Bolani to begin the discussion and offer his critique. Bolani concurred with the basic concept of operations but asked for a more robust plan for the police and judiciary, urging formation of independent legal panels from outside the region to process the large number of anticipated detainees. He also suggested additional focus in the plan against local AQI financial resources such as kickbacks from black market distribution of kerosene and gasoline. Bolani also expressed serious concern with corruption and lack of security at the Iraqi-Syrian border Port of Entry (POE) at Rabiah, calling it a major threat to the battle for Mosul.  7. (S) General Riyadh concurred with Bolani on the problems at Rabiah POE, saying it might be necessary to close it completely during some of his anticipated military operations.  General Mosin, Commander of the Iraqi Border Guards, disagreed arguing that closure of the largest trade route into the city would strangle the economy of Mosul. He urged Riyadh to explore other alternatives like establishing additional military checkpoints between Rabiah and Mosul. While Mosin admitted to serious corruption problems at Rabiah, he said he was already considering changing out personnel at Rabiah every six months and replacing them with border guards from other regions. He also believed it necessary to move the POE checkpoint outside the town of Rabiah into a less-congested area, but he lamented that severe limitations in funding and personnel within the Border Guards prevented implementation of these solutions.  Maliki and the Provincial Governor "Get It" ------------------------------------------  8. (S) Ninewa Provincial Governor Kashmoula urged General Riyadh to deploy security forces from their camps into the populated areas as soon as possible. Maliki echoed that sentiment with a query about locations of Joint Security Stations (JSS) inside Mosul. Riyadh acknowledged their importance and pointed out the JSS locations to Maliki and Kashmoula on a map of Mosul. (Comment: The JSS combines Coalition Force (CF), IA, and IP forces together in a neighborhood command post, much like a local police station and is considered one of the key elements in improving Baghdad security over the past year. End Comment.)  9. (S) Concerning Rabiah POE, General Petraeus agreed that its closure for an extended period would cripple Mosul. He suggested that General Mosin use the technical and procedural solutions recently developed for the Al-Qaim POE in Anbar province and adapt them to the Rabiah POE. General Petraeus also offered Coalition Force assistance, especially for improving biometric data collection and processing.   Pressure for Actual Timelines -----------------------------  10. (S) MinDef Abdel Qadr also agreed with the operations concept but criticized Riyadh's presentation as lacking specific timelines. On the other hand, he took note of Riyadh's request for more troops and offered him additional Special Forces and mechanized units as required. The MinDef also questioned reports of shortages in uniforms and equipment in the 2 IA and 3 IA Divisions, but relented when General Petraeus reminded him that equipment shortages with these units were due primarily to the high rate of "battle losses" in Mosul that Coalition Forces were also experiencing.  11. (S) Vice-President Hashimi said he was happy with the concept of operations, but concurred with the MinDef on the need for specific timelines. He also expressed concern that the number of ISF forces committed to the Mosul operation was too small. He urged Riyadh to develop a more comprehensive intelligence plan, especially regarding AQI intentions.  BAGHDAD 00000422  003 OF 003   Hashimi requested that the more detailed plan--currently under development--put additional emphasis on local councils and governmental institutions, particularly in the service sector. The Vice President concluded with a cautionary note about the necessity for limiting civilian casualties and collateral damage during operations in Mosul.  Detailed Plan Coming --------------------  12. (S) National Security Advisor (NSA) Rubaie pointed out this particular meeting was meant to focus on the overall concept of operations and not the detailed plan.  He explained that many of the issues raised by the MinDef, IntMin, and VP had been discussed extensively during the survey visit to Mosul and in subsequent planning sessions. He assured them the comprehensive strategic plan would also include robust plans for police, intelligence, and civilian operations.  Additionally, he said that all members of the Council of Representatives (CoR) from Ninewa province would receive a detailed briefing so the government and legislature could speak with one voice.  13. (S) Multi-National Division - North (MND-N) Commander, Major General Hertling, told the Prime Minister that the ISF and CF were in close coordination and assured him the ISF would have access to the tactical intelligence they needed. He reiterated General Petraeus' offer to work with the IP and Border Guards to help re-equip their forces, especially up-armored humvees. The General urged the IntMin to focus on the prison and detainee issues because they would be critical factors in this campaign, noting that assistance from all the other Iraqi ministries was absolutely necessary for a successful outcome.  In conclusion, Hertling echoed Riyadh's caution about the timelines, pointing out that not all ISF units were yet in place.  14. (S) General Riyadh closed the two-hour meeting with an urgent request for Ministry of Justice assistance in securing the Baddush prison which--because it is Mosul's major detention facility--will figure prominently in this counterinsurgency campaign.  Riyadh cautioned that even though security forces had recently subdued rioting prisoners there, the prison remained very volatile.  Comment -------  15. (S) This was a landmark meeting for several reasons. First, Prime Minister Maliki showed strong leadership during the CAC by keeping the participants focused on the agenda and follow-on discussions.  Second, the senior Iraqi government leaders demonstrated a clear grasp of counterinsurgency fundamentals in their critiques and requested additions to the plan. Clearly, they had internalized many of the lessons learned from Baghdad operations. Maliki's invitation to Vice President Hashimi--who has been a harsh critic of the Prime Minister's policies--sent a strong signal that Iraqis are uniting in this campaign against a very dangerous foe. Finally, the ISF will lead this operation with the CF in a support role. How well the ISF performs will provide evidence of their growing capacity or reveal weaknesses to be addressed through further CF mentoring and training. End comment. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000425  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, MOPS, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI ISLAMIC PARTY HITS BACK AT THREATS BY ANBAR SHEIKHS, QUESTIONS U.S. ROLE  REF: BAGHDAD 400  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (S) During a February 11 meeting with the Ambassador (septel), Vice President Tareq al-Hashimi raised the issue of recent public threats made by controversial Anbar figures Hamid al-Heiss and Ali al-Hatim against the Iraqi Islamic Party (reftel).  Hashimi confirmed that legal actions were being undertaken by IIP against the offending Anbaris. Nevertheless, he worried that the matter was an organized effort to undermine the Islamic Party, and was undertaken (perhaps unwittingly) with MNF-I and U.S. complicity (text below at paragraph three).  Post intends to reply to the Vice President's letter, to correct the record on the relationship between U.S.-supported media outlets Al Hurra and Radio Sawa with Heiss and Hatim, and to clarify MNF's role in protecting prominent Anbaris threatened by Al Qaida and insurgent groups.  2.  (S) Comment:  Since making his controversial public threats, Al-Heiss has been anything but contrite.  We understand from local reports that Heiss and Hatim returned to Anbar where they are helping to close IIP offices using threats against local workers.  They must feel that they have adequate political protection to take such aggressive action, considering the obvious legal and political ramifications. We will need to be clear, publicly and privately, that the protections that Hashimi alludes to in his letter do not extend to support for undermining the IIP.  End comment.  Text of Hashimi-Crocker Letter ------------------------------  3.  (SBU) Text of Letter to Amb Crocker, dated February 10, 2008  Begin Text (translated from the Arabic by Embassy staff)  Iraqi Islamic Party Dr. Tareq Al-Hashimi Secretary General  SIPDIS  His Excellency Ryan Crocker United States Ambassador Baghdad, Iraq  Warm Greetings:  You have probably heard about the terrorist threats pronounced by Hamid al-Heiss and Ali Al-Hatem, calling their followers to arms against the Iraqi Islamic Party in al-Anbar and giving the Party an ultimatum to get out within thirty days.  We are not so concerned about the Party or its future in this governorate or any other governorate of Iraq.  We know how deeply the party is rooted in Iraq's history and the consciousness of the Iraqis.  The Party remains strong, growing solid and steadily despite the hateful campaigns against it during recent months.  We are however very much concerned about the relationship that these individuals have with the United States.  The U.S. guarantees them protection, refuge, and access to the media. Until this moment, U.S. tanks are protecting the offices and residences of Hamid al-Heiss, and providing him with protection for his movement.  Al-Hurra TV channel and Radio Sawa are being used to promote his phony claims and lies against the Iraqi Islamic Party.  For sure, these people would not have dared to threaten the Islamic Party if it was not for their feeling that their attitude would be welcomed and accepted.  The party will deal with such threats according to the law, but at the same time asks: "When will the United States disassociate itself from such figures with histories of being a source of nuisance and instability for Iraq and Iraqis?"  It is unacceptable to us that this situation continues; for that reason I am writing to you out of our eagerness to maintain the strong ties that we have with you and in order to avoid any misunderstandings.  I sincerely hope that you will promptly see that the appropriate steps are taken.  With sincere appreciation,  Tarik Al-Hashimi General Secretary of the Iraqi Islamic Party February 10, 2008  End text of letter. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000427  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  NEA/I: RSCHMIERER NEA/I:PM:TBETTS ISN/RA:KKESSLER S/I:KNUTT L/NPV:THISCH DOE: JSELLEN JS: SNORWOOD OSD: TBENNET  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2018 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, IZ, PARM, PREL SUBJECT: TUWAITHA UPDATE: MOST GOES TO PARIS  REF: A. A. STATE 163968       B. B. BAGHDAD 4126      C. C. STATE 169324      D. D. BAGHDAD 2454      E. E. BAGHDAD 1787      F. F BAGHDAD 734      G. G. BAGHDAD 004227      H. H. BAGHDAD 00410  Classified By: Ambassador Charles Ries, for Reasons 1.4 (B), (D) and (H )  1. (S) Summary. Ambassador Ries met with Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) Minister Raid Jahid (FAHMI) on Feb 8 to provide an updated calibration of the US position on issues such as cost sharing. Fahmi asked for the estimated total US cost for removal and transporting the yellow cake and the expected amount of cost share from Iraq. He felt that those estimates were necessary to determine an acceptable bid and convince the Council of Ministers (COM) that the sales deal is best for Iraq. Ries acknowledged Fahmi's concern with the COM and said US costs should be less than $100 M; the U.S. understands Iraq needs to clear significant funds from the transaction. Ries proposed and Fahmi agreed that the specific cost share would be determined after Iraq had an acceptable bid but before contract signing. Fahmi agreed with Ries and Brigadier General Wendel to stage the yellow cake closer to Baghdad Airport in order to reduce costs and facilitate shipment and asked that the US notify the IAEA as necessary. Fahmi confirmed the GOI would accept the risk of losing yellow cake during shipment and agreed to put the commitment in writing. Ries and Fahmi will meet again  following the Paris negotiations. End Summary  2. (S) On February 8 Ambassador Ries met with MOST Minister Fahmi at the AL Rasheed Hotel. Ambassador Ries and Brigadier General Wendel informed Min. Fahmi that the yellow cake repackaging was complete and the paperwork will be finished shortly. The USG is prepared to move the yellow cake to a staging area at one of the US military facilities close to the Baghdad Airport where it would be temporarily kept awaiting GoI final notifications and destination arrangements. This would help reduce in-country costs, provide for good security, and facilitate ease and flexibility for air transport. Fahmi agreed to a staging concept, provided IAEA was informed and did not object.  Ries agreed that USG would inform IAEA.  3.(S) Fahmi asked Ries for USG,s estimated total removal costs so Fahmi could more precisely estimate GOI,s net revenue from the yellow cake sale. Ries said he was not empowered to provide a dollar proposal on GOI,s cost-share at present, but believed the USG,s costs would be under $100 million. Fahmi chuckled, saying his experts say the yellow cake sale proceeds are about $100 million, potentially leaving GOI very little net after cost-sharing with the USG. Fahmi asked that the GOI,s cost-share figure be negotiated and agreed prior to the Committee making its sale recommendation to the Council of Ministers (COM) for approval. Ries said his goal was that GOI get the most money feasible from the sale and he would negotiate the cost-sharing after the Committee had its high bidder's proposal but prior to the Committee making its recommendation to the COM.  4. (S) The Minister then summarized his understanding of our February 5 discussion on GOI,s liabilities for accidents during the US transportation of the yellow cake to a buyer. He said he understood the US position was that liability for loss to GOI,s yellow cake during USG,s operated transit was GOI,s risk alone and he accepted that. He implied that GOI was not picking up liability for damage to persons, property, or the environment for accidents during yellow cake transport. Ries stated that this arrangement should be memorialized in writing, possibly a letter. Fahmi agreed with the proposal.  5. (S) Turning to the meetings with the buyers next week, Ries told Fahmi that the USG would provide his team in Paris with the records of prior communications the USG has had with the 3 bidders, pursuant to Fahmi,s request at the Feb 5 meeting. Ries asked the path forward Fahmi expected next week and in the following weeks. Fahmi said the he had individual meetings next week with Areva, GE/Hitachi, and Cameco, respectively. His goal is to settle as many issues as possible and to identify remaining questions for further discussions. Fahmi intends to return to Baghdad, study bidders, proposals and if necessary have further meetings to address remaining issues. Once the cost-sharing is agreed, the Committee will make its recommendation to the COM for approval. Following COM OK, the sales contract will be hammered out and executed.  In relation to the expected price for the yellow cake, Fahmi and Ries discussed the recent downward trend in yellow cake spot market prices. Ries noted that the price might rebound but that the world economic downturn probably affects yellow cake spot prices as well and that making the sale with the current price could be the right move. Ries suggested a meeting be held upon Fahmi,s return from Paris, and the Minister agreed. The meeting lasted 45 minutes. The Committee flew to Paris later in the afternoon on Friday.  Attendees  GOI  Minister Raid Jahid Fahmi, Minister of Science and Technology  USG  Ambassador Charles Ries, Coordinator for Economic Transition in Iraq, US Embassy Brigadier General Kevin Wendel, Commander, 20th Support Command Edgar Parks, Energy Attach, US Embassy Robert Boudreau, DOE/NNSA Representative, US Embassy                CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000428  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER MALIKI UPDATES AMBASSADOR AND CG ON POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  ------- Summary -------  1.  (S) During a February 11 meeting with the Ambassador and General Petraeus, Prime Minister Maliki blamed the Kurds for the present budget impasse, insisting their behavior was a challenge to his governance that required a firm hand lest other provinces be so emboldened.  The Ambassador encouraged a quick resolution on the Kurdish demand for a 17 percent budget allocation, followed at a later date by a political deal on funding the Kurdish Peshmerga.  On the ongoing legislative debate on provincial powers, Maliki confirmed his preference for a strong central government, and believed agreement had been reached by key parties.  Similarly, legislation on a general amnesty was close to being approved by Parliament, despite several groups' demands that the law apply to larger numbers of detainees.  On the topic of CF detainees, the CG invited Maliki to visit a CF-run detention facility to dispel rumors that recidivist "insurgents" were being released by the Coalition.  On the subject of Tawafuq's return to government, Maliki dismissively blamed internal divisions within the Sunni bloc for delaying a resolution. End summary.  2.  (SBU) The Prime Minister was accompanied during the 60-minute meeting by his Chief of Staff, Dr. Tareq Abdullah, and Political Advisor Sadiq Rikabi.  The Ambassador and CG were joined by the CG's Advisor Sadi Othman, Staff Assistant Ali Khedery, and Poloff (note-taker).  -------------- Budget Impasse --------------  3.  (S) After confirming Maliki's full recovery from a recent health scare, the Ambassador asked for a readout on the ongoing budget impasse.  The PM said that "political considerations" were driving the Kurds to be "bothersome;" the same considerations had made earlier negotiations on the Constitution difficult.  The Kurds, he continued, withdraw from meetings "as soon as there is something not to their liking."  The 17 percent budget figure was based on population figures from the Planning Ministry, which has revised that number downwards to 14 percent, he said. Regardless, "we offered them up to 17 percent of the budget, with addendum to cover any further expenses" (referring to requests to fund the Peshmerga).  Maliki said that he offered to fund two divisions of the Iraqi Army that could be stationed in the KRG; an offer the Kurds felt was a "conspiracy."  4.  (S) Responding to the Ambassador and CG's call to settle on the 17 percent issue now, and follow up with a political deal with KRG President Barzani later, Maliki quickly pointed to CoR opposition from Sadrists, Tawafuq, Hewar, and others. The PM took credit, however, for the "hard work" it required to successfully convince his Dawa comrades to support the 17 percent figure.  The Kurds, he added, even after an agreement on 17 percent, were "uncooperative;" insisting on full funding for the Peshmerga.  Maliki asked the Ambassador to weigh in with Barzani and the Kurds to settle on 17 percent now, and decide the Peshmerga issue later. (Comment: Our subsequent discussions that evening with Talabani and KDP rep Showays confirmed this deal.  End Comment.)  Returning to the funding issue for the Peshmerga, Maliki complained that the Kurds were demanding funding for 190 thousand forces, and benefits for an additional 90 thousand retirees and "martyrs."  If we agree, he worried, "other provinces will demand the same thing."  If we concede, the end result will be an Army of a million and a half, with all our oil money needed to pay salaries.  Furthermore, he noted, the KRG is demanding provision by the GOI for advanced tanks, planes, and artillery -- items that the Iraqi Army does not yet have.  Asked if he was in direct touch with President Talabani or Barzani on these issues, Maliki said Barzani was the problem and added half-heartedly that he would look into when the two might meet.  --------------------- Provincial Powers Law ---------------------  5.  (S) Asked his views on the draft provincial powers law, Maliki responded that issues had been resolved between the United Iraqi Alliance and other Shia parties, and suggested the law was ready for a vote.  Still, he added, "to be very open with you, I support a strong central government; not like Saddam's government, but not weaker than provincial governments."  Maliki stated that there are Iraqi provinces  BAGHDAD 00000428  002 OF 002   that, absent strong central control, could "go with other states."  While some Iraqi politicians want to emulate the U.S. or the Emirates' experiment with federalism, he added, "this took many years."  We need time to convince people to support federalism, he concluded, which many Iraqis equate with permanent division.  The Ambassador acknowledged the difficult decisions involved, and the complicated balance between central and local powers.  Still, the PM's leadership credentials would be enhanced by his successful and timely navigation of legislation through Parliament, and would allow GOI focus to turn to service delivery.  The PM commented that if it were possible to resolve these issues in the CoR this year, and if security improves further, a census would be carried out to determine the proper funding share for each province.  ------------------ Amnesty, Detainees ------------------  6.  (S) Asked about draft amnesty legislation, Maliki confirmed the Ambassador's understanding that the law was ready for a vote in Parliament.  The PM said he spoke with Chief Judge Medhat who had assured him that the legislation encompassed as many detainees as was possible.  Still, he noted, opposition groups "continue to press for more." Responding to the CG's comment that CF detainee numbers were steadily dropping, Maliki said he was concerned that CF was releasing "insurgents," who the GOI was later arresting due to their continued violent activities.  The CG pushed back, describing CF prisoner rehabilitation efforts and invited the PM to visit Camp Bucca to better acquaint himself with USG programs.  -------------- Tawafuq Return --------------  7.  (S) Asked for a readout on talks with the Tawafuq Coalition on the latter's return to government, Maliki said dismissively that the Sunni bloc was divided on the question of returning to the Cabinet; "they can't agree on a position."  After talks last week, he added, they came out publicly with "negative statements" about our talks, even though we agreed to their demands (septel).  The Ambassador and CG proposed that the PM publicly clarify his offer to return the Sunni bloc, in order to put them on the spot regarding a decision to return to government. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000429  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2018 TAGS: ECON, IZ, PGOV SUBJECT: IRAQ EXECUTIVE STEERING COMMITTEE - FEBRUARY 8  1.  SUMMARY:  In place of an absent PM Maliki, Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih chaired the 8 February Iraqi Executive Steering Committee (I-ESC) in support of the Baghdad Security Plan (Fardh Al Qanoon - FaQ).  The meeting featured calls to limit political and religious interference menacing college campuses; and announcement of weeklong GoI media activities to celebrates the Feb 14 one-year anniversary of FaQ; the announcement that the Ministry of Electricity will seek to import $400 M of diesel; and a well received presentation from MNF-I highlighting the $5 billion in contracts let to Iraqi firms since 2006.  The rumor at the Deputy I-ESC suggested that Minister of Oil Sharistani may be replaced by current Minister of Finance Jabr in coming days.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Religious and Political Extremists in Universities --------------------------------------------- ----- 2.  I-ESC Political Committee Chair and CoR Member Hashim Hassani and Council of Ministers Representative Dr. Mohammad Al-Tahmeme presented a litany of problematic issues concerning religious and political infiltration on the campuses of Baghdad's universities.  In addition to stating that more than 1000 professors and students have been killed, arrested or kidnapped, Hassani also stated that pressure and intimidation from religious and political groups seeking to dominate student government was corrupting the integrity of higher education as evidenced by a growing number of false diplomas and a doubling of the average graduates GPA.  FaQ Civ Spokesman Dr. Tahseen Sheekly, himself an academic, stated that the situation on campuses reflects sectarian and political issues affecting the country as a whole.  Sheekly stated that curing such ills at the national level will similarly help in the universities.  3.  Hassani and Tahmeme presented a list of preliminary suggestions including increased security for faculty; assurances that university Deans be selected strictly on grounds of competence, not political affiliation, and a call for legislation that prohibits religious or political activity that interferes with education.  DPM Salih noted that such legislation and might face constitutional problems.  He instructed Hassani and Tahmeme to meet with university directors to develop a list of practical recommendations that can be presented to the Council of Ministers.  (Comment: Discussion at the following Deputy I-ESC Meeting indicated that directives limiting political activity on campuses had previously been issued during both the Allawi and Jabari administrations.  End Comment).  --------------------------------------------- ----- Media Campaign for FaQ Anniversary - Caution Urged --------------------------------------------- ----- 4.  The week of February 14 marks the one year anniversary of FaQ.  I-ESC Media Committee Chair Yaseen Majeed presented a lengthy list of civilian and military media events to mark the occasion including documentaries, poetry readings, celebrations of martyrs and press conferences.  I-ESC co-Secretariat Ali Yaseri announced that a report noting the accomplishments of FaQ was being prepared and that it would be distributed to all Embassies in Iraq and all Iraqi Embassies throughout the world.  Yasseri also stated that a major celebration event will be held February 15th at the Rashid Hotel involving all senior members of the GoI and the Coalition.  Upon hearing Yasseri mention that a goal of these events is to "increase morale," PC Chairman Mueen urged caution and realism, noting that any exaggerations will play poorly in the media.  (Comment.  "Over-promising and under delivering" is a common issue with GoI media efforts. Coalition I-ESC interlocutors regularly stress that need for accuracy and honesty to th eir GoI counterparts.  End Comment.)  --------------------------------------- MoO Calls to Increase Kerosene Supplies --------------------------------------- 5.  In discussions about hampered GoI efforts to distribute sufficient kerosene needed to heat homes, PC Chairman Mueen stated that the crux of the issue is not the new mechanism that the Provincial Council is using to distribute allocations, but rather the overall insufficient supply of kerosene in Iraq.  Mueen called for the Ministry of Oil (MoO) to increase the supply of refined fuel products.  An Inspector General from the MoO in attendance due to his participation in Project Clean Delivery, stated that estimated kerosene demand in Baghdad exceeds 2 million L/day and that the city currently receives only 650,000.  The IG stated that increasing supplies would be difficult due to existing refining capacity, security problems in pipeline transport, and a shortage of refined product in Iran.  The IG also stated that significant problems remain in the District Councils and Neighborhood Councils with the method in which kerosene is distributed.   BAGHDAD 00000429  002 OF 002   ---------------------------------------- Additional Allocation for Diesel Imports ---------------------------------------- 6.  Minister of Electricity Karim Wahid al-Hassan stated that electricity continues to be inhibited by the usual suspects of security, provincial load sharing and overall generator capacity, but that his ministry was working hard to bring five new generator plans on-line in coming months.  Minister Karim once again singled out the Force Protection Service for criticism, stating that "I trust the Army much more than the FPS."  7.  Minister Karim stated that he intended to directly import $400 M worth of diesel and that he currently had only $200 M available.  DPM Salih directed that the Ministry of Electricity be provided the balance.  (Comment.  Notably, Karim his availing the decision made by PM Maliki at last week's IESC that government entities be allowed import fuel products directly, bypassing the State Oil Marketing Company, SOMO.  End Comment.  ------------ "Iraq First" ------------ 8.  MNF-I presented two initiatives designed to stimulate economic growth in Iraq.  "Iraq First" is a program to maximize provision of materials and maintenance from Iraqi firms.  Since March 2006 the program has awarded 20,000 contracts in excess of $5.1 billion.  "I-BIZ" is an initiative to create secure business parks co-located with Coalition military basis.  Since inception in mid 2006 it has grown into eight operating sites with activities, such as bottled drink production, employing over 700 Iraqis.  DPM Salih thanked the Coalition for these activities and asked for follow up meetings to expand their economic impact. (Comment: MNF-I is now regularly using the I-ESC to make presentations about positive contributions to Iraq, typically in response to occasional critiques form I-ESC attendees. End Comment.)  ------------------------- Comments and Observations ------------------------- 9.  Comment:  Attending and chairing the I-ESC for the first time in many weeks, DPM Salih again demonstrated his proclivity to refer issues discussed in the I-ESC to the Council of Ministers (CoM) for decision making.  This stands in contrast to the approach of PM Maliki, who typically issues executive orders for inter-ministerial actions through the Deputy I-ESC meeting chaired by members of the Office of NSA Rubaie, and, with the exception of economic issues, rarely, directs I-ESC follow-up to the CoM.  While PM Maliki's approach may move things faster, Salih's approach may strengthen the CoM as a constitutionally specified body and act to track more issues discussed at the I-ESC towards legislation in the CoR.  End Comment.  10.  Comment:  At the follow-on Deputy I-ESC meeting I-ESC Secretary Saeed Jabour of the NSA Office told JSPAoff that he  SIPDIS was "sure sure" that current Minister of Oil Sharistani would be replace by current Minister of Finance Jabr in an expected government reshuffle within the next ten days.  No mention was made of who would become Minister of Finance.  End Comment. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000430  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ, UK SUBJECT: FCO'S HOWELLS:BRITISH ELECTORATE MONITORING IRAQ LEADERS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) SUMMARY.  In a February 9 meeting, UK Foreign Office Minister of State Kim Howells told Ambassador Crocker that he had not gotten the sense from intense U.K. Cabinet discussions that the British were going to relinquish responsibility in Basrah.  Howells was clear, however, that the U.K. electorate was closely monitoring Iraqi leaders' performance, and that if they were not able to solve Basrah's unique security challenges, it would be increasingly difficult for HMG to justify its mission in the South. Howells, who also visited the capital of the Kurdish region Erbil, noted senior Kurdish leadership's mixed willingness to compromise on key issues.  Howells described himself as "very, very worried" about Iran's nuclear ambitions and added that the December National Intelligence Estimate on Iran (NIE) "floored" him.  British Ambassador Christopher Prentice and FCO Iraq Chief Frank Baker suggested that the EU was ready to assume an expanded role in Iraq and mentioned that EU Foreign Policy Chief Javier Solana had already considered visiting Baghdad, but canceled because of schedule conflicts.  Ambassador Prentice asked for Embassy assistance locating an IZ site for an enlarged EU mission.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (U) FCO Minister of State Kim Howells, British Ambassador to Iraq Christopher Prentice, FCO Iraq Chief Frank Baker, UK Embassy Political Counselor Kate Sands-Knight and Sarah Cowley, Assistant and Private Secretary to the Minister, represented HMG at the meeting.  Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Political Counselor Matt Tueller, Special Assistant Ali Khedery and Political Officer James Hogan attended for the USG.  South -- A Mixed Post-PIC Assessment ------------------------------------  3.  (C) Ambassador Crocker mentioned that in recent meetings, Basrah's top law enforcement officials, Generals Mohan and Jalil had delivered uniform messages describing growing Iranian influence in their city.  Crocker regretted that the generals "made no effort to propose Iraqi solutions to Iraqi problems" but admitted that the situation was difficult to gauge because the city was "denied territory."  Ambassador Crocker added that Mohan had been candid about his need, under the circumstances, to deal with Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM). Ambassador Crocker underscored that in the post-PIC context, Basrah's security was an Iraqi problem, but cautioned that both the U.S. and the U.K. would have to monitor the situation closely.  4.  (C) To Howells' question about police reform, Ambassador Crocker noted that several of the ten attempts on Basrah Police Chief Major General Jalil's life originated within the police department, and Ambassador Prentice added that the Iraqi Ministry of the Interior was also slowing reform by allowing some "of the people Jalil kicks out the door to come back in through the window."  Ambassador Crocker said Mohan's response to Crocker's inquiries about efforts to eradicate JAM from the port of Umm Qasr was the Arabic equivalent of "me and what army?"  Ambassador Prentice suggested that Mohan and Jalil might have been putting the worst light on the security situation to leverage increased material support for their organizations and to promote Governor Wa'eli's Fadilah party.  Prentice also said Mohan was slowing progress by demanding to be the sole point-of-contact between Basrah ISF and MND-SE.  Ambassador Crocker maintained that while the two might have other agendas, the out-gunned and out-manned ISF also had genuine material shortfalls and faced a trying security environment in Basrah.  5.  (C) Howells confirmed that the ongoing commitment of British forces to MND-SE had been the subject of intense discussions within the British government.  Howells assured Ambassador Crocker that he had "not gotten the sense that the UK will relinquish responsibility" in the sector, but made a point to emphasize that security in Basrah was an Iraqi issue.  Howells said he noted the "extreme reluctance of Iraqi leadership to take decisions" in this context and concluded that it was of "overarching importance" that they begin to do so.  Howell cautioned that the British "electorate's attention is shifting to what Iraqi leaders are doing" and that the electorate had to be convinced Iraqi leaders were taking hard but necessary decisions to solve their own problems.  Ambassador Prentice pursued this by suggesting that 2008 could be the high point of international engagement in Iraq and that if Iraqi leadership did not rise to the challenge (Prentice cited the conclusion of an SFA with the U.S. as a bellwether) that it would be "increasingly difficult to justify the engagement."  Ambassador Crocker said it was tricky to determine the weight of a presence that was now focused on support, but left no doubt that British forces were necessary in post-PIC Basrah.  BAGHDAD 00000430  002 OF 003    North/140 Issues -- Barzani to Make Two-Week Trip to Baghdad --------------------------------------------- --------  6.  (C) Howells remarked that the North "looked more prosperous" but regretted he had not gotten a "clear picture of a future Kurdistan" from senior Kurdish leadership. Howells found Massud Barzani "uncompromising" on some topics (hydrocarbons legislation and constitutional implications of delays in the 140 process) but "less exercised" on others, such as KRG/Turish engagement on PKK issues.  Although Howells stressed the need for compromise (and, in a positive development, reported that both Massud and Nechirvan Barzani are planning upcoming two-week trips to Baghdad), he also noted that KRG leadership did not appear to think they had overplayed their hand.  Ambassador Crocker commented that the process was at the beginning and required "strategic patience," but cautioned that all the salient issues contained "huge opportunities for setback."  He regretted that while Sunni/Shi'a tensions waned, Arab/Kurdish tensions were on the rise, a trend fueling violence in Mosul. Ambassador Prentice mentioned that Vice President Hashimi had raised the same concern at an earlier meeting, and Ambassador Crocker warned that tensions could not slide much further.  7.  (C) Howells said that at their meeting, SRSG Steffan de Mistura pushed for an "incremental approach" on Article 140 issues, arguing that solving clear-cut challenges would build confidence and create momentum to tackle thornier problems. Ambassador Prentice added that both de Mistura and KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani have identified five areas (Prentice did not specify if there was any overlap) where they thought they could jump-start the Article 140 process. Ambassador Crocker reminded Howells and Prentice that Article 140 also encompassed hotly disputed southern internal borders, particularly those between Anbar and Karbala.  Elections -- Better to Have Them --------------------------------  8.  (C) Noting that "you don't make (the situation) better by not having elections," Ambassador Crocker pushed for 2008 elections, but wondered if concerns about procedural issues, particularly those of Shi'a parties over IHEC incompetence, did not mask the parties' underlying reluctance to go to the polls.  Ambassador Crocker also mentioned the need to "wicker-in" elections with progress on Article 140 issues.  Strategic Framework Agreement -- Good Start, Executive Council Key --------------------------------------------- ---------  9.  (C) Ambassador Crocker said that procedurally the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA) process was off to a good start and outlined for Howells the three-level negotiating framework (Executive Council, Deputies, working-level) the GOI planned to use.  (NOTE:  Ambassador Crocker specified that Deputy Foreign Minister Mohammad Hamoud would lead the working-level group.  END NOTE)  Declaring that this agreement would be unlike any other the USG had, Ambassador Crocker said the key was to focus on the Iraqi context and find the balance between a clear definition of the authorities needed and the level of explicitness we wished to enter in the agreement.  He modulated his assessment by saying that it was still an "open proposition" whether political parties and leaders were committed to a functioning Iraq and assessed that the Executive Council's (former "3 plus 1") performance during SFA negotiations would be the telling factor.  Ambassador Prentice noted that the Council had not yet "broken into difficult territory" but Ambassador Crocker stressed that it was early and that the Council's approach would be incremental in any case.  Ambassador Crocker observed that unexpected factors, such as council members' health, could also be an issue.  Driving the point home, Howells mentioned that Prime Minister Maliki had cancelled that day's meeting, citing ill health.  (Note: Maliki received a Codel just prior to the Howells meeting and showed no sign of fatigue.  End Note.)  Iran ----  10.  (C) Ambassador Crocker told Howells that we expected to hold working-level tri-lateral talks focused on Iraq's security on February 15 and asked if the UK side had any advice.  Ambassador Prentice offered the services of the UK's Iran Ambassador Geoffrey Adams if we wished to convey specific points to cover during the talks.   Howells admitted to being "very, very worried" about Iran's nuclear ambitions.  He volunteered that the December NIE had "floored" him, and also provided the Iranians the basis for what he called their "triumphalist attitude."  He gave poor marks to the  BAGHDAD 00000430  003 OF 003   International Atomic Energy Commission ("they don't know what's going on in the labs and the plants") and admitted that the EU3   3 talks "were going nowhere." Howells assessed that the major problem was "Iran's uranium enrichment program -- and you don't have to be a genius to know where that's going."  But with a hint of admiration, Howells described Russia's Iran policy as "a very clever, long game."  Syria -----  11.  (C) Howells noted that in their meeting, Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari still appeared concerned about foreign terrorists and fighters (FTF) flow from Syria into Iraq and the SARG's role in the region generally.  Ambassador Crocker said, and Howells agreed, that the diminished FTF flow was partly due to SARG efforts, which, although clearly self-serving, also presented opportunities for further engagement.  Diplomatic Representation in Baghdad ------------------------------------  12.  (C) Ambassador Crocker told Howells that we would like to see broader EU engagement in Iraq generally and in particular EU encouragement of Arab countries to open Missions and send Ambassadors to Iraq.  He added we would also welcome a visit by EU High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana.  FCO Iraq Group Chief Frank Baker said the European Parliament had already instructed the European Commission to take a more active role in Iraq, and that recently Solana's office had approved an Iraq visit, but canceled because of schedule conflicts. Ambassador Prentice said HMG was already pressing for more robust EU engagement, but that the EU mission (which is co-located with the British Embassy in Baghdad) was statutorily too small to manage a dedicated country budget. The EU wanted a site near the U.S. NEC, but felt USG priorities pushed it aside in favor of Arab countries that were also seeking embassy sites in Baghdad's International Zone.  To Ambassador Prentice's suggestion that an EU mission "would be more productive than an Arab embassy" Ambassador Crocker answered that he did not think it was an either/or question and that we would talk to EU representatives and try to accommodate their request. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000431  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: SMALL KURDISH PARTIES TAP FRUSTRATION WITH KDP AND PUK  Classified By: Acting Deputy Political Counselor Chris Hegadorn for rea sons 1.4 (b/d).  1.  (C) Summary: Islamist and other small parties in Iraqi Kurdistan are attempting to exploit growing public frustration with the dominant Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK).  Based on anecdotal evidence, the two parties appear to be losing popularity, though not power, due to the perception that they are less like political parties than political machines -- corrupt, omnipresent influences on public life.  The small parties, most notably the Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU), are attempting to wedge their way into the political space by eschewing corruption and preaching moderation in the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG)'s dealings with Baghdad and Washington.  Four of the smaller Kurdish parties submitted a letter in January 2008 to the KDP and PUK outlining concerns over electricity failures, corruption and regional tensions.  At this time, however, they are attempting only to amplify their voices in governance, not to supplant the PUK or KDP that for decades have dominated Iraqi Kurdish politics.  End summary.  KDP and PUK Dominant But Losing Popularity ------------------------------------------  2.  (C) Based on anecdotal evidence and observation, the Kurdish population appears increasingly frustrated with both the PUK and KDP for their perceived corruption, failure to deliver essential services, and omnipresence in public life. The degree of discontent is difficult to measure, but these complaints are becoming familiar from ordinary KRG residents.  Denise Natali, an Amcit professor at Kurdistan University, and a savvy observer of Kurdish politics, told PolOffs on February 4 that both major parties are losing support due not only to the failures listed above but to the waning power of the Kurdish nationalism that has sustained both parties for decades.  Natali argued that without the threat from Saddam Hussein, and with opinions on KDP and PUK governance mixed at best, the only party inspiring even modest Kurdish nationalism among the general public is the PKK.  As in other areas of the Middle East, Islamists are best positioned to capitalize on this disillusionment because of their reputation as less corrupt than the secular nationalists, in Natali's opinion.  Islamists and Leftists Seek to Fill Void ----------------------------------------  3.  (C) The strongest small party is the Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU), led by Secretary General Salahhadin Bahaddin. The other significant religious party is the Kurdistan Islamic Group; secular parties include the Kurdistan Toilers, Party, Kurdistan Socialist Democratic Party (KSDP), and Kurdistan Communist Party.  The groups have little in common philosophically -- Saad Amin, a KRG minister from the Toilers, Party, told PolOffs on February 7 that he opposes the Islamists, ideology "one hundred percent."  All share, however,  an interest in reducing the dominance of the PUK and KDP, a perception that popular frustration has created a market for fresh voices, and the argument that the two parties are partly to blame for the KRG's perceived deteriorating relations with Baghdad, Washington, and Ankara.  The KIU voices particular objection to the unilateral KRG oil contracts that have so riled the GOI -- Bahaddin and COR Member Sami Atroshi called the contracts unnecessarily provocative, saying they could have waited for Baghdad's support, and criticizing the opaque way in which the KRG awarded the contracts.  Platform Blasts Corruption, Quarrels With Neighbors --------------------------------------------- ------  4.  (C) Four of these parties -- the KIU, Islamic Group, Toilers, Party, and KSDP -- registered their complaints in January in a joint letter to the KDP and PUK.  The letter's principal accusations were that the two large parties are failing to deliver essential services, mishandling the KRG's external relations, and stymieing other groups, political participation.  The PUK and KDP reacted harshly at first -- both blasted the letter publicly for undermining Kurdish solidarity at a delicate time, and Saad Amin says KDP Politboro member Fadhil Merani angrily threatened to withdraw the four parties, public funding if they continue to "oppose" the KDP.  After this initial outburst, Bahaddin claims the large parties, positions softened; a KDP-PUK committee formed to discuss the small parties, grievances, and the two parties accepted the criticism of inadequate service delivery, though maintaining that the time is wrong for Kurdish discord. (Note:  Anger may run deep over the letter, however.  In a February 5 meeting between Senior Adviser and President Barzani, only the  Communist party had representation -- the one small party that refused to sign the letter.  End Note)  5.  (C) The KIU criticized the KRG's handling of the Turkey/PKK crisis.  The party,s stance appears to have endeared Bahaddin to the Turkish government, probably because Ankara sees Bahaddin as more moderate than Barzani and because of the shared Islamist orientation of the KIU and Turkey's ruling AKP.  Bahaddin said he supports a KRG effort to enfranchise its Turcoman population as a confidence-building measure and incentive for Ankara to reciprocate by granting more political rights to Turkish Kurds.  In late November he led the first major Iraqi Kurdish delegation to Ankara, consisting of representatives from each major Kurdish political party, which Ankara received warmly and which helped calm a tense situation after the PKK attacked and abducted Turkish soldiers.  Ankara subsequently has invited Bahaddin back on several occasions, according to KIU MP Sami Atroshi.  Bahaddin said Barzani has forbidden him from accepting the invitations, on the grounds that Ankara must recognize the KRG and Barzani as its primary Iraqi Kurdish interlocutor.  Small Parties Seek Larger, Not Dominant, Voice --------------------------------------------- -  6.  (C) The small parties avoid strident opposition to the PUK and KDP, particularly outside of the KRG.  Bahaddin said the KIU allies explicitly with the two large parties in Baghdad and Kirkuk -- meaning effectively in the Iraqi Council of Representatives (COR) and the Kirkuk Provincial Council -- because solidarity is paramount in advancing Kurdish interests in Iraq.  Furthermore, even within the KRG, the parties campaign for more representation and diversity of political perspective, not for the overhaul of the bipartisan regime.  They probably recognize that accommodation with the KDP and PUK is more likely to benefit the small parties than unrealistic attempts to supplant them.  Comment -------  7.  (C) The KDP and PUK may be losing in popularity, but not in power.  The situation parallels that in southern Iraq: discontent with both major political groups is clear, but the groups, dominance inhibits the rise of an alternative.  The parties may make modest gains in the next elections if the PUK and KDP tolerate reasonable competition, but their true entry into the power structure probably would depend upon a larger change in Iraqi Kurdistan's two-party equilibrium.  As long as the power-sharing arrangement between the KRG's two political juggernauts holds, the small parties will simply seek to influence policy from the periphery. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000433  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQ AWAKENING MOVEMENT CHOOSES NEW DEPUTIES, SEEKS TO ATTRACT EDUCATED MEMBERS  REF: BAGHDAD 400  Classified By: Political Counselor Matt Tueller for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d).  1. (U) This is a PRT Anbar reporting cable.  2. (C) Summary: The Anbar-based Awakening Movement of Iraq took a step toward transforming itself from a tribal security force into a political party February 12 when 300 supporters met to elect new deputy leaders and to signal their intention to attract better educated members into the movement,s ranks.  The plan is to move aside some of the tribal sheikhs from positions of power, but to maintain tribal influence by recruiting their better-educated relatives.  Among SAI,s new 50-member General Secretariat is Hameed Al-Heiss, who recently alarmed IIP members by declaring that the ruling political party had "30 days" to leave Anbar or they would be forced out of the province.  Ahmad told us he and other SAI leaders would "talk to him" and make him "stop threatening violence."  End Summary.  From Street Fighters to Politicos ---------------------------------  3.  (SBU) The Anbar-based Awakening Movement of Iraq, or Sahawa Al-Iraq (SAI), took a step toward transforming itself into a full-fledged political party when at least 300 sheikhs and community leaders met in Ramadi on February 12 to elect new deputies and inject a crop of intellectuals into its ranks.  4.  (SBU) SAI leader Sheikh Ahmad Abu Risha told the crowd of supporters gathered at his Ramadi compound that it was time for SAI to recruit more educated Iraqis into the movement,s leadership, so they could evolve from anti-Al-Qaeda street fighters into political players.  The goal was to make SAI a viable alternative to the dominant Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) in both the provincial and national political scenes.  5.  (SBU) The day before the meeting, Ahmad had explained to us that his plan was to remove some tribal sheikhs from immediate positions of power, but to maintain tribal influence by recruiting their better-educated relatives.  SAI has long been accused by its political rivals in Anbar of being comprised of modestly educated tribal sheikhs who wield power locally but are intellectually unprepared for the business of administering government at either the provincial or national level.  Ahmad also told us that he intends to register the SAI as a legal political party as soon as possible.  6. (C) In the packed meeting hall decked with Iraqi flags and satin-yellow Sahawa banners, Ahmad announced the formation of a 50-member SAI General Secretariat, which includes university-educated Anbaris, many of whom have family ties with local tribal leaders.  7. (SBU) However, the move to bring in new blood raised hackles among some longtime Sahawa supporters at the meeting.  They protested that they had been with the organization since its founding, and that their participation in the fight against Al-Qaeda should ensure them leadership roles in SAI. They also protested that membership in the General Secretariat was determined before the meeting and that the  SIPDIS broader SAI membership did not play a role in its formation.  8. (SBU) Ahmad assured the dissenters that they would always play a role in the organization, but that their family members with formal educations should represent Sahawa.  9. (C) "Sahawa is trying to grow and evolve," said Dr. Jabbir Khalaf Awad al-Jabber, a Ramadi-born physician with a PhD in internal medicine and psychiatry from Paris University, and a member of the leading family of the Ramadi-based Jabber tribe.  Jabbir was selected to serve as a new member of SAI,s General Secretariat.  He is married to a U.S. citizen, but spends much of his time in Amman and Ramadi.  "Sahawa needs to show people that it can do more than provide security.  It needs to have educated people who can develop the economy and provide basic services."  New Deputies ------------  10. (SBU) Despite the call for better-educated members, the General Secretariat includes many longtime SAI partisans. Midway through the meeting, it met in closed-door session to elect three new SAI deputies.  A hastily emptied facial tissue box served as the ballot box.  The new leaders are:  -- Latif Obaid Ayadah, the Mayor of Ramadi, was selected as  BAGHDAD 00000433  002 OF 003   SAI First Deputy;  -- Sheikh Walid Khalid Arraq Albu Ali Jassim, a member of the Anbar Provincial Council, was chosen as Second Deputy; and  -- Muayed Ibrahim Humeesh, SAI liaison to Anbar Governor Ma,amoun, was chosen as SAI,s General Secretary.  11. (SBU) Ahmad,s leadership was not under consideration, and was not questioned by anyone at the meeting.  He directed the proceedings.  Return to the Fold ------------------  12. (C) Selected as a member of the SAI,s General Secretariat was Hameed Al-Heiss, who recently alarmed IIP  SIPDIS members by declaring that the ruling political party had "30 days" to leave Anbar or they would be forced out of the province.  The IIP-dominated Provincial Council voted February 9 to recommend prosecution against Heiss and his sometimes partner, Sheikh Ali Hatim Abdul-Rizk Sulemain (reftel).  13. (C) Both Heiss and Ali Hatim had been top SAI deputies until November when they made anti-Coalition statements to the press, which prompted their expulsion.  Several SAI members told us that Heiss and Ali Hatim have recently resorted to using sharp rhetoric against the IIP to cajole provincial leaders into including them in the Anbar Higher Committee (AHC), a conflict-resolution body formed in late 2007.  The AHC includes Ahmad, provincial IIP leaders, and other prominent non-SAI sheikhs.  14. (C) Ahmad told us that Heiss, return to SAI had been under discussion for weeks, but he doubted that Heiss would be given a top leadership position any time soon.  In response to a question about Heiss, recent threats against the IIP, Ahmad responded that he and other SAI leaders would "talk to him" and make him "stop threatening violence.  We want to work within the law; This is very important for Sahawa."  15. (C) It should be noted that Heiss typically appears in the press as speaking on behalf of an organization called the "Anbar Salvation Council," not to be confused with the SAI. He was its co-founder in 2006 with Ahmad,s brother, the late Sheikh Sattar Abu Risha.  The latter unilaterally abolished the Salvation Council last summer after Heiss made overtures to Prime Minister Maliki on filling Cabinet vacancies created by the Tawafuq walkout.  Sattar considered Heiss, move as breaking ranks.  Nonetheless, since that time, Heiss continues to speak for the Anbar Salvation Council, but it is not clear if that organization has much of a following.  16. (SBU) Ali Hatim, who was reportedly injured in a deadly car bomb at his Baghdad headquarters the day before, did not participate in the meeting.  It is not clear if Ali Hatim will be brought back into the SAI fold.  Eight Demands -------------  17. (C) The congress did not include a discussion of SAI,s platform or future plans.  The party platform, which includes a call for new provincial elections with an eye toward SAI control if the Provincial Council, was announced in April 2007 and remains unchanged.  However, Ahmad reiterated eight demands SAI submitted to the AHC.  These demands, designed to loosen IIP,s grip on provincial power and give SAI a broader role, include the following:  -- restructuring the Provincial Council to include more SAI members; -- re-examining district and sub-district council structures; -- re-examining qualifications for provincial department heads and Directors General; -- re-evaluating procedures for hiring 6,000 new provincial government employees; -- re-appointing members to the Governate Electoral Office; -- de-politicizing internal security forces and the Iraqi Army in Anbar; -- coordinating consensus on the content of provincial government statements; and -- including SAI members in discussions of provincial projects.  Neither Governor Ma,amoun nor Provincial Council Chair Abdulsalam "both members of the AHC" has responded to the demands, Ahmad told us.  Comment  BAGHDAD 00000433  003 OF 003   -------  18. (C) The SAI meeting was designed not only to confirm Ahmad,s dominant leadership role, but also to signal the movement,s transformation into a political party.  The announcement that SAI is seeking better educated members has not changed its decision-making core.  It seems more an attempt to silence criticism that many SAI members lack formal education, and to create a cadre of future politicians.  Ahmad has signaled his intent to rein in Hameed Al-Heiss, long known for his erratic character and inflammatory rhetoric.  It should be noted that Ahmad has made no public condemnation of Heiss, recent threatening utterances against the IIP.  His reaction has been confined to telling his USG contacts that he will speak to Heiss privately about toning down his rhetoric.  Strictly speaking, while Heiss was on the outside, SAI could not be held responsible for his threatening statements.  But if Heiss again resorts to such tactics, SAI,s posture as a moderate and responsible political grouping will be taken to task. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000434  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  STATE FOR NEA/I - JDAVIS, EUR/WE CPALMER PARIS FOR JROSENBLATT, WJORDAN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: FRENCH DIPLOMATS WELCOME VISIT; GUARDED ABOUT IRAQ ENGAGEMENT   Classified By: PolCounselor Matt Tueller for Reasons 1.4d/b  1. (C/NF)  SUMMARY.  In a February 12 meeting - the first on French Embassy premises with U.S. Emboffs in at least 18 months, if not since 2003 -- French DCM Alexandre Garcia and Political Counselor Sylvain Fourriere (protect both) told DepPolCounselor that ongoing security concerns and pervasive corruption would limit the scope of French Government and private engagement throughout Iraq.  They appeared open to Erbil-based training, but unenthusiastic about Baghdad-based programs.  Garcia stressed that France, in its capacity in Baghdad as acting EU President, would press for common GOF/USG priorities, particularly in legislation and Arab diplomatic representation.  The French mission, staffed with both Farsi and Arabic speakers, appeared particularly attuned to Iranian influences in Iraq.  They worried about the allegiances of key ISCI players and urged greater USG engagement with the Sadr trend.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C/NF)  DepPolCounselor and PolOff met on February 12 at the French Embassy in Baghdad with French DCM Alexandre Garcia and Political Counselor Sylvain Fourriere.  Garcia, who has been in Baghdad for 18 months, commented that the visit marked the first time during his tour, and perhaps since 2003, that U.S diplomats had called at the French embassy, which is located across the Tigris river in Baghdad's  Karadah District, approximately one mile northeast of the Palace complex.  3.  (C/NF)  While the French have raised their profile in Iraq with the opening of an Embassy Branch Office in Erbil, both Garcia and Fourriere cautioned that fundamental obstacles -- corruption in the KRG and security in other parts of Iraq -- limited the scope of engagements that the French Government and French investors would undertake in Iraq.  Fourriere was particularly blunt about KRG corruption (and later in the conversation extended his indictment to the whole of the country), describing a system  of "nepotism and mandatory payments" and concluding that, sooner or later, the problem would have to be "referred to by name" and tackled head-on.  4.  (C/NF)  The security situation in the rest of Iraq remains the GOF's primary concern, though both took pains to praise Coalition Forces' effectiveness and stressed that conditions in Baghdad, which they monitor daily from their Red Zone headquarters, had significantly improved.  They tempered their assessment by underscoring that the lull could end "overnight" since it depends on an array of factors, some of which, like the Jaysh al Mahdi "freeze", were beyond our direct control.  The main problem, they continued, was that, despite security gains, basic service provision remained "disastrous, a catastrophe."  Local Iraqi staff and Iraqis resident near the French embassy reportedly were limited to an hour of electricity daily and lacked running water; foodstuffs, too, were limited and the supply chain precarious.  Neither thought the Maliki government, which they saw as incompetent and out of touch with daily reality, was up to the service challenge.  5.  (C/NF)  Both Garcia and Fourriere placed heavy analytic emphasis on Iran's influence in Iraq, which they believed to be pervasive.  (Note:  Fourriere and Ambassador Jean Francois Girault, who was absent, have both served in Iran. Fourriere, who claims to speak fluent Farsi, will transfer to Teheran when his Baghdad tour ends in May.  Girault, Garcia and Fourriere all speak Arabic.  End Note.)  Fourriere said that in dealing with ISCI boss Abdel Aziz al Hakim's family, and especially his sons, he was struck by the "extraordinary hold Iran has on them."  He described them as "indistinguishable from Iranians" in their speech (they use Farsi in private and with Fourriere) and their habits. Fourriere left no doubt where he thinks their sympathies lie.  6.  (C/NF)  Turning to the Sadr trend, Fourriere declared that, while the movement was clearly tainted by association with Iran, it was fundamentally hostile to Iranian ambitions, since Iraqi nationalism was its driving principle.  He thought the trend's "honorable elements" would push for an extension of the JAM freeze, but that the movement was so fragmented that there was no way to be sure who would prevail.  Fourriere urged us, to the extent possible, to broaden our engagement with the Sadr trend.  7.  (C/NF)  Asked about French-sponsored training in Iraq, Garcia admitted that the French thus far had only considered the possibility of language and cultural seminars, likely in  BAGHDAD 00000434  002 OF 002   Erbil, where France recently opened an embassy office. Garcia appeared open to the suggestion that the GOF could provide training for Iraqi judges in Erbil.   He also agreed to look into Baghdad-based training, even briefly raising the prospect of using the Al Rashid hotel in Baghdad for training as he was introducing DepPolCounselor to a colleague who handles legal and cultural affairs.  (Note:  That colleague's response lacked enthusiasm.)  Asked also about French thinking on a potential surge in IDP and refugee returnees, Garcia and Fourriere responded flatly that the latest numbers belied the alleged urgency.  With regard to refugees, more Iraqis were still leaving the country each month than returning, Garcia claimed.  Fourriere added that the recent spate of returns from Syria had been driven by financial necessity and had now languished.  8.  (C/NF)  Garcia stressed that the French, in their capacity as EU President, were already pressing key GOF/USG priorities, particularly on legislation and expanded Arab representation in Baghdad.  (Note:  France, which formally assumes the EU Presidency in July, is now the acting EU President, since Slovenia has no diplomatic presence in Baghdad.)  9.  (C/NF) Comment: The French analysis was striking for its emphasis on the Iranian undercurrents in Iraqi political developments.  While that approach plays to the linguistic strengths of staff, it is a message we hear just as often from Iraqi interlocutors.  Also notable was the judgment on the precariousness of recent security gains coupled with the indictment of the Maliki administration and the diagnosis of grave, systemic corruption, stretching to the KRG.  Our French interlocutors freely acknowledged Coalition achievements and volunteered to be helpful in their EU Presidency role.  The impression remains, however, that the French diplomatic presence in Baghdad functions primarily as an analytic perch from which they are not quite ready to stir.  Greater engagement will likely come in baby steps. The new French office in Erbil, where the incumbent has deeper ties to FM Kouchner than to the MFA itself, is the more probable platform, but we should not give France a pass on engagement in Baghdad itself.  The verdict of corruption could also be a pivot for launching training projects turning on Rule of Law.  Pooling views on Iranian inroads into Iraq may equally prove a worthwhile line of exchange.  End Comment. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000436  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2018 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: CLC JOB PLANS WIN EARLY BACKING IN BAGHDAD  Classified By: Classified by Deputy Political Counselor Greg D'Elia for  reasons 1.4 (b,d).  1.  (C) SUMMARY: Government of Iraq (GoI) officials won initial support from Baghdad Mayor Saber Al-Assawi and Baghdad Provincial Council Chairman Mueen Al-Khademy for two new employment plans for Concerned Local Citizens (CLCs) during a series of meetings in late January and early February.  Both plans -- a "Community-Based Workers Program" and the establishment of the first local Civil Service Department -- aim to identify employment for the majority of those CLCs who will not enter the Iraqi Security Forces. Provincial Council Chairman Mueen stated that it will be difficult to press forward quickly on these programs, and expressed concern about the GoI's ability to sustain a large influx in the government workforce.  Nonetheless, these plans, pressed forward with the Prime Minister's backing and in close consultation with Baghdad's provincial leaders, key ministry officials, Multi-National Division Baghdad (MND-B) and the Baghdad PRT, represent an important GoI step toward transitioning CLCs into sustainable employment in Baghdad. END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- --- BIG PICTURE CONCEPT FOR CLC EMPLOYMENT IN BAGHDAD --------------------------------------------- ----  2.  (C) During a series of meetings in late January and early February, Dr. Bassima Al-Jadri (commonly referred to as "Dr. Bassima"), of the Interim Follow-Up Committee on National Reconciliation (IFCNR), explained the "Community-Based Workers Program" (CBWP) to leaders and stakeholders in Baghdad province, including Mayor Saber Al-Assawi, Provincial Council (PC) Chairman Mueen, representatives from key Iraqi ministries (health, education, and labor and social affairs), Baghdad PRT officers, and the Deputy Commanding General (DCG) of MND-B.  Dr. Bassima said that the CBWP will establish six offices throughout Baghdad to focus on providing jobs to CLCs, starting in "hot" neighborhoods where high levels of violence persist.  The program will hire qualified local residents to refurbish infrastructure and to provide essential services.  According to Dr. Bassima, the CBWP has the full support of Prime Minister Maliki.  3.  (C) Dr. Bassima also announced that a new (yet to be established) IFCNR Office of Contracting will help place CLCs in the ministries.  She added that while skilled workers will move much more easily into these jobs, unskilled workers will be added as they complete vocational training.  Officials in the Baghdad Mayor's office, the Provincial Council, and IFCNR agreed to continue to work out the details, including the mechanism for hiring and paying these workers.  ------------------------------ PILOT PROGRAM SMALLER IN SCOPE ------------------------------  4.  (C) Dr. Bassima also discussed with Baghdad leaders the second CLC transition plan -- a "Proof of Principle" project to establish the first local Civil Service Department (CSD) in the Jihad neighborhood of west Rashid district.  The 4/1 ID Brigade of MND-B, which has responsibility for this area, developed the CSD program in collaboration with IFCNR to assist the Baghdad Amanat and national ministries in the provision of services, including sewage, trash, electricity, and water.  5.  (C) The Jihad CSD will be the first of 11 planned CSD offices in East and West Rashid districts.  Each CSD will employ 395 workers, most of whom will be hired from a pool of more than 7,900 CLCs in these areas.  Salary rates will be based on GoI pay scales.  Each CSD compound will have an office, maintenance facility, and equipment, such as office computers, bulldozers, and backhoes.  The Jihad neighborhood prototype will provide an opportunity to identify those aspects of the CSD program that need adjustment prior to implementation on a broader scale.  Dr. Bassima said that IFCNR will apply lessons learned from Jihad to the other CSDs in Rashid District as they begin operation.  ----------------------------- PC CONCERNS, IFCNR ASSURANCES -----------------------------  6.  (C) Chairman Mueen stated in a January 30 meeting about CBWP and CSD that it will be difficult to press these programs forward quickly, and he expressed some reservations regarding IFCNR's ability to do so.  He also voiced concern about the GOI's ability to sustain increasing numbers of government workers.  Dr. Bassima responded that she had a directive from the Prime Minister to carry out the CBWP, and that it would serve as a temporary transition for former CLC security personnel for at least one year.  She said that she  BAGHDAD 00000436  002 OF 002   would like some of the workers, especially those with relevant skills and background, to integrate into various ministries.  ----------------------------------------- COMMENT: GOI EMPLOYS CONSULTATIVE PROCESS -----------------------------------------  7.  (C) COMMENT: By beginning to build a constructive partnership with Baghdad's provincial leaders, key ministry officials, MND-B and the PRT, the GOI has taken an important step toward implementing new efforts to transition CLCs into sustainable employment in Baghdad.  Mayor Saber heads the powerful Amanat, which provides most of the essential services to residents of Baghdad's nine central districts. PC Chairman Mueen controls budget allocation for the province.  The Amanat, the PC, and the ministries thus have critical roles to play in coordinating the CBWP and CSD initiatives with city and rural planning.  Amanat, PC and ministry officials can help to hire and support CLCs who seek to work on essential services, housing projects, and other public sector jobs throughout Baghdad province.  (NOTE: Mutli-National Corps Iraq began January 25 to refer to CLCs by a new name, "Sons of Iraq" (SOIs).  END NOTE.)  END COMMENT. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000002  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2018 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: COR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER ON BUDGET, INVESTMENT COMMISSION NOMINATION  Classified By: Economic Minister Charles P. Ries for reasons 1.4 (b/d)  1. (C) Begin Summary: On December 31, one day following the conclusion of the Council of Representatives (CoR) holiday recess, First Deputy Speaker Khalid Attiyah told EMIN he expects the 2008 federal budget to pass within the next two weeks. Claiming that the CoR had yet to receive from the Council of Ministers (CoM) the nomination for the head of the National Investment Commission, Attiyah indicated he would support an expedited vote in the plenary. On the reallocation of unspent funds allocated to the Ministry of Interior for current expenditures, Attiyah said that he anticipated the measure would be approved, but could not provide details on the exact mechanism. End Summary  2. (C) First Deputy Speaker Khalid Attiyah opened his meeting with EMIN by citing the continued absence of Kurdish members. Until January 3, the date of their anticipated return, the CoR most likely would be unable to muster a quorum, he explained. Attiyah said that he believes the Kurdish objections to the 2008 federal budget bill had been resolved, and accordingly predicted the CoR would pass the legislation within two weeks. He could not, however, rule out the emergence of unanticipated obstacles that might jeopardize his prediction. Attiyah clarified that should the budget bill pass prior to the end of the month, the CoR would still remain in session through the end of January, thus providing additional time for consideration of other important legislation, including the de-Baathification reform (Accountability and Justice) legislation.  3. (C) EMIN turned to the nomination of Ahmed Ridha for Head of the National Investment Commission and explained the necessity of National Investment Law implementing regulations to attract foreign investment and spur economic growth in Iraq. Attiyah confessed that the CoR had not yet received the nomination from the CoM. He added that the CoR's standard operating procedure for considering nominations to important posts was to hold off voting until a handful were ready to ensure a "balanced composition." Because of the importance of the position, however, Attiyah indicated that he would grant an exception to this policy for Dr. Ridha and have the CoR consider his nomination without undue delay upon receipt from the CoM. If Ahmed Ridha did not have strong party affiliations, his nomination would likely pass smoothly, he concluded.  4. (C) Attiyah claimed that the CoR was in general agreement to permit the reallocation of unspent current expenditures for the Ministry of Interior to be reprogrammed to capital expenditure for purchase of equipment under the auspices of the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program. While he could not provide details concerning the mechanism by which the reprogramming would occur, he seemed confident the measure would pass. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000003  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2017 TAGS: PREL, MARR, ENRG, PHUM, MOPS, NBTS, IZ SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND FM ZEBARI DISCUSS URGENT TOPICS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) Summary.  In a December 30 meeting, the Ambassador reviewed with Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA), suggesting that the GOI establish a negotiating team parallel to the U.S. delegation.  On the Tuwaitha shipment, FM Zebari agreed to send a letter to the International Atomic Energy Agency to allow the US packing team to break the seals on the radioactive material in Tuwaitha.  Zebari also clarified the status and restrictions upon Iraqi funds for refugee assistance in Jordan, but he was evasive in finding cooperative solutions to the problem with PKK on the Turkish border.  End Summary.  SOFA is the First Part of the SFA ---------------------------------  2. (S) Ambassador Crocker met with FM Zebari on December 30, accompanied by EMIN and POLMIL MinCouns.  Ambassador explained that the U.S. approach is to negotiate the security portion of the SFA first, then move to the economic portion. The security portion would be concluded as a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).  The Ambassador passed to Zebari a copy of the preliminary outline of the SOFA.  The Ambassador noted that the U.S. is still assembling its team, with State Department lead, supported by Defense and other agencies.  He suggested that Iraq should have a parallel structure.  FM Zebari agreed that the Foreign Ministry should have the Iraqi lead, but he acknowledged that the Prime Minister's and President's advisors would seek involvement.  The Ambassador added that it is National Security Advisor Mowaffak al Rubaie's stated position that the Foreign Ministry should lead because it has expertise in negotiations.  The Ambassador advised FM Zebari that technical assistance from outside consultants (e.g. UNAMI experts) would be acceptable, but only the two governments should have a place at the negotiation table.  Tuwaitha Radioactive Materials Shipment ---------------------------------------  3. (S) The Ambassador and EMIN explained the urgent time constraints for the following events:  requesting IAEA permission to break seals, packing of radioactive material, and granting of sale authority.  A letter from the Foreign Ministry to the IAEA, requesting permission to break the seals, was most urgent because it was the first event in the sequence for preparation and movement.  FM Zebari agreed to send a letter.  Refugee Assistance ------------------  4. (C) FM Zebari clarified that refugee assistance funds have been transferred to the Iraqi account in Jordan.  He stated that from the GOI point of view, those funds were satisfactorily obligated in the 2007 fiscal year.  The GOI intends to give the funds to Jordan.  Zebari stated that Jordan has asked to give the Iraqi funds to an NGO, like UNHCR or IRC.  He said that Iraq would permit Jordan to give the funds to an NGO, but Iraq could not give the funds directly to an NGO.  Turkey and PKK --------------  5. (S) The Ambassador emphasized that all parties must stay focused on the end of PKK presence on Iraqi territory.  He further emphasized that purely kinetic operations will cause collateral damage and will not solve the problem.  FM Zebari concurred with both points.  The FM worried about the potential for "mistakes" to inflame the situation.  However, Zebari did not acknowledge any recent bilateral contacts with Turkey.  POLMIL MinCouns noted several proposals for meetings between Iraq and Turkey, but FM Zebari evaded the idea, describing instead a long list of pending diplomatic actions and activities.  Upcoming Diplomatic Initiatives -------------------------------  6. (C) FM Zebari was planning to go to Cairo on January 6 to talk about a "long term relationship" with Egypt.  He stated that Egypt was keen to look at a joint resolution and to revive old agreements.  He added that he was also planning a trip to Kuwait.  Zebari said that he wanted to propose the names of potential Iraqi ambassadors to those two countries. He claimed that Russia was pursuing a "framework for a future relationship" with the GOI, but the Iraqi delegation to Moscow was postponed and would not travel until February.  7. (S) FM Zebari stated that diplomacy between Iraq and Iran was currently focused on the schedule for trilateral talks  BAGHDAD 00000003  002 OF 002   (Note: a date is still pending.  End Note.)  He added that the Algiers Agreement was under discussion and that the demarcation of the border needed to be redone due to the shifting of the channel in multiple areas within the Shatt al Arab.  CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000008  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2018 TAGS: PREL, IZ SUBJECT: PRT-WASIT: IRAN PAYS FOR WASIT SHEIKHS' TOUR  REF: A. DIIR-TFM-81-819-08-116      B. BAGHDAD 4146      C. IIR-TFM-81-819-08-114  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (U) This is a PRT Wasit reporting cable.  2. (S//REL TO ACGU) Summary: According to numerous tribal and government contacts, from 21 November to 6 December approximately 60 sheikhs and family members visited Iran for fifteen days to tour Tehran, Qom and Mashad.  An Iraqi tour company named "Sons of Ruhullah," reportedly sponsored by a partnership between the Da'wa party and Iran, organized the trip.  The tour included visits to Shi'a holy sites, shrines to Iranian political/religious leaders, government buildings and the closed US Embassy in Tehran, combined with lectures (ref A).  The invitations were made to the sheikhs by Mohammad Reza al Numani, a part-time religious lecturer in Iran, long time member of Da'wa and close associate of both Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and former Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jafari.  According to the Wasit IP Chief, Iran will likely sponsor additional trips in order to influence tribal opinion before the next Provincial elections.  He said that CF's most effective counter is successful PRT operations, noting that agricultural, business, and other reconstruction assistance will influence the tribal population more than trips to Iran. End summary.  The Tours --------- 3. (S//REL TO ACGU) On 18 and 26 December, CDR 214th FB, Team Leader 819th HUMINT Collection Team and PRT-Wasit met separately with two sheikhs who had made the trip to Iran. Both sheikhs have close ties to 214th FB and PRT and had no problem discussing the details of the trip.  In the first meeting, Sheikh Mohammad Jorani described a steady flow of lectures urging the sheikhs to join fellow Muslims to fight the Americans in Iraq, encouraging them to send their sons to Iran for education, and emphasizing the need to support Iraqi "federalism" (ref B).  4. (S//REL TO ACGU) In the second meeting on 26 December, Sheikh Abd al-Hussein said the tour group of 60 ("20 or so" sheikhs plus their families) moved across the border at the Zurbatiyah Point of Entry, spent a few hours in Mehran, and continued to Tehran for five days, Qom for three days, and Mashad for two days (Note: He reported a three-day train trip from Qom to Mashad. End note).  He said a significant amount of the time was spent with Iraqi expatriates, including one, Sheikh Fadl al Maliki, who told them that "Iran is a danger that supports the militias."  5. (S//REL TO ACGU) Although Sheikh Abd al-Hussein did not directly answer questions about the messages during the trip, he alluded to other reporting of anti-CF themes by noting that he "was not affected by the trip sponsors' messages, as we know the truth." He said he thought the purpose of the trip was to demonstrate to the Iraqis that "Iran is the center of Islam" and he claimed he was unimpressed (ref C).   Iran and Da'wa -------------- 6. (S//REL TO ACGU) The two sheikhs that made the trip and the eleven sheikhs who didn't attend said they received their invitations by telephone from Mohammed Reza al-Numani.  Al Numani was described as the "representative of the Prime Minister in Wasit" by Wasit Police Chief MG Haninn. Al-Numani was a student of Mohammed Baqr al-Sadr when Da'wa was founded in 1957.  He spent most of the Saddam era in Iran, has an Iranian wife and is reportedly well-known for a biography he wrote of Mohammed Baqr al-Sadr.  He reportedly led a delegation of Wasit sheikhs to visit the Prime Minister in June 2007, and is perceived by the tribal community as Maliki's spokesman. (Note:  Numani has met with PRT representatives before but PRT-Wasit was unable to reach him; according to IP Police Chief MG Haninn, he is in Iran. End note.)  Provincial Police Chief ----------------------- 7. (S//REL TO ACGU) On 29 December, MG Haninn confirmed to CDR 214th FB and PRT that Mohammad Reza al-Numani was the primary organizer of the trip.  When asked if the visit was intended to benefit the Da'wa party or Iran, Haninn said Iran is increasing its efforts with the tribes due to CF's tribal efforts and the presence of the PRT.  When asked what he thought the most effective CF response to the Iranian tribal campaign would be, he recommended continuing the PRT's work, noting that the sheikhs are farmers and are especially interested in agricultural and business development assistance.  BAGHDAD 00000008  002 OF 002    Comment -------  8. (S//REL TO ACGU) The reaction from our fifteen contacts was generally defensive if they went on the trip and accusatory if they did not. The sheikhs who declined the invitation didn,t hesitate to take shots at their "disloyal" colleagues for accepting favors from the "Persians." Since beginning our tribal engagements, every sheikh we've had contact with has prided himself on his pure Arab bloodline and his Iraqi nationalism, as demonstrated by a healthy dose of vitriol for Iran.  We take at face value the explanation that most went only to see the holy shrines and visit the country, and we think it unlikely Iran successfully influenced a large number of Wasit sheikhs, a notoriously fickle and self-interested community.  Our contacts noted that there have been similar trips in the past and there would undoubtedly be future trips.  Regardless of how the sheikhs respond, these efforts illustrate the extent to which Iran deems Wasit Province to be under its sphere of influence.  9.  (S//REL TO ACGU) While there is no evidence that PM Maliki had any personal involvement in this trip, the unanimous perception among the sample of tribal and government leaders we talked with is that the trip had his blessing. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000009  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2017 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ SUBJECT: HAKIM OPTIMISTIC ABOUT 2008 IN MEETING WITH AMB  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Summary: In a December 31 meeting with the Ambassador, ISCI leader Abdul Aziz al-Hakim agreed that significant security, economic, and political progress had been made in 2007.  He expressed hope that provincial elections would be held in 2008 but was noncommittal over the possibility of using an open-list system.  Hakim agreed that the Council of Representatives (COR) needed to take its responsibilities seriously, and expressed satisfaction with the improving capability of the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF). He discussed the improving relations between Iraq and its neighbors and emphasized the important role of the U.S. in supporting these relationships.  End Summary.  2.  (C) Hakim agreed with the Ambassador's assessment that the year 2007 ended on a more positive note than it began and cited progress on a range of issues.  In terms of security, he mentioned the increasing ability of the ISF to stand on its own and its success in maintaining stability in Najaf and Karbala.  Hakim noted that the provincial governorates are more active than the central ministries in terms of reconstruction and development and that overall the situation in the provinces is good.  Politically, he said he spoke on December 30 with VP Hashimi and saw a good chance for the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) to return to government.  Finally, Hakim said relations between Iraq and its neighbors had improved.  3.  (C) Hakim expressed hope that provincial elections would be held in 2008. The Ambassador said he considered 2008 elections 'necessary' and asked whether the Provincial Powers law needed to be passed before elections were held. He mentioned a recent meeting in Babil in which four south-central governors all emphasized the importance of the legislation.  Hakim explained that the only required legislation was the Election Law, and said the parties were currently negotiating on the text.  The Ambassador emphasized that, from an outsider,s perspective, the law should sanction open rather than closed lists, adding that the closed-list system was the source of many of Iraq's current problems, but it is up to Iraqis to decide how they select their leaders.  Hakim was noncommittal, repeating only that the electoral system was one of several points under negotiation.  4.  (C) Turning to the Council of Representatives (COR), the Ambassador mentioned the importance of passing the De-Ba'athification Law and the 2008 Federal Budget.  He added that, in meetings with Speaker Mashhadani and Deputy Speaker Attiya, he had stressed that the COR should not take a winter recess after adjourning for several weeks for the hajj. Hakim agreed, and mentioned several sermons recently given by the marja'iyya urging the MPs to take their responsibilities seriously.  5.  (C) The Ambassador said he agreed with Hakim's positive outlook on the ISF.  He noted that although commentators focused on the impact of the U.S. 'surge' of 30,000 additional troops, during the same period the ISF increased its numbers by 100,000.  Hakim cautioned that the ISF still needed more training and equipment but expressed optimism over the ISF's overall capability.  6.  (C) On neighboring countries, Hakim emphasized the positive effects of Vice President Mehdi's visit to Syria and President Talabani's visit to Egypt.  The Ambassador agreed on the positive effect of VP Mehdi's regional travel and Ammar al-Hakim's visit to Kuwait but noted the absence of any Arab ambassadors in Iraq, saying he hoped for reciprocal visits from Arab governments to Iraq in 2008.  Hakim asked whether the U.S. was involved in Talabani's invitation to Iranian President Ahmadinejad to visit Iraq on January 15. The Ambassador replied that he had not "heard a word" about the visit.  Hakim said the U.S. had a very important role in fostering good relations between Iraq and neighboring countries, and the Ambassador emphasized his readiness to assist in these efforts. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000010  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAGR, ECON, ETRD, EAID, EFIN, IZ SUBJECT: PRT Civil Society Outreach in Diyala's Farm Sector  1. (U) This is a PRT Diyala reporting cable.  2. (SBU) SUMMARY: PRT Diyala has conducted outreach and support activities with the Agricultural Chamber of Commerce and the Diyala Beekeepers Association.  Allegations of violence within the Diyala Farmers' Union has required the PRT to step back from supporting what at first appeared to be a promising civil society organization.  END SUMMARY.  3. (SBU) The inaugural meeting of the Diyala Farmer's Union was held at their new building in Baqubah in September.  In addition to more than 300 Diyala farmers, the National Farmers Union Representative for Diyala Province, the Assistant Governor for Administrative Affairs, a representative of the Iraqi Police, and a representative of the Provincial Council Agriculture Committee Chairman, were all present at the inaugural meeting.  4. (SBU) A vote was held for the membership of the Governing Board after a meal and speeches.  In addition to the President, Vice President, and General Secretary, seven delegates were elected to represent the provincial farmers. The chosen delegates were representative of all religious groups and thus represented a potential vehicle for reconciliation using agricultural interests in Diyala.  5. (SBU) Although this fine beginning seemed to augur well for the Union, the PRT has had to step back from its support for the organization due to conflict within the leadership in October.  6. (SBU) The PRT is also supporting the Agricultural Chamber of Commerce which will enable better services to be provided to provincial agriculturalists, and increase the opportunity that they have to influence government operation. Funding has been provided to renovate an administrative and meeting building, and to support their first year of operation.  7. (SBU) PRT continues to collaborate with the Diyala Beekeepers Association as well, particularly on importing honey processing equipment which will greatly benefit members of the association and enable commercial sales to commence.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000011  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2017 TAGS: PREL, EPET, ECON, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: KIRKUK: ATMOSPHERICS FROM PRT MARKET WALKS IN LATE 2007  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ,d).  This is a Kirkuk Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1.  (SBU) Summary: The catastrophic summer 2007 explosions in Kirkuk dampened market activity as residents stayed home and merchants limited their hours.  While violence continued through September and October, it focused more on GOI officials than residential and market areas and market activity increased slightly.   Merchants and residents appeared more confident during a PRT late-November market walk, and hoped security restrictions would loosen to promote commerce.  Attacks Limit Commerce in Summer and Early Fall --------------------------------------------- --  2.  (SBU) The VBIED and IED attacks in July and August 2007 restricted provincial economic activity.  Anecdotal evidence collected by PRT suggested a 50 percent drop in business following the catastrophic VBIED attack of 16 July 2007 which targeted a market and killed over one hundred Kirkukis.  The CF-supported Al-Aman Microfinance Institute, which gives loans to businessmen from a satellite office in a marketplace, reported the same drop during this timeframe. An unknown group in August distributed Arabic leaflets with Koranic phrases warning that market attacks would continue, causing customers to stay away and vendors to curb their hours, usually closing in the early afternoon.  To avoid going to large markets, many Kirkuk city residents increased their purchases from neighborhood stores, which tend to be more expensive.  4.  (SBU) Merchants complain that the security restrictions imposed following this summer,s attacks were hampering business.  Starting in September, merchants said the vehicle permits the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) requires restrict trade with and through the Kurdish region, a major source of wholesale goods sold in Kirkuk.  A new system of inspections and permits for large vehicles following the July mass-casualty VBIED attack also slowed the shipment of goods into the city.  Merchants similarly protested that the T-walls and Hesco barriers emplaced following the summer explosions caused inhibited customer flow.  5.  (SBU) During a series of PRT visits to local markets in September, PRT officers engaged Kirkukis of varying ages, ethnicities, and degrees of political engagement.  All interviewees voiced support for co-existence among ethnic groups and said the politicians were fighting, not the common people.  Many expressed pride that Kirkuk is a multi-ethnic city with close family ties between Kurds and Turcomen.  Even with the VBIED of July 16 still fresh in residents' minds, economic conditions were their leading concern.  The most common complaint across all ethnic groups, including the Kurds, was the unemployment rate and the inability of educated individuals to get jobs.  PRT found unanimous agreement that business was worse than a year before, that food sales were down 25-30 percent over the same period, and that sales of non-food items were down an average of 50%, although activity increased during Ramadan.  Rebound Evident Since October -----------------------------  6.  (SBU) Business improved in October as families stockpiled food for Ramadan and oil and kerosene for the winter months.  Though most residents expected terrorist activity to escalate in connection with Ramadan, the limited IED and VBIED activity in October targeted mainly GoI officials.  On 8 November the city experienced three IEDs on one day, but these again targeted GOI officials, especially security force members, and did not reduce market activity.  7.  (SBU) During a late November walk through the same market PRT visited in September, conditions had markedly improved.  Neither merchants nor customers listed security as a concern, although all found the barriers restrictive to trade.  While residents still expressed concern regarding employment, they also articulated unwonted optimism about Kirkuk,s future.  The Governor of Kirkuk accompanied PRT officials during this market walk and residents of all ethnicities expressed elation at meeting both PRT members and the Governor.  BAGHDAD 00000011  002 OF 002    Comment -------  8.  (C) Market activity varies directly with the level of violence in the city.  Even after the catastrophic explosions, merchants, complaints over vehicle restrictions and security barriers indicate a desire to move forward with commerce in spite of the risks.  PRT plans to expand its market walks outside the city and to conduct more walks in the company of provincial officials, which the population seems to welcome. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000014  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958 : N/A TAGS: EAID EFIN EINV ECON ELAB OFDP PREL SOCI IZ XF XU XB AU ZP ZR SUBJECT:  AUSTRALIA CONSIDERS NEW ASSISTANCE INITIATIVES FOR IRAQ  REF:  BAGHDAD 4163  1.  (SBU) Summary:  Australian Ambassador Innes Brown called on EMIN December 28 to discuss possible areas where Australia could increase its economic assistance to Iraq.  The Government of Australia (GoA) has been tasked by PM Rudd to develop new initiatives by the end of January.  Innes Brown said that Australia is not interested in further contributions to the UN-World Bank led IRFFI.  Australia may be willing to support projects - including co-financing with us or other bilateral donors -- in the fields of health and agriculture (particularly dry land agriculture), as well as training in third countries.  End summary.  2.  (U) EMIN met December 28 with Australian Ambassador to Iraq Mark Innes Brown to discuss economic and assistance opportunities in Iraq.  Ambassador Innes Brown said that following his visit to Baghdad (reftel), Australian PM Rudd had asked the Cabinet to examine ways for Australia to do more in economic assistance in Iraq as it withdraws forces.  The enhanced assistance plan is to be completed by the end of January.  3.   (SBU) Innes Brown said the GoA had an unhappy experience with its contributions to IRFFI.  Much of the money was chewed up in high UN system overhead charges and there was little transparency or recognition of the contributions.  Thus a presumption behind the review is that if Australia does something new for Iraq it will be either of a bilateral character or co-financed with another donor.   4.  (U) Innes Brown suggested that the GoA is most interested in projects in the fields of health and agriculture, and perhaps some offshore capacity development training, perhaps focused on the Council of Representatives (CoR).  He said he anticipated that the GoA would be happy to contribute to "good projects that someone else manages" as long as there is recognition for Australia.  5.  (U) On health, Ambassador Innes Brown was interested in the possibility of supporting training for basic health care professionals who would work in primary health centers (the U.S. is completing a network of 140 PHC's built with IRRF funds).   EMIN noted the U.S. is starting such a project and would arrange for HHS Attache Himmler to provide more details.  Ambassador Innes Brown seemed most interested in finding a discrete aspect of this program the Australians could cite as their own, even if managed Qhe U.S. implementing partner.  Specialized training delivered off-shore might be such a possibility, since the U.S. intends to deliver basic training in-country.  6.  (U) The agriculture sector seemed to offer another possibility. Australia provides assistance to the International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) in Aleppo, Syria. Ambassador Innes Brown said that ICARDA is piloting some drought resistant strains of wheat and barley in Ninewa and Tamim this year.  The GoA may want to support more of this work.  Ambassador Innes Brown said there were no IPR restrictions on the seedlines developed by ICARDA, as it is Qember of the ConsuQtive Group on International Agricultural Research.   He added that the GoA had already decided to support 100 one-year long research fellowships for agricultural scientists in Australia.  As Australia also has dry land agricultural challenges, they think this is a good fit for Iraq, and similar to other long-term training funded by Australia in the past.  7.  (SBU) Finally, Ambassador Innes Brown said the GoA may be interested in doing something additional in the field of ministerial capacity, probably also involving offshore training.  The Australian Embassy has already agreed with CoR Speaker Mashadani to send a CoR delegation to Canberra in the summer, focused on issues of federal/state financing.  The logic is that since Australia has a parliamentary system in a federal structure, they have something to offer here.  8.  (U) EMIN tried to interest Ambassador Innes Brown in cooperating on other ongoing U.S. assistance programs, including small and medium sized enterprise credit programs,  but found little immediate take-up for those ideas.  CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000016  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO SEPSTEIN, NEA-I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IZ, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR US SPONSORED TRAINING FOR AL SADOON   1. This is an action request.  2.  Pursuant to the Leahy Act and Foreign Assistance Act, post requests the Department's assistance in screening the following candidates of the Iraqi Security Forces who have been nominated for training in the United States.  Post has no derogatory information.  3.  The names of the proposed candidates are as follows:  NAME: Maher Riyadh Hamood AL SADOON POSITION:  LTC, Iraqi Army DOB:  March 16, 1970 TYPE OF TRAINING:  Executive Seminar TRAINING LOCATION: NESA, Washington, DC DATES OF TRAINING: January 23 to February 14, 2008  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000019  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: A HARD COR BATTLE OVER PROVINCIAL POWERS?  REF: A. BAGHDAD 3949      B. BAGHDAD 3730  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Robert Waller for reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary: Of all the legislation that Iraq's Council of Representatives (CoR) will grapple with in 2008, none will do more to shape the future of Iraq politically than the Provincial Powers law.  Because Iraq's Constitution is deliberately ambiguous about the balance of power between Iraq's central government and its provinces, the debate over the Provincial Powers law is forcing legislators to define and codify the meaning of Iraqi federalism as never before. At the center of those efforts, ISCI Deputy Bloc leader Hummam Hammoudi is leading an effort to reconcile two competing draft bills.  The first, or "CoR Draft," received a first and second reading in early 2007 and generally favors decentralization.  The second, or "PMO Draft," was written at PM Maliki's behest and favors stronger central government control.  CoR members have yet to resolve three points of contention between the two bills: the appointment and dismissal of governors; the appointment and dismissal of district officials; and control over Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) in times of emergency.  These are questions that the Iraqis must resolve among themselves -- trying to impose a USG solution would likely be counterproductive in the short run (suggesting additional changes at this point is likely to only delay the law's adoption) and could well prove disastrous in the long run (if the resultant political structure never achieves popular legitimacy).  Rather than advocating specific provisions, Post is therefore encouraging all party blocs to work toward a consensus.  If a consensus is not reached and a controversial law is passed by a slim majority, there is a risk that, once the regions law goes into effect in April 2008, provinces may elect to form themselves into regions in order to avoid being subject to the provisions of an unpopular Provincial Powers law.  End summary.  A Guide for the Perplexed -------------------------  2. (C) Of all the legislation that Iraq's Council of Representatives (CoR) will grapple with in 2008, none will do more to shape the future of the Iraqi polity than the Provincial Powers law.  Because Iraq's Constitution is deliberately ambiguous about the balance of power between Iraq's central government and its provinces, the debate over the Provincial Powers law is forcing legislators to define and codify the meaning of Iraqi federalism as never before.  3. (C) Even Maimonides might find himself confused by the multiple iterations of the Provincial Powers law floating around the CoR.  Fortunately, there are only three versions worth knowing about, and of those, only two that really count:  -- The CoR Draft.  Drafted by the CoR's Committee of Regions and Governorate Affairs, this is the version of the law that received a first and second reading in early 2007, was updated in the spring to reflect some 600 suggestions encapsulated in a report produced by that same committee, and in mid-summer was unceremoniously shunted off to the Shura Council.  It has languished there ever since, due to active opposition from Prime Minister Maliki and his staff and a surprising degree of political acumen from the supposedly apolitical Shura Council (which is apparently loathe to bite the hand that feeds it electricity and other perks).  -- The Prime Minister's Office (PMO) Draft.  Unhappy with the CoR draft's emphasis on decentralization, the Prime Minister tapped his Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, Dr. Safa al-Safi, to form a committee and produce an alternative bill favoring a strong central government.  Dr. Safa enlisted the aid of the Acting Minister of Provincial Affairs, Hasan al-Sari, as well as legal advisors from the PMO and the Shura Council.  This draft is reportedly with the Shura Council as well, and has neither been approved by the Council of Ministers nor formally transmitted to the CoR.  -- The Leaders' Draft.  In their August 26 communiqu, the GOI's political leaders claimed to have reached an agreement on the Provincial Powers law.  It quickly became apparent that they had done little more than to agree that, in principle, they should agree to something on Provincial Powers sometime.  Fortunately, their deputies continued to meet for a short time afterwards and managed to produce an incomplete version of the law based on the earlier CoR draft.  For reasons that remain unhappily vague, this draft was neither completed nor transmitted to the CoR, and now appears to be dead in the water (for more details on the content of the Leaders' draft, see para 13).   BAGHDAD 00000019  002 OF 003   Where the Action Is -------------------  4. (C) Based on the above, one might reasonably assume that the Shura Council is the current locus of all activity on Provincial Powers.  In reality, the Shura Council is merely acting as a repository -- the legislative equivalent of a parking garage.  All of the real action on the Provincial Powers law is taking place among the CoR's various political blocs, with ISCI Deputy bloc leader Hummam Hammoudi (who also chairs the CoR's Constitutional Review Committee) leading an effort to resolve six points of contention between the CoR Draft and the PMO Draft.  Of those six points, Hammoudi claims to have successfully brokered compromises on four, leaving (in a mathematically rational universe) two unresolved.  Iraq apparently being unfettered by mathematical convention, Hammoudi then enumerated three unresolved issues:  --  Who has the power to hire and fire governors? --  Who has the authority to appoint and dismiss district officials? --  Who controls Iraqi Security Forces in the event of a provincial emergency?  In a December 27 meeting (reported septel), Hammoudi said that he would have already ironed out compromises on these final points as well if not for the hajj break that began on December 6.  Assuming that an agreement is forthcoming, Post will urge that the resultant compromises be incorporated into the CoR Draft prior to its third and final reading (rather than be enshrined in a brand new draft, which would necessitate three full readings in the CoR).  One PM to Rule Them All . . . -----------------------------  5. (C) The first of Hammoudi's unresolved points, the question of who can hire/fire governors, is an example of artful murkiness by the authors of the Iraqi Constitution. The CoR Draft takes an expansive view of the powers of the Provincial Council (PC), allowing the PC to elect the Governor from inside or outside its members.  The PM, in contrast, is limited to issuing a pro forma decree appointing the Governor to office within fifteen days of the Governor assuming office.  The CoR draft includes two options for dismissing a governor.  The first requires one-third of the PC's members to request the Governor be fired; this motion must then pass the PC by an absolute majority.  The second option allows the CoR to fire a Governor upon the recommendation of the PM and provided that an absolute majority of CoR members agree.  6. (C) In contrast, the PMO Draft endows the PM with much stronger authority.  Like the CoR Draft, it stipulates that a Governor be elected by the PC and that the PM then issue a decree appointing the Governor to office (Articles 10 and 33).  Likewise, the PMO Draft parallels the CoR Draft by allowing the PC to dismiss a governor with an absolute majority of its members.  The critical difference between the two is that the PMO Draft allows the PM to remove a governor if asked to do so by as little as one-fourth of the PC members, potentially enabling the PM to exert disproportionate influence in provinces where he enjoys little support on the Provincial Council.  (Maliki's failed attempt to oust Basrah Governor Wa'eli (Fadhila) may well have been the inspiration for this particular provision.)  In the wrong hands, such power could do much sectarian harm.  7. (C)  Similarly, at the local council (Qada) or sub-district council level (Nahiya), the CoR Draft gives more authority to the councils in electing or dismissing Chairmen, Deputies, and District/Sub-district Directors.  The PMO's version allows for the majority of members of a relevant local council to appoint/elect a District Director or Sub-district Director, but the PM must then make these appointments valid.  This level of influence is of considerable concern to certain parties, such as ISCI, which are pushing for more decentralization.  A Bi-opoly on the Use of Force? -------------------------------  8. (C) The CoR Draft enables the PCs to approve security plans submitted to them by provincial security institutions in the provinces through the Governor, and to approve the assignment of directors of security-related "apparatus" (sic) based on recommendations by the Governor.  It allows for these same security officials to be terminated based on a majority vote of the PC following a request by one-fourth of the PC members, or by the Governor (who must show cause).  It also provides the Governor with control over provincial security forces (e.g., the police), with the exception of the Iraqi Army.  However, in situations where the Governor  BAGHDAD 00000019  003 OF 003   decides that the provincial security forces under his command are insufficient, he may refer the matter to the PM, laying out his need for additional forces to perform these activities.  In emergencies when there is no time to consult the PM, the Governor can temporarily take control as Commander of the ISF in the province.  9. (C) The PMO Draft does not permit the Governor to assume control of ISF forces during an emergency in which there is not time to consult the PM.  It does, however, give the PM extraordinary oversight in issuing statements/orders to administrative units, which are required for maintenance of security.  VP Hashimi is unusually aligned with PM Maliki over this issue of maintaining national control of ISF forces during emergencies, and has mentioned in meetings that this area of the law needs further clarification (ref B).  Other Differences -----------------  10. (C) Other areas of significant difference between the two drafts include dissolving PCs, legislative authority, control over financial resources, and approving administrative decisions on provincial boundaries.  In the CoR Draft, a PC can decide to dissolve itself by an absolute majority of its members, based on a request of one-third of the members. However, the CoR also has the right to dissolve a PC by an absolute majority vote in the CoR, based on a request by the Governor or one-third of the PC members.  In the PMO version, the CoR (based on a request by one-fourth of the PC membership), the PM, or the Governor all have the right to dissolve a PC with an absolute majority vote.  (Note:  The language is unclear whether it is referring to an absolute majority of the CoR or PC.  End note).  The PM version, as a result, opens up the opportunity for the CoR and PM to exercise their influence at the provincial level.  11. (C) In the area of legislative authority, the CoR Draft allows the PC to issue domestic legislation, regulations, by-laws and systems for regulating financial and administrative affairs, as long as they do not contradict the Constitution or national law.  In stark contrast, the PMO Draft allows PCs to propose laws but requires that the proposals be submitted to the Council of Ministers (CoM) for study and -- if the CoM concurs -- action.  (Note:  The PMO Draft is ambiguous about whether these draft laws would need to be submitted to the CoR or not after the CoM.  End note). The net effect is to give the PMO pocket veto authority over any and all provincial legislation.  12. (C)  In regards to financial resources/budget, the CoR version provides a province with a financial budget from the GOI that is prepared by the Ministry of Finance and approved by the CoR.  However, the PMO version only requires that the budget be granted by the GOI, with no mention of CoR approval.  Regarding the approval of administrative changes to districts (or sub-districts), and provinces, the CoR version gives this authority to the PCs, based on a recommendation by the Governor.  The PMO Draft of the law, however, requires the PC to propose to the CoM any administrative changes to boundaries.  This gives the national government (and thus the PM) considerably more authority than the CoR's version, particularly over potentially sensitive boundary issues between provinces, districts, and sub-districts.  Leaders' Draft --------------  13. (C) The Leaders' Draft favors decentralization.  It provides for Governors to be elected by the PC and to be fired by two-thirds of the PC.  In addition, members of the PC (with an absolute majority) and members of the CoM (by simple majority) and one-third of the CoR and Presidency Council have the right to file a case before the Federal Court to remove the Governor for justified reasons.  This version gives considerable authority to the PCs in appointing directors of security agencies, but requires that the nominations be submitted to the relevant GOI minister. Control over security forces is not addressed clearly.  As for dissolving the Provincial Councils themselves, the Leaders' Draft stipulates that a simple majority of the CoM, the Presidency Council, and one-third of the members of the CoR can submit a lawsuit to the Federal Court in order to dissolve a PC. (Note:  The draft law does not specify whether the filing of a lawsuit in federal court will itself be enough to dissolve a PC, or whether a legal finding must be made.  End note). CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000020  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KPAO, ECON, IZ SUBJECT: A GREAT BARGAIN IN BAGHDAD: DOURA MARKET REVIVES DUE TO SECURITY GAINS  Classified By: Political Counselor Ellen Germain, for reasons 1.4 (b,d) .  1.  (U) The Doura Market in Baghdad's Rashid district -- formerly one of the city's most dangerous areas -- has experienced a rebirth over the course of the past six months due to significant gains in security for residents of the Doura neighborhood.  The improvements are visible and measurable.  Since June, the number of open shops has increased from 15 to 451, half of the market's capacity of approximately 900 shops.  Though it was a thriving center of commerce before the war, in 2006 and early 2007 Doura Market became a major target for improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and mass casualty attacks carried out by insurgents and terrorists.  Primarily due to efforts by Coalition Forces, aided by the increasingly effective Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and the installation of hardened T-walls, the market and its surrounding areas have experienced a notable revitalization.  The local Battalion reported that another major factor in the market's renewal was the enrollment of many local unemployed and under-employed males in the Concerned Local Citizens (CLC) group, through which they have helped to provide security to the Doura neighborhood.  The Battalion has also worked with Iraqi Security Forces to keep black market activities, such as illicit fuel sales, off the highways and main roads that pass through Doura.  2.  (U) Representatives of the Baghdad PRT and the EPRT covering Rashid district observed the renewed vibrancy during a December 22 tour of Doura Market.  Hundreds of customers -) apparently Sunni, Shia, and Christian, according to locals and the Battalion -) were present along the several blocks of the market area.  The customers crowded into the stalls and shops.  Women in hijabs and head-to-toe abayas shopped alongside women in western dress.  The stores were full of merchandise.  Garbage trucks were visible on the streets, clearing trash and debris.  Locals reported that the schools were in session and that some IDPs, including Christians, have begun returning to their homes in Doura.  3.  (C) Larger issues continue to plague Doura, however, including mounting tension between province- and city-wide institutions, on the one hand, and the Rashid District Council and Doura Neighborhood Council, on the other.  (NOTE: This tension plagues inter-governmental relations in many other Baghdad districts and neighborhoods.  END NOTE.)  The Provincial Council, the Governor, and the Amanat -- all dominated by Shia political parties -- question the legitimacy of the Rashid district and neighborhood councils, in part, locals claim, because the councils include Sunni representatives.  Also, locals report that the Amanat has not provided adequate resources to its Rashid district office (or "Beladiya"), thereby hampering provision of essential services to the entire Rashid district.  Moreover, Coalition Forces continue to pay for CLC salaries and for trash pick-up in the Doura neighborhood.  (NOTE: The USG currently funds the garbage collection program from which Doura and other Baghdad neighborhoods benefit.  This program will end in 2008, potentially releasing into the ranks of the unemployed approximately 20,000 workers in Baghdad, unless the GoI or the Amanat begins to pay their salaries.  END NOTE.)  To help the GoI to address these issues, and other upcoming challenges, the Baghdad PRT, EPRT, and 4/1 Brigade Combat Team continue to facilitate constructive dialogue among the leaders of local, provincial and national institutions. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000021  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 TAGS: ECON, ETRD, EFIN, PREL, MARR, ENRG, MOPS, NBTS, IZ SUBJECT: DPM TO AMBASSADOR: "THERE IS NO POLITICAL WILL"  REF: BAGHDAD 00003  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) Summary.  Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih spiced a 30 December meeting with Ambassador and CG Petraeus with complaints that his colleagues in government lacked the political will needed to steer the country away from civil war in 2008.  He avoided being drawn into any constructive discussion of trying to launch the New Year with an ambitious legislative agenda.  However, he did commit to make personal efforts necessary to address pressing problems of the removal of radioactive materials from Tuwaitha, conduct his own anti-corruption conference, and resolve problems of Turkish electricity supplies to Dohuk province.  End Summary.  "Making Government Work" ------------------------  2. (S) Ambassador Crocker met with DPM -- and Acting Prime Minister -- Barham Salih on December 30, accompanied by CG Petraeus, EMIN, and DCG LtGen Rollo.  Ambassador and CG sought to encourage the DPM to embrace a wide-ranging effort to start 2008 as the Year of Making Government Work.  He hoped that, upon the return of President Talabani to Baghdad from holiday in Sulaymaniyah (2 or 3 January, per DPM), and the PM from medical tests in London (date unknown), a quorum could quickly be achieved in Councils of Ministers and Representatives (CoM and CoR, respecitvely).  Ambassador stressed that that it would be imperative for the GoI to prove itself able of conducting the business of the country, in drafting and passing urgent legislation, pushing services out to the people, taking control of the country's security, re-energizing the Legislative Preparatory Committee -- A Year for Iraqi Institutions.  3. (S) DPM responded that 2008 would either be the Year of Success, or the Year of Disaster, if Iraq squanders the gains made in security.  "If there is no political will, the Legislative Preparatory Committee is a waste of time -- and there is no political will."  Ambassador asked him what he saw as the alternative.  DPM responded, "The issue is political will.  We can go through the motions, put check marks in boxes, but that will all be window-dressing." Ambassador expressed the hope that smart people in positions of influence do recognize what's at stake, and that the DPM was not throwing up his hands in surrender, to which the DPM replied only "I've made clear my opinion ..."  The CG suggested that passage of legislation on accountability, the justice system, and budget would be needed within days, not weeks.  The DPM offered that the amnesty law is in draft, and the budget well along, but expressed little enthusiasm for "the other stuff, like the oil law."  SOFA and Other Priority Issues ----------------  4. (S) Ambassador brought up the subject of the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) security portion of the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA).  He noted that Iraq has only one more year in special status under the UNSCR and encouraged the DPM to find a way to get down to serious business on the SFA, stressing that getting the right people in the room from the beginning would be critical.  The DPM agreed, emphasizing that those involved must have to have full authority to negotiate.  Ambassador pointed to the problems of services, of unemployment, and of the situation in Basra, and suggested that the DPM search for ways to drain some of the animosity out of the political climate.  Ambassador said he would push hard, as leaders returned, for the different parties to return to the project of governing, and stressed the importance of the first meeting of political leaders not "imploding."  DPM responded that he hoped it would be possible to bring up the SFA in the first week in which the President, PM, and CoR are all in Baghdad.  He then stated, "We could have a real civil war if we don't get the politics right.  This won't be a conflict with Al Qaeda -- this will be civil war."  National Investment Law and Commission ------------------------  5. (S) Ambassador noted that the new nominee for head of the National Investment Commission appeared to be on track for eventual confirmation.  DPM said he was not acquainted with the nominee, having met him only once, but had heard both good and indifferent things about him.  "Some say, he's worked only for government his whole professional life -- how can he promote private investment?" he wondered.  He stated that, even without formal CoR confirmation, the Investment Commission Head nominee could begin work.  Ambassador urged  BAGHDAD 00000021  002 OF 002   that the CoR move quickly to confirm, nonetheless.  Anti-Corruption Conference ----------------  6. (S) DPM confirmed that, despite the absence of the PM, he intended to keep to the scheduled January 3, 2008 date for the GoI's anti-corruption conference, which he intended to use to establish unambiguous procedures through which to confront the problem in Iraq.  Dohuk Electricity Cut-Off Threat ------------------  7. (S) DPM stated that the CoM had approved the same day (30 December) renewal of the electricity delivery contract with Turkey, under same terms, for the next six months.  He said payment of the existing $20 mn float charge (referred to as "arrears") will be made, and that this should resolve for the immediate term the crisis in Dohuk.  Tuwaitha Radioactive Materials Shipment ----------------------------------------  8. (S) Ambassador thanked the DPM for efforts to push removal of irradiators and yellow cake uranium materials from Iraq within the next days.  DPM sought verification that of actions immediately required: Ministry of Foreign Affairs notification to IAEA of intention to break seals; GoI instructions to the Iraqi Facilities Protection Force to allow the 90-plus member technical team access to specific buildings on the Tuwaitha site to pack the materials for shipment; and formal GoI authorization for all pertinent materials to be removed from the site and the country.  He promised to push the process forward.  COMMENT --------  9. (S) DPM Barham Salih seemed particularly glum in the meeting, countering most suggestions for the need for energetic efforts to bring true governance to Iraq with dire predictions of civil war generated by rivalries and the absence of political will to do right by the country.  This may have been connected to his expressed lack of joy at being Acting Prime Minister while the PM addressed his medical concerns -- an event that interrupted his plans to pass the New Year in Sulaymaniyah with his immediate family, forcing him to decamp to Baghdad.  END COMMENT. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000023  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 TAGS: IR, IZ, PGOV SUBJECT: PRT MAYSAN: IA OFFICIALS SHARE SECURITY CONCERNS  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1.  (U) This is a PRT Maysan reporting cable.  2.  (C) Summary:  In private and official discussions the Iraqi Army 10th Division Commander and his Maysan Brigade Commander expressed concern over the security situation in al-Amarah since the December 12 bombing.  They advised that an ongoing series of successful raids on insurgents and criminals made the population nervous, and that it would not be prudent for PRT staff to conduct project visits at the present time.  However, they said they would be able to provide full security for future visits when the situation was calmer.  The officers added that provincial officials were complying with the ongoing operations.  End Summary.  3. (C) While arranging a meeting for PRT staff on December 30, PRT Bilingual Bicultural Advisor (BBA) briefly chatted with the Iraqi Army (IA) 10th Division Commander Major General Habib Talib Abbas al-Husayn and his Maysan Brigade Commander, Brigadier General Nabil Yasin Ibrahim.  The following day, PRT Deputy Team Leader (DTL) paid a courtesy call on General Habib to discuss the security situation in Maysan.  The (In)Security Situation --------------------------  4. (C) Asked about Maysan,s security situation and the status of the Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM), Habib answered with three points: 1) JAM provides the linkage for &other countries8, 2) JAM receives training from &other countries8, and 3) there are different kinds of JAM in the province.  Although he initially used 'other countries' to mean Iran, Syria and Saudi Arabia he later only mentioned Iran.  He mentioned a new group forming in Maysan called the &Ashab al-Qadiyya8 (Friends of the Cause), made up of disaffected or rejected JAM members.  He added that this new group was receiving considerable outside support.  He noted that while Muthanna and Nasiriyah were quiet, there was &no stability8 in Maysan at the present time.  Asked about the prospects of the PRT traveling to the province to visiting ongoing and planned projects, he sought to reassure us, saying, &We have control.  We have strength.  We had a request from Baghdad to take control of the security situation.8  Warning to Provincial Officials -------------------------------  5. (C) Habib indicated that during his last visit to Amarah in the wake of the December 12, 2007 bombing, he spoke with members of the Provincial Council and representatives of the Governor.  He told them that he had to fix the security situation and warned them not to get in his way.  Habib added that he met with the Chief of Police (COP), giving him a &strong message8 and saying that he needed to make sure that he had their full cooperation.  He said &that,s why we changed the chief of police8.  Habib confirmed IA was conducting regular, house-by-house raids, successfully catching both insurgents and criminals, and that provincial officials had not resisted these operations.  No JAM-Badr Reconciliation --------------------------  6. (C) Asked about the possibility of renewed JAM-Badr Corps fighting in Maysan, Habib answered, &they will never reconcile8 adding, &Badr supports the Coalition.  We (IA) support the Coalition.  JAM blames Badr for the problems.8 Regarding Moqtada al-Sadr,s (MAS) recent renewal of the six-month &freeze8, Habib observed, &Sadr changed his mind because of the bad reputation of the Sadrists.  He wants to give JAM a nice image; many people are criticizing him.8  Full support for PRT visits ---------------------------  8. (C) Understanding our strong interest in visiting project sites and provincial officials in Maysan, Habib repeatedly assured us of his readiness to control the situation and provide security.  He made clear that he would spare no resource to ensure we had full protective cover while traveling and were able to visit project sites.  Asked when we might be able to go, he said &It will be no problem.  We will take you, but at the appropriate time.  We will get you there and back safely, but we need a little time.8  In a personal visit with the BBA the day before, Habib said, &Right now, don,t go.  If you want my advice, stay here.  I can provide IA security when you do go, and your team will have no problem.8  Nabil: We need more time  BAGHDAD 00000023  002 OF 002   ------------------------  9. (C) During the BBA,s brief hallway encounter, Nabil confided that since the bombing the security situation in Maysan was very bad.  He said authorities had indeed caught the perpetrators who confessed under interrogation to being JAM members receiving support from Iran.  Nabil told the BBA that Iran-sponsored JAM had &taken over the city (Amarah)8.  He clarified that they weren,t Farsi-speaking Persians but JAM members being paid by Iran.  Asked about the purpose of the bombing, he opined that the Iranians needed violence to keep things unstable and that they did not want any safety or success in the south.  Nabil insisted that he still needed time to clean out the insurgents.  He added that they often did raids at night, and that the people were feeling insecure.  He also noted that the confessions of the bombers provided useful intelligence that led to some successful raids.  Nabil said they were arresting both criminals and insurgents, and that he would let us know when it was safe to visit. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000026  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE PASS TO CAPT. BILL JENSEN, NEA/I POLMIL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 TAGS: IZ, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PINS, PNAT, PTER SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR IRAQI MINISTER OF DEFENSE ABDEL QADR JASIM AL-MIFRIJI  Classified By: Classified by Ambassador Ryan Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1. (S) Iraqi Minister of Defense Abdel Qadr arrives in Washington against a backdrop of encouraging news about security in Iraq, still tentative legislative progress, and just as the USG SOFA negotiating team begins its preliminary work prior to its initial meeting with the GOI later this month.  The timing of this visit is advantageous because it affords an opportunity to encourage the minister to actively engage in the formation of an Iraqi negotiating team that is knowledgeable and inclusive and for his remaining actively engaged throughout the talks. It would also be useful to discuss the Turkey-PKK crisis, gain his perspective on the development of the Iraqi military, reassure him we are doing all we can to speed up equipment deliveries in the USG Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program, and to reiterate the message the Secretary delivered during her visit on the need for progress on the political agenda. He will be candid in discussing the strengths and weaknesses of Iraqi military forces and the requirement for a long-term relationship with the United States, which he has publicly endorsed.  Turkey/PKK ----------  2. (S) Abdel Qadr quickly grasped the negative domestic and international optics of a GOI "slow to take charge" following the October 7 PKK cross border ambush of Turkish soldiers, and he pressed for immediate action to avoid military escalation.  In this vein, Abdel Qadr led a GOI delegation (including KRG reps) to Ankara October 26 to detail steps the GOI would take to rein in the PKK and was with General Petraeus to transfer the eight Turkish Army hostages back to Turkish control. He also indicated a willingness to have a Turkish counter-terrorism expert work with the GOI in Iraq. In GOI cabinet-level meetings, however, he has been highly critical of Turkish cross-border incursions. We should commend Abdel Qadr for his pro-active approach to the border situation and underscore the need to maintain the security measures taken by the GOI and KRG such as increased surveillance at airports, increased checkpoints, closure of PKK offices, and denial of supplies and materiel to PKK encampments.  3. (S) Abdel Qadr should be a part of our longer term strategy of encouraging a political solution to the problem through diplomatic engagements between GOI and GOT officials. If Turkish Deputy Chief of Defense Saygun makes his promised trip to Iraq to meet with MNF-I Commanding General Petraeus, he should also meet with Abdel Qadr.  Abdel Qadr has demonstrated that he is a serious interlocutor on this matter and should reinforce the GOI message publicly and privately that the PKK is a terrorist organization and has no place in Iraq.  Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) ---------------------------------  4. (S) During negotiations on UNSCR renewal and Declaration of Principles, the GOI used a small, select staff from the Prime Minister's office for most discussions. A Sunni, Abdel Qadr will likely agree that this small circle should expanded into a more inclusive body before beginning negotiations on the Long Term Security Relationship (LTSR). Abdel Qadr's trip is a welcome opportunity to convey the message that Iraq's team must include appropriate technical experts from MOD and enjoy the support of all political groups. During discussions in Washington, we should emphasize to Abdel Qadr the scale of negotiations and requirement for lawyers and specialists who understand military, security, and technical issues. Moreover, we strongly suggest the Iraqi delegation include working-level representatives from government organs such as the Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Health, Customs, Transportation, Communications, Finance, Labor and Environment. As background, the full-time USG negotiating team will have 11 members with about 30 technical experts on-hand as necessary to discuss individual issues.  Force Development -----------------  5. (C) Abdel Qadr has presided over a major transformation of  BAGHDAD 00000026  002 OF 003   the Iraqi Army--there are already over 160,000 "trained and equipped" Iraqi soldiers deployed throughout Iraq. In 2007 alone, the Iraqi Army added 42,800 soldiers while simultaneously prosecuting the war. By 2010, the Iraqi armed forces is expected to include an army of over 260,000 soldiers, an air force of 8,000 airmen, and a navy of 2,500 sailors. Abdel Qadr has said he intends it to be equal to other armed forces in the region. He described his greatest challenge as establishing a strong logistics and training system to sustain the planned force.  Along these lines, he has told us that this year would see an emphasis on building infrastructure to support the forces and providing proper maintenance facilities at each operating base. Abdel Qadr has since followed up with funding allocations and contractual obligations to secure this effort. Since infrastructure remains the Achilles Heel in the Iraqi force structure, we should commend his efforts and encourage his continued emphasis in this critical area.  FMS vs. Other Weapons Purchases -------------------------------  6. (C) In discussions with the Ambassador, Abdel Qadr said he is pleased with the USG Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program and applauded the support of the Multi-National Security Transition Command-Iraq (MNSTC-I) during the past year. He has described the training component included in FMS packages as especially valuable. He understands well that FMS eliminates the risk of corruption and ensures quality equipment but has also been very frustrated with the pace of deliveries. Recently Abdel Qadr has sought alternate sources of equipment from Romania, Serbia, Ukraine, and China. Last month, Qadr signed agreements worth $230 million with Serbia's state arms dealer Yugoimport for personal protection equipment, machine guns, mortars, and sniper rifles. This visit will be an opportunity to explain in detail what we are doing to address Iraqi concerns to speed up the FMS process. Last week, Abdel Qadr signed Letters of Request to the USG for pricing and availability on major long term purchases of M1 tanks, LAV-25, 120mm mortars, and the OH-58 helicopters.  ACSA ----  7. (S) On 13 December, the Deputy Commanding General of MNSTC-I briefed the MinDef regarding the need to move ahead with negotiations on an Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA). MNSTC-I estimates that an ACSA would greatly accelerate almost one-third of recurring logistics cases now covered by FMS.  The MinDef agreed to develop an ACSA but several follow-on meetings with his staff have been cancelled. We should encourage Abdel Qadr to continue the process as a means of relieving stress on the FMS system and speeding up delivery of critical logistics services.  Biographical ------------  8. (S) Although MinDef Abdel Qadr has now donned a business suit, he still carries the unmistakable air of a soldier. He is proud of his combat experience, as well as his survival in Saddam's prisons during the nineties for his opposition to the war with Kuwait. This toughness has served him well as an independent Sunni minister, and from our perspective, he has been a very effective apolitical and non-sectarian minister. He sees the ministry very much as his own. As a former general officer, however, he does not believe that he needs the advice of his senior military leadership, an approach that has caused strains between him and the Chief of the Defense Forces, GEN Babakyr Shawkt.  9. (S) With significant Coalition assistance, the Ministry of Defense is considered the best-run, most efficient relative to other Iraqi ministries and the MinDef has taken a strong stance against corruption and appearances of it within the MOD. Prime Minister Maliki continues to follow Abdel Qadr's advice on important security issues like the timing of Basrah's return to Provincial Iraqi Control, as well as the filling of highly sensitive military leadership positions. Although he is comfortable with some small-talk in English, he will use a translator for any substantive discussions.  10. (C) In our experience, Abdel Qadr has been willing to  BAGHDAD 00000026  003 OF 003   talk to Congress about the Iraqi security strategy and plans to rebuild the Iraqi military. We should take advantage of any opportunity to include members of Congress in his scheduled events or encourage the Iraqis to arrange additional private meetings with them if the schedule permits. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000035  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/03/2017 TAGS: ECON, EPET, ENRG, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: BETTER SUPPLY AND MANAGEMENT REDUCE SOME BLACK MARKET FUEL PRICES  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ,d).  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Summary: Black market benzene and diesel prices in Mosul have fallen since August but still remain above the government price for each fuel.  Increases in benzene supply, a slight seasonal reduction in benzene demand, and improved Iraqi discipline and management of fuel distribution are some of the factors contributing to the lower prices.  Winter demand kept the kerosene black market price consistently high through December.  The long-term solutions to meeting local demand and reducing black market profitability and corruption include increased fuel supply through imports and parity between official and world fuel prices.  Benzene and Diesel Prices Fall, Kerosene Remains High --------------------------------------------- --------  2.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) The average black market price for regular benzene in Mosul fell from Iraqi Dinar (ID) 925/liter (USD 0.74) in mid-August 2007 to about ID 700/liter (USD 0.56) in mid-December 2007, according to Coalition Force surveys and Oil Products Distribution Company-Northern Branch (OPDC) statistics.  Mosul residents reported that over the same period the quoted government price for a liter of benzene rose from ID 350/liter (USD 0.28) to ID 500 (approx. USD 0.40).  Benzene delivery from the Baiji Oil Refinery (BOR) increased at least 35 percent during the same time period.  3.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) The average black market diesel price in Mosul fell from ID 700/liter (USD 0.56) in mid-August to ID 633/liter (USD 0.51) in mid-December, while the quoted government price stayed constant at ID 400/liter (USD 0.32).  Diesel delivery decreased 18 percent during the time period.  4.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Kerosene prices in Mosul began in August at ID 769/liter (USD 0.62), moved up to about ID 825/liter (USD 0.66) in September and October and dropped back to only ID 700/liter in December, compared to a quoted government price increase over the same period from ID 150/liter (USD 0.12) to ID 200/liter (USD 0.16).  Kerosene delivery from the BOR tripled between August and December.  5.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Businessmen, farmers and government officials from Mosul and outlying areas of western, southern and eastern Ninewa corroborated the statistical picture of falling benzene and diesel black market prices.  These PRT contacts reported that queues were shorter and black market prices were down for benzene and diesel.  However, kerosene prices and shortages remained high or increased over the same period.  Improved Iraqi Administration Stretches Meager Supply --------------------------------------------- --------  6.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) OPDC-Northern Branch General Manager Mohamed al Zibari, who oversees fuel distribution for northern Iraq, has worked closely since September with the Mayor of Mosul, where two-thirds of Ninewa's three million people live, to enforce discipline in the fuel distribution system.  Working from an OPDC-Northern Branch schedule of deliveries, provincial officials followed up to check stations' supplies on hand and hours of operation.  In November alone, 25 gas stations were closed or fined for pulling fuel out of the official system and selling it at inflated prices on the black market, al Zibari said.  Al Zibari and the Mosul Mayor said they would like to replicate their enforcement system in the rest of the province.  7.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Al Zibari attributed some of this year's drop in the black market benzene price to increased consumer confidence as they recognized better accountability in the fuel distribution system.  This increased predictability, coupled with the increased benzene supply, reduced the need for consumers to grab any available benzene at exorbitant black market prices.  Alternatively, the kerosene market saw continued high prices because the increased supply from the BOR was overshadowed by Ninewa residents' increased demand for their perceived winter needs.  Ninewa residents told the PRT in the fall of 2007 that they planned to stockpile kerosene at up to three times the government price, contributing to a bidding war that reinforced black market profitability.  BAGHDAD 00000035  002 OF 002    Businessmen Would Trade Higher Prices for More Supply --------------------------------------------- --------  8.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Operating at full capacity, without restricted credit or security fears, Ninewa's economy would require 3 million liters/day of benzene, al Zibari said, based on estimates of personal and vehicle fuel usage.  In the current restrictive security and economic environment, he said the province only needed slightly more than the 1.1 million liters/day of benzene that it received.  As security and economic conditions improve, though, Iraqi officials would need much more benzene, diesel and kerosene, a demand Al Zibari said imports at the world price for each would have to meet.  9.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) Business owners and investors across Ninewa told the PRT in fall 2007 that they understood how the disparity between the official and black market fuel prices encouraged corruption.  They endorsed an increase in the official fuel price, with the understanding that the higher official price would attract increased private imports and reduce the black market's profitability.  They acknowledged that about one-quarter of Ninewa residents relied on the current officially priced fuel, for which they might wait in line seven days.  Few businesses or farmers could afford to wait so long for fuel, no matter how cheap, the Ninewa entrepreneurs said.  Comment: Increased Imports and Price Parity -------------------------------------------  10.  (C/REL AUS, GBR, CAN) While administrative improvements at the OPDC-Northern Branch are a good sign for GOI capacity, they will not solve the underlying problems in Iraqi fuel distribution: lack of sufficient supply and disparity between black market and government prices.  Iraqi refineries are unlikely in the short term to triple domestic supply, indicating that government or private imports must meet Iraqis' needs both during this winter's kerosene crunch and as the country's improving security demands more benzene for a growing economy.  If the government markets imports at the world price, it would meet the terms of the International Monetary Fund agreement with Iraq.  11.  (SBU) Simultaneously, official Iraqi fuel prices should be allowed to match the world price, incentivizing private importers and eliminating black marketers' windfall gain. Such a policy would help eliminate black market-driven corruption and provide a more steady supply of fuel to the businesses that need it to power Ninewa's economy.  However, increased official fuel prices would be politically untenable unless a system, such as the Social Safety Net, continued to provide for the poorest 25 percent of society that relies on cheap fuel. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000036  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  NEA/I:RSCHMIERER NEA/I-PM:TBETTS ISN/RA:KKESSLER S/I:KNUTT L/NPV:THISCH DOE:JSELLEN JS:SNORWOOD OSD:TBENNET  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2017 TAGS: ECON, PARM, PREL, IAEA, IZ SUBJECT: TUWAITHA UPDATE: MEETING AT MOST -- GOI LETTER TO IAEA SIGNED  REF: A. A. STATE 163968      B. B. BAGHDAD 4126      C. C. STATE 169324      D. D. BAGHDAD 2454      E. E. BAGHDAD 1787      F. F. BAGHDAD 734      G. G BAGHDAD 004227  Classified By: Charles Ries, Economic Minister, for Reasons 1.4 (B), (D ) and (H)   1.(S) Summary: Energy Attach and staff met at the Ministry of Science and Technology with Deputy Ministers Dr. Samir (RAOUF) and Dr. Fauad (Al-Musawi) and Director General of National Monitoring Mohammed Jawad "AL SHARA".  The purpose of the meeting was for NNSA to provide an overview of the activities the US Team at Tuwaitha to repackage and remove four irradiation sources and 550 metric tons of uranium yellow cake located on-site. In addition, Shara provided a copy of the GOI notification letter to the IAEA signed by him and stated that it had already been forwarded to the MFA for transmission to Vienna. MOST requested US assistance in purchasing a replacement irradiation capability. The US requested a written summary of the activities for which the replacement capability would be used in order to help determine the best option. MOST agreed to provide that information. While discussing next steps such as the MFA forwarding the GOI letter to the IAEA and appointment of an Iraqi to negotiate the sale of the yellow cake, MOST officials indicated that Surood (NAJIB) no longer held his post in the MFA.   IAEA Letter Provided  2.(S) Parks opened the meeting by thanking MOST for the excellent cooperation and support on-site for the US Team at Tuwaitha, citing specifically the access granted yesterday and today to remove the irradiation sources from Buildings 4 and 4A.  Al-Musawi and Shara noted that they understood from the MOST representatives on-site that the work  was going well.  Boudreau presented the overview briefing and answered questions. Shara asked if the yellow cake was going to be stored at Area C or moved. When told it would be moved from C to B for storage awaiting shipment, he asked that the US provide a letter stating its intention to move the material from C to B and out of the Country.  He also asked that we confirm that the repackaging would meet IAEA standards because "that is what our letter says."  Boudreau agreed to provide a letter and asked about the status of he GOI letter to the IAEA notifying the Agency that the seals on the bunker housing the yellow cake would be broken. Since the US had briefed Mr. Shara as requested and the briefing to MOST technical experts was ongoing at the site, could MOST send the letter.  Shara replied that the letter to the IAEA was already completed, signed by MOST and sent to the MFA for transmission to Vienna. He then handed over a copy of the letter, signed by him (see para. 7). The US thanked him for his prompt action on the notification letter.   Replacing the Irradiation Sources with Substitute Non-nuclear Devices   3.(S) MOST would like US assistance to procure a replacement for the irradiation sources that are being removed. Deputy Director Raouf made the key points regarding the importance to Iraq to have such a capability in order to support agricultural programs.  He stressed that Iraq wanted to replace the sources with something "safe."  Raouf further stated that Mrs. Nawal (Director General for the MOST Directorate of Agricultural Research and Food Science) is preparing a letter for the MOST Minister to sign formally requesting US assistance for a replacement irradiation capability. Parks stated that the US would work with Iraq on this issue and requested that MOST provide a list of expected uses for the alternate sources (Comment: The US has requested this information several times before. End Comment) Al-Musawi and Shara agreed to provide the information.  Sell it All/Value of the Uranium  4.(S) All three Iraqi officials stressed that Iraq wants the yellow cake sale to include all of the items inventoried. After some clarifying discussion, it seemed that they meant all of the items containing uranium, not just the large quantity of relatively pure uranium.  Recognizing that the details would be in the contract between Iraq and the international buyer, DOE has previously understood that the material inventory provided to potential buyers included various materials that would require significant investment to convert to a useable form. It is important to inform potential buyers that Iraq's goal is to have all of the material removed.  5.(SBU) Shara then noted that the price for the yellow cake was "easy" to estimate given the market price. Boudreau responded that while the spot price seemed to have stabilized, it could change significantly over time. In addition, he reminded Shara that none of the Tuwaitha material was in the form normally marketed (U3O8) as yellow cake.  All of the material would require additional processing.  The cost of that reprocessing would reduce the sale price. He stated that NNSA offers to act as technical advisor to Iraq regarding the uranium. Echoing the meeting held on 30 December with MOST Minister Fahmi (See Ref G BAGHDAD 004227), the US will work with Iraq to get the best value for the uranium, recognizing there must be some cost-sharing for the US repackaging and transporting the material.  Next Steps/Role of Najib in question  6.(S) In a discussion of next steps, DOE highlighted the need for the GOI to approve removal of the irradiation sources from Iraq and to designate an Iraqi representative to negotiate the commercial contract for the sale of the yellow cake.  Raouf noted that "all interested parties" in the Iraqi Government will be properly informed to ensure the sale and transfer go smoothly and professionally. When DOE raised Surood Najib's name in the context of selecting a GOI representative to negotiate a sales contract and the MFA role in the transmitting the IAEA letter, Al-Musawi responded that Najib had different responsibilities; Najib's former office would still transmit the notification letter to the IAEA.  7.(SBU) Text of GOI Letter to the IAEA:  Ministry of Science and Technology Iraqi National Monitoring Directorate Baghdad-IRAQ  Mr. Neville Whiting                       Confidential Date: 2 Jan. 2008 Acting Director, Operation B Dept. of Safeguards IAEA-Vienna  Sir:  Please be informed that the United States will begin repacking 550 MT of yellow cake at (IQY) location (C) Tuwaitha site in the near future.  We request the IAEA grant approval to break the seals needed to access the material to start the repacking process.  The United States will return the seals as instructed by the IAEA. We are very pleased with the level of support and cooperation by the IAEA in the ensuring this effort is consistent wtih all safeguards requirements.  Accept, Sir my highest consideration.  Cc: Mr. Herman Nackaerats, Director Operation B     Mr. Laure Pedraza, Operation B     Mr. Walter Veia-Espirnboza, Operation B                                             Mohammed Al Sharaa                                           D.G. INMD                                           Baghdad-Iraq   8. (U) Attendees  GOI   Dr. Samir (RAOUF), Deputy Minister  Dr. Fauad (Al-Musawi), Deputy Minister  Mohammed Jawad "AL SHARA", Director General of National Monitoring  Sundus Ahmed "MOUSA", Head of Computer & Administration  US  Edgar Parks, Energy Attach  Robert Boudreau, Senior NNSA Representative  Albert Walgreen, DOE Staff            CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000039  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/03/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: ANBAR POLITICAL LEADERS DISCUSS POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS WITH THE AMBASSADOR  REF: BAGHDAD 4224  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C)  Summary: Four Anbari leaders met with the Ambassador December 31, to highlight the newly formed Anbar Higher Committee (AHC) as a conflict-resolution mechanism in the province.  Anbar is eager to pursue an economic zone (EZ), perhaps in the city of al-Qaim.  The Anbaris noted the lack of support from the central GOI regarding service-delivery improvements in the area of oil/fuel products, electricity, water and sewage, Public Distribution System (PDS) rations, and security.  The Mayor of Nukhayb district in the Anbar Province also shared concerns over the GOI/MOI transferring security coverage to Karbala, and deep-seated fears the GOI will attempt to redraw or expand the Karbala provincial border into Nukhayb.  The Anbar leaders thanked the Ambassador and Coalition Forces (CF) for USG support during the past year in fighting against al-Qaeda, and asked for on-going support to resolve problems with the central GOI. End summary.  ANBAR HIGHER COMMITTEE ----------------------  2. (C) Former State Minister for Foreign Affairs, Rafe Al-Essawi informed the Ambassador of the formation of the "Anbar Higher Committee" (AHC) (ref A) on behalf of the four Anbar leaders present -- Governor of Anbar Ma'amoun Sami al-Alwani; Chairman of the Provincial Council Dr. Abdulsalam; Mayor of Nukhayb Sheikh Lawrence; and Sheikh Hameed Turki al-Shooka, Chairman of the Anbar Sheikhs Council.  He emphasized this new committee "will work as one team for Anbar."  He mentioned that the Anbar Higher Council (AHC) is working to develop a Sunni-Shi'a tribal delegation for the International Visitors Program (IVP) to be scheduled in February 2008. (Note:  This is a follow-up to the visit of the Anbar delegation from November 2007. End note). Provincial Council (PC) Chairman Abdulsalam also promoted the new AHC as a mechanism to promote inclusion of the tribes, to resolve conflicts in Anbar, and to continue fighting al-Qaeda.  ECONOMIC ZONE -------------  3. (C) PC Chairman Abdulsalam informed the Ambassador of Anbar's intent to pursue an economic zone in the upcoming year.  He added that the PC has a great relationship with DPM Saleh and that Anbari leaders would discuss this idea with him in the new year.  Anbar is in the process of identifying a location for the economic zone.  PC Chair Abdulsalam and Governor Ma'amoun asked for the Ambassador's support of this effort.  The Ambassador assured them he would engage DPM Saleh on this issue in the near future.  PROBLEMS WITH THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT ------------------------------------  4. (C) Governor Ma'amoun highlighted numerous problems with the central government, and highlighted service-delivery to the province as a particular problem.  "The electricity crisis," he said, "is getting much worse."  He lamented that Anbar does not see any help from the Ministry of Electricity on this problem.  Obtaining oil/fuel products is also very difficult.  He complained that the central GOI was extending offers for development to Syrian and Iranian companies.  The Governor expressed, however, that the Anbaris wanted American oil companies to develop any hydrocarbon resources in the province.  Similarly, on the project for the refinery in Haditha, the MoO was not adequately supporting the restart. He claimed that the GOI is not consulting with the Anbar PC or provincial government.  He asked for the Ambassador's support in trying to resolve these problems with the central GOI ministries.  5. (C) Service delivery of the Public Distribution System (PDS) rations is another area in which the Anbaris claimed that the central GOI is failing them.  The Ministry of Municipalities is not providing Anbar sufficient water and sewer services.  The Anbar leaders also fear that provincial funds from the Ministry of Finance are being stolen because they are transported by an Iraqi private company instead of Coalition Forces.  The lack of sufficient equipment and pay for guards at the border posts in Anbar between Syria and Jordan is another area of concern.  Rafe Essawi blamed the Ministry of Interior (MOI) for some of these security issues.  The Ambassador encouraged the Anbar political leaders to engage the central GOI, particularly the Minister of Electricity Kareem Wahid and Minister of Oil Hussein Shahristani regarding these concerns during one of their visits.  BAGHDAD 00000039  002 OF 002    NUKHAYB DISTRICT AND FEARS OF KARBALA EXPANSION --------------------------------------------- --  6. (C) Sheikh Lawrence, the Mayor of Nukhayb, shared with the Ambassador problems that Nukhayb has had with the central government.  Of particular concern, he discussed, was a GOI decision (through MoI) to transfer responsibility for security coverage of the Nukhayb district to Karbala.  He added, "Nukhayb has been part of Anbar province for forty-seven years and not a conflict zone.  Security in the province should be ours."  He highlighted the interference in security for the Hajj and the GOI's/MOI's ill-advised attempt to insert security posts from neighboring provinces in Anbar police stations.  Anbaris also fear that the GOI will attempt to redraw the Anbar/Karbala provincial border to restore it to the pre-1990s jurisdiction (Note: Saddam changed the border after the 1991 Shi'a revolt to punish the Shi'ites. End Note).  Anbar leaders are now nervous about the border being re-adjusted under Article 140 of the Constitution.  UNITING TRIBES IN ANBAR -----------------------  7. (C)  Sheikh Hameed Turki, Chairman of the Anbar Sheikhs Council, highlighted security improvements in Anbar since the tribes stood up with Coalition Forces to fight against al-Qaeda.  "Through this tribal committee," he said, "eighteen sheikhs have united from the big tribes in Anbar to support security, reconstruction efforts, and to rebuild trust in Anbar province."  He complained that the tribes in Southern Iraq are being heavily influenced by the Iranians and asked for USG support on this issue. CROCKER 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000042  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  DEPT for NEA/RA  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KBCT, ABLD, PHUM, AL, ECON, AMGT, ASUP, AFIN, IZ SUBJECT: WAIVER REQUESTED -- Section 565 Waiver of Prohibition against Contracting with Firms that comply with the Arab League Boycott or Discriminate in the Basis of Religion  REF: STATE 166398  1. (SBU) Section 565 of Title V, Part C of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (PL 103-236, 22 USC 2679c) prohibits the Department of State from entering into any contract, except real estate leases and contracts below the small purchase threshold (currently $100,000), that expends funds appropriated to the Department of State with a foreign person that complies with the Arab League boycott of Israel, or with any foreign or United States person that discriminates in the award of subcontracts on the basis of religion.  2. (SBU) Reftel requested that Posts that will not be able to carry on diplomatic functions while meeting either or both of the requirements of Section 565 send a cable requesting a waiver of the relevant requirement(s) and justifying the request.  3. (SBU) Post's request for waiver for 2007 stated, "Iraq does not maintain diplomatic relations with Israel.  The U.S. Embassy in Baghdad has reported instances in which Iraqi agencies have sought to enforce compliance with boycott requirements.  The current requirements of Iraqi law in this regard are not clear, and this has been the subject of ongoing discussions between the USG and the GOI.  The Embassy believes that local firms would generally be unable to provide the certification necessary under Section 565.  Therefore, without a waiver, the Embassy would potentially be unable to obtain essential supplies and services in-country."  4. (SBU) Post's experience over the contracting year has indicated that, despite previous presumptions to the contrary, local firms contracting with Post's GSO Contracting Officer have in all cases been able to provide the certification necessary under Section 565. The Embassy's ability to obtain essential supplies and services, to the extent that these are procured in-country, has not been hampered.  Nonetheless, not all agencies at Post have been able to obtain the necessary certification.  5. (SBU) Iraq does not maintain diplomatic relations with Israel. While, the Department of State has included the boycott noncompliance clause outlined under Section 565 in all GSO-originated contracts in 2007, the current requirements of Iraqi law remain unclear.  Post therefore must request a waiver because of ambiguities under Iraqi law and potential compliance with the boycott by subcontracting entities.  6. (SBU) For the reasons stated in para 5 above, Post requests a waiver of the relevant requirement(s) of Section 565.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000044  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2018 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: ALI AL-ADEEB CONFIRMS THAT DA'WA WILL SUPPORT DE-BAATH LAW  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Ellen Germain for reasons 1.4  (b) and (d).  1. (C) Ali al-Adeeb, the Da'wa party bloc leader at the CoR, told us January 2 that Da'wa would support the Accountability and Justice Law (i.e., the de-Ba'athification Law) when it comes to a vote, adding that Da'wa would like to see the law amended -- not for substantive reasons, but to persuade the Sadrists that their participation in the parliamentary debate had been worthwhile.  He said any amendments would be previewed by Vice President (VP) Tariq al-Hashimi before the law is brought to a vote, so as to ensure that the VP will not veto the law on the grounds that it deviates from what Iraqi leaders agreed to on August 26.  Al-Adeeb revealed that Tawafuq CoR member Ayyad Sammaraie vigorously opposed the December 24 agreement between Hashimi and the Kurdish Alliance, thereby furthering the competition between the two Sunni leaders.  2. (C) Asked whether the Awakening Movement (aka, Sahwa) would likely evolve as a rival to Tawafuq or be assimilated into the Sunni coalition, al-Adeeb confidently predicted that Sahwa would emerge as an alternative to Tawafuq.  However, he argued that the current balance of power between Sahwa and the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) in Anbar Province is unsustainable.  "Without new provincial elections, Sahwa will not be able to consolidate the power it has gained," said al-Adeeb.  He observed that a provincial election in Anbar would serve both to empower Sahwa at IIP's expense, and to moderate Tawafuq's behavior at the national level (on the grounds that, after being chastened in the provincial election, Tawafuq would take a more cooperative line with respect to the central government in order to avoid being routed by Sahwa at the national level).  3. (C) Al-Adeeb reacted coldly to the message that the CoR should dispense with its scheduled February holiday, having already taken a lengthy break in December for hajj/eid.  He insisted that the time taken off in December should not count, because the CoR had dispensed with its regular 3-day work week in November and had met daily.              CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000048  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON, ELTN, IZ SUBJECT: PASSENGER RAIL'S RETURN HINTS AT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES  REF: 2007 BAGHDAD 2724  1. (U) SUMMARY: On December 16 the Iraqi Republic Railway (IRR) renewed scheduled passenger service between Baghdad and Basrah for the first time since before the 2003 invasion. The first week of service was marred by two attacks--one suicide bomb and one IED--and a train-automobile collision under arguably suspicious circumstances.  Security challenges notwithstanding, the Office of the Transportation Attach (OTA) continues to work closely with the IRR and the Ministry of Transportation (MoT) to help them maximize the railway's commercial potential through infrastructure improvements, training, technical assistance, and capacity development.  In 2008 several USG-funded, OTA-managed projects should enhance the railway's capacity to serve both Iraqi and Coalition customers.  The GOI must, however, invest more in the system and its security to solidify its role as an economic activity enabling transportation infrastructure.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------------- PASSENGER RAIL RETURNS ----------------------  2. (U) On December 16 the IRR renewed scheduled passenger service between Baghdad and Basrah for the first time since before the 2003 invasion.  The IRR now offers two trains per day, seven days per week, on the 552 kilometer (KM) route: a 09:00 Baghdad to Basrah arriving in the evening and a 21:00 Basrah to Baghdad arriving in the morning.  The trains average 40 KMs per hour and, passengers depending, stop at approximately 30 stations.  Each train set consists of a diesel locomotive, a power car, a sleeper, and three coaches; the sleeper holds a maximum of 80 passengers, and each coach holds 70.  Iraqis have shown interest in the service so far, drawn in part by the low fares.  A coach ticket sells for 2400 Iraqi Dinar (ID) or approximately USD 2.  The sleepers have sold out completely, and the coaches have been approximately 60 percent full.  ---------------------------------- EXTREMISTS CHALLENGE RAIL SECURITY ----------------------------------  3. (U) Scheduled passenger rail presents an easier target for extremists than the more irregular cargo service.  Extremists exploited this vulnerability at least twice during the first week of passenger service.  On December 19, a female suicide bomber detonated her charge outside a coach car at a station roughly 50 KMs south of Baghdad.  The explosion killed the attacker and derailed the car.  The IRR reported no other injuries.  On December 21, an IED prematurely detonated north of Latifiyah, killing the bomber and damaging the nearby track.  The explosion temporarily disrupted service, but injured nobody and damaged no other IRR equipment or facilities.  In addition to these attacks, on December 23 the southbound train collided with a minivan at a known rail crossing near Hillah.  The nature of the incident--suspicious or merely unfortunate--is still a matter of debate. (NOTE: The vehicle's driver had the wherewithal to flee the scene before impact, leaving the eleven remaining occupants of the van to die.  END NOTE.)  No injuries were reported on the train.  --------------------------------------------- -------- IRR AND OTA WORKING TO UNLOCK THE NETWORK'S POTENTIAL --------------------------------------------- --------  4. (U) OTA continues to work closely with the IRR and the MoT to maximize the railway's commercial potential through infrastructure improvements, training, technical assistance and capacity development.  OTA's overarching goal is to help the IRR formulate a strategic vision for the network and adopt and implement a business model suited to that vision. Passenger rail is unlikely to be a significant revenue generator for the IRR with fares so inexpensive, but the state-run company's cargo service has greater potential. Presently the IRR runs an average of seven cargo trains per day.  Each cargo train consists of nine container cars, and USD 400 is a common tariff per container.  Current payloads include supplies for Iraqi and Coalition forces, heavy fuel oil for power plants, and bulk commodities from the Port of Umm Qasr.  5. (U) Several USG-funded, OTA-managed projects should help the IRR serve its customers in 2008.  Two related projects--the Communications Based Train Control System (CBTC) and the Digital Microwave Radio Communications Network (DMRCN)--should be operational by mid-year.  The CBTC is a USD 14 million project that will modernize the IRR's antiquated system for directing train traffic, allowing technicians to manage the rail system from the Dispatching  BAGHDAD 00000048  002 OF 002   Department based in the Baghdad station.  The USD 38 million DMRCN is the CBTC's communications medium, comprised of 33 microwave telecommunications towers positioned along the train routes.  The IRR has selected eleven technicians to be trained on the CBTC equipment in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, in the first quarter of 2008.  The technology and its Iraqi operators should improve both efficiency and safety of the railway network.  6. (U) But fundamental challenges remain.  The light-weight track that runs from Basrah to Baghdad to Mosul needs replacing: it is over 60 years old and has been neglected since the Iran-Iraq war.  In addition, the IRR complains that the Rail Police, which formerly reported to the IRR itself but now falls under the Ministry of the Interior, are inexperienced and ineffective.  IRR employees report that militias and criminals associated with trucking cartels continue to threaten them.  7. (U) COMMENT: The December attacks on the passenger rail service highlight the difficulty of securing the railway. OTA will continue to engage the MoT and the IRR to assist them in strategic planning, identifying priorities, developing a sound business model, and executing contracts to achieve their goals.  But greater MoT investment in railway security and new track will be essential to maintain and expand its passenger and cargo services.  Continued neglect of the system will leave underutilized the railway's latent potential to move people and goods into, out of, and through Iraq. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000049  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2018 TAGS: IR, IZ, PGOV SUBJECT: CODEL COLEMAN DISCUSSES 2008 OUTLOOK WITH HAKIM   Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Rob Waller for reasons 1.4 (b ) and (d).  1.  (C) On January 5 CODEL Coleman (Sens. Norm Coleman (R-MN), John Cornyn (R-TX), Johnny Isakson (R-GA)) met with ISCI Leader Abd al-Aziz Al-Hakim.  MPs Hadi al-Amri and Redha Taki also attended the meeting.  Hakim opened by saying 2007 ended on a better note than it began, citing a "20-25%" decrease in terrorist attacks and improvements in construction, employment, and service delivery, and improved relations with neighboring countries.  Coleman responded by saying, "Thank you for your leadership and resolve in bringing together different people and ISCI and Badr support for the cause of Iraqi unity," but noted significant challenges remain.  Asked what was needed from the U.S., Hakim listed: training and equipping Iraqi Security Forces (ISF); Iraq's exit from Chapter VII; support for the political process; and strengthening Iraq's relations with neighboring countries.  Security Update: Blarney Hills of Baghdad -----------------------------------------  2.  (C) Cornyn asked if American troops should leave on an arbitrary date or at a time when the ISF is ready to assume security responsibility.  Hakim agreed this was a "central question," explaining that in 2003, the Iraqi army was not ready to assume responsibility and Hakim and others advocated using militias to provide stability.  He referred to the success of the Anbar Awakening and the ISF in Karbala and said "the greatest result has come from Iraqi security forces."  Coleman said "Americans will be fighting al-Qaeda forever," but noted that Americans cannot stay forever in Iraq.  Hakim maintained they were many positive developments and Amri chimed in that "Iraq is much better off than Ireland."  Coleman grills on legislation -----------------------------  3.  (C) On the subject of de-Ba'athification legislation, Hakim did not predict when the law would pass but noted that "we all want this" and "all Iraqis must learn to live together."  Warming to the topic of reconciliation, Hakim discussed a series of recent conferences in Najaf that focused on freedom and democracy and were attended by Iraqis from all sects.  Isakson mentioned the need for foreign investment, and Hakim explained that the COR investment committee "was busy fighting terrorism" but that it could now focus its attention on drafting investment legislation.  4.  (C) Comment: Hakim's positive comments on the Anbar Awakening echo similar statements made recently to Iraqi press and represent a change from his past public opposition to tribal engagement.  During a January 3 lecture at a religious conference in Najaf, Hakim called for signing an agreement with the U.S. related to the presence of American forces in Iraq.  End Comment.  5.  (U) CODEL Coleman did not have an opportunity to clear this cable before their departure. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000050  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2018 TAGS: EWWT, KU, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PBTS, PINS, PNAT, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: SEEKING KUWAITI CONCURRENCE ON MNF-I SALVAGE OPERATIONS  REF: A. 07BAGHDAD 4136      B. KUWAIT 0015  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (U) This is an action request, please see paragraph 7.  2. (C) Summary. On December 18, 2007, the Kuwaiti Navy ordered two vessels contracted by the Multi-National Force in Iraq (MNF-I) to depart disputed waters in the Khawr Abd Allah (KAA) waterway. These contracted vessels were surveying two submerged shipwrecks for eventual removal. Embassy Kuwait delivered a diplomatic note on December 26 to the GOK requesting concurrence to allow the ships to return to recover lost equipment and complete their mission. Delay costs since December 18 are about $2 million, roughly half of the entire contract allocation for this survey mission. Embassy Baghdad requests the Department bring this issue to the attention of the Kuwaiti Ambassador in Washington in order to get a positive response to the diplomatic note.  End Summary.  Incident Background -------------------  3. (C) On December 18, the Kuwaiti Navy ordered two vessels contracted by the MNF-I to immediately depart from their anchored position in disputed waters in the Khawr Abd Allah (KAA) waterway. The Captain was forced to cut anchors and cables which secured the diving platform to the seabed in order to comply with the Kuwaiti navy request and avoid boarding (Reftel A). The ship was contracted by MNF-I to undertake a detailed survey of two submerged wrecked ships which pose a significant navigation hazard. This is a required step prior to MNF-I planned operations for their eventual removal.  4. (C) Embassy Kuwait subsequently delivered a diplomatic note to the GOK requesting concurrence for the ships to return to the disputed area, retrieve the lost anchors and cables, and complete their survey mission.  On December 31, Embassy Kuwait CDA met with MFA U/S Al-Jarallah for follow-on discussions about this request.  While supportive, the U/S told CDA that the issue had been referred to the MOI (Reftel B).  Not About Disputed Waters -------------------------  5. (C) Although the Captain believed he was in Iraqi waters at the time of the incident, his stated geographical position appears to be in disputed waters between Kuwait and Iraq. For the purpose of this wreckage survey, however, it is not necessary or desirable for the U.S. to be drawn into the territorial dispute.  Delay Costs -----------  6. (C) Estimated delay cost is about $100,000 per day or--to date--about $2 million. For the entire survey operation, MNF-I allocated $4 million from the Commander's Emergency Response Program (CERP), i.e. delay costs alone have now consumed over half of this allocation and further delays threaten to deplete the remaining funds.  Action Request --------------  7. (C) In support of Embassy Kuwait's efforts to resolve this issue, Post requests the Department bring this issue to the attention of the Kuwaiti Ambassador in Washington at the earliest opportunity in order to reiterate to the GOK the importance of obtaining a response to the U.S. diplomatic note delivered on December 26 and the subsequent request made by CDA on December 31 to permit the survey ship to return to the survey site.  The following points are provided for use.  (BEGIN POINTS) --------------  - We want to bring to your attention an important matter regarding a survey ship that was conducting surveying operations in the Khawr Abd Allah (KAA) waterway December 18 but was intercepted by Kuwaiti Naval and Air Forces, which ordered the ship out of the area.  BAGHDAD 00000050  002 OF 002    - The survey ship was contracted by the USG for the purpose of surveying two submerged wrecks in the KAA for subsequent removal.  - These submerged wrecks pose a significant navigational hazard to the ships of all nations--including Kuwait--that traverse the KAA.  - Unimpeded access to Umm Qasr will provide expanded trade opportunities and economic benefits for the entire region.  - The USG requests GOK concurrence to proceed back to this site to retrieve equipment (primarily anchors and cables) left during the departure on December 18 and allow the vessels to complete their survey mission without interference.  - Our survey mission is transparent; we are prepared to remain in close contact with the GOK during the remainder of the mission, including hosting Kuwaiti observers.  - The USG requests GOK support for the overall mission of removing these wrecked ships, which will benefit all maritime vessels.  If raised:  - Although there may have been some initial confusion by the GOK on December 18 about the purpose and identity of the two survey vessels in the KAA, subsequent discussions between U.S. Embassy Kuwait and GOK have made it clear these are USG-contracted vessels. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000053  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/07/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: SALIH AND RUBAIE SAY 2008 THE YEAR OF ECONOMIC, POLITICAL GAINS   Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Ellen Germain for reasons 1.4  (b,d).  1.  (C) Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih and National Security Advisor Muwaffaq al-Rubaie met January 5 with Senators Norm Coleman, John Cornyn, and Johnny Isaksen in Salih,s home.  All agreed that Iraq has made important security strides in the last year, a fact which Salih hoped the Senators would use to persuade their constituencies to engage in Iraq a while longer.  He listed signs of progress on the economic front, including that the Kurdish leadership had agreed to support the draft of the hydrocarbon law that the Council of Ministers passed last February.  Both Salih and Rubaie acknowledged much work remains on the political front, but both expressed optimism that the de-Ba,athification law would pass in the Council of Representatives (COR) on Monday, January 7.  End summary.  Salih: Iraq Can Succeed But Needs U.S. Support --------------------------------------------- -  2.  (C) Senator Coleman opened by marveling at the improvements in Iraq,s security since his last visit, and asked Salih what more remained to be done.  Salih agreed that much had improved, arguing that if Anbar can be won back then so can all of Iraq, and that Iraq was the first Muslim country in which the native population had risen up to expel Al Qa,ida.  New Year,s Eve in Baghdad had been inspiring this year, as nearly every hotel in town held a large celebration that would have been unthinkable only months before.  He also noted Iraqi security forces were taking over more responsibility from the Coalition, and Senator Isaksen cited Basra as a prime example.  Salih said the greatest need on the security front was simply for leaders like the Senator to persuade the U.S. public that Iraq,s progress justifies a continued U.S. commitment.  3.  (C) Salih said whereas 2007 was the year of security, 2008 will be the year of economic regeneration.  He listed signs of economic progress, including that the GOI executed more of its budget in 2007 than 2006, and would soon pass its largest budget ever.  He added that the COR had summoned him to discuss the budget on Monday, January 7.  He called GOI management in the oil sector inadequate, but said a hopeful sign is that Presidents Talabani and Barzani met today in Erbil and agreed to support the draft of the hydrocarbon law that reached the COR in February.  Several other crucial industries have taken important recent steps forward, in Salih,s estimation: a major conference is scheduled this month in Amman to bolster the cement sector, bids for a GOI mobile telephone contract had been much higher than expected, and the GOI is working on a plan to revitalize Iraq,s only major port.  He noted finally that the GOI had recently concluded Iraq,s first-ever public forum on fighting corruption, which Salih had patronized.  4.  (C) Undeterred by the prospect of overusing the construct, Salih said whereas 2007 was the year of security, 2008 will be the year of political settlement.  He expressed hope that the de-Ba,athification law would pass this Monday (January 7).  The GOI, in his view, needs to be more inclusive, with Tawafuq, Fadhila, and the Sadrists outside the government and the Kurds having major difficulties with it.  Salih stressed, however, that the debate should not be personalized and that Maliki is not solely to blame for the stagnation.  The system needs to change, he said, not "Mr. X or Mr. Y;" if it fails to change, the Sahwa councils that have so improved security may devolve into merely another militia.  Rubaie: GOI Better Than You Think ---------------------------------  5.  (C) Rubaie interjected that the GOI has made more progress than many give it credit for, including on the political front.  First, he noted that a year ago there was no 3 1 1 mechanism; he gushed that Maliki is excited about the body and has an unspecified new plan for it.  Second, he said the nationwide tribal awakening was a GOI initiative, although others have attempted to claim credit for it. Third, the GOI had turned around its previously bloody relationship with Iran, in addition to improving relations with Syria and Saudi Arabia.  All these he cited as signs of political progress.  Rubaie acknowledged that much remains to be done, but predicted with confidence that the COR would pass de-Ba,athification on January 7.  (Comment: While we are most likely in the endgame on the de-Ba,athification law, it did not pass today and we understand that proposed amendments to the law are still being finalized by the CoR,s de-Ba,athification Committee.) CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000054  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: CODEL COLEMAN URGES VP HASHIMI TO CONSIDER NATIONAL RECONCILIATION AS TOP GOAL FOR 2008   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary: CODEL Coleman pressed VP Hashimi on national reconciliation on January 5.  VP Hashimi responded he is open to compromise to enable Tawafuq's return to the GOI, but blamed PM Maliki for the lack of progress.  VP Hashimi hopes the IIP-KRG Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be a good step for IIP to build cooperative ties.  During several points in the discussion, VP Hashimi emphasized that he "fears" the Iraq Awakening Councils and their growing popularity.  VP Hashimi was not optimistic that reviving the 3 1 leadership process will work.  Senator Coleman urged the GOI to reach a power-sharing agreement in the near future, stressing USG patience for political reform is not "open ended."  End summary.  NATIONAL RECONCILIATION THE GOAL FOR 2008 -----------------------------------------  2. (C) CODEL Coleman (Senator Norm Coleman, R-Minn; Senator John Cornyn, R-Texas; Senator Johnny Isakson, R-GA) encouraged VP Hashimi to seize upon the current window of opportunity with the improved security situation to focus on national reconciliation with PM Maliki and his administration.  VP Hashimi responded, "We have spent months (working) to bridge differences."  He added the situation has reached the point where compromises can be made.  However, in usual form, VP Hashimi put the onus for resolving the outstanding problems on PM Maliki.  He lauded the IIP-KRG Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) as a good step for IIP in building cooperative ties with the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG).  When Senator Coleman raised the on-going Tawafuq ministerial boycott of the GOI, VP Hashimi responded that professional ministers are needed; he avoided making any commitment on Tawafuq/IIP's return.  VP SCARED OF IRAQI AWAKENING COUNCILS -------------------------------------  3. (C) VP Hashimi emphasized several times during the discussion that he "fears" the Iraq Awakening Movement and "is scared for the future."  He said there should be some hesitancy regarding how long the contracts for the Awakening Councils should continue.  At the same time, he acknowledged the achievements during the past year in pushing back against al-Qaeda.  CAN THE 3 1 WORK OR POWER-SHARING REALLY HAPPEN? --------------------------------------------- ---  4. (C) VP Hashimi stressed during the meeting with CODEL Coleman that there must be a change of course politically. "We did 3 1 twice," he said.  He complained that agreements with PM Maliki were made one day and then implemented differently the next.  Senator Coleman added, "It is not enough just to complain," and urged VP Hashimi to make the 3 1 work.  VP Hashimi only responded, "There needs to be room for acceptable compromise."  Senator Coleman again pressed the need for the GOI to reach a power-sharing arrangement in the near future.  He added that the USG patience for the GOI to bring about political reform is not "open ended," stressing that U.S. elections in November 2008 might be a turning point in USG support for Iraq.  5. (U) CODEL Coleman did not have a chance to clear this cable before departing. CROCKER 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000057  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: KU, MARR, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PREF, PREL, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: MCNS FOCUSES ON IRAQI MINISTRY OF INTERIOR  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker for reason 1.4(b) and 1.4(d)  1. (S) SUMMARY: At the Ministerial Council on National Security (MCNS) on January 6, Prime Minister Maliki and security ministers set aside most of the prepared agenda and focused on two issues raised by MinInt Bolani--apprehension about foreign ownership of Iraqi communications companies and dissatisfaction with  security contracts at the Baghdad International Airport (BIAP). The ministers also discussed problems with MOI budget execution.  Briefers from the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I) concluded with a positive economic assessment of a new scrap metal collection and reprocessing program, and convinced the ministers to press for full funding. END SUMMARY.  Foreign Ownership Issues ------------------------  2. (S) In a lackluster MCNS, Prime Minister Maliki and his security ministers set aside most of the agenda prepared by National Security Advisor (NSA) Rubaie and turned their attention to MinInt Bolani's issues and programs, which he tabled without prior coordination. Bolani lamented recent acquisitions of Iraqi mobile phone companies by foreign investors. He cited as problematic the Kuwaiti government and its investors, who now own 62 percent of Iraq's largest mobile phone provider. He urged Maliki to meet with the new owners and advise them of their security responsibilities to the GOI. When pressed by Salih and Rubaie to be more precise, Bolani described a raid by Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) on a private security contractor hired by one of these newly purchased communications companies.  Bolani pointed out that the detained security guards possessed illegal weapons and cited this as a serious cause for concern. Salih and Rubaie expressed skepticism, with Rubaie adding that the government must guarantee the rights of investors for the economy to grow.  Despite Bolani's disjointed and unconvincing presentation, Maliki asked the ministers to set up a meeting with Atheer Telecom to discuss these security issues. (NOTE: Bolani is presumably concerned either about the loss of governmental control over communications or access to sensitive information from these foreign-owned companies. END NOTE.)  BIAP Security -------------  5. (S) Realizing the foreign ownership issue had no traction, Bolani launched into his second major point about MOI dissatisfaction with the security contract at BIAP. He noted that the Global Security Company had exclusive rights regarding security at the airport but did not yet possess a valid license or permission from the GOI to operate there. He pointed out that their contract was up for renewal and he expressed concern that there was no alternative. Bolani added that it was time for the ISF to gain experience at securing airports.  6. (S) General Petraeus countered that Coalition Forces have worked diligently at cleaning up a very weak security environment at BIAP, freed it from its Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) stranglehold, and subsequently engaged Global to ensure the security environment met international airport standards. He offered to work with the GOI on developing their own security plan but noted that without an internationally recognized security company at BIAP, the airport risked losing its certification for international air traffic. General Petraeus suggested that if the MOI wanted to train its forces on port security, they should consider initiating it somewhere else, like Basrah or Umm Qasr.  7. (S) DPM Salih expressed his strong support for renewal of the contract with Global Security to prevent disruption of international air traffic at BIAP while the GOI studied the issue further.  Both the Prime Minister and IntMin Bolani--albeit reluctantly--concurred.  MOI Budget Execution --------------------  8. (S) Bolani then shifted the discussion to his budget woes, reporting that lack of a quorum in the Council of Representatives (CoR) prevented approval for an end-of-year rollover of MOI funding (NOTE: the MOI had a dismal FY2007 budget execution--among the worst of all ministries--leaving most funding for equipping MOI forces untouched. END NOTE). NSA Rubaie countered that inadequate budget controls and  BAGHDAD 00000057  002 OF 002   execution threatened national security, especially in light of the GOI stated goal of self-sufficiency by FY2009. He announced that both the MOD and MOI would now brief the MCNS each month on their budget execution.  Clearly upset with Rubaie's interference, Bolani shot back that monthly briefings were unnecessary; he countered with an offer to brief quarterly.  Rubaie, saying he "only wanted to help", stood firm on the monthly requirement. Since Maliki had earlier left the MCNS for another appointment, DPM Salih did not press the issue but closed the discussion by offering to meet with CoR members on the ro ll-over proposal. He noted that even though the GOI had better budget execution this year than last, there were a large number of issues and discrepancies to solve. (NOTE: On January 8, MinInt Bolani called embassy POLOFF to report that the CoR had approved the MOI request to roll-over FY2007 allocations into FY2008, END NOTE).  Scrap Metal Initiatives -----------------------  9. (U) In October 2007, the MCNS agreed to devote $75 million to the Minister of Industry and Minerals (MinInd) to begin a scrap collection and smelting program. MNF-I briefers followed up at this meeting with an interim report in which they assessed the economic potential of this effort at over $16 billion.  The ministers--clearly surprised by this large figure--agreed to press for full funding of the program. They also called on the Ministry of Industry to return to the MCNS with a comprehensive plan for the rehabilitation of smelting plants. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000059  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2018 TAGS: EAID, IZ, MARR, PTER SUBJECT: MANAGING CLC ACTIVITIES  REF: A. A. 07 BAGHDAD 3874       B. B. 07 STATE 171256  Classified By: EMIN CHARLES P. RIES FOR REASON 1.4 B   1.  (C) Post has met with MNF-I to discuss REF B cable. This is a joint DOD/DOS/USAID response.  There is no longer a requirement for USAID to execute any pilot program under the Community Stabilization Program (CSP) for former Concerned Local Citizens (CLCs).  Receipt by DOD of the USD 155 million revised Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration (DDR) funding for use under the Joint Technical Education and Reintegration Program (JTERP) and Civil Service Corps (CSC)programs obviates the need for a special program by USAID in conjunction with former CLCs. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000063  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  NEA/I: RSCHMIERER NEA/I:PM:TBETTS ISN/RA:KKESSLER S/I:KNUTT L/NPV:THISCH DOE: JSELLEN JS: SNORWOOD OSD: TBENNET  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: ECON, IZ, PARM, PREL SUBJECT: (S) GOI PROVIDES PAPER ON ALTERNATIVE IRRADIATION SOURCES  REF: A. A. STATE 163968      B. B. BAGHDAD 4126      C. C. STATE 169324      D. D. BAGHDAD 2454      E. E. BAGHDAD 1787      F. F BAGHDAD 734      G. G. BAGHDAD 004227  Classified By: CRies for Reasons 1.4 (B), (D) and (H)   1. (S) In a Jan 8, 2008 meeting held at Iraq's Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Minister Raid Jahid (FAHMI) provided NNSA Representative Boudreau a paper outlining the agricultural purposes for which Iraq used the four irradiation sources the US has prepared for shipment from the Tuwaitha Nuclear Research Center.  The paper also outlines the purposes for a replacement irradiation source (non-nuclear).  Nawal H. (SHAMOON), Director General of the Agricultural Research & Food Directorate in MOST, attended the meeting.  Her Directorate authored the report.  She made several points regarding the importance of using the replacement source to fight disease in Iraq and asked that the US move quickly to help Iraq obtain an alternative source.   2. (SBU) GOI paper on alternative sources:  Background      The Agric. Res. & Food Tech. Directorate concerned with the peaceful application of nuclear technique in agriculture & biology since its establishment in the sixties of the last century within the Nuclear Research Center.  In 1966, when the first Gamma-220 (60 Co source) at about 11000 Ci was imported from Canada with aid of IAEA.  In 1978, an open type gammabeam-650 (60Co source) has been imported for food irradiation (for) mainly dates disinfestations (Alternative quarantine treatment to methyl bromide), sprout inhibition in potato, onion & garlic.  The latter unit was upgraded to about 50000 Ci in 1985 to meet further needs (Sterilization at Medical Supplies).  Because of low intensity of the gammacell-220 a new one with 60Co source at about 24000 Ci was imported in 1984 along with gammacell-40 with 137Cs source of 2530 Ci for low dose purposes which (was) imported in 1981.       The above four mentioned units have been used to perform studies in the following fields: 1) Irradiation Disinfestations of Dates. 2) Irradiation Disinfestations of wheat, barely, rice. 3) Induce Mutation to improve plant breeding, e.g., wheat, barely, rice, corn, sunflower, etc. 4) Increases shelf-life, enhances freshness by reducing spoilage organisms & delay ripening. 5) Induce either sexual sterility or inherited sterility in insect pests, e.g., Date Moth, Pomegranate Moth, Corn Stem Borer, Fruit Flies & Screwworm Fly. 6. Sprout inhibition in potato, onion and garlic. 7. Sterilization of medical supplies. 8. Irradiating biological specimens.       Furthermore, Iraq planned during the eighties of the last century to have a gamma plant to be used for agriculture, industrial & medical purpose at a commercial level but no positive action was taken & this goal has been frozen after 2 August 1990.  Therefore, the scientists at the Directorate of Agric. Res. & Food Tech continue their research using the four gamma ray irradiators till March 2003.  Present and Future Plans      The researchers at Agric. Res. &  Food Tech. Directorate/MoST will continue their research in the above mentioned fields because they believe in the peaceful applications of nuclear technique in the above mentioned fields.  They share the view in different countries that modern technique should replace the conventional technique, e.g., using Sterile Insect Technique (SIT) for eradicating insect pests instead of using chemical insecticide which is dangerous & hazardous to the environment.  Need Gamma Ray Irradiators or other Technology       Because the Agric. Res. & Food Tech. Directorate have well trained staff for using Gamma Ray Irradiators, it is believed that these gamma ray irradiators should be kept at (the) Tuwaitha Site; but, if this is impossible because the Tuwaitha Site is a very hazardous place for Iraqi researchers to work as Mr. Riedy mentioned in his report, (then), electron beam irradiation could replace the most new two gamma ray irradiators.  These electron beam irradiators could be supplied to MoST (by US Embassy (put in parenthesis by Iraqi drafter)) to replace the four gamma ray irradiators. In which case, MoST then needs some of her staff to visit specific site in U.S. as Mr. Edgar Parks & Mr. Albert Walgreen suggested during 3 Dec 2007 meeting with MoST Minister and his colleagues.  Old World Screwworm (OWS) Project      MoST likes to explain to U.S. Embassy why it needs the gamma ray irradiator urgently (Gammacell-200 for Screwworm project.      This pest, Old World Screwworm Fly, is a parasite, notifiable to OIE, that attacks all warm-blooded vertebrate, including humans.  Unfortunately no sustainable success was obtained so far by insecticide/larvicide's based control of this pest.  Therefore, the use of STI is considered and proposed as the only practical approach for sustainable controlling of this pest in Iraq. In this respect we would like to let you know that 23 cases of human myiasis (were) reported between Sept 1996 through Dec. 2004, 2005 & 2006 (occurred in Iraq?).      Researchers in MoST carried (on) all needed studies related to use SIT to control this pest.  Furthermore, researchers from MoST, Ministry of Agriculture (Agricultural Directorate?) with support from experts from AOAD, FAO & IAEA (are) planning to establish Mass Rearing Unit in Iraq to produce millions of sterile OWS, then release them into infested provinces to eradicate this pest.  To achieve this (goal) project, (either) a gamma ray irradiator or electron beam irradiator should be available in the unit urgently.  Thanks for your cooperation. Looking forward to hearing from you.  3. (U) Attendees:  GOI  Raid J. Fahmi, Minister of Science and Technology Dr. Samir S. Al Attar, Senior Deputy Minister, MOST Dr. Fouad K. Al Mousawy, Deputy Minister, MOST Mohammed J. Sharaa, Director General, Monitoring Directorate, MOST Ms Nawal H. Shamoon, Director General, Agriculture Research and Food Technology, MOST Ms.Sundua A. Mousa, Minister's Office Dr. Jamal Wahaib, Project Manager, Aeronautics and Space Technology Directorate, MOST Mr. Salam Ahmed, Engineer, Aeronautics and Space Technology Directorate, MOST  US  Ms. Cheryl Dukelow, Commercial Attach Robert Boudreau, Senior Representative DOE/NNSA Dr. Paul Savello, ITAO Senior Consultant Mustafa AL Qassab, Advisor, Department of Commerce  Note: Commerce Delegation had separate agenda. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000065  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2017 TAGS: ECON, PGOV, EAIR, EAID, IZ SUBJECT: NINEWA: SUCCESSFUL HAJJ FLIGHTS CREATE HOPES FOR COMMERCIAL AIR TRAFFIC  Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Ellen Germain for reasons 1.4  (b,d).  This is a Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) message.  1.  (C) Sumamry: Mosul Airport in December successfully processed thousands of Hajj pilgrims, arousing a sense of local pride and hope that commercial flights will continue for the betterment of the Ninewa economy.  While there are many logistical hurdles to dividing Ninewa,s airport and airspace between commercial and military use, PRT is convening a working group and talking to local business contacts to determine means of moving forward.  The economic boon and popular enthusiasm that a commercially functional airport is likely to generate make this initiative well worth the effort.  Mosul Airport Commercial  Air Service Is a Reality ---------------------------------------------  2.  (SBU) The Iraq Civil Aviation Authority and Iraqi Airways successfully enplaned 2,629 Hajj pilgrims through Mosul Airport on 22 commercial domestic and international flights from December 2 to December 9.  Those operations utilized approved Civil Aviation Security (AVSEC) procedures, which provide four redundant screening processes, without incident.  Apart from an initial return flight to the Erbil Airport, all Mosul passengers are returning to Mosul Airport.  The successful operation of Hajj flights is a tribute to the dedication of Iraqi officials in Baghdad and Mosul, and the multi-agency team of the PRT, 1st Armored Division, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment, the Embassy Baghdad Economic Section, the Office of the Transportation Attache and the Office of Provincial Affairs.  Ninewa's Energy Unleashed -------------------------  3.  (SBU) With the feasibility of commercial air service through Mosul Airport now established, local and national Iraqi officials have told the PRT they hope to see regular commercial flights from Mosul continue after Hajj operations.  The possibility of air service to the political, cultural and tourism centers of Baghdad, Aleppo, Damascus, Istanbul, Ankara, Cairo and Dubai has generated excitement and unleashed energy among Mosul's traditionally active political and business communities.  Surmountable Issues Remain on Way to Regular Flights --------------------------------------------- -------  4.  (SBU) Several key issues must be resolved before long-term air service commitments to air carriers outside of Iraq can occur:  - Planned, phased and staged transition of Mosul airspace and airport from total military control to controlled, shared and joint use civilian airspace and airport operations.  - Mosul Airport designated as a landing rights airport for international operation to and from other countries.  This step will require international coordination and route approval.  Domestic service to intra-Iraq destinations, however, could occur much faster without requiring international coordination.  - The new, USG-funded, $10.3 million Air Traffic Control Tower is located in the middle of a Coalition Force base. CF, PRT and Iraqi authorities have to negotiate control of, access to, and equipment needs for shared use of the tower.  - Proper airport planning to locate short-term capital development for fuel storage, cargo facilities, vehicle maintenance and other similar development must take place. Usage of current temporary facilities on the CF base will continue until sound land-use planning is completed.  - Instrument Landing System commissioning, approach and departure procedures and charts, and Navigational Aids need calibration, testing and commissioning.  Possibilities for Future Airport-Linked Investment --------------------------------------------- -----  5.  (SBU) Looking to the future, Iraqis could leverage increased Mosul Airport passenger and cargo air service to build economic activity in the province.  The Iraqi investor who holds the airport duty-free concession has already said  BAGHDAD 00000065  002 OF 002   he is interested in renovating and reopening his facility. The airport could also host conferences, with the possibility of meeting spaces and accommodations constructed under Iraqi auspices on land adjoining the airport outside the CF base. Commercial air cargo operations will create jobs and facilitate the movement of high value goods to and from the region.  Short Term: PRT Convening Working Groups ----------------------------------------  6.  (SBU) To address the short-term logistical issues, the PRT is working with CF to convene a working group to identify and plan solutions to technical, logistical and tactical issues.  We will forward these solutions for review and approval by CF and Embassy Baghdad.  In addition, the PRT is canvassing local business contacts to assess the possibility of Iraqis investing in facilities that may be co-located with the airport.  Lastly, the PRT is facilitating contacts among Iraqis and international aviation industries interested in using Mosul Airport.  Long Term: Combined Support for Full Airport Capacity --------------------------------------------- --------  7.  (SBU) In addition to planning and resolving technical aspects of a joint-use airport, the current Iraqi management and staff at Mosul Airport would have to be expanded, trained and improved to drive the facility's long-term development, operation and management.  Building sustainable capacity for the facility and the local economy, the PRT is working with local and national Iraqi and USG officials to develop a comprehensive strategic plan to develop this capacity with a combination of GOI funds, Quick Response Funds, Economic Support Funds and other USG money.  8.  (SBU) COMMENT: Ninewa residents and officials happy to see national attention and economic progress return to their province have greeted the reopening of civilian commercial passenger traffic through Mosul Airport with pride and enthusiasm.  The PRT will continue to work with Iraqi and USG partners to facilitate continued commercial operations. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000066  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: KURDS STILL SEEKING CHANCE TO REPLACE MALIKI  REF: A. BAGHDAD 04090      B. BAGHDAD 03913  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Summary: Kurdish leaders have agreed not to remove Prime Minister Maliki in the short term, but have little faith in him and probably would move to replace him if not for the Secretary,s strong message that Iraqi leaders must focus on issues instead of personalities.  While that message registered, subsequent statements by Kurdish leaders have not demonstrated much appetite for rapprochement with the Prime Minister.  The Kurds continue to criticize Maliki,s perceived failure to break the political stalemate in Baghdad, and disparage his leadership after clashing with the PM on core Kurdish issues - the Kurdistan Regional Government,s (KRG) unilateral oil production and development contracts, Iraq,s long-term security relationship with Washington, federal funding for the Peshmerga, and the delayed Article 140 process.  Maliki,s governing coalition depends on Kurdish support and the Kurds probably would have little trouble removing Maliki through the Council of Representatives (COR), but there is no guarantee they could muster a majority behind any replacement, including their preferred candidate, Vice President Adil Abd al-Mahdi.  The Kurds will likely continue maneuvering behind the scenes to broker a new governing coalition in the hope of jettisoning Maliki after the anticipated congressional testimony in March.  End summary.  Can Maliki win the Kurds back? ------------------------------  2.  (C) The Kurdish leadership reluctantly accepted the message from the Secretary, the Ambassador, and others that now is not the time to replace the PM, and instead have offered Maliki a window to break the national political stalemate before they attempt to replace him.  Kurdish leaders on 24 December signed an agreement with the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP), the purpose of which both the Kurds and IIP head Tariq al-Hashemi have said is to show Maliki they have other political options if he fails to change his ways. Two days later, Kurdish leaders sent Maliki a letter - to which Hashemi told the Ambassador he contributed - demanding steps Maliki must take on national (rather than Kurd-specific) issues.  These included implementing the 26 August leaders, agreement, empowering the cabinet at the expense of Maliki,s inner circle, and strengthening relationships with provincial governments and neighboring countries.  Barham Salih told the Ambassador the Kurds would form a committee to work with Maliki on these objectives and monitor his progress; senior Kurdish MP Mahmud Uthman said it already has been established but did not know its membership.  The letter offers no timelines or specific benchmarks that would keep Kurdish leaders in Maliki,s coalition.  More importantly, several top Kurdish leaders say they have no expectation Maliki will meet these objectives.  Why are the Kurds so frustrated? -------------------------------  4.  (C) While months of political stagnation in Baghdad have created a crescendo of Kurdish frustration with Maliki, that frustration peaked because of the confluence of four key disputes: KRG oil contracts, Iraq,s long-term relationship with the US, funding for the Peshmerga, and Article 140.  The most serious is the oil dispute - not only has Maliki challenged contracts Erbil considers vital to its future economic viability, but the Baghdad government,s perceived unwillingness to compromise on the issue has left Kurdish interlocutors feeling negotiations are futile.  Some of the feud derives from the personal animosity between Oil Minister Shahristani and KRG Oil Minister Hawrami, but the dispute has a substantive basis going beyond a ministerial rivalry.  As KRG PM Nechirvan Barzani told Maliki in December, if Shahristani spoke for Maliki when he called the recent KRG oil contracts "illegal," then the Kurds could no longer be part of his government. (Reftel A)  5.  (C) The Kurds had a generally peripheral role in the arduous negotiations over the SPD and UNSCR renewal, but the intransigence of Maliki and his advisors threatened another core Kurdish priority: the long-term role of the US in Iraq. Kurdish politicians still tell us regularly they want a permanent US presence in Iraq, specifically in Kurdistan, and Barzani in late December told the Ambassador he could not leave the future of this relationship in the hands of an unpredictable team like Maliki,s inner circle (reftel B). Talabani told Ambassador Satterfield in November that he had threatened to pull the Kurdish ministers out of the cabinet if Maliki continued to obstruct the SPD (reftel B).  6.  (C) The Kurdish bloc in the COR in has clashed with  BAGHDAD 00000066  002 OF 003   Maliki over funding for the Peshmerga, a seemingly simple budget issue that has also festered because of Maliki,s perceived unwillingness to compromise.  The root conflict is over who will pay for the Peshmerga: the Kurds define them as a national security force which the GOI should fund separately from the 17% of the budget allocated to the KRG, while Maliki defines them as a regional security force that the Kurds must fund with their 17% allotment.  This was one of Nechirvan Barzani,s primary discussion topics on his mid-December Baghdad trip, and while several Kurdish interlocutors anticipated it would be the least contentious issue, the two governments made no breakthrough.  7.  (C) Finally, while even the Kurds do not blame this issue only on the GOI, the Article 140 deadline expired on December 31.  The major Kurdish parties had long since realized the referendum on disputed territories would not occur on time. Nevertheless, the arrival of the deadline and the complaints it unleashed among Kurdish politicians, journalists, and citizens shone a brighter spotlight on the national government,s paralysis, and the deleterious effect this paralysis has had on the Kurdistan region,s efforts to consolidate all it has gained since 2003.  8.  (C) We have seen symbolic steps forward on some of these issues in the last month, but they probably are insufficient to temper Kurdish anger.  Maliki and the younger Barzani agreed on the last day of his visit to establish a committee to examine the oil issue, consisting of two constitutional experts, the COR Energy Committee, Hawrami, and former GOI Oil Minister Thamir Ghadban (a mild concession to the Kurds, who refuse to work with Shahristani).  This agreement resolves nothing of the substantive dispute, however, and may serve only to formalize the unproductive discussions already underway.  On Article 140, SRSG De Mistura brokered an encouraging agreement to postpone the referendum and allow for a helpful UN role, but the Kurds remain suspicious that Article 140 is being shunted off on the UN in order to slow or prevent progress.  Separately, Maliki condemned Kurdish civilian deaths during a mid-December Turkish bombing.  The statement fell far short of condemning the Turkish campaign itself, however, and did little either to placate Masud Barzani,s rage or to counter the appearance of GOI fecklessness when Kurdish territory comes under attack.  Trouble Ahead? --------------  9.  (C) The question is whether the Kurds will become angry enough with Maliki to disregard the advice of their key allies, both in and outside Iraq.  Kurdish officials probably hope U.S. officials will be more amenable to leadership change if several more months pass without significant political progress.  One risk is that the Kurds might try to slow-roll progress on reconciliation so as to undermine Maliki in the run up to the anticipated congressional testimony in mid-March, although we have seen no indication they are doing this so far.  Another possibility is that the Kurds will not only assemble the votes to oust Maliki (which they could easily do with the cooperation of Tawafuq, Fadhila, Iraqiyya, and the Sadrists), but will also build a consensus on Maliki,s successor - which might persuade otherwise lukewarm Maliki backers to finally pull the plug on his premiership.  Who would come next? --------------------  10.  (C) All indications are that the Kurds prefer Vice President Adil Abd al-Mahdi as the next Prime Minister.  Abd al-Mahdi enjoys close relations and similar politics with President Talabani, and in recent weeks both KRG representative to Baghdad Dilshad Miran and Mahmud Uthman have identified Abd al-Mahdi as the Kurds, consensus favorite.  Miran added that while the Kurds have reservations about former Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari, they would accept him, the implication being that Maliki,s removal is valuable enough in itself to tolerate a potentially mediocre successor.  Indeed, the mere process of elevating a new head of government could benefit the Kurds - as a likely "swing vote" for any candidate attempting to accumulate a majority in the COR, they are in a position to extract concessions on oil, 140, or any other issue, regardless of the candidate. Miran also added, however, that former Prime Minister Iyad Allawi would not be an acceptable candidate.  Comment -------  11.  (C) While the Kurds may hope engineering Maliki,s departure will advance their interests, there is no guarantee that a new Prime Minister - even one as seemingly sympathetic as Adil Abd al-Mahdi - would achieve breakthroughs on  BAGHDAD 00000066  003 OF 003   unilateral oil contracts, Article 140, a permanent U.S. presence in Kurdistan, legislation in Baghdad, or stability in Iraq,s many conflict zones.  Maliki,s perceived unhelpfulness to the Kurds on these issues reflects deep and ongoing disagreements along Iraq,s ethnic and communal divides that transcend any one leader.  Regardless of who holds the office of Prime Minister, the Kurds must prepare for difficult negotiations on the very issues on which they have assailed Maliki,s performance. CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000067  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: TIME FOR TALKS BETWEEN KRG AND TURKEY  REF: BAGHDAD 4199  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) Summary: Despite their strong reaction to Turkish airstrikes, including Massoud Barzani,s refusal to meet Secretary Rice (reftel), Iraqi Kurdish leaders are continuing  SIPDIS to implement the anti-PKK measures they had previously imposed.  Iraqi President Jalal Talabani, Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Massoud Barzani, and KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani condemned the January 4 Diyarbakir bombing, which appears to be an indication that they are still committed to playing a constructive role in addressing the PKK problem.  We should move quickly to get political contacts moving either bilaterally or trilaterally before inevitable additional strikes by the Turks in retaliation for PKK terror attacks in Turkey make it much more difficult for the Kurds to participate.  End Summary.  2.  (C) Iraqi Kurds remain angry at recent Turkish airstrikes, but are not at this time retaliating through the Iraqi political process.  The Kurdistan Alliance like other blocs straggled back last week from a long COR vacation, but well over half their deputies attended the session on January 3rd, and we expect nearly all to return within the coming week.  There remains a possibility the Kurds will slow-roll key legislation to discredit Prime Minister Maliki, with whom they are engaged in a high-stakes struggle over political and economic issues (reftel), but we have no indication they have done this and expect them to vote for the de-Ba,athification law as planned.  KRG Carries On With Anti-PKK Measures -------------------------------------  3.  (C) KRG leaders, while protesting the airstrikes publicly, appear privately to be sticking to the measures against the PKK they previously imposed.  Talabani and Massoud Barzani in late December assured the Ambassador the KRG would continue roadblocks, financial interdictions, and heightened airport security.  Anecdotal evidence and reporting in other channels confirms the restrictions remain in place and have made normal operation more difficult for the PKK, but even the most diligent application of these promises probably will not prevent the PKK,s ability to conduct attacks as they are thought to have many alternate supply routes through mountain passes and a good stockpile of weapons.  4.  (C) After the terrorist bombing in Diyarbakir, both Talabani and Nechirvan Barzani made strong statements condemning the attack and offering condolences to the victims.  We take this as a signal (as was Talabani,s statement to the Ambassador that he is still willing to travel to Ankara) that the KRG leaders are still willing to engage with Turkey on a solution to the PKK problem, despite their suspicions of Turkish motives vis-a-vis the KRG.  5.  (C) With Turkish attacks in Northern Iraq all but inevitable in the wake of the recent terrorist bombings, it is all the more urgent that we get the Turks and Iraqis talking about their joint problem while KRG leaders still have some political space to participate.  Under the circumstances, a return trip by Foreign Minister Zebari to Anakra might be a relatively non-controversial way to begin. This would complement the constructive value we think will come from planned Jan 15 visit to Baghdad by TGS Deputy Saygun, who has been invited by General Petraeus.  Talabani should be taken at his word as soon as the Turks are willing to have him. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000068  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, MOPS, ECON, KCOR, IZ SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S JANUARY 7 MEETING WITH IRAQI AMBASSADOR TO THE US  REF: A. 07 BAGHDAD 3818      B. 07 BAGHDAD 3830  Classified By: AMBASSADOR RYAN C. CROCKER FOR REASONS 1.4 (b) AND (d).  1. (S) During a January 7 meeting with Ambassador Crocker, Samir Sumaidaie, the Iraqi Ambassador to the U.S., sought to establish shared U.S.-GOI priorities in the lead up to the Ambassador's upcoming testimony to Congress.  The Ambassador told Sumaidaie the most significant bilateral issue at hand was negotiating the nature of the U.S.-GOI strategic relationship in the long run and that the U.S.'s original intention was to have this done by July.  Sumaidaie noted that he is a supporter of a status of forces (SOFA) arrangement and has long urged his "masters" to embrace SOFA.   2. (S) Sumaidaie said he had perceived that the U.S. wanted the U.S.-Iraqi Strategic Partnership Dialogue "Declaration of Principles for Friendship and Cooperation" document (released on November 26, 2007) "at any cost" (reftels).  Noting that negotiations leading up to the declaration were tense, Sumaidaie complained that "neither side should be in that position if we're trying to put together something sustainable."   The Ambassador responded that for these reasons, correct preparation for future talks on the long-term U.S.-GOI strategic relationship -- especially getting the right people at the table from the start to form a broad-based team (i.e. through the 3 1 Presidency Council plus PM framework) -- was crucial.  3. (S) Acknowledging the Ambassador would again testify before Congress in the spring, Sumaidaie stated, "I can promise we can produce something worthwhile before that to show the American people it is worth the cost and effort to succeed."  The Ambassador told Sumaidaie that besides observing political progress, people need to see that life is getting better tangibly in terms of improved services and employment, and that the GOI is taking steps to take over capacity that the Coalition is building in Iraqi institutions.  Sumaidaie noted that the Concerned Local Citizens (CLC) program, along with a reversal of the social climate that had supported the insurgents, has had a positive, locally-based impact on security.  Sumaidaie also noted the tribal awakening movements' contributions to improved security, and said he had urged Islamic Supreme Council of Iraqi (ISCI) Chair Abdul-Aziz al-Hakim to support sending a joint delegation of Shi'a and Sunni sheikhs to the US.  (Note: A delegation of eight Sunni Anbari sheikhs participated in a two-week visit to the US as part of a State Department-sponsored International Visitor Leadership Program (IVLP) from late October to early November 2007. End note.) He cautioned that despite security progress, "...we're still in a danger zone," and "...the question of corruption is huge and equivalent to the insurgency."  Sumaidaie offered to provide the Ambassador with reliable contacts who could provide accounts of corruption in which multiple parties split the proceeds.  He said that he had discussed the corruption problem with PM Maliki during a two-hour meeting that same day (January 7).  4. (C) Sumaidaie also told the Ambassador there was a tendency for Iraqi delegations visiting the U.S. to bypass the Iraqi Embassy and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), and that often the MFA is unaware of the visits.  The Ambassador assured Sumaidaie that official delegations must present a diplomatic note from the MFA in order to receive U.S. visas, and pledged that the USG will coordinate official visits to Washington in a more transparent manner. CROCKER 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000070  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: TROUBLES ABOUND FOR TAWAFUQ LEADER ADNAN DULEIMI  REF: BAGHDAD 3955  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S/NF) In a January 7 meeting with the Ambassador, a grieving and somewhat incoherent Adnan Duleimi ranted about his troubles.  Earlier in the day, Duleimi had lost his son-in-law, Thia al-Hadithi (the husband of Duleimi's daughter, CoR member Asma Duleimi) in an attack on the Sunni Endowment Office.  That loss, combined with the stress that Duleimi has been under since the November 29 arrests of his guards and son, Makki, were clearly taking a toll on the Iraqi People's Conference leader.  Duleimi implored the Ambassador to get his son and bodyguards out of jail, occasionally pounding the table for emphasis.  He claimed his guards were being tortured and protested his innocence of all knowledge of terrorist activities, despite the incriminating evidence found during a November 29 joint Iraqi-MNF/I raid on his Baghdad offices.  He implored the Ambassador to intercede on his behalf with the Prime Minister, who refuses to see him.  The Ambassador coolly encouraged Adnan to submit a written request to PM Maliki.  2. (S/NF) Trying to focus the septuagenarian Duleimi on the future, the Ambassador urged him to play a more positive role in the Council of Representatives.  Yet Duleimi, who struggled to maintain focus and composure, showed few signs that his behavior would improve: at one moment he insisted that he was on "good terms" with the Shi'ites, and in the next breath he denounced the Shi'a community as "the enemies of national reconciliation."  He claimed that the Shi'ites say "all Sunnis have a tail (like a dog)."  He then accused the USG of conspiring against him and Makki by accusing them of "fictitious crimes."  Later in the conversation, Duleimi rambled in evident confusion: "I do not understand, what do you want from me.  You never submitted me one dollar."  3. (S/NF) Comment: Though Duleimi's grief was genuine, his troubles are largely of his own manufacture.  His ardent sectarianism and ill-concealed sympathy for the Sunni insurgency, to say nothing of the car bombs conveniently parked outside his office, epitomize the worst aspects of Sunni political leadership in the post-Saddam era. CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000079  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: VENICE COMMUNIQUE TEXT ON ARTICLE 140  1.  During a January 9 meeting with Ambassador Crocker, Italian Ambassador to Iraq Maurizio Melani mentioned a December 18-22 conference in Venice focused on Article 140. He noted that the conference included participation by members of the Iraqi Council of Representatives and Kurdish National Assembly, and passed the conference's final communique to the Ambassador.  Text of the communique is below.  2.  Begin text:  Venice Final Communique adopted  Upon the invitation of the International Alliance for Justice, Mr. Bakhtiar Amin and No Peace Without Justice, in cooperation with the Iraqi National Assembly, the Kurdistan National Assembly-Iraq, and with the support of the Italian Ministry for Foreign Affairs, an International Conference on Diverse Cities and Dispute Areas was convened on 18-22 December 2007 in the historic and auspicious surroundings of the city of Venice.  The Conference gathered Deputy Speakers and Members of both the Iraqi Parliament and the Kurdistan Parliament, representatives of their various political groupings, Governors, and representatives of Provincial and City administrators in Iraq, together with the experts and scholars from diverse and disputed areas around the world.  The Conference built on the solid foundations of the outcomes of the previous discussions on Practical Federalism in Iraq held in Venice on 18-26 July 2006, in Erbil, Kurdistan-Iraq on 10-16 July 2007 and in Rome on 26-27 September 2007, also convened by the International Alliance for Justice and No Peace Without Justice.  Discussions were conducted in a spirit of mutual respect, objective analysis, dialogue and friendliness, and were underpinned by a shared commitment to the best interests of Iraq as a whole, with a view to discussing and resolving complex issues by taking into account the widest variety of positions and interests.  Within this constructive atmosphere, participants discussed many of the problems associated with settling the political status of disputed areas, and considered how the foundations for long-term stability and prosperity might be built through the careful and committed management of local diversity.  With reference to these discussions, and to the opinions submitted and presented, participants agreed upon the following recommendations:  1.  The existence of ethnic, religious, sectarian and cultural diversities creates the necessity to believe in it and respect it.  2.  Acknowledge that the problem in Kirkuk is its self determination.  It,s a real problem that requires a solution based on democracy principle, respect of human rights and loyalty to Iraq within a new democratic, federal and unified system.  3.  The problem must be divided, and a solution must be found at the satisfaction of all parties.  4.  Adopt dialogue, commit to national peace, reject violence and threats in all its forms, and adopt peaceful methods to solve problems which should be the basis for any solution. No deviation should be allowed, under any circumstances.  5.  Request the Iraqi political forces and groups to take their historical responsibilities to achieve a real political agreement that guarantees rights for all components of the Iraqi people with its different sects and ethnicities.  6.  The Kirkuk administration should be jointly administered between the different ethnicities of the city: Arabs, Kurds, Turkmen, and Chaldo-Assyrians.  7.  Awareness should be expanded in the fields of tolerance, federalism, by raising the facts of the present, while past injustice should only remembered as lessons to avoid repeating such injustice, reject disagreements, and promote peaceful coexistence.  8.  Find suitable methods to strengthen friendship and relations of love between different ethnicities in disputed areas, and disseminate the spirit of tolerance and coexistence in those areas.  9.  The comprehensive aspect of article 140 of the Iraqi  BAGHDAD 00000079  002 OF 002   Constitution must be stressed in its two paragraphs, one and two.  10.  The need for more transparency in solving article 140 of the constitution should be stressed.  11.  Article 140 is the basis to deal with the problem. Providing the appropriate atmosphere is the method to achieve the solution as per this article.  12.  Release all detainees who have not been convicted on any charge, by any party detaining the, and exhort all efforts to orient those released to carrying messages of love, peace and tolerance amongst their communities.  13.  Continue the normalization process and do not use issues related to the process of normalization for political purposes.  14.  Activate the Property Claims Commission and provide it with necessary financial resources, judges and establish a special Cassation Commission.  15.  Ban demographic changes that could lead to new realities and proceed with just treatment of previous changes.  16.  Address (abolish) all abuses that have taken place after 9 April 2003 all over Iraq, and submit these to the legal rules.  17.  Take into consideration the situation in areas included in Article 140, and not attempt to change power balances in these areas by arming civilians.  18.  Economic factors should be stressed and the living standards of the citizens of diverse areas improved by eliminating unemployment and creating job opportunities on an equal basis for all society,s components.  19.  Allocate an extraordinary budget and give priority to regions with diversity.  20.  Increase the percentage of Cheldo-Assyrian members in the Governorate Councils and the Parliament, so as to compensate for events of the previous elections.  21.  Recommend the donor countries, United Nations and other international humanitarian organizations to contribute to the reconstruction of the city of Kirkuk and other areas covered by article 140, and bring back life in them.  22.  An Iraqi solution achieved according to the Constitution and taking into account the complexity of the matter, with the technical support of UNAMI, should be politically supported and guaranteed by the international community, if it is so wished by the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi parties concerned.  End Text CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000087  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/11/2018 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: TALABANI ON RESTARTING THE 3+1 AND MODERATING KURDISH PUBLIC STATEMENTS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary: Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih on January 9 met with the Ambassador on the occasion of Talabani,s return to Baghdad from the Kurdistan region.  Talabani said he is ready to move forward on the 3 1 mechanism now that all the principals are back in Baghdad.  He said he and Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Massoud Barzani had agreed the previous week in Erbil that Iraqi Kurdish leaders would keep their public statements strictly in line with U.S. policy, and to drop their suggested changes to the hydrocarbon law in order to restart movement on the draft that passed the Council of Ministers last February.  End summary.  2. (C) Talabani declared readiness to move forward on the 3 1.  Visible political progress in his view is necessary by the end of January, and Barzani is prepared to fly to Baghdad whenever necessary to join the meetings.  Talabani sought the Ambassador,s guidance on what the group should discuss.  The Ambassador conveyed Prime Minister Maliki,s suggestion that the 3 1 should discuss the negotiating team for the long-term security agreement with the U.S., and also suggested that the group discuss how to institutionalize the 3 1 meetings. Barham Salih said National Security Advisor Muwaffaq al-Rubaie had suggested a secretariat for the 3 1, which would include Rubaie, Salih, and Presidency Council chief of staff Naseer al-Ani and would prepare issues for discussion to lend structure to the 3 1.  3. (C) The President said during his visit to Erbil he and Barzani had agreed no Kurdish official, especially Barzani, would make any statement contradicting Washington,s Iraq policy.  Barzani allegedly promised to refrain from public comment on foreign affairs -- including with regard to Turkey -- and to leave these issues to Baghdad.  The Iraqi Kurdish leadership would cooperate with Turkey against the PKK, according to Talabani, and to this end an unspecified KRG representative continued to meet weekly with TNIO chief Emre Taner.  4. (C) Talabani discussed the prospects for legislative progress, acknowledging this would be necessary to shore up support in Washington for continued engagement in Iraq.  He and Barzani had also agreed to abandon their two outstanding quibbles with the hydrocarbon draft that passed the Council of Ministers in February, and endorse the agreed-upon draft in its entirety.  Barham Salih noted the mood in the COR is positive at the moment, and that he had received a standing ovation the day before following his presentation on the proposed 2008 budget.  Minister of Trade Abd al-Falah al-Sudani, on the other hand, had been "torn to pieces" during the same session, a reflection in both Salih,s and Talabani,s opinions of the fact that Sudani is a good man but a failure in his job.  Finally, Talabani was optimistic about the imminent passage of de-Ba,thification reform, dismissing Sadrist opposition by saying "the Sadrists object to everything."  5. (C) Talabani addressed his recent comments on the 1975 Algiers Accord between Iraq and Iran.  He said his intent was not unilaterally to abrogate the treaty, but rather to scrap the many dated agreements on the Iraq-Iran border in favor of a new understanding.  He noted that former Iranian President Khatami wishes to visit Iraq to meet with Talabani, and that the split between the camps of President Ahmadi-Nejad and former President Rafsanjani is widening. CROCKER 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000088  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EIND, ECON, EFIN, IZ SUBJECT: THREE STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES FIND STRATEGIC PARTNERS  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Three cement plants in Iraq have found joint venture partners in consortia built in each case from different European firms joining with separate Iraqi partner companies.  The deals are not final -- negotiations may take several more months -- and are to be developed around production-sharing contracts and equity investments, thus are not privatizations, in that the Ministry of Industry and Minerals retains ownership.  But the consortia will be responsible for management, purchase of inputs and payment of employee salaries in exchange for a specified share of the physical output over a 10- to 15-year term.  To make the deals work, each of the consortia must make substantial (multi-million dollar) investments in plant and equipment modernization.  The production sharing model should allow the companies to recover that investment in 3-4 years.  END SUMMARY  2. (SBU) Minister of Industry and Minerals (MoIM) Fawzi Hariri told EMIN on January 9 that the Ministry was finalizing a short list of joint venture projects to be announced imminently. The Ministry had begun in May 2005 with basket of 13 state-owned companies thought to be able to generate operating profits if they could attract a strategic partner for a joint venture.  The basket was culled after several meetings with prospective partners to four state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the cement sector.  Hariri reported to EMIN that a meeting in Jordan to finalize preliminary partnership agreements, to finish January 10, would likely settle on two, possibly three handshakes that would then proceed to negotiations for the final terms of the joint venture agreements.  THE COMPANIES --------------  3. (SBU) Per the Minister's information, it appears that cement plants in Al Anbar, Kirkuk (At Tamim), and Al Muthanna provinces are a step further toward productive joint ventures.  Three consortiums are the "selectees".  the first is a partnership between an Iraqi firm, Al Jawhara Al Khalijiyah, and a Romanian partner Uzen.  They are to partner with the MoIM to restart the cement plant at Al Qa'im, at the Syrian border in Al Anbar.  In Kirkuk it is a partnership among the Iraqi company Al Sharq Al Awsat and an unidentified German company.  Last, in Al Muthanna, the partnership is between the German firm KHD and an Iraqi company called the Economic Group.  While the Minister had briefed that different consortia seemed headed toward getting the nod in Al Muthanna -- he had pointed to a Swiss-led consortium -- and had expected a French firm to partner in Karbala, in the event Karbala seems to be left in the cold, and Al Qa'im -- initially thought to have been the hardest to move -- has found a suitor.  THE DEAL ---------  4. (SBU) Minister Hariri set out the essential terms of the joint ventures as follows:  The strategic partner would enter into an agreement in which the financial benefit comes from a contract for a share of production -- these will NOT / NOT be deals in which the partner takes an equity position.  The strategic partner could take up to 65% share of the production -- subject to negotiation -- with the Ministry retaining the balance.  The life of the production sharing contract would be 10 to 15 years.  5. (SBU) The strategic partner for its part would invest on the order of $100 million in the SOE, the Minister said.  The partner would also be responsible for employee salaries and -- critically -- company management.  These terms as described are the framework for the deals.  Once the announcement of the selectees is made, a negotiation process would begin, with the agreements to be finalized over the next several months.  Minister Hariri said that the consulting firm of Grant-Thornton, part of DOD Deputy Under Secretary Brinkley's Task Force to Improve Business and Stability  SIPDIS Operations in Iraq (TFBSO), is to provide legal technical assistance in the negotiations toward final contracts.  THE ANNOUNCEMENT -----------------  6. (SBU) The Minister said he expected the two, possibly three selectees to be determined at the end of the January 9-10 meeting in Jordan.  He would present the joint venture concept to the Council of Ministers (CoM) on Monday, January 14, and make a formal announcement at a press conference the following Tuesday.  WHAT'S NEXT ------------  7. (SBU) Minister Hariri said the next phase of his efforts to restructure the SOE sector would be to build another basket of target companies -- this time as many as 30 -- that may become attractive targets if they first were to receive an infusion of investment from the capital budget.  He provided EMIN with a list of some 21 companies that were his priority recipients for up to $300 mn in total capital investment in 2008 (emailed to NEA/I-ECON).  He explained that, in deciding between whether to divide the $300 mn  BAGHDAD 00000088  002 OF 002   evenly among provinces, or to focus funds on SOEs with greatest turn-around potential, his list reflects the latter option.  8. (SBU) Hariri said he was ready to issue 16 tenders just as soon as the CoR has approved the national budget.  He has made it his goal to have all $300 mn committed by August 31, in order to be well placed to request a budget supplemental for the SOE sector.  CROCKER 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000090  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  TREASURY FOR CMORAVEC, SBLEIWEIS COMMERCE FOR AKLEINER, SHAMROCK  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2018 TAGS: ECON, ETRD, EFIN, IZ SUBJECT: DE FACTO NON-IMPLEMENTATION OF ARAB LEAGUE BOYCOTT IN IRAQ  REF: A. BAGHDAD 0042      B. 07 BAGHDAD 1944      C. 07 BAGHDAD 1308      D. 06 BAGHDAD 4690  Classified By: Charles P. Ries, Economic Minister, for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Embassy's quiet diplomacy on the issue of Iraq's implementation of the Arab League Boycott (ALB) has borne fruit.  The Council of Ministers (CoM) has agreed to allow trademark applications submitted by PepsiCo to be registered, and the first five were officially registered on January 8, 2008.  The Minister of Industry and Minerals, who championed the decision in the CoM on the grounds that ALB provisions hinder economic development, states that this decision to not implement ALB provisions should apply to other areas affected by ALB provisions handled under different ministries.  2. (C) From another angle, it has become apparent that Iraqi firms are free to sign contracts with Embassy that contain clauses certifying that the firm will not comply with ALB provisions, without fear that they will be prosecuted under current Iraqi law.  Although current Iraqi law continues to contain ALB provisions, the GoI has taken a clear step in the trademark case in the direction of non-implementation, as have other League of Arab States members.  This should have a positive impact on Iraq's ability to attract foreign direct investment.  We suggest that the accumulation of de facto non-implementation practices warrants consideration of removal of Iraq from the Department of Treasury's anti-boycott list as a "country under review".  END SUMMARY.  Trademarks, Patents, Copyrights, Company Registration --------------------  3. (C) PepsiCo's VP for International Government Affairs notified Embassy and USG agencies that the company's five most important trademark applications in Iraq were officially registered on January 8, 2008.  NOTE: PepsiCo has suggested, and we agree, that publicity of this fact is not appropriate, in part to allow the company space within which to prepare future action against product counterfeiters.  END NOTE.  She said that other applications, presented through a different agent, would soon be registered as well.  This is the end of a process by which the applications are submitted, and if found to be in proper form, are gazetted and subject to a 60-day notification and objection period.  In the absence of objections, the official date of registration was the end of the 60-day period for the first five applications.  4. (C) This is the culmination of nearly three years of quiet diplomacy on behalf of U.S. businesses seeking trademark protection in Iraq.  It is the result of the decision of the Minister of Industry and Minerals, Fawzi Hariri, to champion a practice of non-implementation of the ALB provisions that exist in Iraqi law.  As in many League of Arab States member countries, it would be politically difficult for the GoI to publicly renounce the ALB, but it appears that the GoI is ready to establish a practice of non-implementation.  In a meeting with EMIN on January 9, Hariri stressed that his winning argument was that ALB implementation acts as an unacceptable break to foreign investment in Iraq, and unnecessarily hampered the country's economic recovery and development.  He noted that while the PepsiCo trademark applications are handled by the Trademark office within his ministry, he had obtained the cooperation of the entire Council of Ministers on the question.  He said that this would affect other areas where  ALB provisions impact on investors and businesses.  We presume this means that applications for copyright protection in the Ministry of Culture, patent protection in the Ministry of Planning, and company registration applications in the Ministry of Trade, should now all receive the same treatment.  Firms Free To Do Business with the USG ----------------------  5. (C) Reftel A reported that, although Embassy felt it wise to request a waiver of the provisions Section 565 of Title V, Part C of the Foreign Relations Authorization Ace, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (PL 103-236, 22 CFR 2679c) to ensure our ability to carry on diplomatic functions, in practice over  BAGHDAD 00000090  002 OF 002   the previous year it had become apparent that Iraqi firms with which we had contracted did not seem constrained by ALB provision in Iraqi law.  In all cases, firms had willingly signed contracts containing clauses certifying that the firm would not comply with ALB provisions.  We believe this to be anecdotal evidence of another area in which the GoI has determined that implementation of ALB provisions is not in the country's national interest.  COMMENT --------  6. (C) Post believes PepsiCo's news warrants quiet celebration of significant progress made.  The anecdotal evidence of non-implementation against Iraqi firms should also be taken as evidence of progress.  This pattern of non-implementation, and the CoM's response to Minister Hariri's economically-based arguments, seems to show that the GoI "gets it".  7. (C) As we have urged in the past, we believe that generating public attention to these decisions for non-implementation is likely to undercut the CoM, and may push individual ministers to make public statements in support of the ALB.  We will seek opportunities to applaud the CoM's decision in private; determine whether our experience in contracting indicates another instance of implicit non-implementation; and encourage an explicit if private statement from instances of authority that the GoI has determined to make this a de facto, if not de jure, policy.  Given the positive evidence, we suggest that it is time to consider removing Iraq from the Department of Treasury's anti-boycott list as a country "under review". END COMMENT. CROCKER 
