C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000005  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IR, IZ, Shia Islamists SUBJECT: SHIA POLITICO:  JA'AFARI HAS TO GO  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Summary:  In a meeting on December 31 with Qassim Daoud, a moderate liberal in the Shia Alliance, the Ambassador stated that, while the ultimate decision rested with the Iraqi people, the U.S. Government, as a partner in the new Iraq wished to make its concerns clear.  He laid out five main points: the need for a national unity government; a more efficiently run Prime Minister's office; nonpartisan and technocratic leadership of security ministries; no militia involvement in ministries; and the need for capable, qualified candidates, especially in key ministries like Oil, Finance, and Foreign Affairs.  Daoud agreed and called for the active mediation of the U.S. Government, particularly to convince current Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari to step aside and to support the candidacy of SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi.  Daoud did admit to some reservations about Mahdi - namely that he was too close to Iran and giving away too much to the Kurds - but stressed that he was by far the only viable candidate for the position.  Daoud mentioned that his own name had been put forward to head the Ministry of Interior, and he suggested several names for the other key ministries.  Finally, in response to the Ambassador's query about Allawi's possible role in the new government, Daoud replied that Allawi's participation could only be through his Iraqiya List, since Allawi would never accept any post other than Prime Minister.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- -- Need Competent Professionals to Head Ministries --------------------------------------------- --  2. (C) In a meeting on December 31 with Qassim Daoud, a moderate liberal in the Shia alliance, the Ambassador stressed the need for a national unity government staffed by competent technocrats.  The Ambassador stated that, while the ultimate decision rested with the Iraqi people, the U.S. Government, as a partner in the new Iraq wished to make its concerns clear.  He laid out five main points:  - All main parties have expressed their support for a national unity government, although it is not clear that everyone shares the same definition of "national unity";  - The Prime Minister's office must be much better run in this new administration.  The new Iraqi government, whoever is chosen as the Prime Minister, must create and develop decision-making capacities at the working level; for example, a department for policy options that could present interagency-coordinated decision options for the Prime Minister's approval and a process for follow-up;  - The security ministries are of top importance and will need strong leadership that is nonpartisan, is able to bring people together, and will gain the confidence of all citizens;  - People affiliated with militias are not acceptable for senior positions.  While the final decision is up to the Iraqi people, if some of these are chosen the U.S. Government will not be able to cooperate with them;  - Ministerial appointments should be awarded on the basis of technical expertise, not as political rewards.  Key ministries like Oil, Finance, and Foreign Affairs should be given careful consideration.  ------------------------- Yes, But Ja'afari Must Go -------------------------  3. (C) Daoud agreed on the need for a national unity government and stated that he had told U.S. officials during his last trip to Washington in September that Iraq was severely polarized between the Shia and Sunni Arabs. American involvement is critical precisely because it is Iraq's partner, and if necessary the U.S. Government's refusal to cooperate with someone would be enough of a signal to Iraqi leaders.  The Shia Alliance was unified on one point - current Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari must step aside. According to Daoud, in his meeting with British Ambassador William Patey on December 30, Patey stated his intention to inform Ja'afari that Coalition Forces would not support him. Daoud advised Patey to make sure that Ja'afari could not spin the meeting to his own advantage by also telling Jewad al-Maliki and Ali al-Adeeb of the Coalition's decision. (Comment:  We doubt that Ambassador Patey spoke for MNFI, but in our discussions with President Jalal Talabani and British Ambassador Patey, both emphasized to the Ambassador that Ja'afari's reappointment was unacceptable.  End Comment.)  4. (C) Emphasizing his own close relationship with Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, Daoud stated that Sistani was also concerned about the poor quality of the leadership in both the Prime Minister's office and the Transitional National Assembly (TNA).  Sistani reportedly told Daoud that current Prime Minister Ja'afari gave Sistani the impression that the U.S. supported his reappointment as Prime Minister.  Sistani expressed surprise at this since he felt Ja'afari had been a disappointment.  Daoud reassured Sistani that the U.S. had made no such overture to Ja'afari and indeed shared Sistani's criticism of Ja'afari's administration.  5. (C) The main priority for the Shia Alliance, Daoud continued, was to choose a Prime Minister from among its ranks.  In Daoud's opinion, the only viable candidate was Adil Abd al-Mahdi.  There are only two types of politicians in Iraq, Daoud stated, the dilettantes, who collect ministerial postings, and the statesmen.  Mahdi was one of the few statesmen in Iraqi politics: he has good strategic vision, is a capable negotiator, and always seeks to work as part of a team.  There are two concerns about Mahdi, however, confided Daoud:  - Mahdi is too close to Iran.  Before Mahdi went to Washington, he called Daoud two days before to ask for his passport.  When he told Daoud it was for an Iranian visa application, Daoud refused to go to Tehran with Mahdi.  He told Madhi that he had no wish to appear to be under Tehran's guidance.  He advised Mahdi, however, to arrange for a short visit to Ankara as well to appear as though Mahdi was concerned about all of Iraq's neighbors, advice which Mahdi reportedly heeded.  Daoud noted that, while he was personally not anti-Iranian, he shared many of Washington's fears about Iran trying to control Iraq through their shared Shia religion and about Iran's nuclear program.  Stopping Iran's nuclear aspirations would also benefit Iraq's regional security, noted Daoud.  - Daoud was also concerned that Mahdi was giving too much to the Kurds.  National unity, in Daoud's opinion, did not only mean an arrangement with the Kurds.  Currently, the Shia Alliance had two delegations negotiating with the Kurds and the other parties.  This should shortly be merged into one delegation, and a trilateral meeting of the Kurds, Tawaffuq, and the Shia Alliance should be held to hammer out the details jointly.  This meeting should not be closed, however, but open to other groups as well, including former Prime Minister and leader of the Iraqiya List Ayad Allawi and the Sunni Arab National Dialog Group leader Saleh al-Mutlak. Daoud reported that Mutlak had told him he wanted to join forces with the Shia Alliance.  6. (C) The Ambassador noted that other names were also being floated as candidates for Prime Minister --  Fadilah's Nadim Jabiri, for example.  Daoud dismissed as "not serious" all candidates other than Ja'afari and Mahdi and stated that reports of TNA Deputy Speaker Hussein al-Shahristani's positioning for the role had reached even Sistani's ears. According to Daoud, Sistani had merely laughed at the idea of Shahristani as Prime Minister.  Ja'afari has been alienating everyone with his recent behavior, Daoud claimed.  "Ja'afari believes he has a 'religious responsibility' to be Prime Minister - this language is reminiscent of Saddam," stated Daoud.  --------------------- Potential Candidates? ---------------------  7. (C) The Ambassador then asked Daoud whom, in his opinion, the Shia Alliance might put forward as ministerial candidates.  Daoud stated that Sistani's office, Abd al-Aziz al Hakim, and Patey had urged him to accept the Minister of Interior (MOI) position, a job Daoud was loath to take. Daoud noted that he preferred an interagency coordinator position.  (Comment: Daoud has told Embassy officers in the past that he wanted a position similar to that of the U.S. Secretary of Homeland Security. End Comment.)  If he were  SIPDIS forced to take the MOI, however, Daoud told Hakim he would do it only under one condition - that he be given free rein, without interference from anyone, especially Badr Corps elements.  This was all contingent on Ja'afari not continuing as Prime Minister, however.  If the Kurds balked, the MOI position could be offered to Kosrat Rasoul Ali.  (Comment: Daoud mentioned several times how unwilling he was to accept the MOI position; when pressed by the Ambassador for a plan, all he could say was that he would assess the situation. End Comment.)  8. (C) As for the other ministries, Daoud's recommendations were:  - Ministry of Oil: Thamir al-Ghadhban, the former Minister of Oil during the Allawi government.  According to Daoud, al-Ghadhban is a first-rate technocrat, manager, and strategic planner.  - Ministry of Finance: Muhammad Ali al-Hakim.  He is a secular man, despite his family, said Daoud.  He also worked for the Allawi government as Minister of Communications and in the Ministry of Finance; he is currently Mahdi's advisor. Mahdi felt, however, that al-Hakim's family ties would preclude him from getting this position.  Daoud then speculated that a Sunni Arab might be in line for Finance, although that person would have to be a technocrat and have a good working relationship with whoever is Prime Minister.  - Ministry of Defense: The Sunni Arabs should submit names for this position.  As far as Daoud is concerned, the current Minister of Defense, Sa'adun al-Dulaymi, would be acceptable.  Ayad al-Sammara'i would also be a good choice, or even Mahmoud al-Mashhadani.  Al-Mashhadani is a Salafist, but a man of compromise.  Usama al-Tikriti could also be a possibility.  - Minister of State for Ministerial Affairs: Muhammad Ali al-Hakim would fit in this role, said Daoud, if he were rejected for the Finance position.  ------------------ A Role for Allawi? ------------------  9. (C) When asked whether he envisioned a role for Allawi in the new government, Daoud stated that it could only be through his Iraqiya List.  "Allawi will never consent to be anything other than the Prime Minister," stated Daoud. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000013  SIPDIS  CONFIDENTIAL RELEASABLE TO MNF-I  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2016 TAGS: ECON, EPET, ENRG, PGOV, KCOR, PINR, IZ, Petrolium, Energy Sector SUBJECT: BAYJI REFINERY FUEL DISTRIBUTION RESTARTED  REF: BAGHDAD 5153  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David C. Litt for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C/REL MNF-I) SUMMARY: Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) Chalabi, who is now the acting Minister of Oil, informed us the Bayji blockade has been broken and trucks loaded and dispatched to Baghdad.  He also reported pipeline repairs had been expedited on the energy corridors between Baghdad and Bayji, as well as from Bayji to Kirkuk.  Chalabi told us a warrant has been issued for Mishan Al Jabouri, the GOI official with oversight of the Strategic Infrastructure Battalions, for his involvement in corruption in a skimming of salaries from the infrastructure security forces.  END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) DPM Chalabi met with Ambassador at his request New Year's Eve to discuss the fuel crisis situation in Iraq.  The meeting was attended by the Acting Commander of MNF-I LTG Houghton, A/DCM, IRMO Director of Operations, and ECONOFF. Subsequent telephonic updates were made.  ------------------------ REFINERIES AND PIPELINES ------------------------  3. (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi informed us that intimidation levels at Bayji refinery have been reduced.  Chalabi said some fuel had been delivered by 10 trucks to Tikrit on December 31.  He added that 29 trucks had been loaded with fuel and were dispatched to Baghdad on December 31.  Coalition forces had stopped them on the road, but MNF-I secured their release and the convoy proceeded to Baghdad.  There were another 30 trucks on January 1 and 130 expected by January 2 to be dispatched from Bayji to Baghdad carrying fuel with police escort.  Chalabi said this would total delieries of over 3.5 million liters of fuel (1 million gallons).  (NOTE: Normal consumption in Baghdad is currently at a low of only 5.5 million liters, or 1.5 million gallons, per day. END NOTE.) Two platoons from the 4th Iraqi Army Division are reported to have been deployed as added security forces to Bayji refinery as of January 2.  4. (C/REL MNF-I) Bayji Refinery remains shut down due to its product storage tanks being full.  The 22-inch product line from Bayji to Baghdad was repaired and is currently being gravity filled.  It is scheduled to be fully filled by late January 2, and pumping will be initiated at 10 million liters (2.5 million gallons) per day to Baghdad.  Chalabi called the Director General of the Oil Pipeline Company to check on the progress of the repairs during the meeting.  He reported repairs were ongoing on the 26-inch pipeline between Kirkuk and Bayji, with completion expected by January 3, and he expects completion of the repairs on the 40-inch pipeline by January 10.  Chalabi has ordered crews from other regions to support these critical pipeline repairs.  5. (C/REL MNF-I) The immediate goal is to fix the 22-inch product line and send additional fuel to Baghdad by pipeline, providing needed space in the storage tanks at Bayji and supplying Baghdad with critical fuel.  Bayji refinery can restart when 20 million liters (5 million gallons) of storage space is available.  It will take 4-5 days to bring the refinery up to normal production levels.  Immediate repair of the 26-inch pipeline will provide crude oil for refining at Bayji, while repair of the 40-inch pipeline will provide redundancy of crude oil supply.  Bayji can refine product for the next seven days with the 1.3 million barrels of crude oil stored at the IT1A storage depot.  The goal is to have the 26-inch pipeline repaired before Bayji runs out of crude oil supplies from the IT1A depot.  6. (C/REL MNF-I) DPM Chalabi is to fly to inspect the Bayji refinery on January 3 with MNF-I aviation support.  A follow-on meeting of the infrastructure security steering group will be held on January 4 to assess the energy sector infrastructure status.  7. (SBU) Chalabi will refer the alleged intimidators at Bayji to the legal system of the GOI for prosecution.  He said that, as a Minister, he has the authority to refer charges to the judicial system in Iraq.  He stated that the GOI should take a hard line against these smugglers and intimidators. He said the Tikrit Governing Council and the local authorities support the price rises and government actions to break the blockade.  8. (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi told us the corruption investigation of Mishan Al Jabouri (reftel), the GOI official with oversight of the Strategic Infrastructure Battalions (SIBs), had led to a warrant for his arrest for stealing 900,000,000 Iraqi Dinars (USD 600,000) per month from the SIBs' salary funds. LITT 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000014  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KDEM, IZ, Parliament SUBJECT: AYATOLLAH AL-SADR LEANS TOWARD ALLAWI FOR PRIME MINISTER  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David C. Litt for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Summary: On December 31, Baghdad's most senior Shi'a cleric Ayatollah Hussein al-Sadr told Ambassador Khalilzad that Ayad Allawi would be the best Prime Minister for Iraq, if Allawi can temper his rhetoric.  Sadr also supported current PM Ja'afari for the presidency.  Sadr was concerned about rising sectarian divisions in Iraq.  The Ambassador agreed with Sadr's view that the new government should be non-sectarian and representative of all Iraqis and advised that candidates for key positions should be able to attract broad support.  We need to encourage moderate trends in Shi'a Islam, such as those represented by Ayatollah al-Sadr.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ------- Iranians in South, Kurds in North, Threaten Division --------------------------------------------- -------  2. (C) Sadr praised the December 15 election as the beginning of the path for Iraq to democracy and freedom, but noted that Iraqis voted largely along sectarian lines rather than for political platforms.  The Ambassador agreed with this assessment.  As a result, they agreed, the sectarian rift between Sunni and Shia has grown.  This threatens to weaken Iraq, said Sadr, who feared increased Iranian influence - especially in southern Iraq - as a result.  3. (C) Sadr felt that Iranian influence has permeated Iraq's nine southern provinces.  With the regional oil wealth, he feared further Iranian interest in the south.  Sadr vowed his love for Iraq over Sunni or Shia sectarian divisions.  He implied that Iran's different history, culture, and understanding of Islam threaten further division within Iraq.  4. (C) Regarding Kurdistan, Sadr said the Kurds would already have created their own state, if they had a strong enough economic base.  He implied that, as the economy improves there, Kurds would push harder for independence. Sadr emphasized the importance of Kirkuk to the Arab community in Iraq and warned that the Kurds would support Shi'a control of the south simply for the chaos this would create.  In such a vacuum, the Kurds could more easily stake full claim to the three provinces in which they hold a majority.  --------------------------------------------- --- No to Mehdi, Yes to Allawi in the New Government --------------------------------------------- ---  5. (C) The Ambassador advised Sadr to help create a national unity government with officials who are competent, representative of all Iraqis, and free of militia affiliations.  He also said the Council of Representatives' choices for the new ministers of Interior and Defense should have the confidence of different ethnic and sectarian groups.  Sadr suggested Zarqis abu Sarmak, a former MoD advisor to Ayad Allawi, as the new minister of Defense.  6. (C) Sadr felt that Prime Minister Ibrahim al Ja'afari is "the best of the bad options" as the next president because "he makes decisions based on his own convictions."  Sadr complained that Vice President Abd al-Mehdi, on the other hand, cannot make decisions because President Jalal Talabani is a "dagger at his belly".  7. (C) The Ambassador pointed out that the United Iraqi Alliance (555) will likely be eight to ten seats short of a majority in the Council of Representatives.  As a result, they will need to propose candidates for the major positions whom the other representatives broadly support.  Sadr said the best candidate outside of the 555 for Prime Minister is Ayad Allawi-- if Allawi adopts a more moderate message.  Sadr added that Vice President Abd al-Mehdi should not hold a major role in the new government because his "Islamic, sectarian" views divide the country.  8. (C) Biographic Note: Ayatollah Hussein al-Sadr is a moderate, well-respected Shi'a leader.  His wife and Moqtada al Sadr's wife are sisters.  He returned to Iraq in 2003 from London.  9. (C) Comment:  A major challenge to USG interests during negotiations leading to a new Iraqi government will be to strengthen the moderate Shi'a clerics, whose religious philosophy opposes political Islam.  Radical Shi'a clerics and militias will seek to impose a sectarian government on Iraq, even if it means conceding Kirkuk to the Kurds, which may speed Kurdish aspirations for independence.  Ayatollah Sadr represents a counterweight to the followers of the strand of political Islam championed by the late Ayatollah Khomeini.  Hussein al-Sadr would also balance Iran's challenge to Iraq's national and secular identity. LITT 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000015  SIPDIS  STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: OPRC, KMDR, KPAO, IZ, Elections, Media SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD  SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials include Iraq's future in 2006, the political discussions and conflicts surrounding parliamentary elections, and the utility of sending international observers to Iraq to review election results.  In its third-page editorial entitled "Happy New Year to the Occupation," independent Al-Fourat described how Iraqi leaders selfishly cooperate with the occupation while Iraqi citizens are threatened by death. In "The New Year," PUK- affiliated Al-Ittihad focuses on the security and stability that all Iraqis crave in the new year. The editorial argues that security is the responsibility of the new government, which must put Iraq's affairs on the right path to prevent a repeat of last year's disasters. In its last-page editorial entitled "The Next Three Years," independent Az-Zaman asserts that after three years in Iraq, conditions remain dreadful for Iraqi citizens. The author raises the question of the next three years, and whether Iraq will be better off, especially after the withdrawal of U.S. forces. END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------- TABLE OF CONTENTS -------------------------------  A. "International Committee" (Al-Adala, 1/2) B. "Elections and International Monitors" (Ad-Dustoor, 1/2) C. "Forming the Government" (As-Sabah, 1/2) D. "Division Is Better Than Death Based on Identity" (Al- Bayyna Al-Jadeedah, 1/2)  ---------------------------------------- SELECTED COMMENTARIES ----------------------------------------  A. "International Committee" (Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI, published this third page editorial in support of the international committee investigating election results, by Dr. Ali Kleef)  "Those opposing the election results have agreed to resort to an international investigative committee to look into their complaints. There is no doubt that winners also have their complaints, and the international committee will assess and study these objections on the bases of legal standards previously adopted by the IECI, which has confirmed that these complaints will not change the overall election results. If the international committee were to discover major violations in one or two polling centers, it would only be normal to disregard these votes.  "The intervention of the international committee in the electoral process in Iraq will add a further sense of legitimacy and additional confirmation of its compliance with the international standards that were followed by the IECI and ignored by certain parties because they were not presented with results that met their exaggerated expectations. These expectations were supported by an ignorance of laws governing the elections and the work of the IECI. This led some to harshly attack the commission after its refusal to be the scapegoat for the losers.  "This step might convince those who rejected the will of the nation and the initial results since they were the ones who demanded the intervention of the international committee. The initial results have revealed the size of each political entity and unveiled the will of the people. It is unreasonable for some to try and undermine the will of the nation, which has led to a true formula representing the components of Iraqi society that should be accepted and dealt with by all in a positive manner.  "The world witnessed the Iraqi election and it knew that the odds would be on one side or the other based on a sound reading of facts, including the large majority of people whose rights were deprived by the previous regime and were finally granted the chance to have their say in the new government. They certainly had their say in the parliamentary election, which might have annoyed some parties. Surely the arrival of the international committee will confirm the people's decision and support their true representatives."  B. "Elections and International Monitors" (Ad-Dustoor, independent, published this front-page editorial by Bassim Al-Sheikh) "The arrival of international monitors to follow up and investigate election results might be considered an important step to silence those who want to make the election process a major crisis, rather than a solution for all of Iraqis' problems. Whatever conclusion the international monitors reach, it will not greatly affect that which has been announced already. Followers of the electoral process will not find many violations. The whole process in its final form is almost perfect, and now it will be based on an international point of view.  "While some political entities who questioned the electoral results demanded appeals to be investigated as a main condition for engaging in any political settlement, many accepted these settlements in spite of their extreme stances regarding results, as if the whole process, for them, is about getting posts, ministerial portfolios, and publicity. And some selfish people who opposed the results threatened to set Iraq on fire to provoke a sectarian war.  "Whether political entities accept or refuse the election results, the international monitors' report, which is welcomed by all parties, will have the final say and will silence everyone in an attempt to calm the situation and reinforce the election results, melting away justifications that some publicized for well known reasons."  C. "Forming the Government" (As-Sabah, Iraqi Media Network, published a front-page editorial by editor in chief Mohammad Abdul-Jabbar about the formation of the next government. The editorial reads in part)  "Forming a government in stable democratic systems depends on electoral rights, which play an essential part. If a party wins enough votes, then it will form the government alone, but if it lacks a majority of votes, then it seeks alliances to form a coalition government. This democratic solution is difficult to implement in a new-born democracy."  D. "Division Is Better Than Death Based on Identity" (Al-Bayyna Al-Jadeedah, affiliated with the Shiite Political Council, published a front-page unattributed editorial about the delay in forming the government. The editorial reads in part)  "All indications suggest that the formation of the next government will be delayedfor a long time because of the illegal demands by groups that work against the United Iraqi Alliance and against electoral rights. All indications suggest that violence and terrorism will increase in the next stage due to the absence of a strong government. We say it frankly: people, especially in southern Iraq, are psychologically prepared for separation in the case of continually increasing violence and unrealistic demands by others. Many people therefore think that division is much better than a united country that is threatened by death."  KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000017  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, OPRC, OIIP, KPAO, IZ SUBJECT: BAGHDAD PD RESULTS (09/01/05 - 12/24/05)  1. Summary.  Embassy Baghdad PAS programming (09/01/05- 12/24/05) addressed post's MPP themes of Democracy, Stability, Prosperity, and Mutual Understanding.  This programming produced positive results from exchange alumni, distribution of books to target audiences in Baghdad and beyond, and a meeting between Iraqi intellectuals and a visiting Senate Foreign Relations Committee staffer.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ------ Exchange Participants Run in December 15 Elections --------------------------------------------- ------  2.  Dr. Salam A. Mahdi, Ministry for Women's Affairs advisor and an alumna of June 2005 International Visitors Leadership Program (IVLP) project "Women's Leadership and Advocacy," ran as a candidate in the December 15 elections as part of Dr. Laith Kubba's slate "National Peace." Embassy Baghdad's political section nominated Dr. Mahdi for the program. Mithal Al-Alusi's list "Iraqi Nation Party" included Tamathir Al-Jenabi, director of the Iraqi Business Center. Al-Jenabi expects to go to the United States next January for the IVLP project "Women as Economic and Business Leaders."  MPP Goal: Democracy  --------------------------------------- New Code of Conduct for Iraqi Officials ---------------------------------------  3.  Nadia K. Hessin, Ethics Advisor for the Iraq Commission on Public Integrity (CPI), expressed gratitude for an opportunity to participate in the International Visitor Leadership Program project "Accountability in Government and Business" (October 27 - November 17, 2005).  Hessin, who is responsible for development, approval, and implementation of the Iraqi government employee "Code of Conduct," told emboff she planned to review the Code of Conduct to ensure that government ministers did not put their political affiliation above their official duties. Nadia also plans to work with CPI's public relations department to publicize the Code of Conduct among the Iraqi public.  MPP Goal: Stability  ------------------------ Books for Journalists... ------------------------  4.  On November 15, the Cultural Affairs Office distributed 40 copies of the Arabic version of IIP-produced "A Responsible Press Office: An Insiders Guide" and "Hi Magazine" at a reception for local Arab press.  The participants also received feedback forms to allow them to submit their comments and additional book requests.  MPP Goals: Democracy/Mutual Understanding  ------------------------ ...Provincial Leaders... ------------------------  5.  At the September Tikrit Provincial Council meeting, Tikrit SET provided "The About America Series" book set to all 42 members of the Council.  Many looked at the books, although some were left behind by members who may be reluctant to be identified with the Coalition Forces.  The rest of the books may have been taken later, when doing so drew less attention.  6.  In October, Tikrit SET gave "The About America Series" book set to the 16 members of the Dialogue and Communicating Committee hosted by the U.S. Commanding General.  The members from Salad Ad Din, Diyala, Sulaimaniya, and Kirkuk are from various sectors-- education, business, media, health and law.  One Kirkuk newspaper owner requested six more copies.  The SET also distributed them to various Salah Ad Din sheiks and government employees and found that they were well received.  MPP Goals: Democracy/Mutual Understanding  ----------------------- ... and School Children -----------------------  7.  The Cultural Affairs Office delivered 100 copies of "What is Democracy" (60 in Arabic and 40 in English), 51 copies of "Hi Magazine," and 20 copies of "Portrait of the USA," to the International Zone-based Optimist Club, a community-service group comprised of Americans and Iraqis. The Optimists distributed the books throughout primary and secondary schools in the International Zone to allow Iraqi students to learn about democracy and life in the United States.  The students were encouraged to complete feedback forms with their impressions and requests for future reading materials.  The students showed particular interest in "Portrait of America" because of their interest in various environments throughout the United States.  MPP Goal: Mutual Understanding  ----------------------------------------- Exchanging Views with Iraqi Intellectuals -----------------------------------------  8.  On November 8, the Public Affairs Counselor (PAC) hosted a dinner in honor of a visiting Senate Foreign Relations Committee staffer, which offered a rare opportunity for Embassy officers and American officials to meet with a group of prominent Baghdad intellectuals in a relaxed social setting and exchange views on major cultural and education issues facing Iraq.  The guests, a Ministry of Culture advisor, the University of Baghdad English Department head, a liberal newspaper editor-in-chief, and a leading Iraqi archaeologist, raised important issues dealing with Iraqi national identity and the need to preserve the country's cultural heritage and instill democratic values in the young generation.  The Public Affairs Section will follow up on proposals by the Iraqi guests for conferences and book translations with the goal of informing the Iraqi public about U.S. society, values, and culture.  MPP Goal: Mutual Understanding  -------------------------------- Humphrey Program Returns to Iraq --------------------------------  9.   The  Cultural Affairs Section interviewed twenty-three applicants  for  the Hubert H. Humphrey Fellowship  Program and  nominated  nine  candidates.  The  nominees'  selected fields  of  study  include  public  administration,   human rights, teaching English as a foreign language, journalism, and  public  health.  Five of the nominees  are  women  and three come from outside Baghdad, including the impoverished southern  regions.  PAS commenced the Humphrey  Program  in Iraq for the first time this year since the 198Os.  MPP Goals: Democracy, Prosperity, Mutual Understanding  --------------------------------------------- What Exchange Alumni Say About Their Programs ---------------------------------------------  10.  Lt. Col Abbas, Babil Provincial Deputy Police Commander, recently returned from the IVLP project on "Border and Homeland Security."  After his first visit to America, Lt. Col. Abbas told emboff, "In America, there is no discrimination; all of the people are equal.  They have a great respect for the rule of law and are respectful of each other.  They exhibit Islamic values of honesty, faithfulness and devotion, even if they are not Islamic."  MPP Goals: Stability, Democracy  11.  Sunni Sheikh Majid I. Mohammed, Imam of the Grand Mosque in Sulaimania, spent nearly a month in the United States under an IVLP project "Promoting Interfaith Dialogue." Upon his return in December, the Sheikh told emboff he had immensely enjoyed the opportunity to experience America first-hand: "I was never so free and so happy as I was during my time there."  MPP Goal: Mutual Understanding  12.  Comment: PAS Baghdad's Arabic book program and the IVLP remain instrumental in developing contacts in the diverse spectrum of Iraqi society.  Post plans to investigate further the possibilities for greater media interaction with CAO program participants in order to enhance the positive messages they convey to Iraqi society and the region as a whole. End comment.  Litt 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000022  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/03/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, KDEM, IZ, Elections SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL MISSION FOR IRAQI ELECTIONS (IMIE) WORKS TOWARDS COMMON SENSE TIMELINE   Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Michael Oreste for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY.  On January 3, IMIE representatives Fred Schaffer and Reem Ersheid told Poloffs that IMIE is sensitive to the media and political pressures associated with their efforts, and would therefore make a preliminary announcement before IECI's final certification of results.  The IECI plans to announce preliminary results on January 8, with a final certification announcement occurring January 18-20. Schaffer estimated an IMIE announcement timeframe of 1-2 weeks - after the IECI preliminary announcement but before final certification.  Schaffer said they would be able to better focus their efforts once the remaining IMIE members arrive January 3.  Meanwhile, various political parties have been awaiting IMIE's arrival with anticipation in the hopes of sharing their complaints about campaigning and election fraud, and using IMIE's findings as a political bargaining chip for leadership positions.  End Summary.  --------------------------- IECI ANNOUNCEMENT TIMEFRAME ---------------------------  2. (C) On January 2, Deputy Chief Electoral Officer Harith Hassan told PolFSN that the IECI had completed adjudicating all but one red complaint case.  Hassan mentioned that the remaining complaint related to fraud concerns in Out-of-Country Voting in Turkey, would most likely be resolved by the end of January 3. Given this timeline, the IECI would be able to make an announcement of certified final results as early as January 4.  However, International Commissioner Craig Jenness noted to PolCouns and PolOff on January 2 that the IECI would announce preliminary results January 8, with the follow-on announcement between January 18-20 (septel).  ---------------------- IMIE MAPS OUT ITS PLAN ----------------------  3. (C) Poloffs met with IMIE representatives on January 2 to discuss IMIE's timeline and agenda for their two week stay.  Fred Schaffer (American) and Reem Ersheid (Palestinian) noted that the six IMIE members, once fully assembled, would be divided into two groups: one focused on IECI complaints and audits, and the other focused on political party complaints. Schaffer told Poloff that their focus and organizational structure had not yet been finalized, but that the complaints and audit team would be focusing on the complaints process, IECI audit results, and Kirkuk registration fraud issues. Ersheid said the political party team would be communicating soon with the political parties.  4.  (C) Schaffer said a final report would not be produced until well into February.  However, because IMIE is aware of the importance that the Iraqi media and political parties are placing on their work, they understood the importance of developing some type of statement or preliminary report prior to the IECI's certification of final results.  Schaffer declined further comment on IMIE's work, noting that his team members, most of whom he had not met, had not decided among themselves how best to proceed.  --------------------------------------------- --------- POLITICAL PARTIES AND MEDIA PREPARE FOR IMIE'S ARRIVAL --------------------------------------------- ---------  5. (C) Local media has begun highlighting the arrival of the IMIE observers.  Likewise, political parties are awaiting their chance to speak with these experts. Leading Iraqi National List members Dr. Adnan Pachachi, Mehdi Hafez, and Ibrahim al-Janabi told PolCouns and PolOff December 31 that they will welcome and cooperate with the new team of monitors from IMIE .  They hope that this IMIE team will report that there were serious election violations and fraud. They want to use such a report to strengthen their bargaining position in government formation negotiations.  Such a report will help them to counter Shia Coalition demands that ministries should be distributed according to the results at the ballot box by calling into question whether the Shia Coalition majority really reflects the voters' real choice.  ------- COMMENT -------  6.  (C) The arrival of IMIE representatives are being seen as a panacea to Iraqi political parties, particularly to the Sunni Arab bloc and to the Iraqi National List.  They  view IMIE's arrival as both a face-saving mechanism to their constituents as well as a way to improve their bargaining position during government formation negotiations.  Others are viewing IMIE's arrival as a way to silence discontent with the Iraqi election and confirm the IECI's results.  IMIE representatives are aware of the importance being placed on their work, but it remains to be seen whether the focus or results of their work will satisfy those opposed to the results of the election. LITT 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000025  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PTER, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: TEAM MEETS WITH IRAQIS TO DISCUSS NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION CARD  1.  (U) SUMMARY: Post supports the proof-of-concept proposed by the GOI and endorsed by a joint DOS-DOD team from Washington, who traveled to Baghdad to assess the Iraqis' national ID card proposal.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (U) A joint DOS-DOD team traveled to Baghdad to assess Iraq's Unified Identification Card Committee's proposal for a national ID card.  The team met with representatives from the Iraqi Ministry of Planning (MOP), Ministry of Interior (MOI), MNF-I and the Embassy to devise a way-ahead for USG involvement in the Iraqis' national ID card.  3.  (U) To understand the Iraqis' concept of a national ID card the team met with MG Yaseen, MOI Director of the Department of Citizenship and Travel.  MG Yaseen is head of the Iraqis' "Unified Identification Card Committee" (UICC) set up jointly by MOI and MOP per the direction of Dr. Barham Salih, MOP.  The UICC was set up in October 2005 to craft a written proposal for the national ID card before the 15 December elections.  MG Yaseen outlined the Iraqis' model of their national ID card plan and related the history of the Committee; he also delineated the Government of Iraq's needs for USG technical assistance.  Ideally, the national ID card will be issued to all Iraqi citizens in time for their October 2007 national census.  4.  (U) In early December the committee's written proposal and additional memoranda were accepted by the Iraqi Council of Ministers.  As the champion of the project, Dr. Salih sent a letter to the Ambassador asking for technical assistance from the USG on a proof-of-concept for the Iraqi national ID card.  5.  (U) The team then met with MOI and MOP reps to discuss their formal proposal and address funding concerns.  The Chief of Staff to MOP assured us the GOI will not be looking to the USG for future funding.  The only request is for the USG's funding of the proof-of-concept, to which OSD has agreed. Salih has formally taken the lead for soliciting funding from donor GCC nations for the national ID card.  He assured the Council of Ministers that other Gulf nations currently implementing their own national identification card systems (UAE, Oman, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia) have a vested interest in compatibility with the Iraqi national ID card.  6.  (U) The proof-of-concept will include scanning of three civil registration facility records in Baghdad, setting up a database of citizens, choosing volunteers to add their biographical/biometric information to the database, vetting their data through the Iraqis' criminal Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS) and issuing the volunteers a prototype national ID card.  The end-to-end test will utilize some of the technology currently in theater for DOD's Biometric Identification System for Access (BISA) program -- used for Coalition base access.  All proof-of-concept details will be decided upon by the Iraqi Committee.  7.  (U) The proof-of-concept will be implemented during the period between elections and solidification of the GOI. LITT 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000036  SIPDIS  STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: OPRC, KMDR, KPAO, IZ, Media, Elections SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD  SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials included the formation of the next government and the results of the December 15 election.  In Ad-Dustoor's fifth page editorial, "National Considerations before Election Results," Mahmoud Al-Shamri argues that the current situation in Iraq, burdened by sectarian division, requires a government founded upon national unity rather than a government determined by election results. Al-Mada's sixth page unattributed editorial, "Politicians Are a Source of Public Concern," criticizes the politicians who are driving the political scene towards a crisis without concern for people's desire to lead normal lives. And independent Az-Zaman published a fourth page editorial titled "Don Quixote and the Wind Mills" in which the author criticizes the sectarian lobbying that took place during the elections and continues to occur today.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------- TABLE OF CONTENTS -------------------------------  A. "Death Certificate for Cairo Conference Agreement" (Al- Basaer, 1/4) B. "Accepters and Rejecters" (Al-Mashriq, 1/4) C. "People Always the Victims" (Al-Bayyna Al-Jadeedah, 1/4) D. "National Project" (Al-Adala, 1/4)  ---------------------------------------- SELECTED COMMENTARIES ----------------------------------------  A. "Death Certificate for Cairo Conference Agreement" (Al-Basaer, affiliated with the Muslim Scholars' Association, published a front-page unattributed editorial about the Cairo Conference for Iraqi reconciliation. The editorial reads in part)  "The criminal and inhumane acts practiced by the authorities are considered a death certificate for the agreement that was reached at the Cairo Reconciliation Conference. For many Iraqis, the conference offered hope for a reduction in the violence and evil that started in the country at the beginning of the occupation and continues today. If only there were good intentions and the general interest would come before personal interests-but that is a dream that will not come true. This indicates that some of the groups that participated in the Cairo Conference were neither serious in their commitments nor genuine in their desire to end terrorism."   B. "Accepters and Rejecters" (Al-Mashriq, independent, published a front-page editorial by Dr. Hameed Abdullah about the honesty of the elections. The editorial reads in part)  "Between the rejecters' statements and the accepters' replies concerning the honesty of the elections, the Iraqi citizen continues to wait for the end of the battle. The Iraqi citizen spent all of his life involved in wars-first due to the rulers' foolishness, another time due to large countries' conspiracies, and a third time due to politicians' eagerness for power. All of that is because of oil; if our country was not full of oil, no one would be interested."  C. "People Always the Victims" (Al-Bayyna Al-Jadeedah, affiliated with the Shiite Political Council, published a front-page unattributed editorial about the violence. The editorial reads in part)  "The Iraqi-Iranian war lasted eight years without any change in the political map for either country. If all areas that claim to be resisting kill half of the Shiite citizens in the south, would that change the balance or would the Ba'thists regain power? And if the Kurds do their best, would they make Kurdistan an independent state? And if the Shiites have all of the authority and wealth in southern Iraq, would they be able to establish a practical government or a state that contains a variety of ethnicities and sects? Let the reasonable men think and figure out that there is no way but to accept the reality and reject the principle of excluding others. The incessant blind violence is considered the beginning of the end for a country called Iraq."  D. "National Project" (Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI, published a second-page editorial by Dr. Ali Khalaif about the establishment of a national unity government. The editorial reads in part)  "The democratic changes in Iraq over the past three years make everybody optimistic about the future of the political process in the new Iraq, as opposed to what the negative media describes. [The media] attempts to show the negative more than the positive. Certainly the establishment of the new government, which will perform based on the constitution that Iraqis voted for, will be a major factor in eliminating any enemy of the new Iraq. The agreement by the patriotic groups on a joint vision for establishing a national unity government will be the real end for the terrorists. A joint vision will serve the people and work for the country's interest."  KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000041  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON, EPET, PGOV, PINS, KCOR, IZ SUBJECT: AN IRAQI PUBLIC-EDUCATION STRATEGY FOR ECONOMIC REFORM  REF: A. BAGHDAD 0020      B. BAGHDAD 4559      C. BAGHDAD 5079  Sensitive - Not for internet distribution.  1.  (SBU) Summary:  Embassy, the British Department for International Development (DFID) in Baghdad, and the GOI are developing an economic-reform public-education strategy.  To date, we have established that an effective campaign would address three areas:  1) fuel-subsidy reform; 2) social safety net implementation; and 3) basic economic issues.  We believe the campaign must have simple messages and mainly target the average Iraqi, who typically does not understand basic economic issues.  We have already engaged the Iraqi media on the necessity for fuel-price increases, have gotten GOI agreement to take the same message to the public, and are working this with the Ministry of Finance (MOF).  The creation of a public-education strategy must have Iraqi ownership, and it will be an on-going process, requiring flexibility to change tactics as the public responds.  End summary.  ------------------------------------------- Educating on Reforms That Are Happening Now -------------------------------------------  2.  (SBU) Fuel-price increases went into effect on December 18 in order to satisfy requirements for the IMF Standby Arrangement (SBA).  In initial response to the price increases, certain segments of the general public demonstrated in protest.  These protests were mostly non-violent and measured, and there has been no upswell of opposition among the general population of Iraq.  The insurgent and criminal elements of Iraq have taken a different approach, using violence and threats of violence to intimidate refiners, truckers, and ordinary Iraqis into cutting production and distribution and into protesting against the price hikes.  This terrorist activity has caused severe supply problems throughout Iraq, which in turn has caused further public unrest.  Urgent public-education efforts are needed to explain the price increases to the general public, and the GOI has been taking measured actions (Reftel A), both on its own initiative and in response to our encouragement.  However, no amount of aggressive public education will convince the terrorists and criminals that they should relinquish their violent actions and allow fuel supplies to flow freely.  We should make fuel-subsidy education an integral part of the public-education effort, but we need to set the strategy with the Iraqis in the lead, having the key officials at the planning table.  3.  (SBU) USAID and the Embassy have worked with the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA) to create new social safety net legislation that has been put into operation (Reftel B).  While not specifically addressed by the SBA, many ordinary Iraqis believe it is linked.  In any case, the basic messages about the economic distortions and corruption caused by continued subsidies are the same. This new Safety Net will provide money, career counseling, and job training to approximately one million Iraqi households, or that 20% of the population that lives in extreme poverty.  USAID plans to use World Bank funding to launch a public-education campaign in the mid-March timeframe to teach the public about the benefits and necessity of the new Safety Net.  This new Safety Net is critical (and revolutionary for Iraq) in that it creates a means-tested welfare system on which Iraq can base future subsidy reductions, especially critical as Iraq begins reforming its Public Distribution System (PDS) (Reftel C).  ---------------------------- Educating on Reforms to Come ----------------------------  4.  (SBU) Possibly the most important part of an economic-reform public education campaign will be to prepare the Iraqi public for the necessary changes that will come, and State has $3 million that should be put toward this program.  Post believes that this program should be based on three main objectives of economic reform in Iraq:  1) Subsidy reductions; 2) Privatization; and 3) Anti-corruption.  Under each of these subjects, there should be three simple messages that the Iraqis push out to their people, and these messages should be crafted both to educate the recipient on basic economics and to influence his current beliefs about the Iraqi economy.  (Our current discussions with the MOF are focused on this strategy, and we will be using the US/Iraq Joint Task Force on Economic and Financial Issues as a structure to continue developing and refining it.)  5.  (SBU) While the campaign will need to address government, business, and social leaders, the main audience of the campaign should be the average Iraqi, who currently believes that the government owes him handouts because of Iraq's oil reserves and who quite possibly benefits from some form of corruption in his daily life.  Only by influencing the attitudes and opinions of average Iraqis can we truly ensure that the GOI is taking actions that will be understood and supported.  If we focus our efforts on the leadership and intelligentsia of Iraq, whatever positive actions they might take run the risk of falling on the deaf ears of unwilling citizens.  6.  (SBU) Post believes that the GOI should hire Iraqi media companies to design and implement the public education campaign.  This is necessary to avoid the impression that outsiders are forcing change on a sovereign Iraq.  Post, through the Public Affairs Office, can assist with the design and publication of posters, but only with the agreement and buy-in of the GOI.  However, according to Embassy media sources, the best way to reach the average Iraqi audience is through television, and Iraqi media companies are in the best position to utilize this medium.  ---------------- Media Engagement ----------------  7.  (SBU) Discussion with the media and government on the subjects of reform and subsidies has already begun. EconMinCouns and Commercial Counselor participated in an on-the-record press conference for the domestic and international media January 4 in Baghdad.  EconMinCouns emphasized the linkages between corruption, fuel blockages, and protest actions.  He also provided an outline of the budgeting impact of subsidies on security and a large variety of social services valued by the public.  Later, during a discussion between Acting DCM Litt and DPM Chalabi, the latter said he would:  a)  Provide a brief explanatory paper for the media on subsidies;  b)  Release to the press a paper on the reasons for unrest contributing to the fuel crisis at Bayji; and,  c)  Initiate a public discussion of Iraqi consumption of refined products, focused on the need to cut imports owing to negative budget impact.  (Parenthetically, Chalabi observed that consumption has dropped in Baghdad from 10 million liters to 6 million liters per day.  As we see Baghdad as better supplied than the rest of the nation, we tend to agree with Chalabi that this is a price-related drop in demand.)  8.  (SBU) Public Affairs will be holding press conferences on a regular basis with Embassy Econ and Commerce to inform the Western and Iraqi/Pan-Arab media on economic issues. EconMinCouns and Commercial Counselor participated in the first of these on December 27.  These press conferences will serve as one medium through which to educate the Iraqi public on the need for subsidy reductions and anti-corruption efforts. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000045  SIPDIS  STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: OPRC, KMDR, KPAO, IZ, Elections, Parliament, Media SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD  SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials included the political discussions and conflicts surrounding the formation of the new government and the international committee investigating the election results.  In its front-page editorial entitled "The National Unity Government We Want," independent Al-Fourat discusses the international committee that is assigned to audit the election results. Hayan Al-Baghdadi opines that if there is a genuine intention to make political progress, a true national unity government will be formed.  In its front-page editorial entitled "No Way Out of the Current Crisis Unless the Right Is Returned to Its Owners," Dar As-Salam, affiliated with the Iraqi Islamic Party, comments on the aftermath of the election, remarking that the Al-Tawafuq Front has been tyrannized by the election, and expressing hope that the international committee for investigating the elections will avoid bias toward specific political groups. In its third-page editorial entitled "A Plot Disclosed," SCIRI-affiliated Al-Adala focuses on the recent terrorist operations. The editorial stresses the need to eradicate the crime that is plaguing Iraq and the importance of revealing those who support and benefit from it.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------- TABLE OF CONTENTS -------------------------------  A. "Politicians and Posts" (Ad-Dustoor, 1/5) B. "This Morning" (As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, 1/5) C. "The Iraqi Solution to the Political Crisis Is Better Than Foreign Solutions" (Al-Ittihad, 1/5) D. "The White Smoke of the IECI" (Al-Bayan, 1/5)  ---------------------------------------- SELECTED COMMENTARIES ----------------------------------------  A. "Politicians and Posts" (Ad-Dustoor, independent, published a front-page editorial by editor in chief Bassem Al-Sheikh about the political conflicts surrounding the formation of the new government. The editorial reads in part)  "Some politicians think that if they do not obtain a senior position in the government, it means they have been marginalized from the political process. It seems that those politicians are opportunists and seek only to gain profit. The current political crisis indicates that some major political lists are demanding governmental positions that they do not deserve, according to their electoral strength. However, I am sure that our political crisis will disappear when the politicians feel they have an important role apart from opportunism and narrow-minded thinking."  B. "This Morning" (As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, independent, published a front-page editorial by editor in chief Ismael Zayyer about the current political talks. The editorial reads in part)  "It seems that our politicians are not in a rush, but our people are upset and impatient about the current political discussions. The political maneuvering bores observers. In fact, we face today a tedious political process; those politicians do not care about their people. We heard that the new ministerial formation will be based on a geographic rather than an electoral basis. The Iraqi people are looking forward to a technocratic government that works more than it talks."  C. "The Iraqi Solution to the Political Crisis Is Better Than Foreign Solutions" (Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK, published a third-page editorial by Abdul Hadi Mahdi about the political discussions in Kurdistan. The editorial reads in part)  "The political successes that were achieved in Kurdistan represent a step toward reaching an agreement on forming a strong national government. This government can get over the current crisis and end the political congestion. The meetings that will be held in Baghdad among the political groups will reveal the features of the next government. The success that was achieved in Kurdistan to gather Iraqi political groups represents pride and honor for every honest and patriotic Iraqi. We know that the political solutions that can be reached in Kurdistan are better than any immediate solution that may come from outside of the country."  D. "The White Smoke of the IECI" (Al-Bayan, affiliated with Ad-Dawa Islamic Party, published a fifth-page editorial by Salim Rasoul about the results of the elections. The editorial reads in part)  "In the past year we waited a long time to see the white smoke waft from the Green Zone indicating that the government was formed. Today, the IECI is blamed by most of the political groups; these groups demand an international investigation into the election results. Some political groups doubted the honesty of the IECI, but the IECI did not reply to those accusations.There is no need to waste our time investigating the honesty of the elections. This investigation has preoccupied the Iraqi community; perhaps it spoiled the happiness of holding the election. These groups try to hinder political accomplishments because they did not win the elections."  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000046  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2016 TAGS: PNAT, PGOV, KDEM, IZ, Ba'ath, Elections SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR ADVISES IECI ON RESULTS ANNOUNCEMENT TIMELINE AND DEBAATHIFICATION   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) SUMMARY:  In a January 2 meeting with IECI commissioners, the Ambassador encouraged the IECI Board to be careful announcing election results before the international observer group presents its own findings, lest those findings undercut the IECI.  Recognizing that the IECI faced its own pressures in announcing results, the Ambassador suggested it present preliminary information after the complaints review, but hold off on final results until after the international observer mission's announcement.  The Commissioners agreed with this advice and indicated that they would follow this timeline.  The Ambassador also urged IECI Board members to hold off on disqualifying names listed by the Deba'athification Commission until Prime Minister Ja'afari had a chance to review the issue and make a decision as to his involvement.  The Commissioners made no commitment but seemed amenable to this request as well.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) On January 2, the Ambassador met with all the IECI Commissioners present in Baghdad. (Chairman Izadin al-Mohammady and Commissioner Farid Ayar are currently out of the country.)  During this meeting, the Ambassador praised the Commissioners for their December 28 statement welcoming the arrival of international experts who would continue to monitor the post-election process.  Noting that the International Mission for the Iraqi Elections (IMIE) team would arrive by January 3, the Ambassador cautioned the Commissioners that the timing of the election results announcement would be critical to political buy-in.  The timing, he said, should take into account the arrival and research timing of IMIE.  Although there were several announcement options available to the Commission, the Ambassador said, he recommended the final announcement of results wait until the January 18-20 timeframe to give IMIE time to produce their own statement.  As a complement to this approach, the Ambassador suggested announcement of preliminary results in the next week, once the Commissioners had completed their review of the red, serious complaints (somewhere around January 8).  3. (C) The Commissioners were generally receptive to the idea that timing be linked with IMIE's efforts.  They recognized the importance that political parties and outside groups were placing on the IMIE results and agreed that appropriate IECI announcement timing would reinforce IECI credibility. Highlighting the importance of a "coordinated front", Commissioner Su'ad al-Jabouri opined that this timeline would work.  Commissioner Abdulhussein al-Hindawi indicated acceptance of the Ambassador's suggestion by noting that the suggestion merited the IECI's attention and serious consideration.  4. (C) The Ambassador also recommended that the Commissioners hold off on disqualifying names covered by the Deba'athification Commission.  He remarked to the Commissioners that Prime Minister Ja'afari was reviewing this issue and therefore it would be premature to disqualify any names out of hand.  Commissioner Safwat Sidqi, a lawyer by training, was initially reluctant to delay IECI action since he believed that the IECI was legally obligated to start disqualifying candidates.  However, after further discussion, Sidqi and the other Commissioners acknowledged that the law gave the Prime Minister special jurisdiction to weigh in on Deba'athification issues.  Given this clarification, the IECI Commissioners indicated that they would hold off on candidate disqualification for the time being.  5.  (C)  Comment:  We had reviewed these ideas with the UN team here prior to the meeting, and they too are in full agreement with them.  End Comment. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000047  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2016 TAGS: IZ, PGOV, PHUM, Elections SUBJECT: IRAQI ELECTION COMMISSION DISQUALIFIES IRAQI VOTE IN TURKEY  REF: 05 ANKARA 7677  Classified By: POL Counselor Robert Ford, reason 1.4 (d)  1. (C) On January 4, Commissioner Safwat Sidqi told Poloff that the IECI Board had disqualified all of the Istanbul votes due to strong evidence of fraud.  Ninety-five percent of these votes, estimated between 10,000-20,000, were for the Iraqi Turkman Front.  The disqualification of these votes will not have any affect on seat distribution.  2.  (C) The decision to disqualify these ballot boxes was prompted by International Mission for Iraqi Elections (IMIE) reports as well as incongruent turnout statistics (ref).  IMIE monitored all 4 polling centers in Turkey including the 3 Istanbul polling centers.  The IMIE assessment noted that:  --No polling centers were established in the Kurdish areas of Turkey; -- Repeated voting was observed in all Istanbul polling centers; --Party agents were observed with vaseline and bleach products, presumably to help voters take off the voting ink; --Voters were overheard to ask polling staff when they could return to vote again; --Polling staff frequently went behind voter screens to assist voters; --Many staff appeared to be related to each other and were very familiar with all the voters; and --The IECI-OCV office in Istanbul reimbursed the travel cost for five buses of voters transported from Bursa and Yallova.  3. (C) Commissioner Saftwat Sidqi also noted that when the IECI examined some of the ballot boxes, the boxes appeared to be stuffed, containing on average more than 1,000 ballots per box ? twice the number of votes normally contained by a ballot box.  The Commissioner told Poloff that the IECI would hold a press conference within the next week to discuss complaints generated during the December 15 election, and would consider mentioning the complaints about voter irregularity in Turkey and other complaints at that time. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000048  SIPDIS  RELEASABLE TO MNF-I  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2016 TAGS: ECON, EPET, ENRG, PGOV, KCOR, PINR, EFIN, IZ, PO, TU, Energy Sector, Petrolium SUBJECT: OIL SECTOR IN CENTER OF CONFLICT  REF: A. BAGHDAD 0013      B. EMAIL EXCHANGES WITH ANKARA         GOLDBERGER-YOUNG-KIMMEL      C. BAGHDAD 0020  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission David M. Satterfield for reasons  1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C/REL MNF-I) SUMMARY: Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) Chalabi, who is now the acting Minister of both Oil and Finance, hosted a status review January 4 of energy infrastructure protection.  Fuel convoys were reported to be delivering fuel to Baghdad.  The convoys had been attacked multiple times with casualties, but still managed to deliver 15 million liters (4 million gallons) of fuel to Baghdad. Most pipelines to and from Bayji remained interdicted as of January 4; however, DPM Chalabi is forming rapid repair teams for deployment from Ministry of Oil personnel.  Chalabi's priority energy issues for Iraq are to export oil and to deliver energy to the people of Iraq.  Chalabi told us the Kurds are withholding customs revenue and making contracts improperly for energy projects.  Chalabi acknowledged the USD 800 million debt to Turkish fuel suppliers that may again slow product deliveries from Turkish sources.  Chalabi said he will travel to Poland.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------- MOVEMENT OF FUEL ----------------  2.  (SBU) DPM Chalabi met the Steering Group for Infrastructure Security on January 4, 2006 to discuss the fuel crisis situation in Iraq.  The meeting was attended by the Acting Commander of MNF-I LTG Houghton, A/DCM, Deputy Commander of MNC-I, MNF-I STRATOPS, IRMO Director of Operations, and ECONOFF.  3.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi reported a 68-vehicle government fuel truck convoy moved from Bayji to Baghdad on January 4. The convoy had been attacked multiple times with casualties and a few trucks destroyed, but it still managed to deliver 15 million liters (4 million gallons) of fuel to Baghdad.  35 additional contract civilian fuel trucks were en route back to Bayji to load fuel and return to Baghdad, and 50 more contracted tanker trucks were expected to be dispatched by January 5.  Chalabi's intention is to lease 300 trucks, with an indemnification clause in the leases for damage to the vehicles, and run convoys of 100 trucks per day to and from Bayji until the 22-inch pipeline is repaired. (NOTE:  MNF-I reporting suggests these attacks are directly linked to the fuel price increases and the resulting loss of profit margins by organized criminal and terrorist elements that benefited from smuggling and black marketing operations of subsidized fuel.  END NOTE.) Chalabi stated the price rises had generated the attacks because the smugglers and terrorists now had to pay 5 million Iraq Dinars (USD 3500) for a loaded truck of fuel and could only sell the load for 8 million Iraqi Dinars (USD 5,500).  Given the cost of the bribes they had to pay along the way, profits were now minimal. (NOTE:  Our calculations are somewhat different, but our conclusion is the same.  END NOTE.)  ------------------------ REFINERIES AND PIPELINES ------------------------  4.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi informed us that intimidation and threat levels inside Bayji refinery are no longer an issue. He provided his personal assessment after flying to visit Bayji on January 3.  He opined that the impact of government and Iraqi Security Forces attention to Bayji had led to the improvement in the situation there.  Bayji Refinery has begun startup of one process train and will begin the remaining trains over the next few days.  January 8 was estimated to be the first operational day of production, as the fuel storage tanks should be available for new product and the refinery system would be brought on line.  The 22-inch product line from Bayji to Baghdad is still not repaired from a leak caused by old bullet holes in the pipeline, but he estimated that repairs would be finished soon.  Chalabi reported repairs were ongoing on the 26-inch pipeline between Kirkuk and Bayji, as well as on the 40-inch pipeline. (NOTE:  The 26-inch line is reported to be operational as of January 5. END NOTE.)  The 18-inch crude oil supply pipeline to Daura was not yet repaired.  Chalabi has ordered crews from other regions to support these critical pipeline repairs.  5.  (C/REL MNF-I) The Ministry of Oil (MOO) has developed a plan for emergency pipeline repairs.  The ministry will now provide five emergency repair crews which will be deployed to military camps.  These 20-man crews will have their own vehicles, equipment, security, and live at the military camps.  They will be paid 300 percent of their salaries as an incentive for manning of the crews.  MNC-I will coordinate with MOO for the deployment, hosting, and security of these crews.  The PJCC (Provincial Joint Coordination Center) will remain the focal point for all such coordination.   Chalabi complained that he could not expeditiously get his repair crews to the repair sites because of all the time delays at checkpoints, and he pointed out that the terrorists seemed to be able to rapidly move through those same checkpoints to destroy the pipelines.  His specific words were, "My repair crews cannot move through checkpoints, but terrorists can."  --------------------------------------------- --- FUEL PRICE INCREASES AND A FUTURE MEDIA CAMPAIGN --------------------------------------------- ---  6.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi asserted there would be no more price increases for fuel for the next 6-7 months.  He said the government had increased gasoline fuel prices higher than was required by the IMF, and he did not expect more increases to be acceptable in the near future. (COMMENT: Chalabi claimed no IMF-mandated increases would be necessary during that period.  In fact, the IMF Stand By Agreement calls for further price hikes on March 31 and June 30, 2006.  The DPM may not be aware of those commitments, or he may be echoing the idea raised earlier by Finance Minister Allawi to combine the 1st and 2nd quarterly increases to avoid constantly revisiting the price hike issue.  END COMMENT.)  7.  (SBU) There have been demonstrations across Iraq concerning fuel shortages, and these shortages are now linked in the public mind with the fuel price increases, due to the critical shortage of fuel at any price.  Chalabi concurred with our suggestion that the Iraqi Government should launch a media campaign to explain the reasons for the current price increases and noted he intended to take the following steps: 1) Prepare a paper on subsidies for the press, 2) Publish the reasons for the price increases in the newspapers, 3) Inform the press of the level of imported fuel and the costs of these imports to the Iraqi government, 4) Inform the public about the reductions of oil exports and lost income, and the resulting impact of lowering the budget revenues for Iraq in 2006.  We also suggested he take an opportunity to brief Western and Arab journalists on the fuel and subsidy situation, perhaps at a refinery, so they could assist in the education of both Iraqis and the rest of the world on the negative economic situation caused by fuel subsidies.  (See Ref C and also septel, An Iraqi Public-Education Strategy for Economic Reform.)  --------------------------------------------- ----------- IMPORTS AND PRICE INCREASES HELPING TO SOLVE FUEL CRISIS --------------------------------------------- -----------  8.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi told us the key survival mechanism for the current fuel crisis in Baghdad was the flow of 3 million liters of imported fuel per day via pipeline from the port of Umm Qasr.  These imports supplement the limited production of fuel at the Daura refinery in Baghdad.  He also told us that the increases in prices had reduced demand for fuel in Baghdad from 10.5 million liters (2.7 million Gallons) per day to 6 million liters (1.5 million gallons) per day.  ------------------------------ HFO TO TURKEY AND DEBT PAYMENT ------------------------------  9.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi suggested that he would like to change the contracts of the Turkish firms which deliver refined fuel to Iraq, adding a requirement to accept Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) from Bayji refinery to offset the price of the refined fuels and to reduce volume of HFO stored at the refinery.  The HFO fills much of the storage space at Bayji and needs to be exported or sent to be burned in power generation plants.  (Note: Interdictions of electrical lines from Bayji have reduced the power demand, thus lowering usage of HFO at the Bayji thermal units.  End Note.)  Chalabi opined this take-away of fuel oil would be a good method to get rid of the HFO from Bayji and perhaps make additional money through the process.  His goal was to move 4500 tons of HFO per day to Turkey.  At that volume of shipments, 15 days could clear out the backlog of HFO at Bayji refinery.  He acknowledged that the Iraqis would have to price the HFO at an attractive price level as an inducement to the trucking companies.  (NOTE:  It is not likely that fuel haulers will backhaul HFO to Turkey as it contaminates the tanks and they cannot haul clean fuel without extensive cleaning to remove the HFO from their tanks.  Use of rail, if available, would be preferred.  END NOTE.)  10.  (SBU) We asked Chalabi about the GOI paying the imported fuel debts to Turkey (Ref B).  He said that the $800 million was over one-third of the total funds left in Iraqi accounts.  He did not say if he was going to pay the bill or not, but he indicated that the bill was very high.  ------------------------ INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT KEY ------------------------  11.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi was concerned about the lack of viable intelligence on the saboteurs, terrorists and smugglers.  He said we needed to identify the people involved in the intimidation, smuggling, and other illegal activities, arrest them, and bring them before the court. He requested MNF-I support on intelligence.  He said he would set up a MOO intelligence unit to support protection of oil infrastructure and operations.  --------------------------------------------- WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR SECURITY COORDINATION? ---------------------------------------------  12.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi said he was uncertain who is responsible for coordination among the various security forces.  He explained that during his Bayji visit he had deliberately asked that the Salah Ad Din Police, the Oil Protection Forces, and the 4th Iraqi Army all be present, to support the Bayji refinery security problem and to provide protection for the fuel convoys to Baghdad.  He said it became evident that no one present knew who was in charge. There needed to be a better system for national coordination.  MNF-I responded that it was responsible for the coordination of security for infrastructure, but that the Iraqi ministries were responsible for the fixed installation security at their facilities, such as power plants and refineries.  Chalabi said that the Ministry of Electricity could not provide security for the electrical lines and the Ministry of Oil could not provide security for the oil pipelines or for fuel convoys.  Chalabi added that Ministry of Interior (MOI) could not support infrastructure security effectively at the present time. Chalabi then concluded that his priority for protection was oil exports and oil products, then electricity distribution.  He argued that government-provided electricity was important, but, as long as fuel was available, the public could provide its own electricity from generators if the grid were down.  Chalabi observed the highest threat to the energy infrastructure is the vulnerability of linear infrastructure, as the fixed facilities were well protected.  ----------------------------- ENERGY CHALLENGES FOR CHALABI -----------------------------  13.  (C/REL MNF-I)  Chalabi informed the steering group that his priority issues were 1) to export oil, and 2) to deliver energy to the people of Iraq.  He said refined products were in shortage across the country.  The electricity crisis was part of the fuel crisis.  He said "we cannot use all of our new gas turbines because we do not produce enough gas, the thermal plants are outmoded, decrepit and inefficient, and we cannot even fix them properly because of the security issues."  He also alluded to a few corruption issues in the Ministry of Electricity involving construction contracts.  --------------------------------------- CUSTOMS AND LEGAL PROBLEMS IN KURDISTAN ---------------------------------------  14.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi related that there was an added problem in Kurdistan with the regional government.  He said the PUK/KRG were collecting customs moneys on the border with Turkey and not giving them to the government of Iraq. He said this was a huge loss of over USD 700 million from the Iraqi national budget.  He also related that the Kurds were signing BOO (Build, Own, Operate) contracts for electrical generation plants in Irbil and Sulamaniyah.  His concern was that there might be implicit legal obligations of the national government to support these contracts, signed by a regional Iraqi entity without coordination with the national government.  --------------------------- UPCOMING TRAVEL FOR CHALABI ---------------------------  15.  (C/REL MNF-I) DPM Chalabi said he would be leaving in a few days to go to Poland.  Chalabi referred to Polish interest in participating in the Iraqi oil industry and discussions on the prior purchase of old military equipment from Poland by the Ministry of Defense. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000049  SIPDIS  CENTCOM FOR POLAD  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, IZ, Elections SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL MONITOR GROUP'S GOAL TO  ANNOUNCE FINDINGS BEFORE IRAQI ELECTION RESULTS OUT  REF: BAGHDAD 0022  Classified By: POL Couns Robert S. Ford, reason 1.4 (d)  1. (C) In a January 5 meeting, the international monitoring group (IMIE) representative Mazen Chouib confirmed to Poloff that the IMIE assessment team's goal is to produce a preliminary statement on their findings before the Iraqi election commission (IECI) announces its own preliminary election results. Though not an assessor himself, Chouib has taken the lead in organizing the IMIE team.  He noted to Poloff that, while the team's personalities required special handling, the group was proceeding well and the IECI was being extremely cooperative.  2. (C) Chouib mentioned to Poloff that it is too early to detail the IMIE assessment, but the team had not discovered any major problems with the electoral process.  Chouib did say, however, the IECI did not appear always to be thoroughly investigating complaints.  There also appeared to be procedural and legal weaknesses regarding how IECI punished staff implicated in fraud.  He also noted that the IECI may have weaknesses in the way it pursues allegations of fraud by its staff.  3. (C) Choiub said the team would be meeting with the group complaining loudest against the election results, MARAM, by January 5.  Thus, that group's complaints had not yet been incorporated into IMIE's analysis.  Ibrahim al-Janabi, Chief of Staff to Ayad Allawi, confirmed to PolOff January 5 that this meeting had been scheduled.  4.  (C)  Separately, UN election advisory team leader Jenness told PolCouns late January 6 that the IECI would likely not announce even the preliminary election results until mid-January (after the Muslim 'eid holiday which is to conclude roughly January 12). Jenness anticipated the IECI might give a detailed briefing to the press about the complaints process prior to the 'eid.  5.  (C)  Comment:  Our sense is that the international monitoring group and the UN team are in enough contact that we are likely to have no problems about timing of announcements.  Our own sense is that the election commission does not have a strong internal investigation capacity.  We anticipate that IMIE observations  about Iraqi election commission weaknesses will strengthen demands, especially from Sunni Arabs, for major changes to the election commission during this year. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000051  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/07/2015 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, IZ, Parliament, Shia Islamists, Sunni Arab SUBJECT: (U) DAWA MEMBERS THINK SHIA COALITION STILL  FAR FROM DECISION ON PRIME MINISTER, RULE OUT DARK  HORSE CANDIDATE   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D)  1. (C) Summary:  In separate meetings, senior Dawa Party members Ali al-Adeeb and Jawad al-Maliki thought the decision on whom the Shia Islamist camp would put forward as prime minister is still some distance off. They both acknowledged tough competition between current Prime Minister, and Dawa leader, Ibrahim Jafari and Deputy President Adil Abdel Mehdi.  In a January 3 meeting, senior Da'wa party member Ali al- Adeeb stated that there had not been any progress on reaching an internal consensus within the Shia Coalition on the Prime Minister candidate, but was prepared to hold an internal vote to determine the candidate.  In separate conversations on January 4 and January 5 senior Da'wa party member Jawad al-Maliki, told PolCouns that the competition between the two main Prime Minister candidates was increasingly fierce within the Shia Coalition.  In a different spin from al-Adeeb, Al-Maliki reported that there was as yet no consensus within the Shia Coalition on the means for choosing a candidate; whether it would be by a vote or consensus.  Neither of these top Da'wa party officials thought Fadilah's leader would win support as a compromise candidate between Jafari and Adil Abdel Mehdi.  PolOffs emphasized the key points on government formation: the need for a unity government; no militia involvement in the key security ministries; and a competent Prime Minister who can work cooperatively with the rest of the government.  Shia Coalition redlines, according to al-Maliki, were that the Prime Minister must be from within the Shia Coalition, and that there ought to be balance in the government structure.  By balance, he added, the various groups' representation should reflect their achievements in the December 15 elections; if the Sunni Arabs won one-fifth of the seats in the Council of Representatives (COR), they should have no more than one-fifth of the executive positions in the new Government of Iraq.  Al-Adeeb replied that Iraq was still a tribal community, making a unity government difficult.  On any potential deals with the Kurds, Al- Adeeb admitted that the Kurds would play a pivotal role.  As to promising the Kurds Kirkuk in exchange for supporting the Shia Coalition's PM candidate, al- Adeeb demurred that there would be both domestic and international consequences to such a decision.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- -------- (U) Shia Coalition: Internal Disarray, But Fadilah Is Not an Option --------------------------------------------- --------  2. (C) In a January 3 meeting, senior Da'wa party member Ali al-Adeeb stated that there had not been any progress on reaching an internal consensus within the Shia Coalition on the Prime Minister candidate.  The two main contenders, Adil Abdul Mahdi and current Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari, were both still vying for the position.  Ideally, said al-Adeeb, the two would discuss between themselves who would step down for the sake of Shia Coalition unity; practically, the Shia Alliance was prepared to hold an internal vote to determine the candidate.  The winner, he said, would be determined on strict majority rules (50 plus 1). If neither candidate managed to win this majority, then the possibility of a third party candidate could be raised.  While there was no timetable by which the voting had to take place, al-Adeeb noted that nothing could be decided until after the hajj and Eid al-Adha (roughly January 10-12), when the majority of the Shia members would return to Baghdad.  3. (C) When pressed about the third candidate option, al-Adeeb replied that the independents in the Shia Coalition had raised the specter of a third party candidate.  However, the consensus was that a third candidate could be anyone within the Shia Coalition, to include other candidates within Da'wa or Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI). Al-Adeeb would not commit to this option, repeating only that the idea "had been heard."  Asked who he believed would be the next Prime Minister, al-Adeeb refused to commit himself, saying only that it was not yet clear.  However, he stressed that Fadilah had no support whatsoever within or outside the Shia Coalition.  PolOffs emphasized the Ambassador's key points on government formation: the need for a unity government; no militia involvement in the key security ministries; and a competent Prime Minister who can work cooperatively with the rest of the government. 4. (C) In separate conversations on January 4 and January 5, senior Da'wa party member Jawad al-Maliki, confirmed to PolCouns that the competition between the two main Prime Minister candidates was increasingly fierce within the Shia Coalition.  He repeated Al- Adeeb's contention that no movement could be made until the members returned from the hajj, delaying a decision until late January.  In contrast to al-Adeeb, Al-Maliki reported that there was as yet no consensus within the Shia Coalition on the means for choosing a candidate; whether it would be by a vote or by consensus, and if by vote whether it would be a two- thirds majority or a simple majority.  He told PolCouns that the Shia would not begin deliberations until the IECI certified the final results.  (Comment: Maliki is very connected.  His estimate would play out as follows:  Shia Coalition members gather after the Eid to decide how to choose their prime minister candidate.  They arrive at a decision about the time the election commission announces final, certified election results - roughly January 20.  They then finish their internal negotiations and decide on a prime minister candidate roughly a week later - perhaps around January 27.  It could, of course, be later.  End Comment.)  5. (C) Asked where the Shia Coalition stands in the negotiations on government formation, al-Maliki stated that although Jalal Talabani would like to remain as President, many would prefer to see him out.  (Maliki appeared to prefer a Sunni Arab president but recognized this might be too difficult.)  If the Sunni Arabs did not get the presidency the Shia Coalition would have to offer the Sunni Arabs the post of Foreign Minister to forestall inevitable Sunni Arab complaints about "a Kurdish face of Iraq."   Maliki warned that if the Sunni Arabs present too far- reaching a set of demands for joining a unity government, the Shia Coalition would drop them and make a separate deal with the Kurds.  PolCouns reminded of the utility of a unity government.  Maliki did not argue, but he then charged that the Americans are pushing too hard on the security ministries question.  Dawa, he said, agrees that persons with ties to militias must stay out of the security ministries, but he warned that Baathists still hold too many positions in them as well.  6.  (C)  Al-Maliki did not produce a list of possible names for the new government.  Instead, he anticipated that before naming ministers all sides must agree on a set of principles, much like the government program the Shia and the Kurds drew up last spring when setting up the transitional government.  This time, however, al-Maliki stated that the Shia Coalition would ensure that the Kurds stood by their promises. For example, he claimed, in all the ministries this past year where the Kurds were in charge, they had moved in all Kurds to the top jobs.  7. (C) Shia Coalition redlines, according to al- Maliki, were that the Prime Minister must be from within the Shia Coalition, and that there ought to be balance in the government structure.  By balance, he added, the various groups' representation should reflect their achievements in the December 15 elections; if the Sunni Arabs won one-fifth of the seats in the Council of Representatives (COR), they should have no more than one-fifth of the executive positions in the new Government of Iraq.  In addition to selecting the ministers, the Shia Coalition would also pay close attention to the selection of the deputies, especially in the key security ministries.  -------------------------- (U) Role of the President? --------------------------  8. (C) Al-Adeeb on January 3 said current President Jalal Talabani is the sole nominee for President, but noted somewhat ominously that no alternatives had been suggested .  (Comment:  It is not clear whether al- Adeeb was seriously suggesting that another candidate might appear, or laying down a marker that a Kurdish president was by no means a done deal.  End Comment.) Adeeb opined that a Sunni Arab should not be a candidate for president, since they had not really participated in the political process (as opposed to the Kurds), and even now were too fragmented to hold together.  He simply said the Sunnis cannot be trusted.  9. (C) Al-Adeeb rejected calls to increase the powers of the presidency, stating that in the parliamentary system the Iraqis had chosen for themselves, the post of president was largely ceremonial.  So far, however, al-Adeeb stated that the Kurds had not made any requests to increase the presidential powers; Talabani had only requested that the Prime Minister consult with the Presidency Council before taking any action. KDP Leader Masud Barzani, he noted, disagreed with Talabani on increasing the purview of the presidency.  --------------------------------------------- --- (U) Quid Pro Quo: What Will You Offer the Kurds? --------------------------------------------- ---  10. (C) Although Al-Adeeb admitted that the Kurds would play a pivotal role in selecting the next Prime Minister, al-Adeeb would not answer direct questions on what the Shia Alliance would be willing to offer the Kurds for their support.  Instead, he blamed "non- official" Americans allegedly encouraging the Kurds to push for independence in contrast to the official American policy.  The U.S. has supported the Kurds since 1992, setting the stage for the Kurds to establish their own state in preparation for independence, he claimed.  An independent Kurdistan, however, will create regional tension.  When Poloffs pushed back, reiterating that the U.S. was not seeking an independent Kurdistan, al-Adeeb countered that the Ambassador should hold a meeting with Shia, Sunni Arab, and Kurdish leaders and declare this publicly.  11. (C) As to whether the Shia would promise the Kurds Kirkuk in exchange for supporting the Shia Alliance's Prime Minister candidate, al-Adeeb demurred that the issue of Kirkuk is particularly delicate.  There would be, he commented, domestic and international problems if such a decision was made without extensive consultations with international organizations and other ethnic groups in Kirkuk.  Turkey, for example, would not be willing to accept such an arrangement. Al-Adeeb stressed, however, that the very fact that the Kurds are considering asking for Kirkuk implied that they were seeking independence.  They could accept making Kirkuk a separate federal province if they planned to stay in Iraq.  Adeeb warned that Kurdish demands would stop with Kirkuk; they would ask for at least half of Ninewa, causing confrontations with Christians and Shebak living there.  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  12. (C)  Neither of our interlocutors spoke particularly warmly about Dawa leader Jafari.  Indeed, if Jafari gets the prime ministry, their ambitions for ministerial slots will be compromised in the other trade-offs.  Al-Maliki is a much harder-line interlocutor within the Dawa Party that any of the Embassy's other Dawa interlocutors.  He is particularly concerned about the composition of the security ministries.  Although al-Adeeb is ranked third (behind Ja'afari and Maliki) in the Dawa party leadership, he appears to act mainly as a mouthpiece for the higher Shia leadership. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000052  SIPDIS  REL USA AND MCFI S FOR JIM JEFFREY AND STEVE BEECROFT  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, IZ, Sunni Arab, Shia Islamists, Security SUBJECT: SHIA ALLIANCE LEADERS BLAME MNF-I AND SUNNIS FOR CURRENT SECURITY SITUATION  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (b) AND (d).  1. (S/REL) SUMMARY: A Shia Coalition "security committee" told the Ambassador and MNF-I Deputy Commanding General (DCG) that the level of violence in Iraq since the election has prompted community and religious leaders to call for taking measures to defend themselves.  The committee members said they may not be able to restrain the street from reacting. Furthermore, post-election statements by the Sunni-Arab Tawafuq bloc threaten violence over the election results, but the security ministries are telling the "security committee" that MNF-I is preventing MOD and MOI forces from carrying out their duties.  The Ambassador and the DCG reiterated Coalition commitment to fighting terrorism in Iraq, and Coalition support for building up the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and continuing to transfer security responsibility to them.  The Ambassador stressed that he has told Sunni Arabs that they cannot participate simultaneously in the political process and the insurgency without being branded as terrorists.  END SUMMARY. .  --------------------------------------------- -- SECURITY SITUATION: SO BAD WE MAY NOT BE ABLE TO CONTROL THE STREET --------------------------------------------- --  2. (C/REL) The Ambassador and MNF-I DCG Lt Gen Houghton met January 4 with Dr. Hussein Shahristani (Deputy Speaker of the TNA), Jawad al-Maliki (leading figure in Dawa and chairman of the Security and Defense Committee), and Hadi al-Amiri (Badr Corps).  According to Dr. Shahristani, they, along with Dr. Qusay (a Sadrist who was not present), constitute a security committee appointed by the leadership within the Shia Coalition, the United Iraqi Alliance (UIA).  3. (S/REL) Dr. Shahristani described the security situation as "very serious," with religious and local leaders complaining.  He said the situation has deteriorated since December 19 when Tawafuq announced it would resist the election results, with some Tawafuq leaders threatening violence.  He claimed that many Shia are saying that if the government cannot protect them, then they will take measures to defend themselves.  Shahristani added that political and religious leaders have been able to restrain the street previously, but that they may be reaching a point where they do not have enough influence to stop the street.  --------------------------------------------- - MOD AND MOI SAY MNF-I HINDERS THEIR OPERATIONS --------------------------------------------- -  4. (S/REL) Dr. Shahristani told Ambassador Khalilzad and Lt Gen Houghton that this newly formed UIA "security committee" had met January 3 with the Ministers of Defense and Interior, and with UK Ambassador Patey on January 4, regarding the security situation.  Dr. Shahristani said that MOD Dulime and MOI Jabr had both acknowledged that there are sufficient forces to protect the people; however, they said their work is being hindered by MNF-I, specifically citing a lack of cooperation and of support for targeting insurgents.  Dr. Shahristani stated that this assertion called into question the Shia Coalition's faith both in democracy and in MNF-I. He said they thought MNF-I was here to help Iraqis build democracy and build the capacity of the ISF in order to allow MNF-I to leave.  He said that if this perception is not correct, the Shia Coalition will have to tell its supporters that it cannot continue the political process and that the ISF is being prevented from carrying out its duties.  5. (S/REL) Ambassador Khalilzad thanked Dr. Shahristani for his comments and replied that he endorsed the UK Ambassador's proposal for an additional meeting to be held on the security situation.  This meeting would include MOD Dulime and MOI Jabr, and would address specific complaints.  6. (S/REL) Ambassador Khalilzad then addressed three points. First, he has been clear with the Sunnis that they can't have one foot in politics and one foot in the insurgency/terror. There is no such thing as legitimate resistance (violence) to a legitimate government.  Second, there are issues about areas of responsibility for MOD and MOI forces, particularly in Baghdad.  It may be necessary to reduce some MOD areas of responsibility to prevent forces from being spread too thin, and this is a topic for further discussion between MOI and MOD.  He underlined the U.S. and Coalition commitment to fighting terrorism and establishing security throughout Iraq, and he also reiterated that the Coalition wants the ISF to carry out its responsibilities so that MNF-I can reduce its footprint.  Last, the Ambassador noted that there are certain standards that need to be held to in a democracy, and that ISF and MNF-I may differ on tactics and techniques.  He stated that the Coalition wants all people who are in custody to be treated according to the law.  6. (S/REL) Lt Gen Houghton then stated that the overall status of transfer of security responsibility to the Iraqi government is good.  He said there is a concern that the nature of the security situation in places like Diyala and Baghdad is shifting to inter-sectarian conflict.  It is important, he added, not to respond in a sectarian fashion to sectarian tensions; security issues need to be resolved in an even-handed manner.  Lt Gen Houghton noted that MNF-I counsels against the Iraqi Police conducting large-scale detention raids in Sunni communities because these actions that would likely exacerbate the security situation.  More carefully targeted operations would be better, he cautioned. Lt Gen Houghton said the Baghdad security plan is being reviewed and will be presented shortly to the Minister's Committee for National Security, in an effort to balance security and sectarian concerns without making the security situation worse.  -------------------------------------------- HUMAN RIGHTS CONCERNS ARE PARALYZING THE MOI --------------------------------------------  7. (S/REL) Hadi al-Amiri agreed that the number of ISF are growing, which is good, but so are the car bombings and kidnappings, which is not.  He pointed out that the kidnapping of MOI Jabr's sister the day before (on January 3) "tells everyone that they are vulnerable."  He acknowledged that large-scale operations and mass arrests are not good, but the security situation will deteriorate if the security ministries do nothing.  Al-Amiri acknowledged that there are human rights abuses in MOI, but pointed out that the abuses are committed by people who were themselves abused by the Sunnis under Saddam Hussein (and therefore understandable). He reiterated that MOI should not be held back by human rights concerns; it needs to act.  The Ambassador said MOI should not be frozen into inaction, but still needs to adhere to certain standards.  Lt Gen Houghton added that MOI must try to improve its intelligence operations.  8. (S/REL) Jawad al-Maliki said the GOI is trying to control the street, but terrorists are provoking people.  He said there are rumors that the U.S. Embassy had agreed with Tawafuq to stop all raids, adding that all gains will be lost if groups can pull out the violence card.  He also alleged that while the MOI and MOD are paralyzed, killers are being released because of the Embassy.  Al-Maliki said that people need to be interrogated, accusing the Ministry of Human Rights of acting as if only criminals have rights.  He then stated his concern that a unity government will be set up in a manner that hampers those who received the most votes in the election.  9. (C/REL) The Ambassador stated that there is no agreement with Tawafuq or anyone else, adding that the Coalition has been pushing Tawafuq to disavow violence.  He said the Coalition has told Sunni leaders that the Coalition does not prefer big raids, but instead supports intelligence-driven, focused operations.  As for politics, the Ambassador acknowledged that the Coalition favors a national unity government and that Sunni integration is good.  The Ambassador said the USG has never called for a ministry distribution formula outside of the elections.  He cautioned al-Maliki not to believe stories that the U.S. supports a particular shape or weight for the GOI.  --------------------------------------------- - TAWAFUQ STATEMENTS: MAKING US RECONSIDER NATIONAL UNITY GOVERNMENT --------------------------------------------- -  10. (S/REL) Dr. Shahristani noted that the Shia Coalition leadership meets daily and that they have been committed to the idea of a national unity government with Tawafuq.  The Shia Coalition is under great pressure to reconsider this position, Shahristani said, because Tawafuq is perceived not to be a serious partner.  He said Tawafuq made strategic mistakes by calling for violence and that it should retract those statements.  He said the Shia Coalition will continue to engage Sunni Arab leaders, urging them to use their influence to reduce violence.  The Ambassador pointed to the shock felt by Sunni Arabs from the election results, especially in cities like Baghdad.  He mentioned that the IMIE observers will act as a face-saving mechanism, and he urged the Shia Coalition to talk seriously and realistically with them.  Lt Gen Houghton then offered to brief Dr. Shahristani on the security situation and the transfer of security responsibility on a regular basis, to which Dr. Shahristani agreed. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000053  SIPDIS  REL TO MNF-I  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2015 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, IZ, Security, Dawa Party, Human Rights SUBJECT: (U) SENIOR DAWA MEMBER ON THE SECURITY  SITUATION: IT'S MNF-I'S FAULT  REF: BAGHDAD 052  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) A ND (D)  1. (C/REL TO MNF-I) In a meeting with senior Dawa Party member Ali al-Adeeb on January 3, al-Adeeb blamed the Iraqi government's difficulties with the security situation on the "interference of American advisors."  Al-Adeeb complained that the Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr was being restrained from doing his job by the U.S. advisor, and that raids or arrests cannot happen without MNF-I permission.  He also claimed that USG had stopped all interaction with the MOI, and thus terrorist attacks have increased (COMMENT: Adeeb's allegations, which we have heard from other Shia Islamist politicians, are very inaccurate.  MNF-I does not prevent MOI from conducting legal activities.  Moreover, USG officials from a broad interagency group continue to work closely with the MOI on all levels, from the Minister himself down to the local policemen, including on human rights issues. END COMMENT).  2.  (C/REL TO MNF-I) Al-Adeeb's outburst was in response to PolOffs' emphasis on the Ambassador's key points on government formation: the need for a unity government; no militia involvement in the key security ministries; and a competent Prime Minister who can work cooperatively with the rest of the government. Al-Adeeb replied that Iraq was still a tribal society, making a unity government that could leave past wrongs behind them difficult.  Leaders take care of their tribe and sectarian group first, he stated.  Thus, he claimed, current Minister of Defense Sa'adun al- Dulaymi is publicly non-partisan but most of the positions (particularly officers) within the Ministry are filled with Sunni Arabs.  The Shia, Adeeb said, are worried that not enough groups are represented in this key ministry, especially since Dulaymi's chief of staff is a Kurd who "controls everything." (COMMENT: In fact, the MOD is one of the more diverse ministries.  SCIRI-aligned politicos have long complained there are not enough of their people in senior leadership positions.  In fact, SCIRI has attempted to replace current MOD officials with members from their party.  Such measures have been met with successful resistance. END COMMENT.)  3. (C/REL TO MNF-I) As for human rights abuses, al- Adeeb said these are not surprising when considered in the context of the post-Saddam period.  He said that terrorists are operating in certain areas and that the same people who terrorized during the Saddam era are now using political cover.  He described the Shia as non-violent and asserted that the militias are not used for violent purposes.  A--Adeeb noted that in all of his discussions on the need to exclude militia groups from key ministries, the Ambassador had never once addressed the issue of the peshmerga.  3. (C//REL TO MNF-I) COMMENT:   Adeeb's remarks were frequently manifestly untrue - such as his downplaying Shia militia involvement in violence - but his remarks also are broadly representative of what we hear from other Shia Islamists.  During this meeting, al-Adeeb stressed complaints that the MOI was being constrained by the U.S. interference.  The Ambassador heard similar charges from Deputy Parliament Speaker Shahristani and two other top parliamentarians who now make up a Shia Islamist Coalition "security group." Adeeb's blaming on "alleged abuse" in the MOI detention facilities on Baathists within the Ministry that the US prevented Jabr from removing is also a charge we frequently hear from Shia Islamists.  The fact that US forces witnessed the state of the abuse victims at sites, saw the officials in charge of the sites, and personally removed instruments of brutality from the premises belies this accusation.  When pushed, Shia Islamists like Jawad al-Maliki and Hadi al-Amari will acknowledge human rights problems, but they justify excesses in the name of preserving security more broadly.  We can expect the rank and file Shia Islamists to be very reluctant to concede ground at the Interior Ministry during the cabinet formation process.  KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000058  SIPDIS  REL USA AND MCFI  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/07/2016 TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PHUM, IZ, Security, Terrorism SUBJECT: PM JA,AFARI, MOI JABR, MOD DULIME BLAME COALITION FOR CURRENT SECURITY SITUATION  REF: BAGHDAD 00052  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (a), (b), AN D (d).  1. (S/REL) SUMMARY.  Prime Minister Ja'afari, Interior Minister Jabr, and Defense Minister Dulime conveyed their concern with the increasing level of violence in Iraq since the election, particularly in and around Baghdad.  As these officials relayed to the Shia Coalition "security commission" earlier in the week (see Reftel), they blame this increase on what they perceive as operational restrictions that MNF-I has placed on Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and on the Coalition's weakening stance against terrorist groups.  To reverse the trend, Jabr and Dulime recommended a number of "practical solutions" for Coalition consideration.  2. (S/REL) SUMMARY CONTINUED.  Ambassador Khalilzad, UK Ambassador Patey, and MNF-I Deputy Commanding General Lt Gen Houghton reiterated that the Coalition's commitment to fighting terrorism in Iraq is "absolute" and agreed to discuss further modifications to MNF-I policies that are inhibiting the ISF's ability to operate effectively and efficiently.  Ambassador Khalilzad stressed that any changes to the security strategy must take into account our continued objective to isolate the terrorists and integrate the Sunni Arabs into the political process.  END SUMMARY.  3. (S/REL) COMMENT: While the Coalition is treating these allegations regarding the security situation seriously, we are cautious in our assessment.  The terrorists are likely trying to provoke the Shia street and the Shia-dominated government to retaliate against Sunni Arabs, thereby provoking a civil war.  At the same time, the Shia Alliance could be trying to force the Coalition to take action against the Sunni Arabs, thereby removing the Sunni Arabs from the political process.  This would allow the Shia Coalition to keep political compromises to a minimum in the formation of a new government.  The Coalition is encouraging all sides to condemn these acts of terrorism and to tone down the rhetoric.  END COMMENT.  -------------------------------- DETERIORATING SECURITY SITUATION --------------------------------  4. (C/REL) Ambassador Khalilzad, UK Ambassador Patey, and LTG Houghton on January 7 met with PM Ja'afari, MOI Jabr, and MOD Dulime.  In the second part of the meeting, they were joined by Shia Coalition "security committee" members Dr. Hussein Shahristani (Deputy Speaker of the TNA), Jawad al-Maliki (leading figure in Dawa and chairman of the National Assembly's Security and Defense Committee), and Hadi al-Amiri (Badr Corps).  5. (S/REL) PM Ja'afari described the security situation as "very serious" and turned to MOI Jabr for a security update. MOI Jabr conveyed that, since the election, all major crime indexes were up including assassinations, kidnappings, and suicide bombings and that, in the last seven days, there had been 1440 civilian injuries and deaths throughout Iraq. Based on intelligence reports, MOI Jabr projected the violence will only increase, particularly in Baghdad Sunni neighborhoods such as Dora and Adhamiyah.  6. (S/REL) LTG Houghton questioned the accuracy of the crime statistics as MNF-I reporting did not show an increase in attacks.  In fact, MNF-I reporting actually showed a decrease in the number of attacks from November to December.  LTG Houghton also wondered if the last few days of spectacular attacks in Karbala, Ramadi, and Diyala were really driving a perception of an out-of-control violence trend rather than demonstrating the reality of episodic major violence. Because of the divergent views, both Ambassador Khalilzad and LTG Houghton agreed with MOI Jabr and MOD Dulime that all relevant parties should conduct a joint assessment to come to a mutual understanding of the current security situation.  ------------------------------------------- MOD AND MOI BLAME MNF-I FOR SECURITY SITUATION AND OUTLINE "PRACTICAL SOLUTIONS" -------------------------------------------  7. (S/REL) MOI Jabr and MOD Dulime both acknowledged that there are sufficient forces to protect the people; however, they claim their work is being hindered by MNF-I's operational policies and its weakening stance on terrorism. As evidence of the former, MOI Jabr pointed to the fact that it took five days to gain the approval of MNF-I to strike at ten identified targets, resulting in the loss of opportunity.  As evidence of the latter, MOD Dulime identified MNF-I's opening of an ISF recruitment center in Ramadi, "the hotbed for terrorists."  According to both ministers, this center was opened without their knowledge and against their advice. 8. (S/REL) Lt Gen Houghton stressed that no one in the Coalition wants to stymie the ISF.  MNF-I wants to see the ISF advance and increasingly take the lead in operations.  As for the opening of the recruitment center, Houghton was not familiar with this development but would discuss it with MNSTC-I Commanding General LTG Dempsey.  However, LTG Houghton and Ambassador Khalilzad made clear they did not believe recruiting people from Ramadi was a sign of weakness on terrorism; MNF-I's resolve to root out terrorism in Iraq has never been stronger.  9. (S/REL) To remedy the security situation, MOI Jabr and MOD Dulime outlined a number of measures they would like to implement with cooperation from MNF-I. They suggested the following steps be taken:  --Intensify control of the twenty-two manned checkpoints throughout Baghdad and build permanent accommodations for forces next to each checkpoint.  --Increase the number of MNF-I advisors "embedded" with forces in the field to improve operations and add to the legitimacy of the ISF operations.  --Develop more efficient procedures for approving target lists, and act on intelligence more efficiently.  --Return the MOI Brigade that was moved to Ramadi and Samarra for election security purposes to Baghdad.  --Reduce publicity around human rights abuses (NOTE: Only MOI Jabr made this request. He claims the publicity is breaking the morale of his police and fear of being caught up in an investigation has led to paralysis among the police. END NOTE.)  --Mount serious operations against terrorist-filled communities such as Ramadi and put them under strict control.   10. (S/REL) Ambassador Khalilzad, UK Ambassador Patey, and LTG Houghton requested follow-on meetings with the appropriate Iraqi and MNF-I members to assess the Ministries' recommendations.  Ambassador Khalilzad closed the discussion by emphasizing that, whatever modifications are adopted and actions taken, the Iraqis and the Coalition must proceed in a way that does not incite further violence, intensify the ethnic-sectarian divide, or push Iraqi citizens away from the political process and toward the terrorists. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000059  SIPDIS  STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: OPRC, KMDR, KPAO, IZ, Terrorism, Media, Iraqi Islamic Party SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD  SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials included the recent terrorist attacks in Ramadi and Karbala, economic crises, government formation, and the recent agreement between the PUK and KDP.  In its front-page editorial entitled "The Announcement of Unity Is a Great Event," KDP-affiliated At-Taakhi lauds the agreement between the KDP and PUK, which unites the two Kurdish administrations in the Kurdistan region. Independent As-Sabah Al-Jadeed published a front-page editorial by editor-in-chief Ismael Zayyer highlighting current political negotiations, recent terrorist attacks, and the preparations for forming the new government.  Other independent papers focused on the country's political and economic obstacles, with Az-Zaman's back page column discussing the political process since the downfall of the former regime, and Al-Mashriq's front-page editorial discussing the current fuel crisis. The author considers the observation that Iraq's situation deteriorates following each political achievement. Independent Al-Mada also assumes a somber tone in its third-page column entitled "Successive Crises and Tyrannical Decisions," by Tarek Al-Jiburi, who bemoans the relative dearth of fuel, electricity, employment and potable water in Iraq. The author suggests that the Iraqi government has intentionally harmed Iraqi citizens by remaining silent since April 9th, 2003.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------- TABLE OF CONTENTS -------------------------------  A. "Playing with Blood" (Dar As-Salam, 1/8) B. "The People Know" (Al-Adala, 1/8) C. "Cost" (As-Sabah, 1/8) D. "For the Sake of Ending Terrorism" (Al-Ittihad, 1/8)  ---------------------------------------- SELECTED COMMENTARIES ----------------------------------------  A. "Playing with Blood" (Dar As-Salam, affiliated with the Iraqi Islamic Party, published a front-page unattributed editorial about the recent terrorist attacks in Karbala and Ramadi. The editorial reads in part)  "We were surprised to hear some groups accuse specific political parties of being behind the criminal events that took place in Karbala and Ramadi. These accusations widen the divisions among Iraqis and make it difficult to know who benefited from those crimes. At the same time, there are demands that the government's security forces intensify their operations without restriction. It seems that the accusations are attempts to win political benefit at the expense of innocent blood. Iraqis have the right to know why these accusations were associated with the current political crisis that began after the election fraud was revealed. This is merely playing with fire and blood, and it resembles an adventure more than a political process."  B. "The People Know" (Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI, published a third-page editorial by Ali Khalif about Iraq's political scene. The editorial reads in part)  "We are not surprised to see some groups release statements that provoke terror. We noticed that some political figures are two-faced, but the Iraqi people discovered these types of politicians before the election. For this reason the overwhelming majority of Iraqis voted for their real representatives. The political scene after the election shows that there are groups in Iraq that do not believe in democracy or ballot boxes. In any case, the determination of Iraqis will be stronger than any other tyrant because our people know what they want and they expressed this wish during the great Election Day."  C. "Cost" (As-Sabah, Iraqi Media Network, government financed, published a front-page editorial by editor in chief Muhammad Abdul Jabbar about Iraq's economic situation. The editorial reads in part)  "The needs of the people cannot be satisfied by donations. In Iraq, there are three kinds of citizens: government employees, private sector employees, and the unemployed. Salaries of government employees must be based on the real cost of living in the country. On the other hand, the unemployed have no solution for their problem. Recently, the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs began presenting financial donations to the unemployed. But these donations cannot cover the costs of the basic standards of living. If we want to find solutions to the salary problems of government employees and to the problem of the unemployed, we first have to calculate the real costs of a good life."  D. "For the Sake of Ending Terrorism" (Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK, published a front-page editorial by editor in chief Faryad Rawanduzi about the recent terrorist attacks in Iraq. The editorial reads in part)  "Terrorists have increased their crimes against the Iraqi people. This time they attacked funerals, shrines, and mosques. Theses terrorist operations come after the terrorists realized that the political process in Iraq is progressing. These operations represent a proclaimed battle against the Iraqi people and their dreams to establish a democratic, federal country. Hence, the political participation of all Iraqi sects and groups can bring an end to terrorism in Iraq. Terrorism has become a principal obstacle facing the progress of this country. For this reason, we have to save Iraq, the region, and the entire world from the evils of terrorism and terrorists."  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000063  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2015 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ, Shia Islamists, Parliament SUBJECT: THE CITIZENSHIP LAW IN TAL CONTROVERSY  REF: A. BAGHDAD 4662      B. DEC 10 BAGHDAD O/I      C. BAGHDAD 4993      D. DEC 13 BAGHDAD O/I  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) On December 17, Saifaldin Abdurrahman, Chief of Staff to Dr. Hajim al-Hasani, the Speaker of the TNA, told PolOff that members of the Shia Coalition were agitated because VP Adel Abdul Mehdi evidently never agreed to the veto of the Nationality Law that the Presidency Council (PC) issued on December 4, nor had he agreed to the vetoes issued on the Martyrs' Foundation and the Political Prisoners' Foundation laws.  2. (C) In response, al-Hasani sent the following letter December 18 to the Presidency Council: The Iraqi National Assembly is of the opinion that the appeal decision (i.e. the veto) for the laws sent to you in accordance with Article 37 of the TAL should be issued unanimously by the Presidency Council members pursuant to the provisions of Article 36(C) of the aforementioned law.  Since the reversal decisions (vetoes) issued regarding the Nationality law, the law of the Martyrs Foundation, and the Political Prisoners and Detainees law were not issued unanimously; therefore, these laws are deemed approved.  Pursuant to what has been stated above, you are kindly requested to send these laws to the Ministry of Justice in order to be duly published in the official gazette.  3. (C) Post is following up with the Presidency Council to see if they have received the letter and what their reaction is.  4. (C) COMMENT.  Our protests about discriminatory provisions in the law generated a response from the Presidency Council, but we sense no movement on the issue since mid-December.  By sending the December 18 letter, the Speaker sought to push this issue back to the Presidency Council.  The December 4 Presidency Council letter lacked signatures of any of the members of the PC (it was signed by Talabani's Chief of Staff), but there is no prior veto practice against which to evaluate the effectiveness of such a letter. The working interpretation is that Presidency Council vetoes must be unanimous since TAL Article 36(C) says states "The Presidency Council shall take its decisions unanimously."  In addition, because a practice has developed in which all three Presidency Council members sign laws before they are published in the Official Gazette, it may be reasonable for the TNA to expect all three members of the PC to sign a veto letter as well.  The end of the transitional period and the formation of a new government also make it difficult to predict how this dispute will be resolved.  Nevertheless, because the PC is, by practice, the entity that sends enacted laws to the Official Gazette for publication, Talabani simply could refuse to send these laws to the Gazette, which effectively may prevent them from becoming law. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000065  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2015 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, IZ, Sunni Arab, Elections SUBJECT: ALLAWI/SUNNI ARAB GROUPS WILL ACCEPT  ELECTION RESULTS - PONDERING PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Ibrahim al-Janabi, Chief of Staff to Dr. Ayad Allawi, told PolOffs January 8 that the political parties working with Allawi and the Sunni Arabs (MARAM) are beginning to concede the reality of the election results.  He anticipated that they ultimately will negotiate for entry a national unity government. After a discussion of the MARAM meeting with the international monitoring group IMIE January 7 (septel), he said serious government formation talks will not begin until after Muslim Id al-Adha holiday that starts January 10.  During the meeting, al-Janabi took a call from Dr. Ayad Allawi who told al-Janabi to return from his Id al-Adha vacation in Jordan by January 13 for political party talks that will begin the following day in Baghdad.  (NOTE: Dr. Allawi met with Iraqi President Talabani January 7, but they reportedly did not discuss the formation of the new government.  End Note.)  2. (C) Al-Janabi agreed with the assessment that the IMIE report could help spur changes in a future Election Law or Election Commission law.  Al-Janabi acknowledged the importance of the final IMIE report because he considers the political future to be the provincial elections with the eventual shift to greater federalization.  He speculated that the Iraqi National List, Tawafuq, and the National Dialogue Front could perhaps run as one group in these elections.  3. (C) Al-Janabi also told us that MARAM had not rescheduled a demonstration originally scheduled for January 6 in Firdous Square.  PolOff reminded al- Janabi that these demonstrations could spark counter- demonstrations by Shia Coalition supporters, with the danger that the situation could spiral out of control. Al-Janabi said he did not see the benefit of demonstrations now given both the current state of play with the international observers and the perceived deteriorating security situation in Iraq.  4. (C) Comment.  The MARAM group, as a force of rejection and denial, has substantially lowered its rhetoric and its expectations.  Adnan Pachachi, another senior Allawi list member, told Sharqiya TV on January 8 that the international monitor report "might not rise to the level of our expectations."  Although he did not promise the Allawi government would join unity government talks, he laid out detailed thinking about their position on a unity government. Similarly, Adnan Dulaymi from the Tawwafuq Front in MARAM, told Sharqiya TV on January 8 that he welcomed a national unity government.  It is interesting that Al-Janabi suggested that the same group members could keep working together for the provincial elections, although we don't know how serious he was.  (He even joked that MARAM should change its name since "refuse" the elections would no longer apply as the group takes on a new identity.)   If this intent comes to fruition, an electoral alliance bringing together Allawi, the Sunni Arab Tawwafuq and National Dialog Fronts and a mix of other, smaller Shia and Sunni Arab political figures would be an encouraging even if its combined electoral appeal will initially be limited. In any case, in the more immediate future is getting the Allawi and Sunni Arab leaders to recognize the utility of joining a unity government and to work with the Kurds.  Clearly we are making progress there.  End comment. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000067  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ, KRG Parliament SUBJECT: MASROUR BARZANI REPORTS BREAKTHROUGH IN KRG GOVERNANCE NEGOTIATIONS  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires, a.i., David M. Satterfield for reason s 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) Masrour Barzani, Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Masoud Barzani's son and advisor, telephoned DCM staff assistant on January 7 to relay that Kurdistan's two main political factions -- the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) -- had come to an agreement to consolidate governance of the KRG, eliminating the redundant regional ministries administered by the dueling political parties.  2. (S) Masrour Barzani highlighted that:  -- Irbil will serve as the KRG's capital, home to all regional ministries and the regional parliament.  -- The KRG ministries of Finance and Peshmerga Affairs are to be headed by KDP officials, while the Justice and Interior ministries will be administered by PUK officials.  "Shadow ministers" from the opposing party will help ease the transition until ministries are fully united.  -- A PUK official will continue to lead the KRG Parliament, while the KDP will continue to hold the regional prime minister's office.  Masoud Barzani will remain the regional president until at least 2007.  -- A formal, written agreement will be passed by the KRG Parliament immediately following the Eid al-Adha holiday -- on approximately January 15.  -- There will be a big push to unite the two parties' peshmerga forces in order to create a non-partisan regional security force.  3. (S) COMMENT: This announcement appears to have come as a surprise even to many Kurds within both the KDP and PUK politburo structures.  Many of the Embassy's Kurdish interlocutors just a few weeks ago flatly stated that the merger was just "public relations."  If indeed the merger takes place, it will probably dismay many of the Arab politicians negotiating Iraq's national government formation, as Kurdish unification would limit opportunities to exploit the fissures and mistrust between the KDP and PUK.  A close examination of the merger details, however, reveals the serious weakness of the PUK.  They backed down on their demands for limiting the Prime Minister position to a one-year rotation and for ensuring that no one party got control over both the Prime Minister and Finance Minister, and they ceded control over the unified peshmerga to the KDP.  In addition, the agreement states that the new seat of the unified KRG will be in Irbil, a Barzani stronghold.  Ongoing tensions may yet open up avenues for other groups, both inside and outside Iraq, to try to split the Kurdish support base for their own interests.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000071  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINS, PTER, PINR, KDEM, IZ, Parliament, Sunni Arab SUBJECT: SUNNI OUTREACH: AMB CONVEYS U.S. VISION OF NATIONAL UNITY GOVERNMENT   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: On January 7, Ambassador Khalilzad outlined suggested principles for the new Iraqi government during meetings with two Sunni sheikhs recommended to the Ambassador by Lakhdar Brahimi, former Special Advisor to UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan.  The Ambassador underlined the  SIPDIS importance of starting to address polarization in Iraqi society and of finding competent persons from across Iraq's communities to manage top government positions.  One sheikh, who claimed connections with the insurgency, was more interested in discussing the withdrawal of MNF-I than the formation of the new government.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) The Ambassador first met with Sheikh Dahran Hawaz al-Sadid, General Secretary of the Arab Democratic Party and member of Saleh Mutlaq's National Dialogue Council.  The Ambassador outlined suggested main principles for the National Unity Government:  --A National Unity Government is important to decrease sectarian polarization and increase confidence among all Iraqis.  --Only competent government officials must lead in this pivotal time.  --The new ministers for MOD and MOI should be non-sectarian and free of ties to any militia.  --The government's three main functions -- security, services, and the economy -- require cross-sectarian and cross-ethnic leadership.  3. (C) Sheikh al-Sadid told the Ambassador the "best of the bad" candidates for the next Prime Minister is Ayad Allawi. Sadid claimed Prime Minister Ja'afari's government -- and by association, Vice President Adel Abd al-Mehdi -- had lost the confidence of the Iraqi street.  4. (C) In a separate meeting, Sheikh Khamis Hawaz al-Sidig, a former Iraqi Army Major General from Hillah, offered to submit names of suggested candidates for the top ministerial positions.  5. (C) Sidig, who claims to be close to the insurgents, seemed more concerned about the withdrawal of MNF-I than about formation of the new government.  He told the Ambassador much of the insurgent violence is perpetrated by unemployed former Iraqi Army soldiers.  Sidig said the insurgents want a timetable for withdrawal of MNF-I but do not want a quick withdrawal.  6. (C) The Ambassador explained MNF-I does not have a timetable for withdrawal but plans to draw down troops gradually as Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) gain competence.  He recommended Sidig explain to insurgents that violence is not the answer, and the future of Iraq depends on good governance and respect for the ISF.  Sidig suggested MNF-I withdraw from one small area for two weeks to see if violence would decrease, as he predicted.  The Ambassador said that he would discuss his proposal with GEN Casey.  7. (SBU) Biographic information: Sheikh Khamis Hawaz al-Sidig has lived in Hillah since 1978.  His father is from the United Arab Emirates.  He is a member of the Shamar tribe.  8. (C) Sheikh Dahran Hawaz al-Sadid, also from the Shamar tribe, is the General Secretary of the Arab Democratic Party.  He is likely to be a member of the Council of Representatives.  His party holds six of the ten seats won by Saleh Mutlaq's National Dialogue Council. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000072  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: ALLAWI RECOMMENDS POSTPONEMENT OF CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW TO PRESERVE NATIONAL UNITY  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1.  (C) In their January 8 meeting, Ayad Allawi told the Ambassador that Iraqi President Talabani believes that a national unity government is a must, but Dr. Allawi added that this must be a national unity government in reality, not just cosmetically.  He also highlighted the importance of balance.  (COMMENT: A not-so-veiled reference to the Sunni Arab/Allawi group idea of equal ministry distribution instead of giving weight to electoral results in the ministerial distribution.  END COMMENT.)  Dr. Allawi told the Ambassador that he will be meeting with President Talabani and KRG President Masoud Barzani after Id al-Adha.  He said the Kurds could play a central role in these government formation negotiations, but they need to consider themselves Iraqis before they consider themselves Kurds.  2.  (C) Dr. Allawi said the new government should not discuss "divisive issues", but should focus instead on unifying issues like security to stabilize Iraq and economic recovery (improving essential services).  He specifically cited the constitutional review and federalism as examples of divisive issues, saying these will "add fuel to the fire."  Dr. Allawi told the Ambassador that, if such issues are considered now, there will be serious problems and a potential for a political backfire, particularly given the upcoming provincial elections.  Dr. Allawi suggested that these discussions will be easier if the security situation stabilizes and the economy grows; he recommended a delay of one to two years.  The Ambassador said this program is worth studying and examining whether all sides could agree to postpone the constitutional review and the establishment of new federal regions.  (COMMENT: The Sunni Arab blocs have been vocal in their demands for constitutional amendments; so any serious discussion of a delay would have to include a postponement of establishing new federal entities.  END COMMENT.)  3.  (C) Dr. Allawi said he told UK Foreign Secretary Jack Straw that decision-making needs to be clear in the new government.  The Ambassador suggested that government functions be divided by key sectoral areas: security, finance/economy, and services.  By doing this, each sector will have multi-sectarian participation (managed by a Deputy Prime Minister or Deputy President).  Dr. Allawi said this concept could help cement national unity. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000074  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2016 TAGS: PNAT, PTER, PHUM, IZ, Sunni Arab, Iraqi Islamic Party, Elections SUBJECT: AMB URGES SUNNI POLITICAL LEADERS TO DENOUNCE VIOLENCE, HELP END THE INSURGENCY  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Ambassador Khalilzad met on January 5 with key leaders from the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) and on January 6 with the Iraqi National Dialogue Council (INDC) to review their concerns about the December 15 parliamentary elections and to solicit their views on the formation of a national unity government.  He also expressed deep concern about the increase in violence and asked that the leaders issue statements calling for calm.  The leaders all expounded unrealistic expectations that the ongoing international review of the elections would result in specific changes to the outcome.  However, none of them threatened to boycott the new parliament or negotiations over a unity government if the election results remain unchanged.  Instead, they said they are talking to the Kurds about the shape of that government. They are developing lists of potential candidates and are engaged in discussions about potential power-sharing arrangements in a national unity government.  The leaders were far less forthcoming regarding statements condemning the recent upsurge in violence, claiming that the violence was a response to GOI repression and killings of their political operatives after the election as well as to provocative statements by some Shia leaders linking all Sunni Arabs with the insurgency.  The Ambassador told the Sunni leaders that they are not credible political partners if they defend the insurgency, which, with the formation of a widely representative government, could no longer be justified and would have to be termed terrorism.  END SUMMARY.  Key Issues - Election, Government Formation, Violence --------------------------------------------- --------  2. (SBU) Ambassador Khalilzad met on January 5 with Tariq Hashimi and Ayad Samarrai, key leaders in the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP).  On January 6, he met with the Iraqi National Dialogue Council (INDC) chairman Sheykh Khalif Al-Ayan, accompanied by Mahmood Mashadani and Abd Nasir Al-Janabi. The IIP and the INDC are two of the three parties in the Al-Tawaffuq Front, the Sunni Arab coalition that, according to preliminary results, won 43 seats in the December 15 elections.  3. (C) The Ambassador told the leaders that the International Mission for Iraqi Elections (IMIE) is conducting a review of election complaints and IECI audits and will issue its preliminary findings before January 18.  The US will support the recommendations in the report, but it is unreasonable to expect that the election will be rerun, the Ambassador told the Sunni Arab leaders.  4. (C) The USG is encouraging a national unity government, said Ambassador Khalilzad.  He noted that the Kurd, Sunni, and secular parties together have more votes than the Shia Alliance and that, if they joined together, they could negotiate with the Shia on an equal footing to form the new government.  The USG has no specific names to propose for any positions but proposed ministers should be competent and the key security agencies (Defense, Interior and Intelligence) led by people who are non-sectarian, with no ties to militias, and who enjoy broad political support.  Otherwise, the USG would have difficulty in cooperating with the ministries.  5. (C) The Ambassador expressed deep concern about the upsurge in violence and asked the leaders to issue statements for an immediate suspension of violence during the government formation process.  He noted that statements by some groups unhappy with the provisional election results suggested support for the insurgency.  This is a mistake that makes the formation of a unity government more difficult, he noted. Parties cannot have one foot in the insurgency and another in the government.  He also cautioned that political parties should not defend as legitimate violence against a government that is the outgrowth of a representative process; such violence must be condemned as terrorism.  Unrealistic Expectations for Electoral Review ---------------------------------------------  6. (C) IIP leader Tariq Hashimi asserted that the Sunni Arab complaints about the election are very important and that their supporters expect concrete remedies; otherwise there will be "trouble".  The Tawaffuq Front is being condemned as being too soft by some parties, especially former INDC spokesman Saleh Mutleq (whose competing Sunni Arab Iraqi Unified Front slate won 11 seats).  Tawaffuq hard-liner Abd Nasir Al-Janabi was more direct, demanding that his bloc be awarded 12 extra seats to compensate for alleged unfair seat allocation in the new Council of Representatives (CR).  He claimed that Sunni Arabs represent 35-40% of Iraq's population, the same as the Shia Arabs.  The Ambassador replied that there is nothing the USG could do about the 12 seats -- any revision in seat allocation will be decided by the next CR (perhaps aided by the census planned for 2007). The allocation of the 45 compensatory seats is distributed according to the electoral law and cannot be simply awarded.  Sunnis Developing Candidate Lists ---------------------------------  7. (C) Both Hashimi and another Tawaffuq Front leader, Khalif Al-Ayan, confirmed that the Tawaffuq is developing a list of candidates for senior government positions and will provide Embassy with the list when internal consensus is reached. Hashimi stated that the Sunni Arabs need to see fundamental changes in the makeup of the government - they will balk at the same names in top positions.  He argued that a Sunni Arab in a top symbolic position, like the President, would be an important sign that things have changed.  PolCouns urged the Sunni Arab leaders to weigh carefully their options.  They need to consider whether it is more useful to gain the Presidency when, under the new constitution, a Deputy President has nearly as much authority and the Sunni Arabs might secure more ministerial jobs by accepting a Deputy President position.  Hashimi and al-Janabi understood the logic but appeared unconvinced.  Increase in Violence --------------------  8. (C) Both groups of party leaders were markedly cool to the Ambassador's call for public statements to end the violence. Hashimi was especially harsh in rejecting the call to condemn the recent kidnapping of MOI Jabr's sister saying, "We have no sympathy for Jabr and view him bitterly."  Expressing sympathy for the victim, he noted that the kidnapping occurred near the IIP office and that IIP bodyguards shot at the kidnappers in an unsuccessful attempt to intervene. Hashimi said that violence is a two-sided problem and that the recent upsurge in insurgent activity is a response to government violence against Sunni Arabs after the election. Tawaffuq Front official Mahmoud Mashadani asserted the violence was in response to the SCIRI leader Hakim's and Da'wa leader Jawad Al-Maliki's recent harsh statements linking all Sunnis with the insurgency.  Ayan claimed that the GOI is assassinating Sunni Arab election observers and confiscating homes and fields in Anbar, with families being "thrown into the wilderness".  He asserted that 58 Tawaffuq observers were detained by the IP the day after the election and that 38 of them were killed.  He claimed that the GOI, along with Iran, supports Zarqawi, whose terrorism primarily affects Sunni Arabs.  Mashadani charged that the GOI is increasing terrorism against Arab Sunnis and the USG is not intervening.  9. (C) Ambassador pushed back, stating that Zarqawi wants to provoke a civil war and that the USG will not cease operations against him.  Shia leaders publicly complain that the USG is restraining the GOI from responding to terror and that that is the reason there is an increase in violence. The Ambassador emphasized that the Sunni Arab political parties must come out firmly against violence or their credibility as a government partner will suffer.  In response, Mashadani said that the political leaders can reach the "resistance" and the Ba'athists to affect their behavior.  Al-Janabi asked that the USG be patient with the Sunni Arab political groups.  Comment -------  10. (C) COMMENT: Hashimi underlined the importance of the international monitoring group looking seriously into fraud allegations and making changes to the results as necessary. That said, in neither meeting with these Tawaffuq Front leaders did anyone mention boycotting the new parliament or abstaining from negotiations about a unity government. Internally they must decide what they want - symbolic leadership in a Presidency or real power through control of key ministries.  They are clearly focused on problems relating to the security ministries as a matter of immediate concern.  The key for the next weeks will be to convince them that, without a definitive public break from the insurgency, their ability to convince the Kurds and Shia to accept them as serious partners in government will be limited, even with our support.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000075  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ, Elections SUBJECT: ELECTION OBSERVER TEAM STILL AT WORK WHILE ELECTION COMMISSION DELAYS PUBLIC TALK ON COMPLAINTS  REF: BAGHDAD 0065  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) Summary.  The international monitoring team (IMIE) continues its post-election assessment work, and has decided that its building workload will require postponement of its preliminary report about January 14.  Partly as a result of this new date, the Iraqi election commission (IECI) has decided to postpone announcing the results of their own investigations into election complaints until after the Eid holiday that starts January 10 or 11.  The IMIE team appears to be well received by the political parties, with the Allawi team expressing satisfaction with the IMIE work as Allawi looks towards the work of forming a new government. End summary.  --------------------------------------------- ------- IMIE MOVES FORWARD WITH ITS POST-ELECTION ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------- -------  2. (C) The International Mission for Iraqi Elections (IMIE) has adjusted the timeline for presenting its preliminary report, with January 14 as the new target date.  In-country IMIE team coordinator Mazen Chouib told PolOff on January 9 that the team encountered more work than expected, and needed more time to pour over the piles of documents the team obtained from both the IECI and the various political parties they have met with during the past week.  Chouib insisted that the date change reflected the level of work; no one should expect any surprise findings or announcements on the 14th.  He also underlined that the IMIE's objective was to conduct an assessment of the complaints process and overall elections procedures, and not/not to conduct a post-election investigation.  He admitted that this type of work (i.e. a post-election assessment) was new territory for IMIE and is not contained in its charter. However, he expressed confidence that the team members have the requisite expertise to produce credible results within the coming weeks.  3. (C) Chouib stated that the two Arab League members were particularly well-received by the political party leaders.  Identified simply as members of the Arab League with no mention of nationality, both team members, Disouki Abaza, an Egyptian and Head of the Arab Affairs Department, and Ali El Jaroche, a Lebanese and a Legal Advisor (also a former judge), have quickly gained the confidence of the Iraqis as well as the other IMIE team members.  Chouib said that the team has finished its meeting with all major and several smaller political parties, and will now focus on documentation review.  He revealed that although the team does not anticipate any new developments resulting from their assessment, the final report will likely contain recommendations for a revision of the IECI legal framework as well as a need for capacity building in order to address inherent deficiencies in IECI structure and operations.  -------------------------------------------- IECI POSTPONES ANNOUNCING COMPLAINTS RESULTS --------------------------------------------  4. (C) Earlier in the day, IECI International Commissioner Craig Jenness told PolOff that the IECI Board of Directors decided not to announce the final results of the complaint process at a press conference previously scheduled for January 9.  Instead, Jenness stated that the announcement will be postponed until after the Eid holidays and, hopefully, after the IMIE gives its preliminary report.  5. (C) When Chouib learned about the postponement by the IECI, he told PolOff that he did not want the work of the IMIE to interfere in any way with the activities of the IECI, and assured that the IMIE will only take the minimum time necessary to complete their assessment.  (Comment: This timing is contrary to IECI previous statements that their timeline would remain independent from the IMIE timeline.  However, a slight delay of this announcement is politically more palatable and should provide for a more positive respite for all parties during Eid.  End comment.) Chouib estimated that IMIE should have a final report completed within two to three weeks, and that their preliminary report should be enough to address the concerns of the political parties on the fairness and objectivity of the election process.  ------------------------------------------ ALLAWI CAMP OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE IMIE TEAM ------------------------------------------  6. (C) On January 8, Ibrahim Al-Janabi, Chief of Staff to Dr. Ayad Allawi, told PolOffs and PolFSN that key members of MARAM had previously met with the IMIE team and provided them extensive documentation on election- related complaints (ref).  He explained that the information was presented to the team in four specific election-related stages: one month prior to the elections, the 24-hour media blackout period prior to election day, activities during election day, and actions during the period following the elections.  7. (C) Al-Janabi expressed satisfaction with the level of expertise on the IMIE team, especially from the Arab League members, describing the team as good listeners.  He also stated that he does not see a need to re-run any parts of the election, and that the formation of government is paramount.  He also said that getting the violations on record by an independent body would be sufficient enough to move past the elections.  ------- COMMENT -------  8. (C)  As noted ref, we sense that at least some of the groups arguing most loudly against in the election results are moderating their tone.  Meanwhile, the IECI Board of Directors is still not fully convinced about the need for the international IMIE group to conduct an assessment of the election's technical aspects.  However, the Board accepts the need for the IMIE assessment to act as a political tool to complement the apolitical technical work of the ICEI. The willingness of the IMIE team to craft an assessment process while giving due consideration to Iraqi political realities is refreshing and should go a long way to producing a useful final report. Post will monitor IMIE's progress closely to ensure that the timeline for its assessment does not expand, and to encourage IMIE to focus on its timeline. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000079  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, PREL, IR, IZ, Parliament, Shia Islamists, KRG Parliament SUBJECT: FM ZEBARI: SHIA FAR FROM DECISION ON PM CANDIDATE, NEW GOVERNMENT FORMATION ALSO DISTANT  REF: BAGHDAD 05 4975  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires, a.i., David M. Satterfield for reason s 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari told Ambassador on January 9 that the Kurdish Alliance has reached agreement on supporting Talabani for President in the new Iraqi government.  The Shia UIA alliance is, in his view, deeply divided over whether to support current PM Ja'afari or current Deputy President Mahdi for the PM slot, with Ja'afari currently in the lead.  It will take some time to resolve this impasse with the decision resting on the views of Iranian Revolutionary Guard Intelligence Corps Chief Soleimani and Grand Ayatollah Sistani.  Per Zebari, negotiations on the rest of the government will begin in earnest only after the PM candidate is chosen.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) Foreign Minister and top Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) official Hoshyar Zebari told the Ambassador January 9 that the Kurds have gone through a very difficult internal process of negotiating the government positions to be sought by the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) and the KDP.  Each of the other political alliances (the Shia UIA, the Sunni Arab Tuwaffuq, and Allawi's moderate group), according to Zebari, also will have to make internal decisions before government formation can begin.  Zebari stated that the Kurds have decided they will support Jalal Talabani again for president of Iraq while Masoud Barzani will remain president of the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG).  The region, he noted, will have one Prime Minister.  With Talabani as President, Zebari stated, the KDP will expect to get the bulk of any ministerial slots allocated to the Kurds in the Iraqi government.  3. (C) Zebari said that Talabani has dropped his opposition to Ibrahim Ja'afari continuing as prime minister.  This follows a visit from Ja'afari, who, according to Zebari, is doing a much better job of lobbying for the PM position than Deputy PM Adil Abd al-Mahdi.  However, Zebari stated, a repeat of Ja'afari in the PM role is a red flag for SCIRI's Abdul Aziz Hakim, who views Ja'afari's tenure as a failure. Zebari added that Hakim would like to reach agreement on the UIA PM nomination -- which the UIA views as its right because it won the most votes in the election -- before it comes to an internal vote.  Zebari opined that Ja'afari would win if an internal UIA vote on the position was conducted at this moment.  Given internal UIA disagreements, Zebari said he doubts there will be a quick agreement on the composition of the new government.  Zebari believes that ultimately Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps Intelligence chief Soleimani and Sistani will decide the UIA PM nominee.  Sistani's influential son, Mohammed Ridha, supports Ja'afari, with whom, according to Zebari, he has some type of family relation.  Zebari recommended that the Ambassador not weigh in at this point except perhaps to outline the qualities that the USG would like to see in a prime minister.  4. (C) Zebari cautioned against attempting to form a Sunni Arab-Kurd-Allawi block to negotiate with the Shia.  Doing so, he said, would cause the UIA to dig in its heels.  Rather, Zebari explained, the Sunni Arabs, along with the other political groups, must form a small negotiating team to negotiate after the Shia PM nominee is decided.  The Sunni Arab-Kurd-Allawi bloc, he stated, can be formed later in the Council of Representatives to oppose UIA initiatives there. Allawi must be kept in the country and engaged in the process, Zebari added.  However, Zebari noted, Allawi is a difficult man to control and now is the center of gravity in the election rejectionist camp.  Only the U.S. can influence Allawi, Zebari commented.  5. (C) The Ambassador and Zebari discussed the rumors of a possible Shia Sadr-Da'wa and Sunni Arab Tawaffuq nationalist Arab bloc being formed, isolating the pro-Iranian SCIRI and the Kurds.  Such a bloc could get the backing of the Arab countries, Zebari stated.  Saudi Arabia, Zebari added, views Sadr as a counterweight to both Iranian and U.S. influence in Iraq.  6. (C) COMMENT: Talabani's much-documented problem of trying to be "all things to all people" appears again with his recent declaration of reconciliation with Ja'afari, despite his long-standing support for Mahdi's candidacy.  Last week the Embassy heard that Talabani again declared his support for Mahdi as being the most qualified candidate.  We continue to monitor Iran's continuing attempts to influence the Kurds through their shuttle diplomacy between Irbil and Sulaimaniyah; they appear to have had more open success in influencing Talabani (see reftel).  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000080  SIPDIS  STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: OPRC, KMDR, KPAO, IZ, Media, Parliament SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD  SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials included Eid Al-Adha, government formation, and the recent agreement between the PUK and KDP.  In its front-page editorial entitled "This Morning," independent As-Sabah Al-Jadeed discusses the agreement between the PUK and KDP, which unites the two Kurdish administrations in the Kurdistan region.  PUK-affiliated Al- Ittihad addresses the same subject and lauds the agreement in "Unity of the Two Administrations Represents a Step to Reinforce the Position of the Kurdistan Region."  Al-Mada's back-page editorial entitled "What an Eid." sheds light on Iraqis' preparations for the Eid Al-Adha occasion. The author also highlights Iraqi frustration with the increase in fuel prices and the recent deterioration of the security situation.  In its front-page editorial entitled "Priorities of the Next Government," Al-Ahali, affiliated with the National Democratic Party, discusses the duties and responsibilities of the new Iraqi government.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------- TABLE OF CONTENTS -------------------------------  A. "Unity" (As-Sabah, 1/9) B. "Dots on Letters" (Al-Bayan, 1/9) C. "Will Negotiations Fix What Was Spoiled by the Constitution and Elections?" (Democratic Al-Wifaq, 1/9) D. "Miracles of the Government's Formation" (Az-Zaman, 1/9)  ---------------------------------------- SELECTED COMMENTARIES ----------------------------------------  A. "Unity" (As-Sabah, Iraqi Media Network, government-financed, published a front-page editorial by editor in chief Muhammad Abdul Jabbar about the unification of the two Kurdish administrations. The editorial reads in part)  "The announcement regarding unification of the two Kurdish administrations represents a step toward building a new federal Iraq. The permanent constitution states that Iraq is a federal country, but the presence of the two administrations in Kurdistan represents an obstacle to establishing a federal state in Iraq. Now that the KDP and PUK have agreed to unite the two administrations, the political and constitutional situation will move forward amid an Iraqi field that is planted with many political mines. Perhaps this move will help remove these mines."  B. "Dots on Letters" (Al-Bayan, affiliated with Islamic Ad-Dawa Party, published a fifth-page editorial by Salim Rasoul about the differences between terrorism and resistance in Iraq. The editorial reads in part)  "I always demand that those who identify themselves as `honest resistance' announce their identities and their political platforms, but I am sure that they do not have the courage to answer. In brief, armed groups in Iraq include Islamist extremists who belong to Zarqawi's group; there is also the Islamic Army, which shares the ideology of Zarqawi's group; and there is another group that is comprised of former Ba'thists, officers from the Republican Guards, and intelligence, which is called `Muhammad's Army.' All these groups in Iraq call themselves an `honest resistance.'  We heard some political groups that defend this kind of resistance say that they target Americans only. But how can we consider Zarqawi's group an honest resistance when it is involved in the recent crimes in Karbala and Ramadi?  Why doesn't this resistance announce it is really an honest resistance that fights terrorists and helps the government expel terrorism from Iraq? We have too many questions for the resistance to answer."  C. "Will Negotiations Fix What Was Spoiled by the Constitution and Elections?" (Democratic Al-Wifaq published a front-page editorial by the editor in chief Salah Omer Al-Ali about the political negotiations to form a new government. The editorial reads in part)  "The political process in Iraq has entered the stage of political negotiation among the groups that are loyal to the occupation. They are seeking a solution to the crisis regarding election results. If these negotiations are aimed at forming a `national unity government' without viewing the results of the election, it means that the results are really false. We want to know who the winners and losers are in this election. I think the Iraqi people are the first losers from this election, but those who call for sectarian division are saying that they are the winners. Anyway, this feverish conflict will lead to an abyss. We have only one chance, which is to review the constitution after the formation of the next parliament to fix all these problems."  D. "Miracles of the Government's Formation" (Az-Zaman, independent, published a back-page editorial by Fateh Abdul Salam about the preparations for forming the new government. The editorial reads in part) "Countries resort to forming national unity governments when they face crises that no political group is able to solve. Some Iraqi politicians have found this solution suitable in the period since the downfall of the former regime. The Iraqi politicians promoted the slogan of national unity during the Governing Council and during the following two governments, but those slogans were useless. After that, they said that holding elections would stabilize the situation in Iraq. The first election was held and it did not stabilize the security situation. Today, after the second election was held, all the political groups announce that a national unity government would be the only solution to overcome the current political crisis. I think that forming a government according to the results of the election is better than forming a national unity government."  SATTERFIELD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000093  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2015 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, KDEM, IZ, Reconstruction, Parliament SUBJECT: BAGHDAD PROVINCIAL COUNCIL (BPC) CHAIRMAN SUPPORTS PRT INITIATIVE AND LOOKS TO THE FUTURE  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY. On January 08 PolOff discussed the new Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) initiative with Mu'een Hameed, the new Baghdad Provincial Council (BPC) Chairman. Mu'een supports the initiative and is eager to work with the PRT.  The Chairman also commented on the termination of Baghdad Chief of Police (COP) General Abdul Rezak and efforts to improve the BPC.  Mu'een is enthusiastic about becoming the new Chairman and looks forward to working closely with Coalition Forces. END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------- NEW CHAIRMAN SUPPORTS PRT CONCEPT ---------------------------------  2. (C) Mu'een was elected as the new BPC Chairman on December 20 in a special meeting of the BPC.  He replaces Mazin Makia who had been BPC Chairman since February.  As Deputy Chairman during Mazin's tenure, Mu'een is well versed in the duties of the Chairman.  Mu'een expressed his support for the PRT Initiative and his desire for the BPC to work closely with the PRT.  The Chairman was impressed with the results achieved by the PST and was certain even greater accomplishments were possible with the PRT.  His goal is to involve more BPC members in the Provincial Reconstruction and Development Committee (PRDC) process. Mu'een told PolOff the PRDC needs to initiate more essential service projects for the people and become more efficient in the process.  ------------------------------- CHIEF OF POLICE WAS INEFFECTIVE -------------------------------  3. (C) Mu'een explained why the BPC had fired the Baghdad Chief of Police, General Abdal Rezak.  The Chairman told PolOff the BPC had given the General one year to improve the security situation but he had failed.  Then the BPC conducted an investigation of Abdul's tenure as Police Chief.  The committee's report concluded that Abdal Rezak failed to coordinate his duties with the BPC. Abdal Rezak's communication with the council was minimal despite repeated requests for situational updates on security matters. Mu'een said the BPC Security Committee recommended his removal based on the findings of the investigation.  He described General Abdal Rezak as incompetent and unaware of corruption within the police force.  Mu'een added many BPC Members found him unqualified to occupy the position of Chief of Police.  No replacement has been identified though Mu'een said the BPC had suggested the Baghdad Governor, Hussein Al-Tahan (from the SCIRI Islamist party), would be a good temporary replacement.  (Comment: In a separate conversation with Hussein on January 7 he indicated he did not want to accept the position as temporary COP. End Comment.)  ------------------------- COUNCIL NEEDS IMPROVEMENT -------------------------  4. (C) PolOff asked Mu'een if he saw a need to make changes to the BPC.  Mu'een said council members need to become more involved in PRDC issues and work done within the various committees of the council.  He expressed a desire to delegate many duties previously accomplished by the BPC Chairman.  Allowing council members to accept those responsibilities will improve their knowledge and reduce the workload on Mu'een.  The Chairman stated increased participation of council members and activation of the PRT Initiative will greatly benefit the citizens of Baghdad. However he added that unless provincial governments receive more attention from Iraq's national leaders, efforts of the BPC and PRT would be wasted.  5. (C) COMMENT:  Mu'een, who also is from the SCIRI Islamist party, has hit the deck running and immersed himself in the duties of BPC Chairman.  He is demonstrating a desire to work closely with the Embassy and improve governance capacity building within the council.  Mu'een recognizes the important roles of the BPC and PRT in improving services for the citizens of Baghdad.  However, as he is quick to emphasize, unless the national government of Iraq provides better support to the provincial councils any efforts to decentralize governmental responsibilities are doomed to failure. END COMMENT. SATTERFIELD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000095  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/11/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ, Shia Islamists, Sunni Arab, Terrorism, Security, Ba'ath SUBJECT: SHIA ISLAMISTS SIGNAL THEIR DISCONTENT WITH US  REF: A. A) BAGHDAD 0052 B) BAGHDAD 0051 C) BAGHDAD 0053      B. D) BAGHDAD 0058  Classified By: CDA DAVID SATTERFIELD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1.  (C)  Summary:  During the past week many of the Shia political and religious figures in Baghdad have sharpened their tone against Sunni Arab political figures.  Their public and private signals of unhappiness with American policy are also stronger now than at any time since the transfer of sovereignty in June 2004.  They are responding in part to very real unhappiness on the Shia street about continued spectacular terror attacks.  They also are responding with visible unease to American efforts to bring Sunni Arabs into the government and trying to forestall our pressure on them during pending government formation negotiations.  In particular, they are deeply unhappy with our criticism of the Interior Ministry's actions and our desire for change.  While the tone against us in Baghdad is sharper than we can remember for a long time, we have not reached a point of no return with the Shia Islamists.  The Najaf clerical establishment and Ayatollah Sistani hves said nothing publicly against us.  Our posts in the Shia heartland report no big change in the attitudes of their local contacts so far.  Instead, as Baghdad Shia Islamist politicos dig their heels in publicly, we can expect them to negotiate very hard on the make-up of the new government, and in particular the security ministries, once the government formation talks begin in earnest.  --------------------------------- SHIA ISLAMISTS SHARPEN THEIR TONE ---------------------------------  2.  (SBU)  The Shia political and religious leadership in Baghdad reacted very sharply against the surge in terror attacks in early January.  Shia al-Furat TV broadcast the January 6 sermon of Hazim al-Araji (brother of prominent Sadrist politician Baha al-Araji) at the Kathimiya Shrine in Baghdad, the main Shia mosque of the capital.  Araji denounced Sunni Arab political leaders Salih Mutlak, Adnan ad-Dulaymi and Khalaf al-Ayyan of being Baathists or terrorists who instigated the wave of violence to change the election outcome.  Pointing to the murder of the Prophet Mohammed's grandson Hussayn by the Ummayid dynasty 1,300 years ago, Araji said history is repeating itself with Sunni Arab killers and Shia victims.   Brandishing a rifle, Araji warned that the Shia were inheritors of an honorable cause (ahl al-bayt) who would fight against the "sons of the Ummayids" (Sunni Arabs).  At the conclusion of the prayer service Araji led a rally in Kathemiya, also broadcast in detail by al-Furat TV.  ------------------------- INCLUDING AGAINST THE U.S. -------------------------  3.   (C)  The Shia leadership also aimed plenty of bile at the U.S.  Shaykh Jalal ad-Din as-Sagheer, the imam of the well-attended Baratha mosque in north Baghdad, who had been relatively friendly towards Embassy personnel until recently, told PolFSN on January 8 that the Americans had changed their approach with the Shia and had become more confrontational.  He bitterly criticized what he called American plans to storm the Baratha mosque to search for detainees.  (Comment:  many Sunni Arabs charge that there is a detention facility inside the Baratha mosque.  End Comment.)  Sagheer charged that the Sunni Arabs were threatening violence to influence the political process and the Americans were accepting this.  The Shia will not accept threats, he warned.  4.  (U)  Iraqi National Security Advisor Muwaffaq Rubai'e told the BBC Arabic Service on January 8 that "certain western embassies and certain western diplomats" are talking to Sunni Arabs with ties to armed groups.  These contacts, Rubai'e asserted, are "encouraging" acts of violence in Iraq.  Rubai'e emphasized in the interview that Iraqi security forces were able to do more but were being restrained.  He added that half the foreign troops in Iraq would be withdrawn by the end of CY 2006 and the remainder would withdraw by the end of CY 2007.  (Comment:  Abdel Aziz al-Hakim, the head of the SCIRI Islamist party and the Shia Islamist Coalition used many of the same themes in a January 8 CNN interview.  End Comment.)  --------------------------------------------- ---- BEHIND THE BLUSTER:  WORRY ABOUT OUR SUNNI POLICY --------------------------------------------- ----  5.  (C)  The Shia leadership is uncomfortable with Embassy contacts with the Sunni Arabs in general, and with Sunni Arab hard-liners like Khalaf al-Ayyan in particular.  They have sought reassurance that we have not made secret security deals to stop operations against insurgents (see ref a).  Shia Islamist politicians also perceive that the Sunni Arabs seek to reverse the December 15 election results by threatening or using violence; in meetings with us this past week their ire towards the Allawi/Sunni Arab bloc was palpable.  They understand that behind the scenes the Embassy is promoting an Allawi/Kurd/Sunni Arab bloc to join in unity government talks, and they have heard our comments that a repeat of the Shia-Kurd deal of the spring 2005 is not satisfactory.  In response, they indicate that they will resist American pressure for Shia concessions to the Sunni Arabs in the government formation process. Indeed, figures such as Husayn Shahristani (Shia independent), Nuri Kamel (Dawa) and Hadi al-Amari (Badr Organization) all have signaled that seats in the next government must be allocated on the basis of shares in the new parliament where the Shia Coalition has the strongest single bloc (refs a and b).  The wildest rumors, which our FSNs tell us are common on the street, have the U.S. planning to restore Saddam Hussayn to power against the Shia Islamists.  (Comment:  A reporter asked PolCouns exactly this question in a January 6 news interview, and the vehement denial came out in some January 8 Iraqi newspapers.  End Comment.)  ------------------------------------------- AND ANGER AT CRITICISM OF INTERIOR MINISTRY -------------------------------------------  6.  (C)  The angry tone also stems directly from our public and private criticism of the Interior Ministry and our pointing to human rights abuses and militia influence at the Ministry.  The head of the Badr Corps, a major Shia militia, told the Ambassador January 4 that criticism of the Interior Minister for abuses committed by Interior Ministry forces was unfair (ref a).  A prominent Shia politician bitterly criticized American attitudes towards the Interior Ministry, noting we do not criticize the peshmerga publicly (ref c).  We hear in public and private that while the Shia Islamist leadership believes in human rights, fighting terror is the priority.   The Interior Minister said public American criticism was undercutting morale among the police (ref d).  The second-ranking leader of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI) told PolCouns in mid-December that while he could understand expressing our concern privately, the public criticism was encouraging the Sunni Arabs.  He saw the issue very much as a zero-sum game.  -------------------------- AND REAL FEAR OF BAATHISTS --------------------------  7.  (C)  The Shia leaders still harbor a very real fear of Baathist penetration of the security services.  Nuri Kamel of Dawa, which has little organized militia of its own, agreed with PolCouns on January 5 that the next Interior and Defense ministers should not be tied to militias.  He was adamant, however, that a much bigger problem is the continued presence of Baathists secretly helping terror groups from inside the security apparatus (ref b). Pointing to an article in the Washington Post that had made the Iraqi press January 5 about a Sunni colonel MNF-I reportedly wanted to assign to a unit guarding the International Zone, Kamel was incredulous.  He wondered why the Americans could not understand that the Sunni colonel could connect with Baathist insurgents to seize control of the International Zone, and hence the government.  When PolCouns pushed back that the colonel appeared loyal, and that in any case MNF-I still had plenty of troops in Baghdad, Kamel responded that the risks far outweighed any possible gains.   This is not mere posturing.  As many Shia Islamist political and religious leaders have been murdered in recent months, the top leadership views the Baathist threat as not only a national problem but an immediate and personal threat.  ---------------------------------------- LESS ANGER AT U.S. SHOWN OUTSIDE BAGHDAD --------------------------------  8.  (SBU)  We don't sense a sharper tone in the Shia heartland yet.  At the Friday sermon at the Sadr-affiliated Kufa mosque on January 6, Sheik Salah Al-Ubaidi condemned the Karbala attack as serving "the invaders and their goal of occupation" - standard Sadrist fare.  The Najaf SCIRI head, Sadder Al-Deen Al-Qubanji, in his Friday sermon said all Saddamists should be removed from the national government, calling them "the cause of the security breaches in the national security forces" - again, the old standard line. 9.  (C)  Basrah RC spoke January 9 with Basra Governor Mohammed (from the Shia Islamist Fadillah party) and Hassan Al Rashid (former governor and an official of the Badr Corps), but neither voiced concerns similar to those expressed by the Shi'a leadership in Baghdad.  Governor Mohammed said there was not much cooperation with British military, but he was referring mainly to assistance and training instead of operations against insurgents.  ------- Comment -------  10.  (C)   The anti-American tone among the Shia Islamist political leadership is probably at its highest decibel count since Iraq regained sovereignty.  The Shia Islamist Coalition leaders are responding to very real unhappiness on the Shia street about continued spectacular terror attacks.  Given the fierce competition inside the Shia Islamist Coalition over its prime minister nominee, we should not expect a rapid mprovement.  SCIRI/Badr, Dawa and independents all will not want to look weak while the PM drama plays itself out behind closed List 555 doors. That said, we have not reached breaking point with the Shia Islamists, either.  We have not heard the vitally important Najaf clerical establishment criticize us in the same fashion as the Baghdad-based politicians; there have been no public blasts from Ayatollah Sistani or other senior Najaf clerics.  The past week's bluster in Baghdad aims at forestalling our pressure before serious government formation negotiations.    They are feeling real pressure from us about the Interior Ministry and the need to cut a deal with Sunni Arabs at the same time they worry about perceived Baathists burrowed in the security apparatus.  As they dig their heels in publicly, we can expect them to negotiate very hard on the make-up of the government, especially the security ministries, once the government formation talks begin in earnest. SATTERFIELD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000101  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2015 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, EPET, EFIN, MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PREL, KCOR, IZ, Energy Sector, Petrolium SUBJECT: DPM CHALABI UPDATES ON ENERGY AND INFRASTRUCTURE  REF: BAGHDAD 0048  Classified By: Classified by Charge D'Affaires David Satterfield for re asons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C/REL MNF-I) SUMMARY: Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) Ahmad Chalabi, serving at that time as acting Minister of Oil (MoO), hosted a status review on January 8 for the Steering Group for Infrastructure Integrity.  According to data he presented, Chalabi claimed that Baghdad has 1.1 days of gasoline supplies on hand, with a tenuous but improved re-supply chain.  The 22-inch product line from Bayji to Baghdad remains interdicted.  MoO intends to pump gasoline by pipeline from Bayji to Kirkuk and truck it to Baghdad to avoid the more dangerous Bayji-Baghdad route.  Chalabi acknowledged the effectiveness of the recent IMF-mandated fuel price hikes as a corruption-fighting tool.  He stressed the existence of a connection among corrupt officials, black marketeers, and insurgents, who he said are engaged in an "effort to make the government fail."  He announced he would restrict the export of fuel products from Iraq over the Syrian border.  Finally, Chalabi once again challenged the effectiveness and utility of the Strategic Infrastructure Battalions (SIBs).  END SUMMARY.  2.   (SBU) On January 8, DPM Chalabi met the Steering Group for Energy Infrastructure Integrity to discuss the fuel crisis situation in Iraq.  The meeting was attended by Infrastructure Coordination Center Chief BG Kamal, DCM Satterfield, Deputy Commander of MNF-I LTG Houghton, POL/MILMINCOUNS, ECONMINCOUNS, MNF-I STRATOPS, IRMO Director of Operations, and ECONOFF.  ------------------------------- PRODUCTION AND DELIVERY OF FUEL -------------------------------  3.  (C/REL MNF-I) Director General of the Ministry of Oil's (MoO) Technical Directorate, Samir Michael Assad, summarized current gasoline production in Iraq.  Samir Michael said that Bayji was providing 1.4 million gallons, Basra 450,000 gallons, and Daura 130,000 gallons of gasoline.  He added that 1.5 million gallons of gasoline had been delivered to service stations in Baghdad January 8.  (NOTE: This compares to average daily consumption from official sources in Baghdad of 2.1 million gallons.  END NOTE).  The total amount of gasoline available in Baghdad on January 8, according to Samir Michael, was 2.4 million gallons or 1.1 days of supply.  Samir Michael explained that normally about 1 million gallons of gasoline comes from the sea-borne imports at Umm Qasr, while a half-million gallons usually are produced at the Daura refinery, near Baghdad.  (NOTE: Total Iraqi production does not even meet Baghdad consumption needs.  END NOTE.)  --------------------- PIPELINES AND CONVOYS ---------------------  4.  (C/REL MNF-I) DPM Chalabi said that the 22" Bayji-Baghdad product line remains down, six days after it was interdicted.  The initial oil pipeline repair crew had been attacked, with three men wounded and their vehicle destroyed.  The interdiction is at a remote location, he said, and the repairs remain incomplete. (NOTE: The Director General for Oil Pipelines agreed to Coalition requests that they will no longer send out repair crews without adequate coordination through the Provincial Joint Coordination Center (PJCC) or without security.  END NOTE).  The inability to ship oil by pipeline to Baghdad from Bayji has necessitated an alternative course of action, for which convoys were selected.  Chalabi said that two convoys have been attacked on January 4 and 5 while carrying fuel to Baghdad on Highway 1, and he concluded that that route to Baghdad is too dangerous.  The truckers are intimidated and, even with bonuses, will not drive that route.  As a result, Chalabi told us he directed that product be pumped from Bayji to a new depot in Kirkuk and then trucked from Kirkuk along Highway 2 to Baghdad.  Chalabi estimated that 500,000 gallons per day would be necessary from Bayji to complement gasoline supplies from other sources for the Baghdad area.  5.  (C/REL MNF-I) The 18" crude oil pipeline to Daura refinery has been repaired, and the second unit at Daura is starting up again.  The 26" pipeline from Kirkuk to Bayji has not been interdicted since its last repair on January 5, and oil is now in the pipeline flowing to depot IT1A from Kirkuk.  The 40" and the 30/32" pipelines both are under repair. (NOTE: Workers from the Northern Oil Company on site at Zagatoon reportedly sabotaged both lines using a backhoe. END NOTE.) -------------------------------------------- PIPELINE REPAIR CREWS -- MOO AND MNF-I PLANS --------------------------------------------  6.  (C/REL MNF-I) The Ministry of Oil (MoO) has developed a plan for emergency pipeline repairs.  The Ministry will provide five emergency repair crews who will be deployed to Iraqi Army camps.  The 20-man crews will have their own vehicles, equipment, and security.  MNC-I will coordinate with MoO for the deployment, hosting, and security of these crews at four Iraqi Army forward operating bases (FOBs) in Kirkuk, Bayji (2 teams), Baghdad, and Mussayib.  These pipeline repair units should then be available to rapidly repair pipelines and would only be dispatched with integrated Iraqi Army security protection units.  The date of the first team's deployment is not set, but MNF-I will work with DG Samir Michael to define requirements and discuss next steps.  -------------------------------- COMMAND CONTROL AND COORDINATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY --------------------------------  7.  (C/REL MNF-I) The PJCCs, as agreed between MNF-I and MoO, will be the focal point for all coordination of infrastructure security, repairs and convoy movements. Chalabi said there currently is "deplorable coordination" on the security operations to secure the oil pipelines and the fuel truck convoys, although he acknowledged that the MoO and the repairs crews, failure to inform the Coalition of their activities resulted in the security problems that has occurred.  He said there was confusion within MoO on PJCCs, and many key MoO officials have "never heard of" these coordination centers, which are not staffed with MoO personnel despite the fact that MoO is a key element of the energy security program.  Chalabi asked MNF-I to coordinate directly with MoO DG Samir Michael to staff these centers with appropriate MoO officials.  (NOTE: Northern Oil Company personnel needed to coordinate already are in place in all three PJCCs; however, OPF and OPC personnel are not. Although coordination has been effective in the past, information sharing between the national level and the PJCCs now need to be improved.  END NOTE.)  -------------------------------- EXPORTS OF REFINED FUEL PRODUCTS TO SYRIA WILL BE FORBIDDEN --------------------------------  8.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi acknowledged that the recent fuel price rise had made smuggling in Iraq a less viable option for terrorist financing and corruption, a point we had made to him some time ago.  The profits from fuel sales on the black market are lower and the incentives to smuggle fuel reduced, but not eliminated, he said.  Syria remains a favored destination, and Chalabi announced that he would strictly enforce existing regulations on the export of fuel products from Iraq, especially to Syria.  Chalabi predicted that this reduction in smuggling would increase the availability of fuel in Iraq.  Chalabi also discussed the option of shutting down deliveries of subsidized fuel to government factories, like the brick factories, so that resold fuel from other government entities would not end up on the black market or exported, as is often the case at present.  Chalabi also questioned the lack of control of all tanker trucks across Iraq, suggesting that only about 10% of the tanker trucks were involved in legal distribution for MoO, with the rest involved in illicit activities, like smuggling fuel and black market operations.  --------------------------------------------- --- INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT AND ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS --------------------------------------------- ---  9.  (S/REL MNF-I) Chalabi expressed his continued concern about the lack of viable intelligence on saboteurs, terrorists, and smugglers.  He cited the need to identify people involved in intimidation, smuggling, and interdiction, and to arrest them and bring them to justice.  Chalabi requested MNF-I support on intelligence.  MNF-I provided Chalabi with information on multiple suspects involved in corrupt practices in the Bayji refinery smuggling operations.  We noted the importance of using this intelligence to acquire evidence through appropriate investigations to support charges that would be admissible in court so the government could prosecute corrupt MoO or provincial personnel.  In addition to the former DG for Distribution (see para 10), another example of an official allegedly involved in oil corruption was the Salah ad Din Chief of Police.  Chalabi asked how a police chief can be removed for corruption, since the provincial council alone has jurisdiction over firing police chiefs.  He asked whether MNF-I could remove this official, as they had removed other officials in al-Anbar Province.  We suggested considering reference to the Central Criminal Court of Iraq (CCCI), whose mandate might include similar crimes.  10.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi informed us he had taken several actions to reduce corruption within the MoO.  He said he had fired the DG for Distribution at Bayji for complicity in the intimidation incident that shut down Bayji for two weeks. Chalabi was replacing him with former Bayji Distribution Director General Hameed.  He said he had formed a committee, comprised of Hameed, former Distribution DG Zuhayr Shakir, and one other official, whom he had asked to resolve the fuel distribution issue, including organizing the fuel truck drivers and motivating them to drive fuel convoys to Baghdad.  ----------------------------------- STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE BATTALIONS -----------------------------------  11.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi said he thought several of the Strategic Infrastructure Battalion (SIB) commanders should be fired, specifically the commanders of the 2nd, 9th, 11th, and 16th SIBs.  Chalabi also opined that the SIBs must be more closely integrated into the Iraqi Army.  Chalabi questioned the SIBs, loyalty and competence.  Chalabi asked MNF-I to present a different solution to the SIB problems and recommended to the steering group that the SIB concept be reviewed in three weeks.  LTG Houghton responded that loyalty and competence are issues that could and should be dealt with.  Making the SIBs a mobile or maneuver force, however, would be a major undertaking, involving revamping their training and equipment since the SIBs had been designed by the Iraqis as a static force.  12.  (C/REL MNF-I) BG Kamal, the Infrastructure Coordination Center Chief, agreed that many of the SIB commanders needed to be replaced.  Kamal confirmed that some of the SIBs are involved in destroying the pipelines, although MNF-I said that the number of interdictions has been reduced.  Chalabi responded that the pipelines are still interdicted and oil is not flowing -- thus the SIBs are not working.  ------------------------- SECURITY RESPONSIBILITIES -------------------------  13.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi and MNF-I agreed that MNF-I was responsible for linear infrastructure security and that the Iraqi ministries were responsible for the fixed installations.  The security of fuel convoys would be coordinated through the PJCCs.  MNF-I reported that the 101st is providing aerial reconnaissance and surveillance of both the 22" pipeline and the route between Bayji and Baghdad. When Chalabi asked about route security to Baghdad for tanker trucks, MNF-I stated that Coalition Forces clear the route twice a day from Bayji to Baghdad.  MNF-I also said the 101st is prepared to ensure protection of the fuel convoys once coordination is effected through the PJCCs but reiterated the importance of respecting the command and control chain in selecting and deploying forces.  (NOTE: In spite of the lack of effective coordination from MoO on the status of convoys, all convoys from Bayji have been protected by security forces.  END NOTE).  When we questioned whether the security was in place for the lengthier route from Kirkuk to Baghdad (Route 2), Chalabi noted that the road was considered much safer.  -------------------------- OIL PRODUCTION AND EXPORTS --------------------------  14.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi reported that oil production in the south should increase when 60 wells currently undergoing well workovers are completed.  Chalabi added that the $40 million initial effort, as well as a planned follow-on project for 77 additional wells, would increase Iraqi oil production by 650,000 barrels per day.  Moreover, berthing confusion of tankers will be alleviated with the planned purchase of additional tug boats from Holland (delivery date unspecified).  Chalabi also announced that there had been 1.71 million barrels of oil exported from the south January 7.  (NOTE:  This is a large increase from the recent exports of late December 2005 and early January 2006, when little to no oil was exported.  END NOTE.)  15.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi prioritized his security issues as protection of the oil infrastructure first and electricity second.  He called the current security crisis "an organized effort to make the government fail by using infrastructure interdiction to isolate Baghdad."  Nonetheless, he concluded on a more optimistic note, claiming that "We are gradually winning the battle of gasoline in Baghdad."  16.  (C/REL MNF-I) COMMENT: We agree that there has been progress, most notably in attacking incentives for smuggling and blackmarketeering via IMF-mandated price hikes. Nevertheless, the overall supply situation remains tenuous, with little redundancy if further attacks are mounted.  END COMMENT. SATTERFIELD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000106  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/11/2016 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, EPET, EFIN, MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PREL, TU, IZ, Energy Sector, Petrolium SUBJECT: IRAQ'S ENERGY TIGHTROPE: ANOTHER PERFECT STORM AT HAND  REF: A. BAGHDAD 0048      B. BAGHDAD 0013      C. 2005 BAGHDAD 5153      D. 2005 BAGHDAD 5132  Classified By: Charge D'Affaires David Satterfield for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C) SUMMARY: Electricity has been in chronically short supply for months, and developments of recent weeks have exacerbated even the normally tight situation. Interdictions, low efficiencies caused by unscheduled maintenance, and use of inappropriate fuels have been the usual culprits behind Iraq's electrical shortfalls.  Low reservoir levels in the north, which led to hydro generation shutdowns, have worsened the situation.  Paradoxically, heavy rains elsewhere, notably in Baghdad, disrupted coping mechanisms as local generating capacity and jury-rigged wiring shorted out.  Meanwhile, refined petroleum products continue to be in short supply, and observers of the political scene and economic analysts wonder if the return of Oil Minister Bar al-Ulum to his recently vacated office will help or hinder efforts to cope with the energy crisis. Al-Ulum's opposition to IMF-mandated fuel price hikes and his inability to crack down on organized resistance to them were not promising signals.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------ Weak Generation Capacity ------------------------  2.  (C) Drought conditions in northern Iraq have lowered the country's hydroelectric power generation.  Stations at Haditha Dam and Mosul are operating at 20 percent of capacity, while at least two smaller stations are off-line altogether for lack of sufficient water supplies. Interruptions in crude oil exports in the south (due to inclement weather, a shortage of tugboats, and limited storage capacity) led to a crude oil production stoppage.  A corresponding interruption in supply of co-generated natural gas led to the to the gas-powered plants in Hillah, Najaf, and the Khor al-Zubayr (KAZ) power stations to go off-line for three days.  Although gas transmission has resumed with the advent of better weather, the pressure in the line remains low.  Finally, shutdowns for fall maintenance started late at a number of power plants around Iraq, leading to a lack of readiness for peak winter electrical demand (traditionally higher than summer, but of shorter duration). Underlying these specific issues is the continued use - by necessity - of inappropriate fuel such as heavy fuel oil (HFO) in many power plants, leading to a more frequent need for expensive (and hence often postponed) essential maintenance.  (COMMENT: Maintenance delayed is not maintenance avoided, however; it simply becomes unscheduled maintenance, when systems go off-line.  END COMMENT.)  ----------------------------------------- Transmission Tipped Over the Razor's Edge -----------------------------------------  3.  (SBU) Bayji-Baghdad West #2 400kV line remains inoperative due to a series of interdictions dating from November.  Of the initial 56 downed towers, 14 still await repair.  The delay on this last tranche stems from intimidation of the  Ministry of Electricity's transmission repair crews.  The Ministry is using contractors for repair and is offering substantial hazardous duty bonuses.  It also has arranged protection for the line via local tribes, coordinated with the area Provincial Joint Communication Centers (PJCCs).  The estimated completion date for repairs to the remaining 14 towers on Bayji-Baghdad West #2 is January 25 -- provided no further towers have been brought down or looted during the lengthy wait for repair.  The Bajyi-Kirkuk 400kV line, which supplies up to 400 MW (four hours of power) to the Baghdad loop, is also down; repairs are expected no sooner than January 20.  Bayji-Baghdad West  #1, as the sole line in operation from the north, is limited to the transfer of some 200MW (the equivalent of 2 hours of power) to decrease blackout potential on the grid.  Late in the evening January 10, a tower on the Bayji-Baghdad West #1 line was brought down by explosives, interrupting power to Baghdad that again dropped to an average of 2 hours of power for the day.  Ministry of Energy (MoE) teams have a temporary tower ready to move to the scene and are coordinating their movement with MNF-I as of this writing January 11.  Finally, unscheduled maintenance at Mussayib and on the Baghdad loop has been higher than usual, further limiting hours of power.  ---------------------------------------- Normal Coping Mechanisms Also Challenged ----------------------------------------  4.  (SBU) Average Iraqis, widely acknowledged as able to cope with the country's ongoing electrical challenges, are being further stretched by wet weather.  Home generators are common (more than a million exist in Baghdad alone), as well as a propensity to pay cash - at market rates - for the privilege of connecting to larger diesel-powered neighborhood generators to supplement sporadic, state-provided power. However, rainy weather that caused minor flooding in many parts of the city is causing many generators to short out -- even when fuel is available.  There is a weather-related positive note -- higher than average temperatures have held off the worst of the winter demand, at least for the moment.  --------------------------------------------- --- Fuel Situation Precarious But Improving Slightly --------------------------------------------- ---  5.  (C) Reftels catalogued the serious fuel situation facing Iraq in the past month.  IMF-mandated fuel price hikes that went into effect December 18, 2005, significantly altered the economics of oil smuggling.  This welcome development (from the government's perspective) has led to a concerted, organized effort by criminal elements to push back by exacerbating the country's fuel shortage.  The critical state of Iraq's fuel supply (two days of gasoline supply or less on hand in most parts of the country) provided an opportunity to pressure the government by interrupting operations at Bayji refinery, where fuel truck convoys operating in lieu of interdicted pipelines were attacked in recent weeks.  6.  (S/REL MNF-I) Under Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi's leadership as acting Minister of Oil and with assistance from Coalition Forces, this attempt to starve the capital of fuel has been counteracted.  A smaller 8" pipeline has been put into service shipping product from Bayji to Kirkuk for more secure onward transport to Baghdad by truck.  And a second 12" pipeline is being completed.  The Director-General of the Iraqi Oil Pipeline company, Raad Rafeq Yassen, reported January 10 that the 26" crude oil pipeline had been repaired since January 6.  (NOTE: Raad admitted he had declined to report the repairs in the hope that keeping the guards at the local checkpoint ignorant would protect pipeline from attack that much longer.  END NOTE.)  Repairs to the 40" Kirkuk-Bayji crude line are expected January 12, allowing a resumption of exports to Turkey from Iraq's northern fields for the first time in almost six months.  The 30/32" crude line, whose repair has been contingent upon repair of the 40" line, could thus be back in service o/a January 20.  Refining at Daura is returning to normal, with crude oil arriving via the recently-repaired 18" pipeline from Basrah.  Bayji is also ramping up production now that product is again moving out from the refinery.  The 22" product Bayji-Baghdad pipeline remains down after a repair effort undertaken without security protection left several Iraqis injured when the repair crew came under attack.  Work is expected to begin again soon, once the repair crew is reassured that security has been coordinated.  --------------------------------- No Respite Seen in the Short-term ---------------------------------  7.  (C) COMMENT: This precarious state of affairs shows no sign of abating anytime soon.  Price increases may have dampened consumption, but the fact that Iraq cannot meet even lower consumption needs internally means that imports will still be essential.  Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi acknowledged a current debt to Turkey for fuel of approximately $800 million in a meeting with Charge January 8 (septel); the average of some 600 fuel trucks that cross into Iraq from Turkey per day has dropped in recent days to 300. The return of Ibrahim Bahr al-Ulum to office January 10, may only further complicate, rather than remedy matters.  It is unclear whether al-Ulum, an outspoken critic of the fuel price increases who was lax in cracking down on corruption and criminal activity, will be willing or able to maintain the positive momentum injected into the oil sector during DPM Chalabi's brief tenure as acting Minister of Oil during the past month.  Post will engage al-Ulum January 12 to press for action on key issues, and will meet with DPM Chalabi to reinforce the need for his continuing direct oversight of the Ministry of Oil.  END COMMENT. SATTERFIELD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000112  SIPDIS  CENTCOM FOR POLAD  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ, Parliament, Sunni Arab, Shia Islamists SUBJECT: SCIRI PARLIAMENTARIAN SAYS SPARE THE ROD, SPOIL THE SUNNI ARAB  Classified By: POL Couns Robert Ford, reason 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY:  SCIRI TNA member and influential imam Sheikh Jalal al Dien al Sagheer told PolCouns in a January 11 meeting that some Iraqi Shia are contemplating secession from Iraq in frustration over the continued security problems and terror attacks.  Others are wondering whether they should take up arms against Sunni Arabs, MNF-I, or both.  He said the Embassy's Sunni Arab outreach plan was ignoring moderate Sunni Arabs and promoting extremists, adding that the use of force is the best way to solve the Sunni Arab-backed insurgency.  Sheikh Sagheer also expressed his support for MOI Bayan Jabr, saying that Jabr cannot be expected to reform the ministry, as it has been riddled with corrupt officials since the fall of Saddam. PolCouns countered that stabilizing security required both political and security approaches and urged the Shia Islamist list support a national unity government that would be accountable to all Iraqis.  Sagheer has a real following on the street, and his remarks indicate our relations with the Shia Islamists will become bumpier in the coming months. END SUMMARY.  ----------------------------------------- What Is On The Minds of Shia Malcontents? -----------------------------------------  2. (C) Sagheer said that he has received many e-mails from Shia telling him they favor seceding from the rest of Iraq and setting up a separate Shia state.  Others would like to see Iraq turn into a loose confederation.  Both views reflect growing discontent with the state of Iraqi affairs, and the desire of many Shia to isolate themselves from Sunni Arabs and Kurds.  3. (C)   Even more worrying, Sagheer said, are the e-mails he claimed to have received from Shia who question whether they should take up arms and fight MNF-I and/or Sunni Arabs.  Sagheer said the some Shia feel both MNF-I and Sunni Arabs support terror and are destabilizing Iraq. Such feelings are fueling a move toward civil war.  Sagheer said, however, that the Shia will not fight unless they are told to, and Grand Ayatollah Sistani, along with most other imams, so far has opposed such a confrontation.  He did warn, however, that he and some other imams are not able to fully control the Shia street.  Some of the young faithful at his Baratha mosque have told him his words are "morphine":  hard and comforting but ultimately not changing the surrounding reality.  PolCouns noted that Sistani and the Shia religious leadership had exercised great patience.  The U.S. had noticed and appreciated this. It was important, he stressed, not to fall in Zarqawi's trap.  A unity government would help ensure that each side in Iraq felt its most vital interests are protected.  -------------------------------------------- Sunni Arab Outreach Does More Harm Than Good --------------------------------------------  4. (C) Sagheer lumped the mainline Sunni Arab political leaders and Zarqawi all together.  He criticized the Embassy's Sunni Arab outreach efforts, saying that it ignores moderate Sunni Arabs and promotes extremists.  He said that the Sunni Arabs with whom the Embassy has been meeting have never fully supported the democratic process. This has lead to more violence.  Furthermore, even when Sunni Arab groups such as the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) campaigned in favor of the constitution, they never really supported it.  It would be better to support moderates like Nuri Rawi and Saadun Dulaymi who eventually can convince the Sunni Arab community to cease violence and join the political process.  PolCouns commented that last-minute IIP support, not support from Nuri Rawi or Saadun Dulaymi, probably secured the margin of passage for the draft constitution in the Ninewa referendum on October 15. PolCouns underlined that the Embassy has consistently told Sunni Arabs to renounce violence and stop supporting the insurgency even while we urge them to participate in the political process.  He emphasized to Sagheer that we have warned the Sunni Arabs that the fighting Iraq's elected, legitimate government will be an illegitimate act and we will label it terrorism.  (Comment:  Sagheer seemed unimpressed.  End Comment.)  5. (C) Sagheer said that the Shia could solve the problem of the Sunni-backed insurgency by killing many of the Sunni Arabs involved in it.  There is, however, a political program for Iraq, and the Shia are patiently following it. The Shia have, for the most part, been peaceful.  ----------------------- Apologia for Bayan Jabr -----------------------  6. (C) Sagheer argued that the U.S. is wrong to criticize MOI Bayan Jabr.  First, Jabr has little room for maneuver in the ministry because there are many bad elements, including some Baathists working there since the fall of Saddam Hussein.  (He blamed post-Saddam Interior Ministers Nuri Badran, Samir Sumaidai'e and Felah Naqib - all Sunni Arabs - for introducing these bad elements despite Shia warnings.)  Jabr does not wish to violate human rights.  He simply cannot exercise complete control over the ministry. Second, the U.S. should not criticize Jabr for the abuse of prisoners who, once released, commit more crimes and acts of terror against Iraqis.  It is better to execute one hundred criminals publicly and deter future terror, he opined.  PolCouns observed that it was important that the one hundred executed are real criminals and had not merely confessed under torture (here, for once, Sagheer agreed). He cautioned that Interior Ministry practices are causing resentment and fear in the Sunni Arab community and helping the insurgency recruit.  PolCouns noted that the Iraqi Government could at least conduct a real investigation into cases like the Jadriya bunker, something it has thus far failed to do.  7. (C) COMMENT:  Sagheer has been a long-time and often acerbic Embassy interlocutor.  He was especially unhappy because he had received information via sources in the Iraqi Defense Ministry that the U.S. military was planning to raid his mosque - something he calmly but deliberately warned against.  There was little give in his position: Iraq's number one problem is Sunni Arab terrorism, and that problem has to be fixed, even with harsh means if necessary.  He also made clear he anticipates and rejects American pressure on behalf of the Sunni Arabs in the future government negotiations.  The Baratha mosque has a strong following, and Sagheer is one of the more influential clerics in the SCIRI party.  His remarks indicate we can expect our relations with the Shia Islamists to become bumpier in the coming months.  END COMMENT. SATTERFIELD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000113  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/12/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ, Elections SUBJECT: ELECTION RESULTS TIMELINE MUCH CLEARER BUT STILL TIED TO INTERNATIONAL OBSERVER REPORT  REF: A. BAGHDAD 0075      B. BAGHDAD 0065  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David M. Satterfield for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d).  1. (C) The Acting UN SRSG Michael von der Schulenburg told the Charge January 11 that, in general, the international observer team (IMIE) is positive about its assessment of the electoral process and the work of the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq (IECI).  He added that the IMIE team intends to present its preliminary report January 15 and its final report January 19; they are keen on the political impact of their report and do not want to slow down the IECI's own timeline for issuing preliminary election results, final election results, and the final report of the complaint review.  2. (C) Schulenburg estimated that the IECI would go public with the complaints report around January 14, with the preliminary final election results released on or about January 16.  He added that the political entities would have two days to appeal the results of the complaints report, followed by another two-day period in which the Transitional Electoral Panel (TEP) would consider any appeals.  The next step, he said, would be a ten-day period of hearings by the TEP.  Once that period is completed, the IECI would be able to certify the final results of the election.  3. (C) (NOTE: Later in the day, IECI International Commissioner Craig Jenness clarified to PolOff that the release dates are targets and not yet confirmed, especially the dates for the IECI reports.  He said that the IECI Board of Directors plans to meet on January 13 to determine exactly when they will release their first two reports (complaints and election results) as the Board has yet to agree whether or not to release any reports prior to the IMIE preliminary report.  Jenness is confident, though, that any delay would be minimal and that both the IECI and IMIE desire to bring closure to the electoral process as soon as practicable.  END NOTE.)  4. (C) Schulenburg said he is satisfied with the work of the IMIE to date.  Schulenburg stated that, although the UN had been concerned that the two Arab League members might work independently of the IMIE, they are now working as fully participating team members and have expressed no intention of submitting a separate report.  He added that the team is moving forward at a robust pace.  5. (C) At the end of the meeting, Schulenburg commented on recent meetings he has had with various Iraqi political leaders regarding the pending constitution review process. He said that the UN is preparing a document on how the process might proceed once the Council of Representatives is seated.  He stressed that the process should be issue driven, that the formation of the Constitution Review Committee (CRC) be postponed, and that the international community use the official Arabic language of the constitution in order to maintain clarity in follow-on discussions.  The CDA stated that the USG is working on a similar paper regarding the constitution.  He suggested, and Schulenburg agreed, that the UN and UK combine efforts with the US to produce a single planning document. SATTERFIELD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000142  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/16/2016 TAGS: PREL, ECON, TU, SY, IZ SUBJECT: FM ZEBARI: TURKEY MORE REALISTIC, SYRIA RIPE FOR REGIME CHANGE  REF: 05 ANKARA 7271  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: FM Hoshyar Zebari told the Ambassador January 9 that the Turkish government has become far more realistic in its dealings with Iraq's Kurdish region.  Zebari said that Turkish trade with the region is now over $3 billion per year.  The Kurdish region has crossed several "red lines" with no Turkish response, said Zebari. He added that the U.S. and EU should exploit the call for regime change in Syria made by former Syrian VP Khaddam.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ---- Turkey Still Concerned about KDSP and KCP Parties --------------------------------------------- ----  2. (C) Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari said that Turkish Ambassador Unal Cevikoz recently complained about two political parties in Iraq, which Turkey says are linked to the Kurdistan Worker's Party (PKK) (reftel).  FM Zebari told the Ambassador that Turkey's concerns about the Kurdistan Democratic Solution Party (KDSP) and the Kurdistan Construction Party (KCP) and their links to the PKK, though valid, are overstated.  The parties received very few votes (around one thousand) in the December 15 election and pose little threat to anyone.  Zebari said Cevikoz believes that U.S. inaction allows these parties to continue operating in Iraq, despite Zebari's assurance to him that only the Independent Election Commission of Iraq (IECI) can take action to outlaw any party.  (NOTE: Post unsuccessfully pressed the IECI to delist the KDSP prior to the December 15 election.  END NOTE.)  Zebari said the GOI will take action against the parties but only after the new government is settled.  3. (C) Zebari stated that, despite their complaints, the Turks now are more realistic in their dealings with the Kurdish region.  According to Zebari, the Turks realize that the Turcoman population in Iraq is far less than the 3 million previously claimed.  Turkish trade with the Kurdish region now exceeds $3 billion per year, second only to trade with Iran ($5 billion).  Although the Kurdish region has crossed several Turkish "red lines," Zebari said that Turkey has not responded.  (NOTE: Zebari did not specify, however, what these "red lines" are.  END NOTE.)  ---------------------------- Syria Ripe for Regime Change ----------------------------  4. (C) Zebari characterized the statements made by former Syrian Vice-President Abdul Khaddam about President Bashar Al-Asad as very serious.  Zebari said that Bashar would give evidence to the UN inquiry into the death of former Lebanese PM Rafik Hariri but would do so slowly.  Zebari opined that the EU and U.S. should exploit Khaddam's call for regime change in Damascus.  The Muslim Brotherhood, Zebari said, will not necessarily take over the government.  He predicted that Iran will support Syria in this dispute. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000148  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/18/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PINS, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: JA'FARI WOOS RAMADI, ANBAR SECURITY COUNCIL WOWED  REF: A. A) BAGHDAD 4733      B. B) BAGHDAD 4788      C. C) BAGHDAD 4830      D. D) BAGHDAD 4935      E. E) BAGHDAD 4915      F. F) BAGHDAD 4981  Classified By: Ambassador Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b), (d).  1. (C) Summary.  The Anbar Security Council warmly welcomed Prime Minister Ja'fari on January 15.  The PM deftly fielded the Anbaris' complaints regarding the fate of former Iraqi military service members, the inclusion of Anbaris in the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF), the release of 'innocent' detainees and policies to address unemployment.  The normally contentious and fractious Anbaris glowed with pleasure at the PM's description of Anbar as the cradle of the nation, the brief reign of Ramadi as capital and the renown of its people as fierce warriors.  Minister of Industry and Minerals Osama al Najafi, Ambassador Khalilzad and MNF-I Commanding General Casey also spoke encouragingly of the new dialogue established with the province and the importance of re- integrating a secure and stable Anbar into the new Iraq. While there remains much work to be done, this keystone event sent a profound signal to the rebellious Anbaris who may be ready to come in from the cold.  End Summary.  2. (C) This is a SET Ramadi Cable.  The Ambassador accompanied the Prime Minister, Minister of Industry and Minerals (MoIM) and Commanding General of Multi-National Forces-Iraq to Ramadi on January 15.  The visit by the PM, his first, to engage the recently formed Anbar Security Council (reftels) was remarkably congenial and substantive.  The PM was well prepped for the visit, addressing in detail Anbari concerns about recruitment of locals for the ISF and the plight of former military officials afforded no pensions.  (Note:  The PM corrected former general Sa'ab al Rawi on his figure of former military officers, noting that he had a report citing the number as 4,500, not 5,000 like Sa'ab suggested.  Sa'ab did not disagree.  End Note.)  Shia PM Breaks the Ice ---------------------- 3. (C) Setting a non-confrontational and intimate tone, the PM reviewed the contributions Anbaris had made to the nation.  He noted the historical renown of Anbari weapons manufacturers and the reputation (referring to the first century A.D.) of their warriors.  Ja'fari acknowledged that Anbar, too, had suffered under Saddam Hussein and that during his days in exile, he maintained contact with events in Ramadi, as he did with other cities.  He praised the citizens for their brave participation in the elections and the Council's 'intellectual' rather than 'emotional' approach to restoring security and stability in the troubled province.  The PM emphasized that Iraq is now sovereign and that the Coalition Forces (CF) remain at the request of the Government of Iraq.  He defined the CF presence as solely to rebuild the country and its security forces.  He urged the Anbaris to prevent the development of 'two teams', e.g. Sunni and Shia militia. Ja'fari invited the Anbari representatives to share in the new government, a government that sought results.  "Your Visit Proves We're On the Right Track" -------------------------------------------- 4. (C) The Security Council members responded well to the PM's overtures.  Tribal Sheikh Anwar Kharbit described the insurgency as three groups: resistance, terrorists and criminals.  Admitting the council respected the resistance, he volunteered that their one mistake had been to let the terrorists infiltrate the resistance.  He suggested that the way to separate the two was for the CF to withdraw from the cities.  Without an external enemy, Kharbit reasoned, the resistance could quickly throw off the terrorist yoke.  He observed that neither law nor power could exist without the other, a sentiment the PM echoed.  Getting More with Honey... -------------------------- 5. (C) In a stark contrast to the rancor that characterized the Anbar Security Council meeting with Minister of Defense Sadoun Dulaime on December 12, the PM hit the right chords.  He agreed with the Anbaris that locals must make up the Iraqi Police force, because "they know it best".  He characterized the deployment of the Special Police Commandos (so-called 'Wolf Brigade') to Ramadi as a 'temporary solution'.  (Note:  After less  BAGHDAD 00000148  002 OF 002   than two months after they deployed, only one police battalion remains in the eastern part of the city. Locals have not complained about the unit to us.  End Note.)  Ja'fari emphasized their presence in the city was not an 'occupation', that they were Muslim compatriots. In response to businessman Sayid proposal to release prisoners who are 'not guilty', Ja'fari observed "we can't keep people in jail without proof".  The PM also reassured the group that all detention centers were under close scrutiny, implying there would not be any further human rights abuse scandals such as the Jadriya 'Bunker'.  "The Founding Fathers Didn't Use Suicide Bombers" --------------------------------------------- ---- 6. (C) Ja'fari did caution the group on the use of terror.  He compared Ramadi's situation with America's war for independence, noting the people of the U.S. earned their freedom through negotiation, not suicide bombers.  He said once Anbaris help stand up the ISF, it would be time to shake hands and say good-bye to the CF. The Ambassador underlined that the U.S. did not intend to establish permanent bases in Iraq.  MNF-I CG noted the 'occupation' ended June 28, 2004 and the 'withdrawal' was announced by Secretary Rumsfeld over a month ago. Governor Ma'moon noted that among the 50,000 unemployed, the well-funded terrorists had a ready and willing labor pool.  The PM stated jobs were his next objective. Former colonel Muthar al-Qubaisy expressed concern over federalism, equating it to the division of Iraq.  Ja'fari again referred the American experience.  He noted that the U.S. constitution was repeatedly amended and that the drafting of the Iraqi constitution, by Iraqis, was a dynamic process.  7. (C) Comment. When PolOff described the radical difference in tenor and progress between the visit of the MoD and this session, the PM quipped the 'the singer is never popular in his/her hometown'.  MoD Dulaime, a Ramadi native, told PolOff before the December session that he "understood his people and knew how to talk to them".  That session was confrontational, bitter and ended in stalemate.  It's fascinating that a Shia PM, described day to day by our contacts as running an 'Iranian government', could hit so many resonant chords in the Ramadi audience.  The confidence building stretched both ways.  Minister of Industry and Minerals (MoIM) Osama al Najafi thanked the Ramadi Security Council for altering his perception of Ramadi.  He said that back in Baghdad, people call the city the 'battleground'.  8. (C) Comment Continued.  Plenty of follow-up remains, and this has always been a Jafari problem.  PM Ja'fari promised a response on the Council's petition (regarding Anbari representation in the ISF) and most importantly invited Anbaris to play a role in national politics. MoIM told PolOff that the ministry plans to privatize the Kusayba Cement factory and has identified a Japanese investor for the Qaim phosphate plant.  General Casey and Ambassador Khalilzad also said they would return.  As we know from our Anbar contacts, they never forget a promise.  Nonetheless, January 15 was a very promising step in Ramadi.  End Comment.  KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000152  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  DS, DS/DSS, DS/ITA/NEA, DS/IP/NEA, NEA/EX  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: ASEC AMGT CASC, PTER IZ SUBJECT: FOLLOW-UP TO JANUARY 10 EMERGENCY ACTION COMMITTEE MEETING  REF: Baghdad 00109  1. (SBU) On January 16, Deputy Chief of Mission and Regional Security Officer evaluated threat and movement information on Routes Dover and Tampa.  DCM and RSO concluded that Route Dover will remain off- limits for Chief of Mission motorcade movements. Route Tampa may be utilized on a case-by-case basis. Patriot Chief of Mission movements are subject to the above guidance.  2. (SBU) The security on these routes will be reviewed periodically to determine our security posture regarding personal security detail (PSD) movements.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000164  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: SENATOR KERRY PUSHES NATIONAL UNITY GOVERNMENT WITH TALABANI AND HAKIM  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) SUMMARY: Senator John F. Kerry (D-MA) and the Ambassador held meetings with President Jalal Talabani and Shia Alliance leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim on January 18 to push for a broad national unity government in the weeks ahead.  Talabani predicted that such an alliance could be forged in "weeks" but downplayed the possibility of major changes to Iraq's constitution.  Talabani said that he hopes that MNF-I forces draw down significantly by year-end, but he also hopes for long-term military bases.  Talabani downplayed Iranian influence in Iraq.  Hakim said he would work for an inclusive government but bridled at the limits being put on Shia majoritarian rule.  Hakim warned that he expects all future cabinet members to hold clear positions on the legitimacy of Iraq's constitution, the crime of armed resistance, and the need for a break with Iraq's Ba'athist past.  He did not object to a review of the constitution but was firm on the need for a federal structure, hoping that opponents would try to influence the regionalization process rather than try to abort a federal transformation supported by the large majority of Iraqis.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) Senator Kerry and the Ambassador held meetings with President Jalal Talabani and Shia Alliance leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim on January 18 to push for a broad national unity government in the weeks ahead.  ------------------------------------- Talabani Sees New Government in Weeks -------------------------------------  3. (C) Talabani asserted that he would insist on a national unity government that draws Sunni Arabs into the cabinet.  He predicted that such a government could be hammered out in "weeks".  Talabani said that he is prepared to review the constitution but does not expect "fundamental changes".  He downplayed the seriousness of Iranian influence in Iraq, noting that three key factors stand in the way of a major Iranian foothold here.  First, Iraqi Shia oppose walayat al-faqih, "the rule of the jurisprudent", which underpins the Iranian political system, he said. Second, the presence of Najaf, the undisputed seat of Shia Islam, in Iraq ensures that Iraqi Shia need never depend on foreign religious influence.  Third, the failures of the Iranian government and suffering of the Iranian people are a cautionary tale well known to any Iraqis tempted by Iranian influence.  4. (C) Talabani expects that the MNF-I presence could decrease substantially by year-end.  However, he argued for the continued presence of at least one or two U.S. military bases in Iraq over the long term, to be modeled on the presence maintained in Turkey at Incirlik.  Asked about corruption in Iraq, Talabani stated that he supports further work against what he agrees is a major problem.  He criticized his predecessor, Ghazi al-Yawar, for running his office with no accountability and blocking auditing efforts. Talabani lamented that Iraqis are inheritors of a system in which Saddam Hussein "legalized corruption", offering poverty wages to all government employees with the expectation that they would supplement them through bribes and kickbacks.  ----------------------------------- Hakim Bridles at Pressure For Unity -----------------------------------  5. (C) Hakim said that he agrees with the goal of a broad-based government but expressed clear irritation with U.S. pressure on the issue.  He argued that he knows of no other nation that requires a two-thirds majority to form its cabinet, a standard that strikes at the rights of Iraq's Shia majority.  He jokingly suggested that Iraq should not be called a Republic, but rather a "State of Consensus", because of the excessive quest for unanimity in its politics.  He warned that any partners in the coming government would have to agree on several key governing principles: (1) Iraq's federal structure, (2) the legitimacy of the constitution, (3) the need for de-Ba'athification and a break with the Ba'athist past, and (4) an agreement that all armed resistance is illegitimate and a form of terrorism.  6. (C) Hakim further warned that the Shia had already been extremely tolerant and responsive to Sunni Arab needs.  He claimed that Falah al-Naqib had been allowed to bring tens of thousands of former regime elements into the security forces during Allawi's tenure and that the Iraqi intelligence service is 98 percent made up of former regime agents who used to spy on groups like his.  He also asserted that the inclusion of Sunni Arabs on the constitution drafting committee had been a generous gesture made in contravention  BAGHDAD 00000164  002 OF 002   of Iraqi law.  7. (C) Hakim stated that he does not object to a full and frank review of the constitution as long as it is confined to the constitution review committee.  He also pointed out that, even if the federal provisions of the constitution are applied "as is," there still would be considerable room for determining the structure of the country, the referenda held to shape the regions, and the legislative process. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000165  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/20/2026 TAGS: IZ, PGOV, PNAT SUBJECT: CONSTITUTION REVIEW SHOULD BE DELAYED SAYS  SUNNI HARD-LINE LEADER MUTLAK  REF: BAGHDAD 150  Classified By: PolCouns Robert Ford, reason 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Saleh Mutlak, whose National Iraqi Front (NIF) won eleven seats in the December 15 elections, told Poloff on January 18 that Constitutional reform should be put off until the next Council of Representatives. The country cannot focus on the Constitution until there is security - the violence must stop, he said. Mutlak is recommending that the formation of the Constitutional Review Committee, along with the timetable for key legislation concerning federalism, be put off until the next term of the National Assembly, when the country is stable.  He claimed violence would erupt after the final election results are announced since most Sunni Arabs consider the elections to have been fraught with fraud that deprived them of many seats.  (Comment:  we think there is some hyperbole here.  End Comment.)  2. (C) Poloff strongly cautioned Mutlak on his public statements, in which he is quoted as saying that he supports the insurgency.  Such statements, said Poloff, anger the Shia and convince them that Sunni Arabs are not suitable partners in governing Iraq. The USG must also condemn statements that appear to justify the killing of Coalition troops.  As an elected member of a legitimate government, Mutlak cannot be advocating violence against it.  Mutlak denied that he supports the insurgency, claiming that he has been misquoted in the media.  Instead, he said, he is urging the insurgents to fight Iranians and not the Coalition.  He promised to issue statements condemning violence and calling on the insurgents to stop attacks against the Coalition.  3. (C) Mutlak has been meeting recently with political leaders in an attempt to forge a governing coalition with the Kurds, Sunnis and the Allawi camp.  He candidly admitted that there are no current negotiations between the Sunnis and the Allawi camp. They have no common platform, says Mutlak.  The Sunni Tawaffuq is a Sunni religious party - like the Shia and Kurds, another sectarian group.  Attempting to position himself as a acceptable moderate secular leader, Mutlak has met with Shia SCIRI leader Abdul Azziz Hakim and Kurd President Talabani to pitch his candidacy for President or Prime Minister.  He said he was angry that both attacked him publicly afterwards saying he doesn't understand why they did that.  4. (C) Comment:  Saleh Mutlak is a firebrand whose provocative public statements in the election campaign have escalated the political tension and perhaps contributed to the hardening of positions in both the Shia and Sunni camps.  They may also have led to an increase in violence.  Breaking from the Iraq National Dialogue Council before the December 15 election to form his National Iraqi Front, he did reasonably well, apparently winning about 11 seats.  But his grandstanding and ego have irritated other Sunni Arab leaders, even within his current coalition (reftel), dimming his chances of emerging as a consensus candidate for any national position.  End Comment. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000166  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, PTER, PHUM, IZ SUBJECT: SUNNI LEADERS FEAR STREET REACTION TO ELECTION REVIEW REPORT  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) SUMMARY: Ambassador met on January 15 with key leaders from the Iraqi National Dialogue Council (INDC).  Sheykh Khalaf Al-Ayan said that Tawaffuq Front was under pressure from the "street" to abandon the political process if the International Mission for Iraqi Elections (IMIE) assessment does not award the Sunnis more seats in the Council of Representatives.  (NOTE: The IMIE report does not make recommendations concerning seat allocation.  END NOTE.)  INDC leaders raised security and safety issues, focusing on Sunni participation in the Iraqi Government and on ensuring that the Ministry of Interior (MOI) and Ministry of Defense (MOD) stay out of sectarian hands.  The INDC leaders claimed that their constituency is under siege - from the terrorists, the government, and the Coalition - and unless they can address these concerns quickly, the anger from the "street" could grow.  Negotiations about a government coalition, they stated, are small advances as the Sunnis grapple with whether to seek a non-Shia alliance with the Kurds or to try to woo moderate Shia into an Arab alliance.  The leaders agreed with the Ambassador that terror and Iran are the two immediate problems in Iraq, adding that they are urging the insurgency to stop attacking the Coalition.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- Street Demands: Abandon the Political Process ---------------------------------------------  2. (C) Ambassador met on January 15 with Iraqi National Dialogue Council (INDC) chairman Sheykh Khalif Al-Ayan, who was accompanied by Mahmood Mashadani and Abdel Nasser Al-Janabi.  The group had requested the meeting to discuss "urgent issues."  Sheykh Khalaf told Ambassador that the Sunni street is demanding that the Tawaffuq coalition, of which INDC is a key party, withdraw from the political process if the IMIE does not award the Sunni Arabs more seats in its assessment report.  Ambassador cautioned Sheykh Khalaf not to fall into SCIRI leader Abdel Azziz Hakim's trap. Hakim wants the Sunni Arabs to respond negatively to the report to paint them as unreasonable extremists, Ambassador said.  (NOTE: The report, released January 19, does not make recommendations on seat allocations.  END NOTE.)  Rather than arguing about a few seats that will not affect the balance of power, Ambassador added, it is better to focus on influencing the makeup of the next government.  ----------------------------------------- New Government - Physical Security is Key -----------------------------------------  3. (C) The Sunni leaders complained bitterly about increased government repression against them following the election. Sheykh Khalaf claimed that 750 Sunnis were detained on the pretext of the investigation into the kidnapping of MinInterior Bayan Jabr's sister (NOTE: She was released on January 18.  END NOTE.)  PolCouns responded that the MOI denied any involvement and the MOD asked for the names so they could look into it.  (NOTE: Sunni leaders had earlier claimed that 58 Sunni election observers were detained and 38 of them were later found dead, but have not provided any names to back up the charge.  Without evidence, these claims are difficult to verify, but violence, including assassinations, against the Sunnis involved in the political process is a fact.  END NOTE.)  4. (C) The Sunni leaders said they must have a Minister of Interior whom they can trust, and they want assurances that the Shia will not interfere with the selection.  Abdel Nasser al-Janabi said that if the Sunnis can name the Minister of Interior and Defense, the Shia can choose the Prime Minister.  For the PM, they would prefer Fadhila's Nadim al-Jabiri over VP Adil Abd al-Mahdi (who they said is too close to Iran) or PM Ibrahim Jafari.  Given a choice between Jafari and Mahdi, Mashadani said he prefers Mahdi, although Allawi also is acceptable.  5. (C) Uncertain if it will be possible to form a coalition with Kurds and moderates to counter the Shia alliance, Mashadani said the ideal coalition would have the Sunnis ally with the Shia Fadhila instead of Allawi.  (NOTE: To have influence, a coalition needs at least 1/3 (or 92) of the Council of Representatives votes -- the margin needed to block a Presidential nomination or changes to the constitution.  (END NOTE.)  If Sadr and Fadhila break from the Shia Alliance, Mashadani said, an Arab governing coalition is possible.  ------------------------------------ Bitter Plight of Arab Sunnis in Iraq  BAGHDAD 00000166  002 OF 002   ------------------------------------  6. (C) The Sunni leaders highlighted the difficult circumstances of their electorate.  The Sunnis are besieged from all sides, they said, threatened by the terrorists and attacked by the government, the Badr Corps, and the Coalition.  Khalaf claimed that MOD units are occupying homes and displacing families in Anbar as well as uprooting palm trees that are key to their subsistence.  U.S. snipers are killing people even when they cross the street with white flags, he added, and corpses of murdered Sunnis are found every day.  Most of the detainees in Coalition and IG hands (over 16,000) are Sunnis.  Some, according to the Sunnis, any held in secret MOI prisons where they are tortured and killed.  Sheykh Khalaf appealed to the Ambassador to look into the "Eagles Square" Green Zone prison, where he said 68 Sunnis are being held by the major crimes unit, some for extended periods, in desperate conditions.  More must be done to release detained Sunnis who are innocent, Khalaf said. Ambassador said that inflammatory statements by SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz Hakim, equating all Sunnis with the insurgency, escalate the situation and give the militias an excuse to attack them.  Other media, he noted, including al-Hurrah, are playing a negative role and escalating the sectarian rhetoric.  Ambassador urged the Sunni leaders to avoid Hakim's provocations and to put themselves on a higher political level, stating their political goals and the desire for a national unity government in a  non-confrontational, deliberate manner.  ------------------------------ Two Scourges - Terror and Iran ------------------------------  7. (C) Ambassador told the Sunni leaders that Iraq faces two scourges, terror and the negative influence of Iran.  Abd Nasir opined that we have identical goals, just different methods.  Ambassador called upon the leaders to use their influence, so aptly demonstrated in the pre-election period, to call for an end of violence against the now fully legitimate GOI.  Sheykh Khalaf said the Sunnis agree that the resistance should stop attacking the Coalition and should focus on the Iranian threat.  8. (C) COMMENT: Despite the many challenges and obstacles ahead, the Sunni Arab political leaders clearly want to be players in the formation of the new government and likely will not withdraw from the political process.  Ambassador pledged to help provide for their security by helping with weapons permits and safety equipment.  It was telling that in the long conversation focusing on Sunni Arab priorities for the next government, none of the leaders mentioned the need to change the constitution.  Mashadani told Poloff after the meeting that security issues are now the focal points of Sunni Arab concerns.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000181  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  STATE FOR NEA/I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: MARR, PINS, ODIP, OFDP, PREL, KS, IZ SUBJECT: KOREAN INTEREST IN REGIONAL RECONSTRUCTION TEAMS  REF: 05 Baghdad 4045  1. (U) This is an action request; please see para 2.  2. (SBU) SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST: Korean Ambassador to Iraq Ki-ho Chang told the Ambassador January 19 that Seoul is interested in participating in, and possibly leading, the planned Kurdistan Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT).  Chang asked that the USG formally request Korean participation in the RRT by letter.  Post is following up with a proposed text for transmission via Embassy Seoul. We kindly request that the Department ask Embassy Seoul to approach the ROK Ministry of Foreign Affairs directly on this issue to stress the value that ROK participation in the RRT would have for our common effort in Iraq.  END SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST.  3. (SBU) In a January 19 meeting with the Ambassador and Strategic Governance and Economic Effects Director Speckhard, Chang reaffirmed the ROK commitment to Iraq and expressed his government's interest in participating in the planned Erbil-based Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT), which would also cover the provinces of Dahuk and Sulamaniyah.  Chang highlighted that no decision had been made in Seoul on participation in the RRT Erbil.  Although he is personally supportive of ROK participation, Chang said, a formal decision and authorization from Seoul would be required prior to any further commitment. He suggested that the USG, as a way of prompting a decision, send a letter to his government requesting its participation.  4. (SBU) During follow-on discussion with Director Speckhard, Chang sought information regarding other Coalition participation in Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs)/RRTs, especially that of the United Kingdom.  While remaining non-committal, Chang asked questions related to potential roles for the ROK to include leadership of the PRT and provision of movement security teams.  Additionally, he asked about the availability of funds both for the operation of the RRT and for reconstruction and development projects.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000195  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/22/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: KURDISH LEADERS, ALLAWI AGREE ON JOINT PRINCIPLES FOR A UNITY GOVERNMENT  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: In a series of meetings at the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) Guest House in Salah al-Din on January 21-22, Ambassador, President Jalal Talabani, KDP Leader Masud Barzani, former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, and UK Ambassador William Patey drafted a framework proposal for a national unity government based on the following six points: the inclusion of the four main political parties (Kurdish Alliance, National Iraqi List, Shi'a Coalition, and Tawafuq); the formation of a National Security Council (NSC) that will act as the main policymaking body for the GOI; representation from the four government partners in the "sovereign" and service ministries, and oversight of groups of ministries by one of the Deputy Prime Ministers; program for the GOI to address strategic issues in the three ministerial groups; NSC oversight of independent national institutions (such as the de-Ba'athification Commission); and restraining the de-Ba'athification Commission from barring candidates for the Council of Representatives (COR).  2.  (C) SUMMARY CONTINUED: In a wider discussion on January 22, Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari and Deputy Prime Minister Rowsh Shaways expressed their concern that the NSC would effectively act as a "shadow government" and questioned the need for more layers to a GOI that already appears to have a difficult path ahead of it.  Ambassador reassured them that everyone in the NSC, with the exception of the regional presidents, would already be part of the federal government, and stated that the NSC was allowed under the Constitution. Ambassador and Patey pressed for the government formation talks to start right away.  They warned that the Shi'a Coalition wants a unity government partners of only the Kurds, the Shi'a, and Sunni Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP).  The Shi'a need to hear from the Kurdish leadership that the Kurds do not envision a national unity government under the same terms.  While agreeing with Zebari and Shaways that the permanent government should be the best possible one they can negotiate, Ambassador and Patey reminded the Kurds that time is also a factor.  Barzani confirmed he will come to Baghdad within the week to begin talks on government formation.  END SUMMARY.  ----------------------------------- (U) A Joint Agreement on Principles -----------------------------------  3. (C) In a series of meetings at the KDP Guest House in Salah al-Din on January 21-22, Ambassador, President Jalal Talabani, KDP Leader Masud Barzani, former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, and UK Ambassador William Patey drafted an agreement on the following six points:  - The National Government must at least include the following four parties: Shi'a Coalition, Kurdish Alliance, National Iraqi List (Allawi), and National Accord List (Tawafuq). None of these parties can be vetoed from participating.  - A National Security Council (NSC) will be formed that includes the President and his Vice-Presidents, the Prime Minister and his Deputies, the Speaker of the Council of Representatives (COR), and the Presidents of the regions. The NSC will lay out the strategic initiatives and create policies that reflect national unity.  - Ministries shall be distributed into three core groups, each led by a Deputy Prime Minister: security (the sovereign ministries of Interior, Defense, and Intelligence); "important ministries" (Finance, Economy, etc.); and Service ministries (Health, Educations, etc.)  The candidates for the Ministries of Defense and Interior must be either neutral or acceptable to all parties participating in the government.  - The GOI must agree on a program to address cooperatively strategic issues in the three ministerial groups.  - The NSC will reconsider the formation and bylaws of independent national institutions, both those mentioned in the constitution and others such as the Commission for Public Integrity, the de-Ba'athification Commission, the Press Commission, Financial Audit, and the Service Council (if it exists).  These institutions must embody national unity in their work.  - The reluctance of the de-Ba'athification Commission to sanction the participation of the some of candidates in the COR must cease.  --------------------------------------- (U) Concerns About Nature, Scope of NSC  BAGHDAD 00000195  002 OF 002   ---------------------------------------  4. (C) In a wider discussion of the principles on January 22, Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari and Deputy Prime Minister Rowsh Shaways expressed their concern that the NSC would effectively act as a "shadow government" and questioned the need for more layers in a GOI that already appears to have a difficult path ahead of it.  Zebari insisted that all proposals should be in line with the precepts laid out in the Constitution.  He and Shaways - both members of the KDP - spent three months negotiating with their counterparts in the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), Barham Saleh and Fuad Masum, on the composition and the scope of the President and deputies, Prime Minister and deputies, Speaker of the COR and deputies, and the ministries.  According to Zebari and Shaways, the PUK is fixated on Defense, Finance, Oil, Interior, and Intelligence.  They also are concerned about the Health, Transportation, Education, Environment and Women's Rights portfolios.  5. (C) Ambassador reassured Zebari and Shaways that everyone in the NSC, with the exception of the regional presidents, would already be part of the federal government, and stated that the NSC was allowed under the Constitution.  UK Ambassador Patey presented a counterargument to their fear of a "shadow government" with the NSC, explaining that the COR would retain its function as the primary legislative body in Iraq, and that anyone confirmed by the COR could be dismissed by the COR.  Ambassador and Patey confirmed for Shaways that the Deputy Prime Ministers in charge of the three groups of ministries would have to report to the Prime Minister directly.  ---------------------------- (U) No Time Like the Present ----------------------------  6. (C) Ambassador and Patey stated that the discussions between the main parties on government formation needed to start right away.  Patey argued that while those present had agreed the national unity government would include the four parties mentioned above, the Shi'a Coalition is still operating under the assumption that the unity government consists only of the Kurds, the Shi'a, and Sunni Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP).  The Shi'a need to hear from the Kurdish leadership that the Kurds do not envision a national unity government under the same terms.  If Barzani came down to Baghdad this week to negotiate the terms of a national unity government, the ensuing details could be worked out by others.  Allawi added that he had scheduled a meeting for January 23 with the leaders of Tawafuq.  7. (C) Shaways argued that the groups needed to discuss a statement of general principles first and then delegate these issues to chosen representatives to work out the details. The primary argument against this, Ambassador stated, is that it would take time.  Ambassador stated that the Shi'a need to learn that the world will not support them if they push to exclude groups from the government.  This only feeds the sectarian conflict.  While agreeing with Zebari and Shaways that the permanent government should be the best possible one they can negotiate, Ambassador and Patey reminded the Kurds that time is also a factor.  The key thing, remarked Patey, is not to give the Shi'a the impression that the need for haste gives them an advantage in the negotiations.  8. (C) Zebari then argued that a principles statement is unnecessary - they should just start with the committees and let the process develop organically.  Everyone disagreed with this approach, and Patey stated that that would take even more time than drafting a principles statement.  Ambassador argued that the working groups could start as soon as the principals gathered in Baghdad, and would report daily on their progress in the committees.  --------------------- (U) Barzani is Coming ---------------------  9. (C) Zebari reported that Barzani would come to Baghdad as soon as the final legislation on the merger of the Kurdistan Regional Governments (KRGs) was passed.  This legislation was supposed to be presented yesterday at the ceremony for the official announcement of the merger.  This law would authorize the nomination of the Prime Minister and his Deputy for the unified KRG, and charged the Prime Minister with forming a government.  Ambassador was subsequently told Barzani would arrive in Baghdad within the week. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000202  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, IR, IZ SUBJECT: AMB AND TALABANI DISCUSS IRAN, DE-BA,ATHIFICATION, AND GOVERNMENT FORMATION  REF: BAGHDAD 00195  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) SUMMARY:  In a January 17 meeting, Ambassador told President Jalal Talabani that the U.S. would never relent on the war against terror, refuting SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim's public statements accusing the USG of encouraging terrorism with its Sunni Arab outreach program.  Ambassador told Talabani that the U.S. is strongly urging Sunni Arab political leaders to renounce violence definitively. Talabani said he understands and supports U.S. efforts. Talabani agreed with Ambassador that Hakim's public statements are causing anger among Sunni Arabs who want to join the political process.  Talabani said he thinks that Deputy President Abd al-Mahdi understands how Hakim's statements are stoking the opposition, and that Abd al-Mahdi is trying to work with others in the Iraqi leadership to restrain Hakim's statements.  Ambassador and Talabani discussed the implications of a proposed statement by the Iraqi Ba'ath Party renouncing Saddam Hussein and Saddamism. Talabani said he thinks the proposed statement indicates the Ba'ath Party might be moving towards accepting the political process.  Talabani also told Ambassador that the Iranian government has approached him seeking support in the dispute over the Iranian nuclear program.  Talabani said that Iraq could do no more than support countries' rights to develop peaceful nuclear energy programs within the applicable UN frameworks.  Talabani said he believes that Iranian President Ahmedinajad is coming under criticism at home.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------------------- NO U.S. RETREAT ON WAR ON TERROR --------------------------------  2. (C) In January 17 meeting with President Jalal Talabani, Ambassador raised POTUS's concern regarding public statements SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim made accusing the USG of encouraging terrorism by preventing the Iraqi Ministry of Interior from carrying out its duties.  Ambassador emphatically stated that the U.S. would never relent on the war on terrorism.  Although there is no possibility the U.S. could support the inclusion of Saddamists in the new GOI, Ambassador continued, it is critical to engage and support legitimate Sunni Arab leaders in the political process.  ------------------------------------- AMBASSADOR AND TALABANI DISCUSS HAKIM -------------------------------------  3. (C) Talabani reported that Hakim had asked whether the U.S. had changed its policy toward the Shias.  According to Talabani, Hakim had approached him January 16 upset because Hakim had heard rumors that Ambassador is supporting Fadilah Party's Nadim al-Jabiri for Prime Minister.  Talabani said he reassured Hakim that this is not the case and urged Ambassador to hold regular meetings with Hakim.  4. (C) Ambassador said that Hakim has been getting a great deal of negative reviews in the Western media, including a recent New York Times editorial.  Ambassador said he had expected a contentious meeting with Hakim January 17, but instead found him very subdued.  Ambassador told Talabani that he urged Hakim to temper the tone of his comments, reminding Hakim that the Shia Coalition does not have the votes necessary for a two-thirds majority of the Council of Representatives and so should not be burning any bridges. However, Ambassador noted, as the party with the most seats overall, the Shia Coalition needs to be more generous in welcoming the Sunni Arabs into the political process.  5. (C) Ambassador noted that he has been very tough on the Sunni Arabs lately, telling them that (a) once the final results of the elections are announced, the Sunni Arab leaders must support the final numbers or risk losing U.S. support; and (b) once the Council of Representatives and the new GOI are established, acts of violence must stop or they will be considered terrorist attacks against a legitimate government.  ------------------- A NEW BA'ATH PARTY? -------------------  6. (C) Talabani then brought up a recent internal draft statement by the Iraqi Ba'ath Party that reportedly renounces Saddam Hussein and Saddamism (e.g., the attacks against the Iraqi people and the invasion of Kuwait).  After handing Ambassador a copy of the document, Talabani stated that he is waiting to express his opinion until after the USG comes out  BAGHDAD 00000202  002 OF 002   with its position on the statement.  Talabani, however, said he believes the document represents a genuine first step. Talabani stated that if the statement is bona fide, a new, more acceptable Ba'ath Party could emerge, which the GOI should encourage.  7. (C) Ambassador asked if something concrete could be offered on changing the de-Ba'athification law if the Ba'athists renounce Saddamism and violence.  Talabani replied that the de-Ba'athification law has caused problems for everyone by not distinguishing between the regular party members and the Saddamist leadership who committed crimes against the Iraqi people.  Changing the de-Ba'athification law, Talabani said, would be one way to help defeat the hardcore Saddamists from inside the Ba'ath Party.  Talabani stated that he, Abd al-Mahdi, and Planning Minister Barham Saleh are in discussions with Hakim to help him understand the situation.  ------------------------------ IRAN WANTS RELATIONS WITH U.S. ------------------------------  8. (S) Talabani said that during a recent meeting with former Iranian President Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani, Rajsanjani indicated again that Tehran is open to establishing a friendly relationship with the USG.  Talabani added that he met with Iranian Charge Qomi on January 16.  Qomi raised the issue of the Iranian nuclear program, Talabani noted, requesting Iraqi public support against international pressure.  Talabani said he told Qomi that Iraq could support the development of nuclear energy for peaceful uses only.  If Tehran was feeling pressured, Talabani reportedly told Qomi, Tehran has only itself to blame.  Iraq would not counter the UN on this issue, Talabani said.  Talabani stated that he heard that President Ahmedinejad is being attacked internally for his international blunders by Rafsanjani and Ayatollah Khatami, who also have openly criticized Ahmedinejad.  -------------------------------------- GOVERNMENT FORMATION - HOW TO PROCEED? --------------------------------------  9. (C) Ambassador asked Talabani about the progress of government formation talks.  Talabani responded that they are now at the stage of leadership-level discussions, and that former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi agreed to accompany Talabani on his trip to Erbil on January 21 to meet with the Ambassador, Talabani, and Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Masud Barzani on forming a unity government (see reftel).  Ambassador mentioned that in a prior meeting Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari had discussed the idea of a two-pronged approach to government formation -- leadership and sub-leadership groups to discuss candidates.  Zebari said Ambassador could discuss this idea with Barzani in Erbil. Ambassador asked whether this was Zebari's idea or someone else's.  Talabani stated that he did not understand the need for a dual approach. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000203  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2016 TAGS: PREL, PINS, MARR, IZ SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND INTERIOR MINISTER DISCUSS JILL CARROLL, PLOT AGAINST HAKIM, AND FRENCH JOURNALIST LAWSUIT   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (a), (b) and  (d).  1.(S/NF) SUMMARY: Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr told the Ambassador January 22 that he believes the kidnappers of Jabr's recently released sister, The Revenge Brigade, also are responsible for the kidnapping of U.S. journalist Jill Carroll.  Jabr reported that Ministry of Interior (MOI) forces had captured the Emir of the group that had held his sister, and MOI is working to develop leads through the Emir that hopefully will lead to the safe return of Carroll.  Jabr also reported that the vehicle involved in Carroll's kidnapping had been recovered and turned over to the FBI.  In addition, Jabr indicated that he believes someone in Adnan al-Dulaymi's office is involved in the kidnapping scheme. Jabr dispelled news reports from Reuters that fifty people were arrested in connection with assassination plots against Abdul Aziz al-Hakim, and he agreed to drop the civil charges he initiated against a French journalist who inaccurately reported statements made by Ambassador about Jabr.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------------- JILL CARROLL INVESTIGATION --------------------------  2. (S/NF) In a January 22 meeting with Ambassador, Minister of Interior Jabr reported that the Revenge Brigade, which was responsible for the kidnapping and ultimate release of his own sister, is associated with the gang that kidnapped U.S. journalist Jill Carroll.  Jabr's knowledge is based on his interrogation of the Emir of the Revenge Brigade, who is in MOI custody.  (NOTE: Embassy is aware of a video received by Al Jazeera in which the Revenge Brigade claimed responsibility for kidnapping her and issued demands. Embassy is working to procure a copy of the video, which never was aired.  END NOTE.)  The Revenge Brigade Emir reported his dealings with the gang involved in Carroll's kidnapping and also conveyed that this group recently rented a residence near Adnan al-Dulaymi's home.  (NOTE: When Carroll was kidnapped, she had just left the office of (but had been unable to meet with) Dulaymi, a leader of the Sunni Tawaffuq coalition, who she believed had agreed to receive her.  END NOTE.)  The Emir told Jabr he would assist in leading authorities to Carroll if Jabr agreed to obtain the release of the Emir's two brothers, who are in Coalition detention.  Jabr said he could make no promises but urged the Emir to cooperate.  Ambassador encouraged further dialogue with the Emir and requested that Jabr press the Emir to demonstrate that Carroll is still alive through such means as a telephone call.  Jabr agreed and confirmed that MOI forces are working closely with Embassy and MNF-I officials.  3. (S/NF) Jabr also reported that MOI forces are following other leads.  Thus far, MOI forces have identified two neighborhoods where Carroll may be held - both of which are near Adnan al-Dulaymi's house.  Jabr's forces also have three houses that appear to be used by the kidnappers under surveillance near Dulaymi's, he said.  Jabr stated that he also has directed his intel office to discuss the day of the kidnapping with two of al-Dulaymi's staff members who could have been involved in setting up the meeting between Carroll and al-Dulaymi.  MOI forces also have tracked the registration of a car abandoned at the scene by the kidnappers to a person in Fallujah, Jabr reported.  Jabr added that he has sent police to Fallujah to investigate further and, if possible, raid the home of the owner of the vehicle.   Jabr, relating his sister's experience with the Revenge Brigade, said he believes that Carroll is safe and that he hopes she will not be harmed.  --------------------------------- PLOT AGAINST ABDUL AZIZ AL-HAKIM? ---------------------------------  4. (C) Ambassador raised with Jabr his concern for the safety of SCIRI leader Abdul Aziz al-Hakim, based on a recent conversation with Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari, who relayed a report that fifty suicide bombers were targeting Hakim for assassination.  Reuters subsequently reported that these fifty individuals had been arrested, which Jabr said was not correct; no such arrests have been made.  The Ambassador and Jabr agreed that the person who planted the incorrect story may have intended to put Hakim at ease and lure him out for attack and that the source of the Reuters story should be checked.  ------------------------------ SUIT AGAINST FRENCH JOURNALIST ------------------------------   5. (C) Ambassador brought up Jabr's recent lawsuit against a French journalist who reported, incorrectly, soQ comments Ambassador had made regarding the Ministry of Interior and Jabr.  Jabr had decided to initiate a suit against the reporter for defamation.  Ambassador relayed to Jabr the request of the French Charge that Jabr reconsider and drop his suit.  Ambassador stressed that journalists do make mistakes and that it is not wise or worth the trouble to take lQal action every time such an incorrect report is published.  Jabr agreed and directed his special assistant to take the necessary steps to drop the charges. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000209  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  REL GBR AUS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2016 TAGS: PGOV, MOPS, PINS, KCRS, IZ SUBJECT: MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE FOR NATIONAL SECURITY DISCUSSES BAGHDAD SECURITY, PM'S TRIP TO ANBAR, AND NATIONAL RECONCILIATION   Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (A), (B), (D ).  1. (C//REL GBR AUS) SUMMARY:  Prime Minister Ja'afari convened the Ministerial Committee on National Security (MCNS) at his residence the evening of January 22.  Although the major topic of discussion was infrastructure security (septel), the MCNS also heard reports concerning: the status of the security plan for Baghdad; the progress being made to provide a security plan to address the upcoming Ashura religious observances; and the PM's recent trip to Al Anbar Province.  The MCNS also began to focus on the subject of national reconciliation.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C//REL GBR AUS) Prime Minister Ja'afari convened the Ministerial Committee on National Security (MCNS) at his residence the evening of January 22.  Members of the MCNS present at the meeting were the PM, Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr, Minister of Defense Saadoun al-Dulime, National Security Advisor Dr. Mowaffak al-Rubaie, MNF-I Commanding General Casey, Ambassador, and British Ambassador Patey. Minister of State for National Security Affairs Karim al-Anzi was absent.  DPM Ahmed Chalabi, Minister of Electricity Muhsin Shalash, and PM's Chief of Staff Dr. Abdul Aziz al-Tamimi also attended.  --------------------- BAGHDAD SECURITY PLAN ---------------------  3.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  MinInterior Jabr reported that, at the direction of the PM, the Ministry of Interior (MOI) announced and enacted emergency measures to forestall political violence in conjunction with the announcement last week of preliminary election results.  Jabr said he was pleased to report that there were no major security problems when the results were announced.  He also noted that MOI and Ministry of Defense (MOD) forces are coordinating well with the recently arrived U.S. Army Fourth Infantry Division with regard to security in the Baghdad area.  These forces' effective coordination, Jabr noted, has sent a message to terrorists who have been forced to leave Baghdad.  He also reported that new proposals are being studied to adjust the plan for Baghdad, which would involve stationing MOI forces in the city, MOD forces on the perimeter, and relying on Coalition forces for overwatch and quick response if needed.  4.  (C//REL GBR AUS) Jabr also reported on progress being made to convert 23 temporary checkpoints in Baghdad, which now consist of concrete barriers provided by MNF-I, into permanent outposts.  Jabr's short-term plan is to spend $2 million to purchase armored trailers that would be reinforced by additional concrete barriers. Adequate funds are available if the PM approves, Jabr added.  The long-term solution, he explained, is to build permanent checkpoints, which he estimated will cost $12 million.  According to Jabr, the funds for this project were appropriated in the 2005 budget but were returned at year's end because they were not spent. DPM Chalabi informed Jabr that he could have these funds returned, and Jabr said he would have his deputy minister forward the request to the PM's office.  ------------------- SECURITY FOR ASHURA -------------------  5. (C//REL GBR AUS) Ja'afari said he is concerned about the potential for violence during the upcoming Ashura observances.  Millions of people will be gathering and marching, he said, which will present terrorists with many targets of opportunity.  Ja'afari said the security forces must be prepared to deal with the types of attacks that have taken place before: suicide vests, mortars, small arms, and VBIEDs.  However, Ja'afari said he fears that terrorists may try new tactics, such as poisoning food and water that will be provided to the marchers.  He directed that the security plan for Ashura include steps to approve and monitor food and water vendors.  In addition, hotels and homes and apartments for rent must be watched closely for the presence of terrorists.  The MOI-led interministerial committee that coordinated the election security plan is working on a plan for Ashura.   BAGHDAD 00000209  002 OF 002   --------------------------------- PRIME MINISTER'S TRIP TO AL-ANBAR ---------------------------------  6. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ja'afari reported on his recent trip to Al-Anbar Province with Ambassador and GEN Casey, during which he visited Ramadi and Fallujah.  While Fallujah looks like a city returning to normal, Ja'afari stated, Ramadi still bears many signs of conflict.  The PM called the people with whom he met in Ramadi "brave, realistic, frank, and willing to cooperate with the government."  One problem he learned during the trip, Ja'afari noted, is that the Ramadi "security committee" formed by the Governor is not representative of the local community.  Ja'afari said it is possible to support the work of the committee but that, at the same time, the others in Ramadi cannot be ignored.  Ja'afari said he wished he had had more time to meet with other segments of Ramadi's society, including the Provincial Council, professionals, and others with a stake in the development of the community.  7. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ja'afari said he was approached regarding two types of problems while in Ramadi and Fallujah.  First, he said, people still need compensation for damage to their property.  Ja'afari immediately made $75 million available for Fallujah and said he would discuss additional financial needs with the MCNS.  Second, regarding detainees, Ja'afari said that many in Ramadi would prefer to see their sons playing a role in protecting the security of the region as part of a locally formed defense unit, rather than seeing them locked up.  Ja'afari said there must be an agreed-upon strategy to address how the government will deal with Al-Anbar, as well as how to determine which requests from its residents are legitimate and able to be accommodated.  He concluded that he should meet with a wider segment of the population, not just the governor's security committee, in order to see what can be done.  ---------------------------- DETAINEES AND RECONCILIATION ----------------------------  8. (C//REL GBR AUS)  With regard to detainees, Ja'afari said that two types of detainees cannot be released: (1) criminals whose cases must be handled by the courts, and (2) those who have been captured in possession of explosives, rocket-propelled grenades, and heavy weapons, or who are members of terrorist organizations.  However, he noted, consideration should be given to releasing those who are held with no proof of terrorist or criminal links.  Ja'afari said that such people could be released on the condition that, if it is later discovered that they lied or were involved in crime or terrorism, they would be re-arrested and pay a heavy price.  Ja'afari said that it may be time to take a courageous stand and consider laws that would allow the government to determine the nature and seriousness of a person's actions and then decide whether to be tough or lenient with them.  9. (C//REL GBR AUS) Ambassador agreed that this is an interesting subject that needs to be addressed.  The law must make provisions, he stated, for people who wish to abandon the "resistance" and become part of the political process; this law should address questions of amnesty and reconciliation.  Ja'afari said he is thinking of South Africa's experience, in which reconciliation took place after democratic elections.  Ambassador Patey said the Iraqis might also profit from taking a look at the Good Friday accord and the British experience with Northern Ireland, of which he promised to make a copy available.  Ja'afari tasked Rubaie to undertake a study of how to deal with the detainee issue and to examine the concept of reconciliation. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000210  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2015 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ENRG, EPET, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, TU, IZ SUBJECT: MINISTER OF FINANCE ALLAWI ADDRESSES FUEL IMPORT CRISIS  REF: A. A) ANKARA 278      B. B) DELARE-GOLDBERGER JAN 22-23 EMAILS/TELECONS  Classified By: Economic Minister Counselor Tom Delare for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d).  1.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Summary: Minister of Finance (MoF) Ali Allawi said that he has a green light from the Council of Ministers to offer the Turks a plan by which Iraq will pay off its arrears over a 12-month period, at an interest rate of 3%-4%.  He said Iraq will commit to keeping its 2006 imports within budget, with SOMO (the State Oil Marketing Organization) empowered to pay suppliers only/only via approved Letters of Credit through the Trade Bank of Iraq (TBI).  As this volume of imports will not meet current consumption in Iraq, Allawi predicted that rationing is inevitable and asked for U.S. assistance in developing an equitable system.  Allawi hopes to use the crisis to push for legislation opening the import and sale of fuel to private companies.  End Summary.  ----------------------- Allawi's Repayment Plan -----------------------  2.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Minister of Finance (MoF) Ali Allawi told Economic Minister Counselor January 22 that the Council of Ministers had approved a plan to offer repayment to Turkish fuel suppliers staggered over a 12-month period.  To make the arrangement more palatable, Allawi said the that the GOI would be prepared to offer a "reasonable" rate of interest - perhaps in the 3-4% range.  As part of this arrangement, the GOI seeks to secure agreement from Turkish suppliers that no/no further shipments of petroleum products will be made without a Letter of Credit (through the Trade Bank of Iraq) or formal MoF agreement to cover the cost of the shipment. In the event of an emergency, additional fuel above the budgeted $250 million/month limit may be imported, but Allawi averred that a decision of the Council of Ministers will be required to make that happen.  Allawi said that MoF has tried to enforce discipline of this sort on the Ministry of Oil (MoO) and its purchasing arm, the State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO) since last October, totally without success.  Given current budget difficulties, Allawi sees it as imperative to hold fast to a tough position now.  3.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Average monthly purchases of imported fuel rose and fell throughout 2005, but averaged out around $400 million/month -- $150 million/month over that allocated in this year's budget.  According to rough numbers offered by Allawi, after liquidation of current arrears of some $880 million, the GOI will have only just over $2 billion available for fuel purchases for the remainder of the year. That will permit purchases at only about 40% of last year's level (Note: This does not factor in possibly higher prices for petroleum products. End Note).  The Embassy estimates that as much as half of all imported fuel goes to generate electricity, leaving the GOI with a stark choice: Do they attempt to keep the grid up and running or do they direct some portion of the limited fuel imports to automotive and other uses, thereby contributing to a further fall-off in electricity generation.  Allawi is concerned that the government will have to quickly launch a rationing or coupon scheme to permit consumer purchases of imported fuel.  He asked our advice on how to implement a workable rationing system and establish priorities.  He said he is concerned that the government will have to quickly launch a rationing or coupon scheme to permit consumer purchases of imported fuel.  He asked our advice on how to implement a workable rationing system and establish priorities.  -------------------------------------- Opening Up the Downstream Fuel Market? --------------------------------------  4.  (C/REL GBR AUS) On a brighter note, Allawi said he sees an opportunity to use the current crisis to secure an opening of the downstream retail market.  In a separate conversation January 21, Allawi's Chief of Staff told us that MoF officials are convinced that prevarication on the part of the Ministry of Oil and its allies within the PM's office prevented a bill opening up the retail fuel sector from ever reaching Parliament for action.  Allawi said that he still views the legislation as an essential first step to getting the government out of the business of fuel imports.  It will begin making headway to reduce costly subsidies, since sales  BAGHDAD 00000210  002 OF 002   of privately imported fuel would be at market rates. EconMinCouns stressed that the bill, when re-introduced, be amended to clearly authorize retail outlets to operate without state control of their profit margins, an essential element to attract potential importers that is vague in the existing draft.  Allawi hopes to urge Prime Minister Ja'fari to recall the Transitional National Assembly (TNA) in an extraordinary session to get action on the fuel import bill, although he confessed that he had not yet broached this subject with the PM (See SEPTEL for additional information on this subject from Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi.)  ------------------------------- MoF Requests Embassy Assistance -------------------------------  5.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Allawi asked for U.S. assistance in floating his plan in Ankara before sitting down with the Turkish Ambassador in Baghdad (Note: Baghdad Econ has been in direct contact with Ankara Econ via email and phone.  End Note).  Regarding next steps, Allawi said that the government would move to establish a joint Ministry of Finance-Ministry of Oil Task Force, on which he implied that he would welcome USG involvement.  Post will follow up on both the task force as well as assisting MoF, if and when they develop their rationing scheme.  6.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Comment: It may be that this strategizing on the part of MoF to use the crisis to open up the downstream retail market and introduce rationing will be quashed by PM Ja'fari.  The country is in a bone fide fuel crisis and some cool nerve would be required to play this hand within the bureaucracy.  Regardless of possible Turkish or Kuwaiti disgruntlement, the goal desired by the Ministry of Finance is a good one.  There is a desperate need to shift the country away from the enormous subsidy payments entailed by the current importation and discounted sale of fuel products.  Opening up even a part of the petroleum sector promises to improve services, cut back on corruption, as well as save budget funds.  7.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Comment cont'd: Under Allawi's plans, rationing would need to start immediately - probably for all uses and/or the state will need to make larger allocations for fuel purchases.  Given the current revenue streams, that would necessarily entail drawdown of capital budgets across the government - the only ready source of funds. Alternately, rapid movement to privatize the oil import market (the goal at the Ministry of Finance) would eliminate the need for rationing as private retail came on line, through true market prices being introduced at the gas pumps.  This rather dire situation would also seem to reinforce the need to continue with subsidy elimination - as a means to free up scarce budget resources. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000211  SIPDIS  INFO MNFIM MNCI//00//  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  STATE FOR NEA/I  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: MARR, PINS, ODIP, OFDP, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: 60-DAY ASSESSMENT OF PROVINCIAL RECONSTRUCTION TEAMS  REF: 05 BAGHDAD 4045  1. (U) THIS IS A COORDINATED EMBASSY BAGHDAD AND MNF-I CABLE.  2. (SBU) SUMMARY: The National Coordination Team (NCT) provided AMB Khalilzad and GEN Casey the 60-Day Assessment of the three operational Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) on January 19.  From this assessment, it remains clear the PRT concept is a crucial component of both our integrated counter- insurgency strategy and our national capacity building in the provinces; the PRTs add value across the political, economic, and governance lines of operation in Iraq.  Mission and MNF-I are prepared to roll out additional PRTs pending resourcing and security manning decisions by the Principals Committee.  END SUMMARY.  ----------------- 60-DAY ASSESSMENT -----------------  3. (SBU) As directed by Ambassador and MNF-I Commanding General (CG) Casey, the NCT developed a 60- day joint assessment of the three proof-of-concept PRTs (Babil, Tamin, Ninawa) and of the PRT initiative overall.  (NOTE: Briefing slides sent separately to NEA/I.  END NOTE.)  The results of this assessment were briefed to Ambassador and CG on January 19. Overall, the initiative is assessed as on-track, with all PRTs functional and engaging provincial authorities.  4. (SBU) Operational highlights of the PRT after 60- days include:  -- All PRTs are functional and, with few exceptions, fully-staffed.  -- Comprehensive work plans have been developed. These plans integrate efforts of USAID, IRMO, DOS, Civil Affairs, and the Local Governance Program, and focus on integration of MNF-I and Mission initiatives in the provinces.  -- The PRTs have provided Mission with enhanced weekly reporting and situational awareness of political, economic, rule of law, and infrastructure developments.  -- Local offices previously established under Local Governance Program-II have been integrated into PRTs.  5. (U) Functional accomplishments of the PRTs after 60-days include:  -- In Babil, the PRT developed a joint Iraqi-US 90-day action plan that includes a prioritized list of small, high-impact projects to address constituents' immediate needs.  -- In Kirkuk, the PRT assisted the Provincial Council (PC) in developing a solid waste management master plan to resolve critical public and environmental concerns.  The PRT also assisted in drafting a local law to transfer authority for weapons permits from Coalition to the PC and for establishing a Missing Persons/Detainees Working Group.  -- In Ninawa, the PRT facilitated a human rights assessment of local prisons by the PC.  It also assisted the Provincial Reconstruction Development Committee (PRDC) Chairman in developing a comprehensive reconstruction plan for Tal Afar that resulted in an allocation of $37 million from the central government.  ------- ACTIONS -------   BAGHDAD 00000211  002 OF 003   6. (SBU) As a result of the review, Ambassador and CG agreed on a number of steps to enhance the effectiveness of the existing PRTs:  -- To address an immediate need to support engagement by the first three PRTs until a permanent PRT arrangement is decided, additional movement security teams will be provided by MNF-I so that each existing PRT will have two military movement security teams to augment the DOS-contracted personal security detail (PSD) teams currently supporting PRTs.  -- Ambassador and CG agreed to cost-sharing provisions by which Mission would take responsibility for logistical support for PRTs located on DOS facilities, and MNF-I would assume responsibility for logistical support of PRTs located on MNC-I facilities.  ------------------ OUTSTANDING ISSUES ------------------  7. (SBU) Acceptance and recognition are still needed from all USG elements that PRTs are central to capacity building at the provincial level and in the counterinsurgency effort.  To that end, capable local governments that have the support of their populations significantly diminish anti-GOI activities while supporting the federalist structure defined by the Iraqi constitution.  6. (SBU) Adequate movement security remains the largest area of concern for existing and future PRTs. Although the proof-of-concept PRTs have initiated their engagement successfully with the provincial governments and have met with notable success, DOS security restrictions have limited the ability of existing PRTs to interact fully with provincial governments.  Mission requires Washington to make a decision on whether dedicated movement security assets will be provided by Coalition forces, contracted private security companies, or a combination of the two.  Additionally, Post has asked for clarification on whether specific Washington authorization is needed (vice existing COM authority) to allow COM personnel to travel with non-COM PSD assets (e.g., Corp of Engineers or military contracted civilian PSDs) in order to increase flexibility of integrated PRT staff and to use resources efficiently.  7. (SBU) USAID funding for the Local Governance Program (LGP) is the critical component for capacity development.  USAID has front-loaded existing LGP funds to stand up the PRTs.  If additional funds are not obtained, it is likely that the program will shut down during the third quarter of FY06.  8. (SBU) The PRTs need supplemental funding or reallocation of IRRF funds dedicated to each team for reconstruction and development projects developed through the PCs.  -------------------- COALITION ENGAGEMENT --------------------  9. (SBU) Mission has engaged with Coalition partners regarding the PRT initiative and has met with varying degrees of interest from the British, Danes, Salvadorans, Poles, Italians, Koreans, Japanese, and Australians.  Mission continues to work closely with the UK regarding their lead on southern PRTs and anticipates a formal proposal from them within the next two weeks.  We believe that the Italians and Koreans will step up and assume a major role in PRTs, and we anticipate that others will commit further following a formal USG decision to move forward.  --------- WAY AHEAD ---------   BAGHDAD 00000211  003 OF 003   10. (SBU) The 60-Day Assessment has highlighted the value of PRTs to achieving success in our mission in Iraq.  The magnitude of the contribution that the PRT program can make depends upon the continued commitment of resources.  The issue of movement security and future funding for the LGP are the critical drivers. Continued staffing of PRTs with quality personnel with requisite skill-sets and dwell-time also is paramount. While these issues are being addressed, we have challenged our team to continue to examine PRT priority and location options that reflect the diverse regional security, Coalition, and battlespace dynamics.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000212  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  REL GBR AUS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2016 TAGS: PGOV, MOPS, EPET, ECON, ENRG, EFIN, MARR, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE FOR NATIONAL SECURITY DISCUSSES ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE CRISIS  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (A), (B), (D ).  1. (C//REL GBR AUS) SUMMARY: At the urging of Ambassador, the members of the Iraqi Ministerial Committee for National Security (MCNS), joined by the Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) responsible for energy policy (Ahmed Chalabi) and Minister of Electricity Shallash, met on January 22 to discuss Iraq's dire situation with regard to electricity and oil infrastructure.  The MCNS agreed that the GOI's inability to deliver electricity to Baghdad has reached a crisis stage; that steps must be taken to protect the electrical infrastructure so that generated power can reach Baghdad; and that steps must be taken to ensure that adequate amounts of refined petroleum products reach Baghdad.  The MCNS recognized that, in addition to security issues, the energy infrastructure system is plagued by problems of corruption, maintenance, poor planning, and lack of coordination.  It was concluded that the National Energy Council (NEC) must be held accountable for fixing these problems and that the head of the committee (Ahmed Chalabi, who will be ultimately responsible for its success or failure) must be given the authority and resources to implement the decisions and directives of the MCNS.  PM Ja'afari committed to issuing such an order.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Following recent discussions by the Principals Committee concerning the energy situation in Iraq, Ambassador urged PM Ja'afari to convene the MCNS to address this critical problem.  Ja'afari convened the MCNS at his residence the evening of January 22 to discuss a number of issues, foremost among them the energy problems facing the country.  Members of the committee present included Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr, Minister of Defense Saadoun Dulime, National Security Advisor Mowwafak al-Rubaie, MNF-I Commanding General Casey, Ambassador Khalilzad, and British Ambassador Patey.  The group was joined by DPM Ahmed Chalabi (who is responsible for overseeing the energy sector) and Minister of Electricity Muhsin Shallash.  Minister of State for National Security Affairs Karim al-Anzi was absent. Other topics discussed during this meeting are reported SEPTEL.  --------------------- "BAGHDAD UNDER SIEGE" ---------------------  3.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  DPM Chalabi presented a report on the current energy situation.  "The electrical situation in Baghdad is deplorable," he stated, noting that Baghdad needs 2400 MW per day but is only receiving 850 MW.  Of these, 700 MW must be reserved for critical needs (such as hospitals, emergency services, etc.), leaving only 150 MW for residential use.  Baghdad is averaging at best only four hours of electricity per day, although the situation is better in other parts of the country.  Chalabi declared that "Baghdad is under siege."  Neither adequate fuel nor electricity supplies are reaching the city.  Although Iraq can, according to Chalabi, theoretically produce 9200 MW, very little of it reaches Baghdad. (NOTE: Our estimates are that while peak demand is nearly 9200 MW, theoretical production capacity is about 7,300 MW; and our current estimate of feasible generation capacity is only about 6000 MW, which would be further limited to about 5,500 MW by the transmission grid.  Recently, production has amounted to between 3600 and 4000 MW. END NOTE.)  Chalabi asserted that the three lines that supply power to the city from the north, two running from Bayji to Baghdad west of the Tigris, and a third from Bayji to Baghdad via Kirkuk east of the Tigris, are frequently interdicted; and he asserted that currently all three are down due to terrorist activities.  (NOTE: MNF-I insists that this statement is not true.  Two of the three lines were down, one of which was due to high winds.  END NOTE.)  4. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Chalabi said that these lines are difficult to repair when they are down, adding that the Ministry of Electricity (MOE) has run out of spare towers to replace those that are blown up or pulled down.  The temporary towers that are being fabricated on-site are not satisfactory for long-term use, he added. (NOTE: The USG has provided and continues to provide many replacement towers funded by IRRF, including at least thirty within the past few  BAGHDAD 00000212  002 OF 004   weeks.  END NOTE.)  Also, when the towers are repaired they are invariably brought down again.  Work crews assigned to repair the damaged lines are too afraid to do the work, Chalabi explained, as they have been the subject of attack in the field and intimidation at home.  Chalabi said that military forces stationed near the electrical corridors have been ineffective at preventing attacks -- including nearby Strategic Infrastructure Battalions (SIBs), which are tasked with protecting the oil infrastructure, not electrical lines.  Many of the attacks occur in the same areas, and Chalabi concluded that the methods employed to protect the electrical grid have proved ineffective and that there is a disparity in the protection afforded oil and electrical infrastructure. Whereas the oil lines are protected by SIBs with over 5,000 individuals, Chalabi lamented, the MOE relies on fewer than 300 people, most of whom are contractors who are not accountable to any ministry.  (NOTE: We are not sure where Chalabi gets these figures.  The Electrical Protective Security Service, which is part of the MOE, is much larger than 300 people.  In addition, we understand that SIBs are protecting electrical transmission facilities in some areas. END NOTE.)  ----------- WHAT TO DO? -----------  5. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Chalabi suggested that three steps must be taken to begin to remedy the situation:  -- First, more and better-trained forces must be made available to protect both electrical and oil infrastructure. The SIBs must be better trained, provided with equipment that allows them to be more mobile, and brought under the command and control of the Ministry of Defense (MOD).  (NOTE: This is already being done.  END NOTE.)  Furthermore, the SIBs also should be directed to take responsibility for electrical, as well as oil, infrastructure.  It was agreed that the Ministry of Interior (MOI) does not have adequate forces in rural areas to make a contribution to this effort.  -- Second, mobile repair teams must be created.  These teams would live on Iraqi army bases and be accompanied to work sites by adequate protective forces.  Chalabi noted that MNF-I has made arrangements to provide for these crews but the Iraqi government has failed to create them.  In addition, adequate supplies of spare parts and the equipment needed to effectuate rapid repairs must be procured and pre-positioned.   -- Third, intelligence-gathering efforts aimed at those who would attack energy infrastructure must be stepped up.  These efforts must be directed not only against terrorists and insurgents but also toward the criminals, smugglers, and saboteurs who prey on the system for reasons unrelated to the insurgency.  On the subject of corruption, Chalabi gave two examples of SIB commanders who had been found by MOD investigators to be corrupt; once they had been removed from command and arrested, the situations improved in their sectors.  Chalabi pointed out that there is broad consensus on these points, noting that Iraqi, MNF-I, Embassy, and IRMO representatives addressing these problems have all agreed.  6. (C//REL GBR AUS)  In addition to the above steps, Chalabi recommended commissioning a security assessment from a company knowledgeable about protecting linear infrastructure in a war zone.  In the meantime, he said, SIBs and other forces (including Iraqi and Coalition forces) should be redeployed to protect the lines more effectively; air surveillance should be stepped up; and those who are responsible for attacking the lines should be pursued more aggressively.  ------------- FUEL PRODUCTS -------------  7. (C//REL GBR AUS) Another critical problem is supplying Baghdad with the necessary fuel supplies.  Chalabi reported that current national demand for fuel is 19 million liters per day.  Production is currently at 8.4 million liters --  BAGHDAD 00000212  003 OF 004   six million of which are produced at Bayji.  Production at Bayji can be increased to nine million liters a day, he reported, but the problem remains getting sufficient product to Baghdad.  The 22-inch product line that runs from Bayji to Baghdad has been interdicted repeatedly, and a decision has been made not to repair it at this time.  Instead, fuel will be trucked from Bayji to Baghdad in tankers.  There are approximately 5,000 tanker trucks in Iraq, 1,000 of which are owned by the government.  It will take a commitment of 300 of these trucks to assure a steady flow of fuel to Baghdad in the amounts required, Chalabi stated.  8. (C//REL GBR AUS) With regard to petroleum exports, Chalabi said the 40-inch line that runs from Kirkuk to Bayji is now operational and oil is being stored in tanks near Bayji for export through Turkey.  (NOTE: The repairs on the 40-inch crude line are not complete yet.  After completing the major repair at the Zagatoon Canal, several leaks were found, including major leaks at the flanges of the newly repaired lines.  Further repairs are underway and are expected to take at least two weeks.  END NOTE.)  In the south, Iraq is exporting approximately 1.4 million barrels per day -- 600,000 barrels short of expectations.  The problems exporting oil from the south have nothing to do with security.  Rather, they are caused by production problems, a lack of sufficient tug boat capacity, and insufficient storage facilities.  9. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Concerning arrears due to Turkish companies for the purchase of fuel to meet Iraq's shortfall, Chalabi reported that $150 million of an $850 million bill has been paid, leaving $700 million due.  A major problem is that the Iraqi State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO) has been spending money to purchase fuel from Turkish companies without the legal authority to do so and has exceeded its 2005 budget by $3 billion.  The GOI is obligated to pay these amounts, but this cannot go on.  Chalabi and the Minister of Finance are working to set up a system whereby Turkish companies would only sell to Iraq based on revolving letters of credit to be established at the Trade Bank of Iraq.  This could allow Iraq to keep these costs under better control and thus within budget. (See SEPTEL on Ministry of Finance views on the fuel arrears problem.)  --------------------------------------- IMPLEMENTATION, COORDINATION, AUTHORITY ---------------------------------------  10. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Chalabi lamented that, despite the agreement on what needs to be done to solve all of the problems discussed above, the government is unable to take action.  With regard to coordination, the group discussed the ineffectiveness of the Provincial Joint Coordination Centers (PJCCs).  It was noted that although the PJCCs are supposed to coordinate all repair and security activities pertaining to infrastructure, they are currently incapable of doing so. This is mainly because the PJCCs are not staffed properly by employees from the ministries involved.  11. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ambassador agreed that the energy infrastructure problem is a critical issue for the government and that the inability to export reliably the maximum possible quantity of crude oil puts at risk the GOI's ability to fund Its activities.  Despite the work of Chalabi's NEC, the situation seems to have gotten worse.  GEN Casey noted that none of the issues discussed at this meeting were new, that there is a committee at the ministerial level, and that MNF-I has been engaged and has taken significant steps to help address these problems.  Casey added that attacks on infrastructure have declined, and the problem of delivering power and fuel to Baghdad is multi-faceted and will not be solved by focusing only on security.  Significant shortages also are caused by scheduled and unscheduled maintenance, he concluded.  ---------------- THE WAY FORWARD? ----------------  12.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  All the members of the MCNS agreed that a major problem is within the Iraqi government -- the lack of a single, accountable individual who has both the responsibility and the authority to implement the decisions  BAGHDAD 00000212  004 OF 004   of the NEC.  Currently, only the PM can order ministries to take the types of actions necessary, but he is too busy with other matters.  However, this power can be delegated, and it was determined that this authority should go to Chalabi, since he is chairman of the NEC.  PM Ja'afari concluded the discussion by affirming that he will issue the order to get this done.  ------- COMMENT -------  13. (C//REL GBR AUS)  COMMENT: We are encouraged that the Ambassador was able to get the MCNS to focus on a problem that continues to worsen despite efforts to make progress. The decision to give one person the authority to do what is necessary to address the problem was easily agreed upon, but implementation will continue to be a major challenge.  In fact, the need to protect energy infrastructure was one of the points originally enumerated in the PM's twelve-point security plan promulgated in July 2005.  At that time, responsibility for this task was given to Chalabi, with the exception of protecting oil facilities, which was to fall to the MOD.  The members of the MCNS seemed hesitant to give Chalabi too much authority at that time, but things clearly have changed.  We hope that he will be given the power to direct the ministers of energy agencies to take steps immediately, for example, to hire mobile repair crews, to staff and utilize the PJCCs, and to enforce a ban on refined products exports.  Embassy and MNF-I will seek another NEC meeting to follow up.  As of January 24, Chalabi reported that he had not yet received written authority from Ja'afari to direct the activities of the MOO or MOE.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000215  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, PHUM, IZ SUBJECT: WITH COMPETING PROGRAMS, UNITY GOVERNMENT WILL TAKE TIME TO ASSEMBLE SAYS TAWAFFUQ LEADER  REF: BAGHDAD 195  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).   1.  (C)  Summary:  One of Iraq's top Sunni Arab political leaders, Tariq al-Hashemi, told us January 25 that while his constitutents are not happy with the election process, he will move forward on unity government talks.  He anticipated difficulties finding common ground with the Kurds and the Shia Islamists on a government program.  He underlined that security is the top issue for the Tawaffuq leadership.  He hoped constitutional issues like federalism could be put off (since he knows he'll lose any vote in the parliament).  A senior member of the Shia Islamist Coalition, meanwhile, told us that the Coalition will work for a unity government even though a deal with the Kurds is "legally sufficient" to stand up a government.  He brushed off Sunni Arab worries about militia-driven killings and said the Shia Coalition will bring its own security concerns --  Sunni Arab religious extremists and ex- Baathists -- to the negotiating table.   Discussions between the political blocs are still in their early stages, but already the future of the Interior Ministry is shaping up as one of the contentious issues.  For the Sunni Arab political bloc, it might be the make-or-break issue. End Summary.  ----------------------------------------- SUNNI ARABS STILL GRUMPING ABOUT ELECTION -----------------------------------------  2.  (C)  Tariq al-Hashemi of the Tawaffuq Front told us January 25 that the Sunni Arab community is still unhappy with the election results.  The fraud, especially in the South, was well documented and the IECI did not investigate the complaints properly, he claimed.  He sought compensation - either extra seats awarded from the 45 compensatory seats or extra ministries in the government. PolCouns told Hashimi that the IMIE report provided recommendations on how to improve the complaints process and better ensure IECI staff obeyed the boundries of propriety.  The U.S. would support IECI and UN effort to implement those recommendations.  PolCouns cautioned, however, that the U.S. had no plan to intervene to boost up Tawaffuq's seat total, whatever it turns out to be.  ---------------------------------------- SECURITY, NOT THE CONSTITUTION, IS VITAL ----------------------------------------  3.  (C)  Pol Counselor said the best way to address Sunni concerns would be for the Tawaffuq to negotiate to obtain real power in the new government.  Hashimi said that he understood this and Tawaffuq will be seeking key ministries rather than symbolic political posts like the Presidency. While conceding that the discussions on government formation and ministry allocation among the political groups may take some time, Hashimi continued to point to security as the number one concern for the Sunnis. Something must be done about MOI Bayan Jabr, said Hashimi. People are being killed every day, he fulminated.  He claimed that 16 Sunnis were killed by people wearing police uniforms and driving police vehicles in Baghdad's al-Salam district on January 24.  The Coalition is doing nothing to stop the killings, pleaded an angry Hashimi.  PolCouns advised that a good police force and army are needed to protect the Sunnis.  Making sure that the Minister of Interior and Minister of Defense are non-sectarian professionals is essential.  Hashimi readily agreed and underlined that security issues top the agenda of the Tawaffuq Front.  4.  (C)  Hashemi said the Tawaffuq Front would not push the constitutional issue of federalism when the new parliament sits.  He readily admitted that the Sunni Arabs would lose a vote about moving forward on federalism badly in the next parliament as alignments stand now.  He suggested that it would be easier to form a national unity government with Sunni Arabs, Kurds and Shia Islamists if the debate on Constitutional changes (including the setting up of any new regions) could be put off for several years.  -------------------------------------------- SUNNI ARABS AND KURDS - NOT NATURAL PARTNERS --------------------------------------------  5.  (C)  Hashimi told PolCouns on January 25 that it will be difficult to reach agreement on a unity government deal with the Kurds.  The Sunnis and Kurds have incompatible  BAGHDAD 00000215  002 OF 003   views on the key Constitutional issues of federalism and the status of Kirkuk.  Hashimi doubted that the Kurds will be flexible on these issues.  A government coalition must have a common program on security, the Constitution and the economy, said Hashimi.  Discussions with Ayad Allawi are proceeding well and the prospects of a Sunni/Allawi block representing 83 seats appear good, Hashemi observed.  He asserted that convincing the Kurds to join the coalition would depend largely on the extent of American pressure. Hashimi readily agreed with ideas agreed upon by Allawi and the Kurds on issues such as a four-way unity government, dividing ministries into functional groups each headed by a deputy prime minister and ensuring each unity government bloc had representation in each functional group.  He liked the idea of a top-level national security council as well. (Comment:  his discussions with Allawi may be progressing, but Allawi apparently didn't brief Hashimi in detail on the discussions in the Irbil.  End Comment.)  6.  (C)  Hashimi underlined that opposition to the Shia plurality in the COR is not a sufficient bond for coalition government partners.  A coalition that excluded key Shia Islamist parties would only trigger a sharply negative reaction from the Shia and the Iranians.  Moreover, the option of breaking the Shia coalition seemed unlikely to Hashimi.  Fadhila's leader Nadeem al-Jabiri is also seeking Tawaffuq backing for his prime ministerial bid, but Hashimi dismissed the likelihood of Tawaffuq supporting him. (Comment:  Hashimi did not discount Jabiri on ideological grounds but rather in a rapid-fire manner in line with Hashimi's perception of the weight of political forces. End Comment.)  ------------------------------------- SHIA ISLAMIST VIEW:  DON'T LECTURE US -------------------------------------  7.  (C)  (C) Later January 25 Saad Qandil of the Shia Islamist party SCIRI told PolCouns that the Shia Islamist Coalition is willing to form a unity government that includes the Sunni Arabs, but people like Hashimi must stop claiming the Sunni Arabs have a "right" to participate in the next government.  Qandil sniffed that that the Shia Coalition and the Kurdish Alliance can practically gain 2/3 of the next parliament alone; they don't need the Sunnis, he stated flatly.  (He added that American insistance on the unity government theme grates some Shia because it ignores the legal reality.)  PolCouns said the math may back Qandil's argument, but excluding the Sunni Arabs or presenting them with a marginal role at the end will narrow the chances of undercutting the insurgency.  He cautioned that the U.S. wants the political process to dampen the insurgency, not aggravate it.  8.  (C)  PolCouns reviewed the types of complaints about the Interior Ministry raised by Tawaffuq in general, and the Hayy as-Salam incident January 24 allegations in particular.  Qandil denied that there are militia members operating in the guise of the Interior Ministry.  He suggested that those responsible for the killings were Sunni religious extremists (takfiris) in police garb. PolCouns rejoined that no other part of the political spectrum outside SCIRI believed that.  It would be best to address the credibility problem at the Interior Ministry directly, he advised.  PolCouns noted that the Sunni Arabs might be flexible about the next minister as long as it was a person with subject expertise and no sectarian agenda. Qandil insisted that the Shia Islamist Coalition would demand a Shia as Interior Minister.  He pointed to the many terror attacks on Shia and stated that the Shia are the real victims of violence, not the Sunni Arabs.  PolCouns urged Qandil to consider also how to use deputy minister positions in the negotiations to enhance the chances of a deal.  ------------------------------ THE PM CHOICE WILL BE - JAFARI ? ------------------------------  9.  (C) Qandil told PolCouns that negotiations to choose the next Prime Minister would be more difficult than in the spring of 2005.  Qandil said the Shia Coalition would not vote to settle the Jafari-Abd al-Mahdi competition because the tight margin of whatever result came out would be very divisive.  Qandil commented that he thought PM Ja'fari is the frontrunner, but Abd al-Mahdi would make a better Prime Minister.  Qandil discounted the possibility of a compromise candidate, such as Fadhila's Nadeem Jabiri or Deputy TNA Speaker Husayn Shahristani, getting the nod.   BAGHDAD 00000215  003 OF 003   ------- COMMENT -------  10.  (C)  Both Hashimi and Qandil agreed on the importance of a unity government, but we doubt the Shia Islamists and Tawaffuq will agree on much after that.  Notably, feelings run high among members of both the Shia Islamist Coalition the Sunni Arab Tawaffuq Front about the Interior Ministry and security problems.  Even once we get past the prime minister choice and the Presidency Council, we can expect an sharp fight over the choice of the Interior Minister. Indeed, it is easy to imagine the Tawaffuq Front quickly threatening to walk out of the unity government talks unless they get satisfaction on the choice of the Interior Minister.  We are quietly gathering names of possible choices should we need them later. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000217  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR DSS/DS, DS/IP/NEA, DS/IP/ITA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2016 TAGS: ASEC, IZ SUBJECT: POSSIBLE SURFACE-TO-AIR MISSILE ATTACK AGAINST COALITION AIRCRAFT   Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission David M. Satterfield for Reason 1.4 (b).  1. (S) SUMMARY: On January 23, 2006 at about 1411 hours local time, a possible surface-to-air missile (SAM) was fired at a Coalition aircraft eight miles southwest of Baghdad International Airport (BIAP).  Countermeasures were deployed and a possible detonation 100 meters from the aircraft was reported.  There were no injuries to crew or damage to the aircraft.  The aircraft continued on to Kuwait without further incident.  END SUMMARY.  --------------- Attack Sequence ---------------  2. (S) A United States Air Force C-12 aircraft (twin engine turbo propeller passenger aircraft) call sign, Pat 24 (Tail # 40325) was set to transport four passengers from BIAP to Ali Al Salem, Kuwait on January 23, 2006.  The aircraft departed Ali Al Salem at 0930 hours local time and arrived at BIAP at 1100 hours to pick up U.S. military passengers.  The aircraft was scheduled to return at 1200.  The crew waited for hours, but the passengers did not show up and the aircraft departed BIAP at 1407 hours.  3. (S) At approximately 1411 hours, the crew received a missile alert on the Common Missile Warning System.  They received indications of a missile approaching the left rear of the aircraft.  The aircraft was at 5,800 feet and traveling at 160 knots.  The system dispensed 15 flares or chaff.  After the flares dispensed, the pilots heard and felt the concussion of an explosion on the left side of the aircraft.  The pilot's estimate is that the explosion was approximately 100 meters from the aircraft.  There were no injuries or damage, and the aircraft returned to Ali Al Salem without further incident.  -------------- Past Incidents --------------  4. (S) On January 16, 2006 at about 0820 hours local time, a U.S. Army AH-64 attack helicopter was shot down by a SAM in Northern Baghdad.  Both crew members were killed, and the helicopter was destroyed.  In the past six months there have been six other SAM attacks against Coalition aircraft in Iraq.  With the exception of the January 16 deadly attack, there have been neither crew injuries nor damage to any of the aircraft.  ------------------------- RSO and Military Response -------------------------  5. (S) The RSO is working in close coordination with the Multinational Forces-Iraq (MNF-I) Strategic Operations Center (SOC) to assess the type of missile which may have been fired, by whom it was fired, and its launch site and to monitor any developing trends.  In addition, MNF-I is reviewing the current "Safe Sky" status for possible readjustment, BIAP arrival/departure schedules for the next several days, and whether to reschedule or restrict flight operations in and out of BIAP.  Increased patrols, sweeps, and cordon operations in the vicinity of the suspected launch site are being coordinated by MNF-I.  Also, MNF-I is coordinating with BIAP Air Traffic Control a temporary traffic avoidance of the area where the SAM originated until a full assessment is complete.  6. (U) Any new information will be sent via separate cable. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000218  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: FADHILA LEADER JABIRI OUTLINES PLAN TO CAPTURE PRIME MINISTERSHIP   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Fadhila Party leader Nadim al-Jabiri, a senior figure in the Shia Alliance, lunched with Ambassador on January 24 and outlined his candidacy for the prime ministership.  Jabiri argued that he alone among the nominees for PM could count on support from the Sunni Arabs and Kurds.  He said he is convinced that a consensus candidate is needed to save Iraq at this pivotal moment, stating that the Sunni Arabs need to be brought in to key positions in any new government.  Jabiri criticized the Shia Alliance as gripped by an "opposition mentality" and asserted that he would withdraw his bloc from the Alliance rather than acquiesce to another Shia-Kurd governing monopoly.  2. (C) SUMMARY CONTINUED: Jabiri said he had conducted talks with Allawi, the Sunni lists, and several smaller groups and could pull together a 103-vote blocking coalition to prevent the Kurds and remaining Shia Alliance members from forming a two-thirds majority (183 votes).  With that bold stroke, Jabiri said he believes that the Shia Alliance would re-evaluate his candidacy and that several groups within it would turn and back him.  He agreed with the Ambassador on the idea for an Iraqi National Security Council that brings together top government figures on all key security questions.  He believes Ayad Allawi should take on a senior security position in the next government, and he discussed the names of several prominent Sunni Arabs for key security positions.  END SUMMARY.  3. (C) The Ambassador discussed the prospects for the next government at a January 24 lunch with Fadhila Party leader Nadim al-Jabiri, a senior figure in the Shia United Iraqi Alliance (UIA).  ------------- The Candidate -------------  4. (C) Jabiri told the Ambassador that his candidacy for PM is serious and that he considers himself the only possible consensus candidate for the position.  Jabiri claimed that he alone could count on support from all segments of the Iraqi population.  Jabiri, a former prominent political science professor at Baghdad University during the Saddam era, said that many rising politicians today were formerly his students.  His status as a respected professor and non-exile who interacted extensively with Sunni Arabs and Ba'athists, he added, makes him uniquely equipped to deal with all Iraqis and understand the state of the country.  He spoke at length about how repressive the past regime had been and how deeply ignorant the population is as a result of a long period of what amounted to solitary confinement.  Jabiri also noted that he is close with the Sadrist Shaykh Muhammad Ya'acubi (the ideological father of the Fadhila Party as well as a well-known Sadrist whose ties as a student of Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr were so tight that many consider him -- and not Muqtada -- to be the late ayatollah's rightful heir).  Jabiri argued that this tie to the Sadrists, combined with his ongoing relationship with Sunnis and Kurds, would make him a good consensus candidate.  5. (C) Jabiri said he had not considered seeking the prime ministership until he reviewed the qualifications of his rivals, saw their flaws, and decided that he personally had to lead a "project to save Iraq."  Jabiri is convinced that the period ahead is pivotal and that victory is by no means assured.  In his opinion, Iraq will either take a turn for the better or for the worse depending on the leadership that takes the helm in the months ahead and on the decisions it makes.  ------------------------ Problems With His Rivals ------------------------  6. (C) Jabiri dismissed the qualifications of his rivals in the UIA for the prime ministership.  Ja'afari is seen as sectarian and incompetent, he said, and Abd al-Mehdi is too close to Iran and SCIRI.  Jabiri said that he issued a public challenge for any candidate for the prime ministership to allow either the Kurds or the Sunnis a veto over his candidacy, and he said only he could meet that challenge among the UIA candidates.  --------------------- Problems with the UIA ---------------------  7. (C) Jabiri stated that he is prepared to split from the  BAGHDAD 00000218  002 OF 003   UIA to keep his candidacy alive.  He bitterly criticized the Shia Alliance as gripped by an "opposition mentality" that has led its members to alienate others, avoid national consensus, and act with excessive caution.  The same mentality had complicated efforts to draft an acceptable constitution, he lamented.  Jabiri, who previously told the Ambassador that the time is not right to scale back de-Ba'athification, this time said that he believes the De-Ba'athification Commission had overstepped its bounds in disqualifying elected parliamentarians and opposing a Saddam trial judge who clearly was not a Ba'athist.  ---------------------------------------- How Jabiri Plans to Block The Opposition ----------------------------------------  8. (C) Jabiri said that he plans to block any efforts by the UIA and the Kurdistan Alliance to form a government on their own with a rival PM candidate.  According to Jabiri, he controls 15-18 seats on the UIA list and could put together a blocking coalition that would add up to some 103 seats.  Such a coalition, he maintained, would be large enough to prevent the remaining members of the UIA and the Kurdistan Alliance from reaching a two-thirds majority.  (Note: A two-thirds majority requires a 183-member bloc in the 275 member parliament, hence 93  seats are needed to prevent a governing coalition).   Jabiri claimed that he could count on support from the following parliamentarians for such a plan, adding their votes to his own 15 or so to form a bloc of at least 103:  -- Tawaffuq (44) -- Allawi's list (25) -- Hewar Front (11) -- Kurdistan Islamic Union (5) -- Yezidi movement (1) -- Turcoman Front (1) -- Mithal Al-Alusi (1)  9. (C) (COMMENT: This appears to be a solid blocking coalition.  Only 93 "no" votes are needed and Jabiri can rally some 103 "no" votes.  Even if Jabiri were to lose the Kurdistan Islamic Union's 5 seats -- which could align with the Kurdistan Alliance -- he would still have 98 seats.  The Shia and Kurds would need to lure 6 more parliamentarians away from him to form a government.  They potentially could pick off Mithal al-Alusi and the Yezidi representative, but that would still leave a 96-vote bloc in place.  The Shia and Kurds would have a tough time winning over the Turcoman representative and three more politicians from the ranks of Tawaffuq, Allawi, and the Hewar Front to form a government. Jabiri's plan could only fall apart if the UIA manages to dismantle his own Fadhila bloc, which would require money, pressure, and religious betrayal -- all of which have combined before in Iraq but are still somewhat difficult to bring together.  END COMMENT)  ------------------------------------------ How Jabiri Plans to Capture The Nomination ------------------------------------------  10. (C) Jabiri told the Ambassador that he is convinced that the internal dynamics in the UIA would shift dramatically once he makes good on his threat to block a Shia-Kurd alliance.  At that point, Jabiri said, people would realize that his nomination is for real, not a bargaining tactic to secure more Fadhila ministries.  Then, Jabiri added, he believes he may be able to sway the sizable Sadrist bloc in the UIA to his side (some 28 seats).  (COMMENT: This would mean healing a well-known rift between Fadhila founder Shaykh Ya'acubi and Muqtada al-Sadr, both of whom claim to be heirs to the Sadrist legacy and leaders of the trend.  END COMMENT.)  Jabiri noted that the Da'wa Party, on the other hand, already is weak and pliable, and it would not have captured any seats at all had it not run on others' coattails within the UIA.  Jabiri claimed that he has a strategic alliance with Allawi and believes that, if the Sunnis, Allawi, and the Kurds support him, the rest of the UIA will come around to the idea.  11. (C) Jabiri said that he sees Ayad Allawi as a security leader within a future Jabiri government, telling the Ambassador, "you read my mind," when the Ambassador presented the idea for an Iraqi National Security Council that joins the top figures in the government and makes all strategic security decisions.  Jabiri recommended adding governors to such a body or drawing them in through a consultative committee. Jabiri agreed that Sunni Arabs needed to be treated in ways that addressed their "fears and their pride" after the end of some 1,400 years of dominance.  BAGHDAD 00000218  003 OF 003    12. (C) Jabiri also seconded the idea of dividing ministries into three baskets -- security, economy, and services -- and putting them under the supervision of three Deputy PMs or similar figures.  He said that he had heard positive recommendations for Tourism Minister Hashim al-Hashimi and Culture Minister Nuri al-Rawi, both Sunni Arabs, to take on positions as Minister of Interior and Minister of Industry and Minerals, respectively.  He also mentioned the prospect of promoting Sunni Arab Ministry of Interior Inspector General Nuri Nuri, a reportedly capable leader. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000219  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2016 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ENRG, EPET, MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: NATIONAL ENERGY COUNCIL PROPOSES WAY FORWARD ON ARREARS  REF: BAGHDAD 0210  Classified By: Economic Minister Counselor Tom Delare for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d).   1. (C/REL GBR AUS) Summary: The National Energy Council (NEC) agreed January 22 in principle to a plan put forward by Minister of Finance Ali Allawi to pay off Iraq's arrears to Turkish fuel suppliers over time.  Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi and MinFin Allawi were both adamant that the State Oil Marketing Company (SOMO) purchase fuel only in accordance with the GOI budget from this point forward.  Doing this could lead to politically unpopular fuel rationing rather quickly.  Mobile repair teams for pipelines are still not established because of poor communication between MoO and interested applicants.  The 22" product pipeline remains interdicted in five places in the area of TharThar; fuel is reaching Baghdad by truck.  Repair of electricity lines is hindered by poor coordination, and curfews preclude contracted security personnel from guarding the lines overnight.  End Summary.  2.  (SBU) Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Chalabi convened a meeting of the National Energy Council January 22.  Minister of Electricity (MoE) Dr. Muhsin Shalash, Minister of Finance Ali Allawi, Infrastructure Coordination Cell (ICC) Chief BG Kamal, Iraqi Army Chief of Staff LTG Abadi, Security Advisor to the Electricity Protection Security Service BG Sa'ad, Ministry of Oil (MoO) Director General for Technical Issues Samir Mikel, Director General for the State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO) Musab al-Dujaili, Ministry of Interior Consultant Dr. Abraham, Pol/Mil Minister Counselor, MNF-I STRATOPS, Deputy Director IRMO and Emboffs attended.  ----------------------------------- Getting - and Staying - Out of Debt -----------------------------------  3.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Finance Minister Ali Allawi told the National Energy Council January 22 that, after "paying off" Iraq's debt to Turkish firms (quoted at $870 million by the Director-General of the State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO), Musab al-Dujaili), Iraq must keep future imports within budget and turn over the bulk of importing over to private companies.  Chalabi agreed, adding "we cannot continue like this in the coming weeks."  Al-Dujaili said that Iraq would need approximately $350 million/month to keep pace with current consumption, which he places at five million gallons per day and of which gasoline accounted for some two thirds.  Allawi stressed the need to come to an agreement with Turkey about both the current debt and on a future payment instrument.  Al-Dujaili demurred, saying that he "opposed complex payment systems," but both Chalabi and Allawi were adamant: the Ministry of Oil can no longer incur such debt.  4.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Samir Mikel reported that one million barrels of crude oil is in Qorage at IT1A and another two million has already moved through the 40" pipeline and is in storage in Turkey (NOTE: the 40" pipeline has subsequently gone offline again.  END NOTE).  Al-Dujaili said that SOMO is exporting an average of 1.25 million/bpd from the south. Chalabi said that SOMO, for planning purposes, should plan on an average of 200,000/bpd exports from the north.  This conservative estimate (the pipeline can move 450,000/bpd) allows for interruptions due to interdictions.  Chalabi said his goal was 1.6 million/bpd total exports.  ------------------------------------ Mobile Repair - Still Only A Concept ------------------------------------  5.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Director General of the Technical Directorate Samir Mikel reported rapid repair teams for oil pipelines, approved by the NEC several months ago, have still not been formed.  Thus the 22" pipeline, interdicted in five places north of the TharThar canal - despite MNF-I forces killing several individuals recently as they attempted to sabotage the line - remains unrepaired because MoO teams are afraid to enter the area.  An exasperated Chalabi said that he had identified a number of skilled workers from outside the Ministry who were willing to work on the teams and demanded to know why these men still had not been connected with the Ministry.  Minister of Finance Allawi urged the GOI to consider bringing in an experienced foreign firm to study pipeline security and recommend appropriate actions.  BAGHDAD 00000219  002 OF 002    6.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Samir Mikel said that some 526,000 gallons of gasoline is being sent from Bayji to Kirkuk via the 8" product line and is then being trucked to Baghdad from there.  A smaller amount is arriving in Baghdad directly from Bayji.  Chalabi said that Baghdad needed just over two million gallons of fuel per day, of which approximately 790,000 gallons is imported.  He complained that the truckers are "working for themselves," alleging that corruption is rife.  Pol/Mil Minister Counselor stressed the urgent need to repair the 22" line in light of the cut-off by foreign suppliers of fuel imports into Iraq.  He also pointed out that, in the longer term, allowing private and foreign companies to import fuel will reduce the burden fuel imports place on the budget as well as the country's reliance on individual pipelines to stave off fuel shortages.  Chalabi said that repair and protection of the oil and product pipelines are his number one priorities.  He also noted that valves to keep better account of the crude/fuel passing through these pipelines could be most easily installed as repairs to the lines are made.  --------------------------------------------- ------- Electricity - Problems with Coordination and Curfews --------------------------------------------- -------  7.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Minister of Electricity Dr. Muhsin Shalash and Chalabi agreed that nighttime patrols - currently prohibited due to an MNF-I-imposed curfew - would be helpful in preventing attacks on transmission lines.  Chalabi said that electricity lines are more vulnerable than pipelines, and said that he would speak with CG Casey to allow the local tribesmen with whom MoE has contracted to protect the lines to carry out night patrols.  8.  (C/REL GBR AUS) The NEC agreed that the Tikrit Provincial Joint Communications Centers (PJCCs) had been ineffective in coordinating repairs on the Baghdad-Bayji West #1 400kV line.  While one break in the line was being fixed, it was attacked someplace else; in response to the second attack, the PJCC reportedly told MoE workers that "it could not help" them as they tried to reach the location.  Chalabi reiterated the need for nighttime patrols, and instructed MoE to purchase night vision equipment.  MoE Shalash said that his people are attempting to repair a large number of towers by the end of January.  9.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Comment: Allawi told us after the meeting that he already had GOI approval to approach Turkey with his incremental plan to pay off the Turks (Baghdad 0210).  He has two problems: the urgent one of paying off the arrears, but also the more intractable one of SOMO.  Neither the DPM nor the Minister of Finance have been able to prevent SOMO from making contracts to import refined products - despite repeated efforts to do so.  It is not at all clear that their views on controlling future SOMO purchases will prevail even if they manage to pay off the arrears to Iraq's neighbors. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000224  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2016 TAGS: EPET, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: VP ABD AL-MEHDI SAYS SHIA ISLAMIST COALITION SHORTCHANGED IN ELECTION BUT WILL ABIDE BY RULES  REF: BAGHDAD 195  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Summary:  In a January 23 meeting, Ambassador Khalilzad and Deputy President (and Prime Minister contender) Adel Abd al-Mehdi agreed that Iraq should take steps to increase oil production in southern Iraq promptly to boost Iraq's income stream.  Abd al-Mehdi said Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi already is working on this.  The Ambassador emphasized that steps need to be taken to secure Iraq's oil infrastructure, and he urged stiff penalties on saboteurs. Turning to the formation of the next government, Abd al-Mehdi claimed that the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq (IECI) had unfairly taken seats from his Shia Islamist coalition, the United Iraqi Coalition (UIC 555).  However, he pledged that the Shia coalition would abide by whatever ruling comes down from the Transitional Election Panel.  On government structure, the Ambassador recommended security, finance, and services as three "pockets" of government ministries, each of which could be controlled by a Deputy Prime Minister or a special representative of the Prime Minister.  Abd al-Mehdi said he could consider this.  Abd al-Mehdi promised the Ambassador that the Iraqi Government would do whatever it could to help secure the release of kidnapped U.S. journalist Jill Carroll.  End Summary.  ------------------- Electricity and Oil -------------------  2. (C) Ambassador Khalilzad on January 23 reminded Deputy President Adel Abd al-Mehdi that hours of available electricity have decreased to subsistence levels.  Baghdad has been hit especially hard by power shortages, largely because of interdiction of linear infrastructure and scheduled and unscheduled maintenance.  Both also noted that there appears to be a purposeful effort to strangle Baghdad. Abd al-Mehdi expressed cautious confidence in Ahmed Chalabi's infrastructure security coordination efforts, calling him "efficient."  Abd al-Mehdi emphasized that power plants must be repaired in order to prevent power outages in summer 2006.  Both agreed that Iraq also must make payments on the 1 billion USD in arrears it owes Turkey for petroleum product imports.  3. (C) The Ambassador recommended to Abd al-Mehdi that Iraq rehabilitate and uncap 60 oil fields in southern Iraq.  The U.S., for its part, has already invested 40 million USD to complete this project.  This effort would increase Iraqi oil production by 450,000 barrels per month, which in turn would provide Iraq with urgently needed additional income.  This task could be completed by the end of 2006.  Abd al-Mehdi agreed and said DPM Ahmed Chalabi already is working on this effort.  4. (C) The Ambassador and Abd al-Mehdi agreed on the need to secure Iraqi's energy infrastructure.  The Ambassador reported that three Iraqis were recently captured attempting to blow up an oil pipeline.  One of the suspects was the manager of the Bayji thermal power plant, and the other two were members of Security Infrastructure Battalions charged with protecting the pipeline.  The Ambassador pressed Abd al-Mehdi to impose draconian penalties on such criminals.  -------------------- Government Formation --------------------  5. (C) Abd al-Mehdi told the Ambassador that the IECI has allocated to the United Iraqi Coalition (UIC 555) fewer seats in the Council of Representatives than it should have received.  Abd al-Mehdi assured the Ambassador, however, that UIC 555 would abide by the ultimate ruling of the Transitional Electoral Panel.  6. (C) The Ambassador suggested to Abd al-Mehdi that security, finance and services may be formed into three "pockets" of government ministries, each of which could be overseen by a Deputy Prime Minister.  If creating a third DPM were not feasible due to the need for a constitutional amendment, the Ambassador recommended examining other options.  This could include creating a special assistant to the PM for the third pocket.  Abd al-Mehdi said he would consider this idea.  7. (C) The Ambassador and Abd al-Mehdi then discussed the Ambassador's recent trip to discuss government formation with the Kurdish leadership and Ayad Allawi (reftel).  KDP leader Masoud Barzani will soon travel to Baghdad to start  BAGHDAD 00000224  002 OF 002   negotiations in earnest on government formation.  Also related to government formation, Abd al-Mehdi put forward Jawad Maliki of Dawa and independent Kassim Daoud as possible candidates for Minister of Interior.  8. (C) The Ambassador informed Abd al-Mehdi that he had contacted Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr to help secure the release of U.S. journalist Jill Carroll.  Abd al-Mehdi agreed that GOI would assist in the case. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000225  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: NSA RUBAI'E TELLS AMBASSADOR THAT SISTANI HAS NO FAVORITE CANDIDATE FOR PRIME MINISTER  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Summary:  In a January 24 meeting, Iraqi National Security Advisor Mowaffuk Rubai'e told the Ambassador that it is not clear who will be Iraq's next Prime Minister. Negotiations on this could last for weeks.  Deputy President Adel Abd al-Mehdi and Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari are the current frontrunners for the job.  Grand Ayatollah Sistani has no favorite candidate, according to Rubai'e.  The Ambassador and Rubai'e concurred that security ministers must be agreed upon by all sides.  National unity is essential now, and public debate needs to move beyond discussions of strictly politics and security.  End Summary.  ----------------------------- Candidates for Prime Minister -----------------------------  2. (C) Rubai'e told the Ambassador that it is not yet clear who will be Iraq's next Prime Minister.  This decision could be weeks away.  Rubai'e also said that the United Iraqi Coalition (UIC 555) is not yet ready to turn to a compromise candidate; Deputy President Adel Abd al-Mehdi and Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari are still the two main contenders for the job.  3. (C) Despite rumors to the contrary, it is clear, Rubai'e said, that Grand Ayatollah Sistani does not favor any candidate.  Rubai'e indicated that Sistani might even be open to a candidate other than Abd al-Mehdi or Ja'afari.  -------------------------------------- The Shape of the Next Iraqi Government --------------------------------------  4. (C) Brushing aside the notion that a national unity government undermines democracy by over-representing the Sunni Arabs, the Ambassador and Rubai'e agreed that ministerial seats in a national unity government should be allocated in proportion to the December 15 election results and that none of the major groups should be excluded.  An important part of government formation is to choose heads of the security ministries who are acceptable to all parties and not tied to sectarian groups.  The Ambassador stated that perhaps in five to ten years these ministries will not be a source of sectarian tension, but for now the choice of who will head these ministries is very delicate.  5. (C) The Ambassador suggested to Rubai'e that the ministries should be divided into three groups:  security, economics, and services.  A Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) should take charge of two of these "pockets" of ministries, while a special representative of the PM could take the third. (NOTE: The constitution provides for only two DPMs in the first Council of Representatives.  END NOTE.)  The ministers in the new government should be competent technocrats who can deliver the services the Iraqi people need.  ---------------------------------- Raising the Level of Public Debate ----------------------------------  6. (C) Rubai'e told the Ambassador that it is necessary to raise the current level of public debate.  All that Iraqis discuss are politics and security.  Economic and social issues are largely ignored.  Sectarian divides could be bridged if Iraqis set aside their sectarian identities and discussed ways to rebuild their country.  Iraqi leaders who prove incompetent often raise the sectarian issue to divert attention away from their failings, Rubai'e said.  This must stop if Iraq is to come together as one nation and rebuild itself. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000241  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE PASS TO AGRICULTURE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2016 TAGS: ECON, EAGR, EAID, EFIN, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: DPM CHALABI ON AGRICULTURE AND FOOD DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM REFORM  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission David Satterfield for reasons 1. 4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C/REL MNF-I) SUMMARY: In a January 14 meeting, Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi said he intends to continue to push substantive reform of the Public Distribution System (PDS) while simultaneously reinvigorating Iraq's struggling agricultural sector in order to better meet domestic demand and reduce the country's reliance on imports.  He added that the GOI's success in making cash payments to each Iraqi family in fall 2005 (as compensation for goods not received via the PDS) "proved" that the capacity exists to push ahead with further monetization of the program.  Chalabi said he has instructed the Ministry of Trade to purchase domestically as many food basket goods as possible, and he has pledged to raise prices paid to Iraqi farmers for wheat and rice to match those paid for imports.  If Chalabi has an influential place in the new government and can sustain his initiatives, we may see substantive reforms across several sectors of the Iraqi economy in 2006.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ---- "Invigorating" Agriculture at the Expense of PDS --------------------------------------------- ----  2.  (C/REL MNF-I) In a January 14 meeting, DPM Ahmed Chalabi told DCM and Pol/Mil and Econ Counselors that the GOI had made cash payments to recipients of PDS benefits in late 2005 to compensate Iraqis for gaps in delivery of many products in the PDS food basket from January-August (septel reports on Chalabi's views on fuel prices and infrastructure security). Mosul, according to Chalabi, turned out to have been the most deprived area.  Chalabi said that the GOI issued a check for 39,000 ID (approximately $26) to the head of each family in that province, along with instructions regarding which specific bank would cash the check.  Other payments varied per province, based on what each province had been shorted during the period in question.  (NOTE: Recipients in Baghdad, for example, report receiving only 19,000 ID.  END NOTE.) Rafidain Bank received the lion's share of the business, Chalabi noted, processing over a million checks valued at $212 million (of an approximate total of $450 million).  3.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi said it is his intention to "invigorate" the agricultural sector.  He added that, with the exception of wheat and rice (which Iraq is currently incapable of producing in amounts necessary to satisfy PDS needs), the Ministry of Trade has been instructed to purchase domestically all commodities supplied via the PDS as much as practicable; the GOI will facilitate imports if importers agree to work at their own risk.  According to Chalabi, $100 million worth of commodities have been imported under the new system to date, and applications from a number of prospective importers are in process.  Chalabi said it is important for multiple players to get involved in the bureaucratic process, estimating that "within six months, the private sector could be mobilized" to provide the country with $1.7 billion worth of wheat, $500 million worth of rice, and $1.18 billion worth of other consumables.  (NOTE: According to Embassy calculations, Iraq only needs approximately $800 million worth of wheat for the PDS each year.  All basket items besides flour, rice, sugar, and cooking oil amount to $700 million at current retail market prices.  END COMMENT.)  4.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi said that the fall compensation payments proved two things: first, that the government has the capacity to reach out directly to Iraqi families; and second, that the private sector can function effectively to meet the country's needs.  Chalabi said he intends to enact a policy whereby the GOI will maintain three months worth of strategic reserve, selling it at auction each quarter in order to prevent price gouging.  He also said he intends to stop paying subsidies to families who make over one million ID/month.  ---------------------------------- Making it Pay for the Iraqi Farmer ----------------------------------  5.  (C/REL MNF-I) Chalabi said he recognizes the need to crack the intertwined challenges of subsidies, destroyed production, and underdeveloped agriculture markets.  He said, for example, that the Ministry of Trade pays Iraq farmers $400/ton for rice.  (NOTE: In fact, we understand that Iraqi farmers received $650/metric ton in 2005.  END NOTE.) Importers, he related, received $650/ton in order to cover  BAGHDAD 00000241  002 OF 002   shipping costs.  Chalabi said that he intends to offer local farmers the higher price to encourage production. (COMMENT: Chalabi's use of statistics is often a bit idiosyncratic. Although he has a Ph.D. in Mathematics, he often tosses off numbers for the sake of illustration that are not wholly accurate.  However, the point here is that Chalabi believes and intends to act on the assumption that domestic producers regularly have been paid less than foreign importers, thus depressing domestic production.  END COMMENT.)  ------- COMMENT -------  6.  (C/REL MNF-I) COMMENT: Chalabi's place in the next government is uncertain.  Despite his checkered reputation, he appears to be a bona fide advocate of fundamental economic reforms.  Yet, even with his current authority, we are seeing push-back on several items on the agricultural reform agenda.  For example, local media reported on January 19 that the Minister of Trade intends to avoid further monetization and has signed several "large" contracts with foreign companies to import food products for the PDS.  Furthermore, the jury is still out on the overall success of the GOI PDS payout effort.  Post has received reports of problems in several areas of the country where some banks did not have recipient lists and others did not have sufficient cash to distribute. Nevertheless, this first large experiment with monetization, despite its shortcomings, appears to lay to rest the view that it would be impossible to have an ambitious monetization scheme, given the rudimentary state of Iraqi banking.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000254  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: ECON, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: HUMAN H5N1 CASE CONFIRMED IN IRAQ  REF: A. 05 BAGHDAD 4384  1. SUMMARY:  The Naval Medical Research Unit-3 (NAMRU) in Cairo confirmed January 29 that the young girl who died January 17 in Sulaymaniyah Province had contracted H5N1 avian influenza (AI).  NAMRU has not yet tested the girl's uncle, who died January 28.  The World Health Organization (WHO) is acting as lead on international assistance to the GOI, whose response since H9N2 was discovered in Erbil in October 2005 has been disjointed (reftel).  The Embassy Avian Flu Working Group continues to monitor the situation and provide assistance to the GOI as appropriate.  END SUMMARY.  ---------- Background ----------  2. NAMRU in Cairo, which serves as the Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office (EMRO)/WHO Regional Reference Laboratory, confirmed January 29 that Shrikeen Abdel-Qader, the 15-year-old girl who died January 17 in Sulaymaniyah, had contracted H5N1 AI. (NOTE: Press accounts and official sources differ on the exact names of the young girl and her uncle. There is only one confirmed case of human H5N1 AI in Iraq.  END NOTE.)  The WHO had reported previously that Shrikeen died from bacterial pneumonia.  NAMRU has forwarded samples to London for a second confirmation and has informed the WHO, which will notify the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Baghdad.  NAMRU also tested samples from two women who had close contact with Shrikeen, both of whom tested negative for H5N1.  Shrikeen's uncle, who was in close contact with her during her illness, died on January 28. NAMRU has not yet tested samples from him.  3. According to local reports, Shrikeen lived in a district called Rania, which is located 60 miles south of the Turkish border and is known as a stopover for migratory birds from Turkey.  Shrikeen's family reportedly kept chickens in their home, and some of these birds also had died.  According to MoH/Sulaymaniyah sources, Shrikeen's uncle, Mohammed Abdullah Qader, lived in the same district but had no direct contact with poultry.  The same source said that Mohammed had accompanied Shrikeen in the ambulance from Rania to the Sulaymaniyah hospital, and that Mohammed said on January 24 that his hometown of Sarkapkan had been free of living birds for the previous 20 days.  ----------------------- Response and Assistance -----------------------  4. The WHO is acting as lead in providing international assistance to the GOI.  The Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) has requested 20,000 doses of Tamiflu (enough to treat 2,000 patients at ten doses per patient) from the WHO, and the WHO is responding through its representative in Kurdistan. In addition, the WHO is sending two investigative teams to Iraq and is prepared send more as the situation requires.  The KRG also requested 1,000 doses of Tamiflu and 100 individual test kits from the Republic of Korea (ROK) contingent in Erbil, which the ROK has provided.  5. Since the initial outbreak of H9N2 in October 2005 (reftel), the KRG and MoH/Baghdad have been working with WHO and Embassy officials to monitor bird movements and suspected AI cases.  USAID has assisted the KRG through its office in Erbil; the Embassy Health Attache regularly consults with MoH officials; and MNF-I has provided guidance on veterinary issues. Also, the Ministries of Agriculture and Health in Baghdad and Kurdistan have been conducting a media campaign to educate farmers and the general population on the dangers of AI and on the proper procedure for reporting abnormal bird and poultry situations. (COMMENT: A systematic lack of communication between the Kurdistani and central governments has led to suboptimal coordination on AI response and prevention planning.  In light of the critical need for a response now, donors should consider approaches to assist GOI ministries in their planning.  We are flying the Minister of Health to Kurdistan January 30 in an effort to improve coordination.  END COMMENT.)  6. Prior to confirmation that Shrikeen had contracted H5N1, only the H9N2 strain of AI had been confirmed in  BAGHDAD 00000254  002 OF 002   Kurdistan and Basrah.  The Embassy Avian Flu Working Group continues to monitor the situation and to provide assistance to the GOI as appropriate.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000258  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, KWMN, IZ SUBJECT: ALLAWI ALLY SAYS AYAD OPEN TO OVERSEEING SECURITY MINISTRIES  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) A ND (D).  1. (C) Summary. Safia Suhail told Poloffs January 30 that former PM Allawi would be open to a government appointment overseeing the security ministries. She added that SCIRI's Abd' al-Aziz al-Hakim is trying to establish a political marja'iya in order to remain in power over ever-increasing popular Moqtada al-Sadr. Suhail claimed that Tawafuq and Allawi will stay aligned during government formation talks. Suhail added that if the Shia Alliance decides to pick Ibrahim Jafari for Prime Minister, it would not be surprising if Fadhila Party's Nadim al-Jabiri and SCIRI Adel Abd al-Madhi leave the Alliance and join with the Kurds.  In that case, Suhail said that the Allawi camp would be open to working with both al-Jabiri and Abd' al-Madhi to form a coalition government. End Summary.  ---------------------------- First Iraqi Woman Negotiator ----------------------------  2. (C) On January 29,  Safar Suhail expressed excitement to PolOffs that she was the only woman named to the Iraqi National List negotiating team for the new government formation talks.  She said that other members of the team included Allawi, himself, as well as Rosum al-Awadi, Adnan Pachachi, and Ghazi al-Yawr.  Mohamed Allawi and Azzet Shahbander will be Allawi,s second tier interlocutors with Fadhila's Nadim al-Jabiri and SCIRI's Abd' al-Aziz al-Hakim.  3. (C) Suhail reported that Mohamed Allawi and Shahbander have spoken with al-Jabiri on policy but not about his bid for Prime Minister. Suhail said that everyone was awaiting Masoud Barzani,s arrival in order to start serious talks about government formation. (NOTE: Barzani arrived in Baghdad January 28. END NOTE) Although Suhail said she urged Ayad Allawi to stay in Baghdad to be available for talks, Allawi left for London and should be back in a couple of days.  ----------------------------------- Allawi Not Insisting on Premiership -----------------------------------  4. (C) Suhail was aware of discussions to create  a third Deputy Prime Minister position and National Security Council. She added that Allawi was resigned to the fact that he was unlikely to be Prime Minister and would be open to a position such as Deputy Prime Minister in charge of the security ministries.  Suhail said the UIA was still unsure as to who would be its candidate for the PM spot.  She said that the declaration that the candidate would be named after the election result certification was just an excuse to cover up internal UIA uncertainty.  Both Jafari and Abd' al-Mahdi are influenced by Iran said Suhail, though Mahdi enjoys President Talabani's support.  Suhail claimed that Da'wa is busy creating its own militia within the security forces.  ------------------------------ Al-Hakim's Political Marja'iya ------------------------------  5. (C) Suhail claimed that Abd' al-Aziz al-Hakim's quest for a political marja'iya is well known to the Allawi bloc.  She added that Hakim's hatred of Moqtada al-Sadr remained strong and that the SCIRI leaders wanted to win over Moqtada at all costs.  Suhail claimed that Hakim was aware he was losing influence to the more popular Moqtada; Hakim's leadership of political marja'iya would afford him a superior position over Sadr.  ------------------------ Delisting Not Unexpected ------------------------  6. (C) Suhail expressed her dismay that Allawi ally Saad al-Janabi was delisted from the candidate list due to de-Ba'thification.  However, Suhail said she understood why both Adnan al-Janabi and Rosum al-Awadi were delisted, admitting that both men had been part of Saddam's power circle and financially benefited from their relationship with the deposed dictator.  7. (C) Suhail did not offer PolOffs names of possible cabinet ministers.  She considered it premature since no decision has been made on who will be the next Prime Minister.  As for herself, Suhail said she wanted a real decision-making position in the next government.  She said she understood the dynamics of a coalition government could result in Allawi's group perhaps garnering only one high-level position.  BAGHDAD 00000258  002 OF 002   "Logically it will be filled by Ayad," she said.  She said serving in the Council of Representatives COR would be extremely worthwhile.  She added that it would be a pleasure to work with her colleague Maysoon al-Damaluji, to whom Allawi promised his seat if he got appointed to higher office.  8. (C) COMMENT: Safia Suhail is number three on the Allawi list.  She is one of the most outspoken female politicians in Iraq.  She appears frequently in the media.  She is considered part of Allawi's inner circle. END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000259  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: ZEBARI DISCUSSES PM CANDIDATES AND CABINET POSITIONS.   Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Robert S. Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)   1.(C) On January 26, Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari told PolOff that Fadhila Party Leader Nadim al- Jabiri's bid for Prime Minister is misguided. According to Zebari, al-Jabiri has yet to approach the Kurds with a deal.  From his conversations with several members of the Kurdish leadership, Zebari said they consider al-Jabiri the wrong man for the job because he lacks government experience.  Zebari added that al-Jabiri's push for the premiership has TNA Deputy Speaker al-Shahristani making a serious bid for the position as well.  Zebari said that Shahristani would have a better chance than al-Jabiri of becoming PM.  2.  (C) Regarding cabinet positions, Zebari said that the agreement between PUK Jalal Talabani and KDP Masoud Barzani remains intact.  Zebari deflected the question of his own aspirations in the new government and re-emphasized that the agreement between Talabani and Barzani does not allow for current Planning Minister Barham Saleh to become Foreign Minister, i.e. leaving Zebari in the Foreign Minister position. Zebari claims to have told the Shia Coalition leaders that the Alliance has the right to choose the Prime Minister without interference from the Kurds, indicated that the Kurds prefer current Deputy President and SCIRI member Adil Abd' al-Madhi over current Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000262  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, KDEM, KISL, KWMN, I SUBJECT: SADR CITY WOMEN COMPLAIN OF POLITICAL AND LEGAL LIMITATIONS; FEAR FUTURE OF "DARKNESS"  REF: BAGHDAD 3382  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (C) SUMMARY:  In a January 22 meeting with PolOff, three Sadr City women complained about the challenges women face living in Sadr City, including a serious erosion in their legal rights.  The women said that that it is difficult for women to be politically active in Sadr City because they cannot engage in politics or even have meetings without the approval of their husbands, or, in the case of single women, a male family member.  They noted that the Shia Islamist parties that dominate Sadr City politics have not put forth many women candidates.  Women who somehow "offend" public sensibilities can find themselves in an illegal Sharia court, while others can suffer an "honor killing."  END SUMMARY.  ----------------------------- The Limits on Political Women -----------------------------  2. (C) Poloff met January 22 with a group of Sadr City women including Soad al Lami, a Sadr City District Advisory Council (DAC) member and lawyer, as well as a recent Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM) kidnap victim, Nadam Hafidh, an administrative assistant at the Sadr City General Information Center (GIC), and Amal Kabashi, a middle school biology teacher.  The group said that while there are Sadr City women who could become political leaders, they remain invisible because of pressures/constraints.  They said that due to community pressures, women cannot hold meetings without the approval of their husbands, or, in the case of single women, the permission of a male family member.  The only way for women to engage in elected politics is through one of Iraq's political parties, which tend to be male- dominated.  3. (C) The group said that the Shia Islamist parties that dominate Sadr City politics often have chauvinistic agendas.  Women who try to be too independent are kicked out of the parties.  The group noted that while the new constitution establishes a goal that no less than 25% of the seats in the Council of Representatives (COR) are to be held by women, it makes no mention of provincial or local governing bodies.  When asked about the future of political women in Sadr City, Nadam predicted "darkness."  4. (C) Soad told PolOff that politically active women can be in great danger, telling how members of JAM kidnapped her while she was putting up political posters in advance of the December 15 elections.  She was blindfolded and held for several hours because JAM did not approve of her actions.  At the time of the interview she was still shaken by the events, and was reluctant to discuss the matter in detail.  -------------------------------- Sharia Courts and Honor Killings --------------------------------  5. (C) The three women also asserted to PolOff that there were illegal sharia courts operating in Sadr City.  These courts allegedly operate in secret locations and prosecute people for such "crimes" as drinking alcohol in the privacy of their own homes.  The courts also sometimes prosecute women for adultery, not covering their heads, and talking to men.  The women reported to PolOff that these "courts" hear cases based on rumor and hearsay.  Women accused of immoral conduct can be sentenced to death by beating or be banned from the community.  (NOTE:  Other contacts in Sadr City have told us about similar "courts" as well.  END NOTE.)  The group also told Poloff that women face discrimination in legitimate courts, e.g. in child custody cases.  6. (C) Poloff asked the women about the frequency of so- called "honor killings" - the practice of killing a woman who has stained her family's honor.  They replied that such murders do occur in Sadr City, but have been on the decline since the 1990s.  Soad, who practices family law, lamented that these crimes are to some degree sanctioned by Iraqi law.  She told PolOff that the maximum penalty for a man who kills his wife or sister in an honor killing is three years in prison.  7. (C) Honor killings can be incited by rumors and hearsay, according to these women.  Consequently, women strive to protect their reputations by avoiding public contacts with  BAGHDAD 00000262  002 OF 002   unrelated men.  Nadam told PolOff that her cousin was killed simply because a man dialed her cell phone number by accident.  For women in Sadr City, receiving a wrong number can lead to death.  The women also reported that sometimes husbands kill wives based on the often erroneous belief that their wives were not virgins at the time they were married. (reftel).  ------- Comment -------  8. (C) PolOff was struck by the openness and frankness with which these women spoke about these topics.  These women expressed the view that Iraq was at a critical juncture in its history, and women are losing out.  While these women dressed as conservative Muslims - they all wore the hijab- they appeared equally concerned about having their voices heard in the new Iraq.  As Islamic parties increasingly dominate Sadr City politics and squeeze out independent candidates, the women feared that they will find it increasingly difficult to be politically active. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000264  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: (U) RESIGNATION OF CHIEF JUDGE RIZGAR AMIN: SADR-JAFARI CONNECTION?   Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for Reasons 1.4 (B) a nd (D)  1. (C) During a lunch at his residence on January 27, President Jalal Talabani told Ambassador that Chief Judge Rizgar Muhammad Amin may have resigned due to pressure from Moqtada al-Sadr.  Talabani related that Sadr had sent a letter to Amin stating that a Sadr-connected Sharia court was opening an investigation in Rizgar's performance during the Saddam trial.  Talabani indicated that it was this threat to prosecute Amin after the trial that ultimately forced Amin to withdraw.  (COMMENT: According to the Embassy's Regime Crimes Liaison's Office, on January 5 Amin received a letter from the Council of Ministers which criticized the manner in which he was handling the trial.  A legal committee of Sadr's organization had submitted the letter to the Council of Ministers.  The Council of Ministers endorsed the letter and forwarded it to the Iraqi High Tribunal.  In response, Amin wrote a letter of resignation which he later submitted to the President of the Tribunal (Judge Jamal Mostafa) on January 9.  END COMMENT.)   2. (C) Interestingly, Talabani also asserted that it was Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari or a Jafari aide who delivered the letter to Amin. Talabani speculated that Jafari might have done so because of his indebtedness to Sadr's support for his candidacy for Prime Minister.  ----------- (C) Comment -----------  3. (C) Sadrist political figures have organized several demonstrations protesting the trial and demanding Saddam's prompt execution.  Embassy has a copy of the letter, and will follow up with the Prime Minister's office.  If Jafari did indeed deliver this note to Judge Rizgar Amin, it raises a concern as to the length to which a Jafari government would have to go to appease Sadr - and his militia - in return for his political support. In addition, the Prime Minister's alleged interference with the judiciary is also troubling.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000265  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: MEETING OF THE BAGHDAD GENERAL SECRETARIAT (BGS) DISAPPOINTS; ENTITY LIKELY TO FADE INTO INSIGNIFICANCE   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY.  On January 28, the BGS met with a proposed agenda including discord among its members, the group's purpose, upcoming provincial elections, and a future meeting of all provincial councils.  Instead the BGS Members discussed the absence of some members, salaries, and the need to raise money for the potential future conference of councils. Based on past actions and probable future trends, this group will likely fade away into insignificance when the Baghdad Provincial Council convenes its own conference of Baghdad councils.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) BGS Membership is comprised of all the chairmen of the district councils in the City of Baghdad and was created to provide a united voice for all of the councils.  This was the seventh meeting of the group.  Though the original meeting was attended by all council chairpersons, members of the Baghdad Provincial Council (BPC) and the local media, the meeting was attended by only six of the councils.  (NOTE: Meetings in the past have been attended by as few as four of the council members.  Karadah District Advisory Council (DAC) has totally withdrawn from the process.  Members of the Karadah DAC believe the BGS undermines the authority of the BPC.)  3.  (C) The meeting was called for the dual purpose of discussing problems between the BGS members and crystallizing the group's objectives.  The group had also planned to address the need to provide recommended provincial election procedures to the National Assembly's Election and Constitutional Committees.  Finally, the group had planned to discuss a future conference of all the neighborhood and district councils in Baghdad Province.  4.  (C) Except for asking the Embassy to financially support the conference of councils, the group addressed none of their agenda items.  Instead they criticized members of the group who failed to attend the meeting.  The members from the Al-Rashid DAC, who had been delayed by traffic, walked through the door shortly after the group remarked on their absence.  The group spent most of its time discussing automobiles and guns.  The BGS members said that members of the Baghdad City Council (BCC), which was dissolved in April by the BPC,  should return any items received from the USG while serving as BCC members.  PolOff said the Embassy would consider the issue on a case-by-case basis.  The meeting then turned to salaries paid to BCC members.  There was no further discussion of objectives, policies, or projects to improve essential services for the citizens of Baghdad.  5. (C) COMMENT.  The Baghdad General Secretariat (BGS), though launched with the intent of improving government representation from the districts, has slipped into constant discussions about pay and incentives.  Though quick to criticize other councils and group members, it seems impossible for the BGS to move past the stage of discussion into planning and execution of any topic or project.  Based on past actions and probable future trends, this group will likely fade away into insignificance when the BPC convenes its own conference of Baghdad councils. By stealing the issues and thunder of the BGS, the provincial council will ultimately cause the group to lose its political base for existence.  It will cease to exist with little fanfare. END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000267  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: MASHHADANI SAYS SEIZE MOMENT TO END INSURGENCY, BUILD UNITY  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D)  1. (C) SUMMARY: Leading Sunni Arab Tawafuq bloc figure Mahmud Mashhadani told Poloff January 29 that his group favors Nadeem al-Jabiri for the prime ministership but is more focused on the dynamics of the next government than its members.  Mashhadani said that Tawafuq strongly supported the creation a national security council for all key security decisions, and he called for creating joint committees in security ministries to follow day-to-day employment decisions.  Mashhadani recommended expanding the post of human rights minister as another way of assuaging Sunni Arab concerns.  With a national unity government of that type in place, he said, the justification for the insurgency would wither away.  He recommended setting a deadline for insurgents to come into the government or be considered terrorists.  He supported keeping the constitution as-is, but moving to establish "administrative decentralization" in Iraq before taking a step as drastic as federal region formation. Mashhadani cast the Tawafuq Front as a largely Islamist, anti-Ba'athist bloc that considered Kurdish secession essentially a fait accompli.  He emphasized repeatedly that Sunni Arab insurgents had come to consider the U.S. an ally, not an enemy, in the struggle against Iran, and he urged the U.S. to seize the opportunity to end the insurgency.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) Leading Tawafuq Bloc figure Mahmud Mashhadani and Poloff discussed government formation and the vision of Iraq's largest new Sunni Arab electoral bloc in a January 29 meeting.  Mashhadani is the official spokesman of the National Dialogue Council, which banded together to form the "Tawafuq (Consensus) Front" with the Iraqi Islamic Party. The group won  44 seats in the December elections and is by far the largest Sunni Arab bloc in the new parliament. Mashhadani offered the following views:  -- SHAPE OF NEXT GOVERNMENT: Mashhadani said Tawafuq fully supports the principle of a national unity government.  It considers the concept of a "national security council" to unite figures on key decisions to be the perfect solution to drawing support behind the next government.  Under such a formula, Mashhadani said, the position of prime minister becomes less important.  Mashhadani made several recommendations on ways to ease the path to consensus over cabinet posts.  First, he argued for expanding the importance of the human rights ministry in the next government as a way of assuaging fears of security service abuse.  He said the organization ought to be made a full ministry and the minister considered the bearer of a "sovereign" portfolio. Second, Mashhadani recommended that each security ministry be made to form an oversight committee including Shia, Sunni Arabs, and Kurds to oversee employment.  Lastly, he recommended that all parties agree on a government action plan.  -- TOP GOVERNMENT POSTS: Mashhadani said Fadhila leader Nadim al-Jabiri struck him and others as the least sectarian candidate for the post of prime minister.  Nevertheless, he said, Tawafuq would be prepared to agree with any prime minister the Shia alliance nominates provided a national security council is formed.  Mashhadani all but conceded the presidency to Jalal Talabani and said he expected Iraqi Islamic Party leader Tariq al-Hashimi to become speaker of the parliament.  -- ENDING THE INSURGENCY: Mashhadani said that the elections and government formation offered a major opportunity to end the insurgency.  The elections, he said, have removed a major justification from the insurgency.  If a national unity government is formed, he argued, a grace period should be announced allowing all insurgents to put down their arms and join the political process and security services.  After the end of that grace period it should be made clear that those who continue to fight are all terrorists.  -- THE "CHANGING" INSURGENT MINDSET:  Mashhadani said the Sunni Arab community had gradually come to the conclusion that Iran and its agents, not the U.S. represent the greatest threat to Iraq, not the U.S.  Most insurgents have come to consider the U.S. an ally, not an enemy, he said.  It is the Badr Corps they fear.  Pointing to his glass of water at the Rashid Hotel restaurant, Mashhadani said if a Badr Corps member had served it he would wonder whether it was poisoned.  On the other hand, he said, "when I hear a U.S. tank rolling down the street I sleep well at night." The key to dealing with the insurgency is recognizing this changing mindset and finding a way to separate the nationalists from the al-Qaeda fanatics, he said.  Zarqawi has succeeded with major  BAGHDAD 00000267  002 OF 003   financing in recruiting Iraqis to do his bidding, Mashhadani said.  The result is that the lines between al-Qaeda and the nationalist resistance are blurred.  The U.S., he argued, should consider funding the Islamic Army, a major Iraqi-only wing of the insurgency, to help it draw fighters away from Zarqawi and clarify the line between these two trends.  At that point, the Islamic Army could be reintegrated into the Iraqi security services.  Mashhadani lamented that the U.S. is incapable of looking "objectively" enough at the situation to see the merits of this plan.  -- DEALING WITH AL-QAEDA:  Mashhadani argued that the U.S. should seize the truce being offered by Osama Bin Laden.  The truce offer was a major mistake by Bin Laden, he said.  "You take the truce.  America is a great nation, it's not going anywhere. No one can question your power.  But Al-Qaeda, it won't be around anymore by the time the truce is over."  -- DESCRIBING TAWAFUQ AND ITS ALLIES:  Mashhadani said the Tawafuq Front is under attack because insurgent Ba'athists consider it a rising alternative to the Ba'ath for the Sunni Arab community. Mashhadani said that assessment is right on. The Tawafuq Front is largely Islamist and 90 percent of its candidates suffered in one way or another by the Saddam regime, he said.  The group was happy to see Salah Mutlak leave and form his own front because Mutlak's presence only confused the group's message.  Mutlak is a secularist, he said, and he is also a blatant opportunist who can be silenced with money or a ministry, especially now that his real political weight has been made clear by the elections. Mashhadani said numerous members of Mutlak's list have already defected to the Tawafuq Front and Mutlak is bound to lose more because he has embezzled large amounts of campaign donations.  -- KURDISH INDEPENDENCE:  Mashhadani said Iraq has struggled to find a place for the Kurds for too long.  They are clearly headed toward independence, he said, and they should be allowed to secede.  Kirkuk will almost certainly join Kurdistan because it is the only way for their nascent state to be viable, he said.  This issue can be solved politically provided the rest of Iraq's political struggles are worked out justly.  He warned against allowing the Kurds to manipulate the demographics in Kirkuk in a way that only drives the area's Arab inhabitants toward greater defiance. Mashhadani said he expected the Iranians to act to prevent Kurdish independence.  He said he believed that Talabani was in touch with Iranian intelligence officers and was being manipulated into allowing the Iranians a larger role in Iraq in exchange for Kurdish independence.  -- SLOWING DOWN FEDERALISM: Mashhadani said he believed that federalism was the right form of government for Iraq, but he argued that it had to be implemented gradually to avoid creating unrest and regional panic.  He warned that even the Shia masses are far from behind the idea, citing the Fadhila Party and Sadrists as extremely reluctant federalists.  The Sunni Arabs would rebel if the issue were pushed too quickly, he said.  Most dangerously, he said, Saudi Arabia would act dramatically to fund the insurgency before it would allow the rise of a Shia-dominated oil-rich southern region likely to support and train Shia dissidents in Arabia.  Mashhadani said he ultimately saw regions that joined Basra, Maysan and Thi Qar in one group; Baghdad, Diyala, and Babil in another; Ninewa, Anbar, and Salah al-Din in another; and the remaining Shia-dominated governorates together in a final group.  -- KEEP THE CONSTITUTION AS IS:  Mashhadani argued that the constitution should remain unchanged but the provisions for a law on federalism should be frozen, or at least fulfilled by establishing "decentralized rule." Under such a construct governorates would be give large authority to handle services while running the local police force.  Subsequently, two governorates could band together administratively. Eventually, regions would form and Iraqis would be made to understand that federalism was only an elaboration of the decentralized governance that had served them well.  -- HOW IRAQ CAN SOLVE THE ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN PEACE PROCESS: Mashhadani then offered what he said was a long range analysis on the peace process well beyond the thinking of his colleagues.  Only the Palestinian refugee problem is truly insoluble, he said.  There are simply too many refugees to resettle in the small amount of West Bank and Gaza territory.  The solution?  Mashhadani said Iraq would ultimately be prepared to allow Palestinian refugees to settle in the ample farmland that rims the Tigris and lies in largely Sunni Arab areas.  In one swoop, he said, the Sunni Arab Palestinians would find a home and Iraq would gain a greater demographic balance to Iraq between Shia and Sunnis.  BAGHDAD 00000267  003 OF 003    3. (SBU) BIOGRAPHIC NOTE: Mahmud Mashhadani claims to be the founder and current official spokesman of the National Dialogue Council.  He was born in 1948 in al-Tarmiya, Baghdad and is a retired medical doctor with a degree from Baghdad University.  Mashhadani's political awakening came in the late 1950s, reading Ba'athist pamphlets to an illiterate cousin who had joined the then-secret party.  Mashhadani said he never took to the Ba'ath, instead falling under the spell of Gamal Abd Al-Nasser.  Mashhadani was an avid Nasserist all through the Nasserist regime of Iraqi President Abd al-Rahman Arif, ultimately dropping pan-Arabism after the disaster of the 1967 war. In retrospect, he now says, Iraq would have been far better off had it never overthrown the monarchy. Mashhadani turned to Islam after his disillusionment, but he avoided the Muslim Brotherhood because of what he saw as an overbearing ideological framework that prevented free thought among its members.  He became a Salafist, a trend of Islamic fundamentalism, because he saw it as the freest form of Islamism.  4. (SBU) BIOGRAPHIC NOTE CONTINUED: Mashhahdani served as a medic in the Iraqi Army and then ran a medical clinic in Baghdad.  He was imprisoned for a year and a half in 1980 after expressing opposition to the Iran-Iraq War.  He was imprisoned in 2000 for a year on the accusation of contact with Iraqi opposition figures in Kurdistan, an accusation he admits was true.  Mashhadani says that he participated in a coup plot with Saddam's official doctor Raji al-Tikriti.  He says his role in that plot is still not widely known.   His uncle (named Fadhil NFI) is a former Ba'athist currently in U.S. detention. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000274  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, PREL, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: BAGHDAD PROVINCIAL COUNCIL: THE HEAVY HAND OF SECTARIANISM  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) A ND (D).  1. (C) Summary:  In the year since the January 2005 elections, the Baghdad Provincial Council (BPC) has fired officials, dissolved councils, seized offices by force, and ignored entire sectors of the province.  Sunnis are not represented on the BPC, which is dominated by Sadr City and/or SCIRI representatives.  Council composition reflects the framework in effect during the January 2005 elections, which did not provide for broad provincial representation.  SEPTEL will provide post's views on how the framework for the upcoming provincial elections could encourage a less sectarian/exclusionary outcome.  END SUMMARY  ----------------------------- The Problem is Representation -----------------------------  2. (C) In the January 2005 elections, candidates from Sadr City won 28 of a total of 51 available BPC seats. The SCIRI Party, with additional members from other districts, emerged as the dominant force in the BPC. This allowed the SCIRI Party and Sadr City politicians to virtually control all aspects of the council and provincial government.  3. (C) As members of the council became familiar with their positions and council responsibilities, they developed the perspective that the BPC was elected by the people and was consequently a more legitimate democratic organization than all other agencies and councils.  Therefore other agencies and councils could be ignored -- including the regional, district and neighborhood councils appointed under the CPA.  -------------------------------------- Government of, for, and by the Council --------------------------------------  4. (C) Prior to the spring of 2005, the Baghdad City Council (BCC) ran the city of Baghdad, while a regional advisory council (RAC) represented the Qadas (districts) outside of the city.  In April of 2005, the BPC "dissolved" the BCC (reftel) charging the city council members with corruption and incompetence.  The BCC took the BPC to the Iraqi Administrative Courts where the case is awaiting a decision.  5. (C) Following its move against the BCC, the BPC took aim at the Mayor of Baghdad, Dr. Alaa Al-Tamimi, who had been initially appointed under CPA.   Dr. Alaa had previously refused to accept the authority of the BCC over his office, arguing that the Mayor of Baghdad's Office was considered a ministerial position and not subject to BCC oversight. After the BCC was dissolved, the BPC began putting pressure on the mayor to start reporting to the provincial council. Just as he had with the BCC, the mayor bristled at the thought of reporting to the provincial council. The BPC fired the mayor in August of 2005 (reftel), accusing him of corruption and incompetence.  The mayor refused to step down and on August 8 the Governor, Hussein Mohammed Ali al-Tahan, walked into the Amanat and seized the mayor's office with guns drawn. The Governor occupied the office for about 45 days until the BPC appointed a new mayor -- Dr. Saber Al-Esawi, a member of the BPC and the SCIRI Party.  The council, in one fell swoop, now had control of the city administration and the budget.  ------------------------ Reaching Beyond the City ------------------------  6. (C) Having dissolved the Baghdad City Council and fired the Mayor, the BPC and SCIRI Party then looked to take control of the Qadas outside of the city.  In August they dismissed the Deputy Governor of the BPC, Zaid Tarak Ahmed al-Zawbairy (reftel) -- a Sunni Arab, who had been chosen by the Regional Advisory Council (RAC) -- in favor of a SCIRI member.  (NOTE: Under Provincial Council and RAC rules, the RAC was allowed to choose an individual to fill the position of Deputy Governor.)  Following this action, there have been no Sunni Arabs on the Baghdad Provincial Council.  7. (C) The BPC's push to consolidate and extend its power has not abated.  In December a special council meeting was  BAGHDAD 00000274  002 OF 002   called to elect a BPC Chairman.  Mazin Makia had been the chairman since the council was seated in February 2005, but Mazin was neither from Sadr City nor a SCIRI Party member. Mazin was defeated, and Mu'een Hameed, a BPC council member from Sadr City and a member of the SCIRI Party, was elected the new chairman.  Mu'een received 28 of 51 votes.  8. (C) In January 2006, the BPC Security Council accused the Baghdad City Chief of Police, General Abdul Rezak, of incompetence and failure to report to the BPC.  The General was fired, but is appealing his case with the BPC. According to Governor Al-Tahan, either the Governor, who is a SCIRI Party member, or another SCIRI candidate will be appointed the new Chief of Police.  9. (C) Since February 2005 the BPC has repeatedly told all other councils in Baghdad that the BPC is the only legitimate, legal, and democratic council in the province. The Provincial Support Team within the Embassy has advised the council to soften this position, but with limited success. The BPC continues to bully the regional and district councils. The provincial council recently created a Regional Council Committee to advise the provincial council on the issues and needs of the outlying districts, or Qadas, in the province. This was the role previously accomplished by the Regional Advisory Council.  The outlying Qadas are also largely Sunni.  This would appear to be a measure to replace the RAC which has a large Sunni membership.  ------- COMMENT -------  10. (C) Results from the January 2005 Elections were based on popular vote without provision for broad provincial representation.  This formula -- along with low Sunni Arab participation in the January 2005 election -- created the atmosphere that currently prevails in the BPC: entire districts and Qadas without representation and no Sunnis in the government. The BPC ignores the voice of entire districts and actively seeks to remove Sunnis in any governmental position where a SCIRI Party member can be appointed.  We can expect this pattern to continue if the framework for upcoming provincial council elections does not foster broad representation from within each province.  SEPTEL will provide post's views on how the framework for the upcoming provincial elections could encourage a less sectarian/exclusionary outcome.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000275  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI INTELLECTUALS WANT STRONGMAN, U.S. TO  SOLVE MILITIA PROBLEM   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  On January 28, the MNF-I/Embassy militia working group discussed militias or Extra-Governmental Armed Groups (EGAGs) with members of Iraq's intelligentsia.  The Iraqi participants agreed that the GOI has failed to protects its citizens and solve the EGAG problem.  Iraq, they asserted, needs a strong leader who can work with MNF-I to maintain order.  The main reasons Iraq has a problem with EGAGs, they argued, was high unemployment and the CPA decision to disband the Iraqi Army. Kurdish parliamentarian Faeza Babkhan told MNF-I Rep that the GOI leadership should publicly announce that EGAGs are destabilizing Iraq and call on all Iraqis to work together to solve the problem.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------- Strong Leader Wanted --------------------  2. (C) Ahlam al Jabiri, attorney and Law professor at the Baghdad University College of Law, Faeza Babkhan, PUK TNA member and attorney, Dhuha Ruhi, head of the NGO "Pioneer Women's Group," and Intedhar al Shamiry and Sumaya al Ruba'i, both Economics professors at Al Mustanserya University, discussed EGAGs with POLOFF and MNF-I on January 28.  Our contacts lamented the failure of Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and the Iraqi Police (IP) to protect Iraqis from violence.  The IP, according to our contacts, cannot even protect themselves, let alone Iraqi citizens.  Iraq needs a strong leader, they said, who can work with MNF-I to protect the people.  Such a leader must not be beholden to any EGAGs and must be willing to deal with them forcefully, if necessary.  3. (C) Our contacts said MNF-I must take a leading role in solving the EGAG problem.  The ISF are thoroughly infiltrated by EGAGs such as Badr Corps and Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM) members, and there is widespread suspicion that these EGAGs are loyal to Iran.  The ISF are therefore incapable of dealing with EGAGs, according to our contacts.  MNF-I must actively help GOI with this issue.  4. (C) A strongman is needed soon because the security situation in Iraq is deteriorating, our interlocutors agreed.  In addition to well-known EGAGs such as JAM, Badr Corps, and the Peshmerga, smaller EGAGs which amount to no more than common street gangs have formed.  In western Iraq Sunni Arabs have formed some small EGAGs because they fear for their safety and do not think the Shia-dominated Ministry of Interior will protect them.  ------------------------------ The Reasons Why Militias Exist ------------------------------  5. (C) Our contacts listed high unemployment and the CPA decision to disband the Iraqi Army as main reasons why EGAGs exist.  Lack of education and subsequent unemployment are perhaps the most important reasons why young Iraqi men join an EGAG.  Many of the EGAG recruits who fall under this category were once members of the Iraqi Army, but are now unemployed due to the CPA decision to disband the Iraqi Army.  EGAGs pay their members rather well by Iraqi standards, our interlocutors stated.  They also give young men a sense of identity and belonging; feelings which many people get from a job. Indeed, as our contacts point out, once an EGAG member can find a regular job, they often resign from the EGAG.  ---------------------------- Admitting the Problem Exists ----------------------------  6. (C) Faeza Babkhan agreed when MNF-I Rep argued that the EGAG problem needs to be addressed publicly by the GOI.  GOI leadership must publicly declare that this is a major problem affecting the stability of Iraq, and that all Iraqis must work together on this issue.  Only by working together can this problem be solved and peace and stability exist in Iraq.  ------- Comment -------  7. (C) Despite all the problems with electricity and  BAGHDAD 00000275  002 OF 002   fuel, insecurity remains the biggest preoccupation of our Baghdad contacts.  The proliferation of armed gangs and militias is a real public concern.  Our contacts were so eager to discuss the militia issue that they addressed the topic immediately; at the beginning of the meeting, they did not even introduce themselves to each other as is customary.  They expressed real frustration at the current Iraqi government's inability to provide security to its citizens.  Their actions and words underscored their deep desire to solve this problem.  Our contacts seemed very sincere when they argued that MNF-I involvement is essential.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000277  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  AMMAN FOR REFCOORD CLAIRE KANESHIRO CAIRO FOR REFCOORD GERRY CHEYNE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2016 TAGS: PREF, EAID, SOCI, PHUM, PREL, IZ, IR, JO, UNHCR, PRM SUBJECT: PRM-FUNDED RELOCATION OF AL TASH KURDS TO ERBIL IS A SUCCESS  REF: A. 05 STATE 180059      B. 05 BAGHDAD 3918      C. 05 KIRKUK 188      D. 05 AMMAN 6270      E. 05 AMMAN 297  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  On January 25, RefCoord accompanied UNHCR to Kawa to monitor and evaluate the PRM-funded, UNHCR-implemented relocation site for Iranian Kurds formerly resident in the Al Tash refugee camp near Ramadi in Al Anbar governorate.  All but a small percentage of the approximately 3000 Al Tash residents have now left Al Anbar for Kawa or Sulaymianiyah.  1273 Al Tash Kurds relocated to Kawa, where they seem to be settling in well.  RefCoord will work with UNHCR on ways to convince the relatively small number of individuals remaining in the Al Tash Camp and the Al Tash Kurds on the Jordanian border to follow their brethren north.  Meetings with local government officials discussed septel.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------------------- BACKGROUND ON AL TASH RELOCATION --------------------------------  2. (SBU)  The Al Tash Refugee Camp for Iranian Kurds in Al Anbar is no longer viable.  Security concerns have undermined provision of adequate humanitarian assistance and protection.  The Government of Jordan has been anxious to see the camp moved out of Al Anbar to northern Iraq.  Hundreds of refugees from Al Tash have already flooded into Jordan; the GOJ is concerned about future flows (refs D and E).  97 percent of the Al Tash Kurds wanted to go to Sulaymaniyah, to join some 2,000 former Al Tash residents who had previously been relocated. NEA, PRM and UNHCR wanted them settled above the green line so that they would not become pawns to increase Kurdish presence below the green line.  Efforts to persuade the Kurdish Regional Government - Sulaymaniyah (KRG-S) to accept the some 3,000 Iranian Kurds left at Al Tash ultimately proved fruitless, but the KRG-Erbil (KRG- E) agreed to relocate 2000 Al Tash Kurds to Erbil and offered an acceptable site above the green line at Kawa (refs B and C).  --------------------------------- CONCERNS OF REFUGEE COMMITTEE MEN ---------------------------------  3. (C) BETTER THAN ANBAR:  UNHCR and RefCoord held separate meetings with the men and women of the Kawa refugee committee.  The men characterized Kawa as a vast improvement over Al Tash.  One refugee said:  "We suffered there -- kidnappings, killings.  Here is very different.  We suffer only small things."  These "small things" included:  1) unemployment, 2) ID issues limiting freedom of movement, and 3) lack of drivers' licenses. The refugees indicated that although there are no restrictions on their movements, the Anbar IDs they have are not always recognized as valid by the local authorities.  Police at static check points near Kawa are used to seeing the Anbar IDs, but the mobile police patrols are less familiar with the Anbar IDs and sometimes detain refugees for several hours for investigation.  UNHCR undertook to raise the issue of the mobile patrols with the local authorities.  4. (C) UNEMPLOYMENT:  The refugees said that approximately 25 percent of men 30-35 have found work. Women are not working.  One refugee complained, "We came from Anbar, the main area of terrorism, and the people here are suspecting us."  He cited the example of a group of day laborers who were going with a contractor into a PUK controlled area.  They were told their Ramadi IDs were not valid there and if they tried to enter with them again they would be arrested.  5. (C) HEALTH ISSUES:  The refugees said health services at the camp are very limited, with a doctor on duty only four to five hours a day.  They have basic health care at the camp, but no specialists and no facilities for emergency care.  They have no ambulance, and lack drivers' licenses to allow them to transport patients in private vehicles.  One refugee said he knew of a refugee  BAGHDAD 00000277  002 OF 004   who was arrested for driving without a license while trying to transport a female refugee with appendicitis to the hospital.  The driver allegedly paid a large fine to avoid a one-month jail sentence.  6. (SBU) DESIRE FOR RESETTLEMENT:  The refugees were eager to discuss third country resettlement.  They wanted to talk about the details of individual cases which they said had been accepted for resettlement or promised interviews with various countries.  They seemed to believe that these cases were still pending.  UNHCR informed the refugees that there are no pending cases and that resettlement is not being considered for this population.  UNHCR undertook to try and arrange a meeting at another time to discuss individual cases in detail since resettlement can be confusing.   7. (SBU) CONCERN ABOUT VULNERABLES:  The men were concerned about the most vulnerable individuals at the Kawa site -- the handicapped, orphans, the frail elderly, etc.  UNHCR advised them that its NGO partner, Qandil, was compiling information on such cases.  UNCHR will formulate a plan for those cases when it receives that information.  8. (SBU) LITERACY AND TRANSPORT:  The men wanted adult literacy classes for refugees who had not been able to attend school as children.  They also wanted bus service from Kawa to Erbil.  UNCHR will consider the former and will raise the latter with the local government.  9. (C) PREFERRED DURABLE SOLUTIONS OF KAWA RESIDENTS: The men said there are three groups in Kawa:  1) political refugees, 2) those who want to repatriate to Iran, and 3) those who want to locally integrate in Kurdistan.  The political refugees want third country resettlement.  According to the men, those interested in repatriation would be interested in UNHCR assisted returns and perhaps 75% of the Kawa population want to return to Iran -- but only if the Iranian government is helpful on issues like identity documents, compensation, and jobs for returnees.  The men called on UNHCR to approach the Iranians on these issues.  The men had heard reports that some Iranian families who had tried to repatriate experienced "all kinds of problems" and have come back to Iraq.  10.  (C) KURDS ON THE JORDANIAN BORDER:  The men said they cannot help convince the 189 at the Jordanian border to move to Kawa, as the group on the border expect to be offered resettlement through the Ruweished Camp in Jordan like the previous group of Al Tash refugees who spontaneously migrated to the No Man's Land between Jordan and Iraq(ref E).  The men alleged that said some of the previous group were not registered with UNCHR and did not have protection claims, but were resettled anyway. UNCHR told the men that Jordan is never going to admit the 189 on the border and they will not be resettled from where they are now either.  The men indicated that the 189 on the border are stubbornly demanding resettlement because: 1) they have relatives in Europe and elsewhere who are encouraging them and 2) the previous group got access to resettlement through Jordan.   ----------------------------------- CONCERNS OF REFUGEE COMMITTEE WOMEN -----------------------------------  11. (SBU) WHAT THE WOMEN WANT:  The women of the refugee committee want training in sewing and in making flat- weave carpets (mahfouth).  They want literacy training, with the most interest in Kurdish and English and some interest in Farsi.  They want mobile phones.  They want courses in first aid, an ambulance, and a female physician on site every day that stays until at least 2 pm.  They called for distribution of sanitary napkins, clothing for those over 16, winter clothing, shoes. UNHCR said Qandil was preparing a list of vulnerable individuals for clothing distribution.  12. (C) SOCIAL CONDITIONS FOR WOMEN OF KAWA:  The women spoke freely about social conditions for female camp residents. Girls left secondary school in Al Anbar for security reasons, but in Kawa more girls attend high school.  No Al-Tash girls are in university yet.  Women  BAGHDAD 00000277  003 OF 004   tend to marry between 15 and 25.  Sometimes the marriages are arranged, but the youngest female present said that did not happen in her family because "my parents are educated."  If a woman refuses to marry, she is socially ostracized.  The women wanted to go on shopping trips without their husbands or male family members.  They cannot go alone now for two reasons:  1) The Ramadi ID cards were issued one per family and the male heads of households have the family ID card and 2) Their husbands won't let them go alone.  It is socially acceptable for women to go shopping in groups, if they can work out the ID problem.  Women and girls who do something to embarrass the family are sometimes beaten.  When asked about honor crimes, the women mentioned only one incident from 1999, involving a family whose abused daughter ran off.  When they caught her, they shaved her head and humiliated her publicly, and she went crazy.  She disappeared and no one knew what had happened to her.  -------------------- SHELTER AT KAWA SITE --------------------  13. (U)  Permanent housing is planned but has not yet been constructed. Shelter at Kawa camp currently consists of one concrete-floored UNHCR-issued tent per family, plus one or more concrete-block-and-mortar shed-like structures.  RefCoord and the UNHCR team visited one of these houses.  The facilities were basic, but adequate for their purpose.  ------------------ WATER AT KAWA SITE ------------------  14.  (U) Water is supplied by a tanker truck which moves through the compound filling individual water storage containers at each family dwelling.  -------------------- HEALTH AT KAWA SITE --------------------  15.  (U) The health clinic is contained in a large warehouse-type tent.  It is divided into several treatment rooms, a pharmacy, a waiting area, and filing area where the refugees' health records are kept.  The staff of the medical center told us that there is one male health worker on staff at night on a rotating basis, but there are no doctors at night.  The female doctor comes only a few days per week.  The facility was clean and appeared well organized, although only minimal services were available on site.  ---------------------- EDUCATION AT KAWA SITE ----------------------  16.  (U) The school consists of two more of the warehouse-type tents.  One contains the teacher's lounge, the administrative offices, and a few classrooms; the other is entirely classrooms.  School was in session during the visit.  The children seemed to be learning by rote.  The Qandil representative commented that "The Kurdish education system leaves something to be desired."   ----------------------- SANITATION AT KAWA SITE -----------------------  17.  (U) Each family dwelling has its own combined shower and Turkish toilet.  The one at the dwelling RefCoord and UNHCR visited seemed to be in good condition.  ------------------------------------ FOOD AND NON-FOOD ITEMS AT KAWA SITE ------------------------------------  18.  (U) The refugees appeared to be eating regularly.  A small number of sheep and goats were kept in mud-brick pens at the outskirts of the Kawa settlement.  A refugee remarked that the livestock was from Al-Tash, and that the number of animals was at present because the refugees had only recently arrived at Kawa.  A few chickens wandered among the tents.  Refugees of all ages appeared to have decent-quality clothing appropriate for the  BAGHDAD 00000277  004 OF 004   winter chill.  Some of the refugees, especially the women and girls and the younger children, wore sandals and socks rather than closed-toed shoes.  The other refugees wore sneakers or loafers.  All the shoes seemed to be in good repair.  The ones wearing sandals were otherwise dressed in a similar manner to those wearing closed-toed shoes, suggesting the sandals may be a cultural preference for ease of removal at the entrance to a dwelling rather than a mark of relative poverty.  The refugee dwelling visited by RefCoord and UNHCR appeared to be adequately equipped with essential non-food items such as blankets, plastic sheeting, cooking paraphernalia, and even a bicycle.  ------------------------------------ UTILITIES AND AMENITIES AT KAWA SITE ------------------------------------  19.  (U) Power lines were visible throughout the camp. Almost every tent seems to have a satellite dish.  Some concrete-block-and-mortar structures under construction are slated to become shops.  Overall, the tent encampment looked far more modern, and better equipped, than the mud-brick construction of neighboring Kawa town visible over the berm at the edge of the relocation site.  ------- Comment -------  20. (C) RefCoord evaluates the Al-Tash relocation to the Kawa site as a success.  PRM's funding for the project was only dispersed to UNHCR in late September 2005 (ref A), yet some four months later almost all the refugees have been moved out of harms way in Al Anbar to safety in Erbil.  The camp facilities, although basic, are in good repair and generally adequate for the immediate needs of the population until permanent housing can be built. RefCoord will continue to work with UNHCR on ways to persuade the remaining Kurds in the Al-Tash camp and at the Jordanian border to follow their brethren North to Kawa.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000281  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: HAKIM LARGELY AGREES WITH AMB,S GOVERNMENT FORMATION PLANS  REF: BAGHDAD 195  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  In a January 25 meeting, the Ambassador told SCIRI head Abdul Aziz al Hakim that he is focused on three areas of government formation: composition, structure, and program.  Hakim told the Ambassador that he agrees largely with the Ambassador's plans for government formation.  Hakim said UIC 555 will have a plan for the beginning of the next government's term, and he concurred that government ministries must be run competently and efficiently.  Hakim told the Ambassador that agreement with political figures, including Ayad Allawi, would be needed to form a National Security Council.  When Hakim raised concerns about the security situation in Iraq, the Ambassador lauded the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) for having improved their ability to coordinate efforts with MNF-I.  He also informed Hakim that Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Masoud Barzani will come to Baghdad January 28 for government formation negotiations.  Throughout the meeting, Hakim was in an agreeable mood and seemed well informed about the Ambassador's plans for Iraqi government formation.  The meeting saw no major points of contention between the Ambassador and Hakim.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------- Laying Out a Road Map ---------------------  2. (C) In a January 25 meeting, the Ambassador told Hakim that the next Iraqi government should have a 100-day program to give the new government direction.  Such a program, the Ambassador added, would be a way to hold the government accountable to the people.  Hakim largely agreed, although he said the program that UIC 555 develops may be for a period longer than 100 days.  Hakim noted that he is prepared to discuss such issues with KDP leader Masoud Barzani when he comes to Baghdad on January 28.  -------------- The Ministries --------------  3. (C) The Ambassador said the government ministers should be technocrats, and -- if it is necessary to dole out political favors -- the party faithful could be minister-advisors.  The Ambassador referred to the Sadrist Minister of Health as an example of the type of ineffectual minister the GOI should not have.  The Ambassador added the security ministries especially need to have non-partisan, non-sectarian leadership that is widely accepted.  Hakim agreed, emphasizing that anyone who supports terror is unacceptable to lead a ministry.  He added that the criteria for such positions have yet to be decided.  4. (C) The various ministries, the Ambassador recommended, should be grouped into three compartments: economics, security, and services.  Each compartment, he elaborated, should be led by a Deputy Prime Minister or a special representative of the Prime Minister.  Hakim agreed but added there may be a fourth basket dealing with social issues such as martyrs.  ----------------------------- The National Security Council -----------------------------  5. (C) Stressing the need to "work within the rules," Hakim agreed with the Ambassador that a National Security Council is needed.  Such a body, Hakim said, could bring together the President, Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers, the leader of the Kurdish region, and other Iraqi leaders to discuss big issues facing Iraq.  This body would not work on day-to-day operations of the country, the Ambassador said, but could embody national unity.  This body could be simply an advisory committee, or it could be a legal body that has veto power over the Prime Minister's government.  Barzani, the Ambassador noted, favors a robust National Security Council that is more than just an advisory body.  -------------------------------- The Need For a Strong Government --------------------------------  6. (C) Hakim agreed with the Ambassador that the next PM should show strong leadership and should be able to account for the whereabouts of the ministers.  The Ambassador stressed that the ministers do not work for political leaders but for the Prime Minister.  BAGHDAD 00000281  002 OF 002    ------------------------- Hakim's Security Concerns -------------------------  7. (C) Hakim mentioned he is concerned about the security situation in Iraq.  The Ambassador said he has spoken with Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr, who is satisfied with the level of MNF-I and Ministry of Interior cooperation.  The Ambassador said close ties also have been achieved with the Ministry of Defense.  ------- Comment -------  8. (C) COMMENT: During the meeting Hakim seemed unusually well-tempered and non-confrontational.  He seemed well informed about the direction of government formation discussions on the part of other Shia and Kurdish leaders. END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000282  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2016 TAGS: ELAB, PHUM, ECON, PGOV, IZ, IR SUBJECT: PRIORITIES AND CONCERNS OF IRAQI TRADE UNION LEADERS   Classified By: Labor Attache OHara reasons 1.4 b/d  1. (C) Summary:  At a rare meeting with key Iraqi labor union leaders in Amman, we challenged them to contribute to economic reform in Iraq, fight corruption, and focus on productive job creation. Despite their diverse backgrounds, the Iraqis agreed their deteriorating legal standing under the current interim government was their highest concern. They said that their bank assets have been frozen and that they were losing their properties.  A high ranking official in the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA) said that he believed that National Assembly passage this year of a pending new Labor Code (approved by the Council of Ministers last December) would help resolve many of the legal difficulties faced by the unions. End Summary  2. (SBU) Embassy Baghdad Labor Attache and Arab-speaking Embassy Labor Assistant met for over two hours January 15 in Amman with Iraqi trade union leaders. Represented were the Basra-based Independent Petroleum Workers Union, the Federation of Workers Councils and Unions in Iraq (Communist-Trotskyite), Kurdistan General Workers Syndicate Union and Iraqi Kurdistan Workers Syndicate Union and the General Federation of Iraqi Workers (the largest and most powerful union federation in Iraq).  Also attending were representatives from Solidarity House, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the ILO. The meeting was facilitated by the Solidarity House Amman office that had already brought the Iraqis to Amman for a two-day leadership development workshop.  ------------- Our Challenge -------------  3. (SBU) After some predictable initial venting against the US presence in Iraq, the discussion turned to what weighed most on the labor leaders, minds, namely their uncertain legal status under the current government. Overall discussion was animated. On our side, we spoke out for an integrated approach to economic reform based on anti-corruption, privatization, subsidy cuts and attracting investment both foreign and Iraqi.  Without improvements in these areas, we argued that job creation remained difficult.  We suggested that the union leaders risked marginalizing themselves if they tried to deny that economic reform in Iraq is urgently needed. Union leaders expressed enthusiasm for the discussion and asked for additional conversations.  -------------- Union concerns --------------  4. (SBU) We were surprised to be told that the number one labor union concern in Iraq today was neither poverty nor unemployment, but rather their allegedly deteriorating legal status under successive governments since March 2003.  Union leaders told us that they had hoped the CPA would have eliminated the ban on public sector unionization by Saddam Hussein and were disappointed when nothing changed.  Union leaders complained that CPA had tried to pick and choose a favorite union ) this was a mistake.  Furthermore, one labor leader said that he believed that the CPA had tried to keep the ILO out of Iraq and to prevent the ILO from trying to reform Saddam,s labor laws.  Union leaders were unanimous in condemning the labor policies of the current government. They alleged that government seizure of union buildings and freezing union bank accounts was a serious threat to the trade union movement's ability to collect dues or organize workers. The unions said that these measures are affecting both public and private sector unions.  5. (SBU) Less a threat and more a disturbing trend, they said, is that the leading political parties in Iraqi have been threatening the current independence of the labor movement by creating special labor wings to the parties.  In the South, religious parties are creating religions trade unions that have begun threatening already existing independent unions. Other union leaders noted that high unemployment made it easy for managers to find replacement workers. They alleged that this affected their right to strike.  Union leaders also complained that since March 2003, their occupational safety concerns had increased ) not only from what they alleged is the deteriorating security situation but the &large amount8 of radioactive waste left behind by the US military.  Also discussed and debated were privatization, the role of women in the work force, how to solve unemployment, the limits of centrally planned job creation, the importance of effective laws, the legal status  BAGHDAD 00000282  002 OF 003   of the labor unions, the importance of petroleum for Iraq, the negative impact of corruption on workers, and the need to combat increasing child labor.  ----------------------- Why Amman vice Baghdad? -----------------------  6. (SBU) Previous Embassy contact with the labor movement has been limited to meetings at the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs Headquarters building in Baghdad (also in the red zone but relatively safe).  Meeting Iraqi union leaders in Baghdad is complicated. First, Iraqi union leaders have been reluctant for security reasons to enter the green zone for meetings here (Bombings at checkpoints to enter the IZ do occur.) Other union leaders are overtly anti-American and do not want to be seen as associating with the USG.  Another problem, as one Communist Party member labor union leader told us, is that government of Iraq has begun seizing union buildings and that many unions do not have a place to meet us.  In light of all this, we recently asked Solidarity House reps if they could facilitate a meeting for us with the Iraqi labor movement leaders the next time they had them in Amman and they agreed.  ------------------------------------------ International Cooperation with Iraqi labor ------------------------------------------  7. (SBU) Working with the ILO and the ICFTU, the Solidarity Center has spent nearly two years bringing Iraqi labor leaders to Amman for training.  The ICFTU and Solidarity Center have consciously decided to work with all trade union leaders and avoid favoring one union over another.  ICFTU and Solidarity House reps, as well as Iraqi union leaders, criticized  a CPA decision to &select8 the now defunct Iraqi Federation of Trade Unions IFTU) as the &one8 officially accepted union.  One Iraq union leader told us that the brutal murder of the IFTU international affairs coordinator in early 2005 might have been caused by his high profile identification with Westerners.  The union leaders who work with the ICFTU, the ILO and Solidarity House come from the north, center and south of the country, as well as the secular and ethnic communities, the communist party and other leftist organizations. Solidarity House does seek to encourage these diverse leaders to speak with one voice to influence current economic and political debates in Iraq.  In fact, during the ICFTU and the Solidarity House sponsored meetings in Amman, the Iraqis found something to agree upon: opposition to the IMF and privatization (English language summary of statement blogged at www.jubileeiraq.org).  ---------------------------------------- Ministry of Labor: new labor code needed ----------------------------------------  8. (C) Upon our return to Baghdad, we raised the legal standing of the labor movement in Iraq with high ranking MOLSA official.  He acknowledge that this is a problem but said that a solution is in the works, namely a new labor code that "would bring Iraqi labor law into the 21st century." He said that passage of this labor law reform is a high priority of the current Minister of Labor and that after months of slow going, the Council of Ministers finally had approved it.  (He demurred when asked if we could see a copy.)  The next step will be to get National Assembly approval.  Both the ICFTU and Solidarity House have urged that this new labor code be approved soonest.  They believe that this new law could provide the basis, as one rep told us, &the only free and independent trade union movement in Arab Mid-East region.  ------------------------------------------- Unions: less independent and less national? -------------------------------------------  9. (SBU) Comment:  The Iraqi labor movement has been intensely political with strong ties to political parties. Unions have also sought to be organized nationally across sectarian or regional lines.  Even under Saddam, many union leaders were Communists while others made their peace with the ruling Baathist party.  Today many Union leaders still maintain strong ideological and political party ties.  In the case of the southern-based unions, there is a new element in the mix, namely growing relations with Iranians.  One of the goals of Solidarity House is to foment independent trade unions that focus on bread and better issues and are independent of external ties whether it be to Iran, Turkey, or Syria.  This will be a difficult task, as even among the few labor leaders we met, we saw a hints of a growing focus  BAGHDAD 00000282  003 OF 003   on regional issues and a greater receptivity to closer external relations with their neighbors. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000285  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, IZ, GM, JO SUBJECT: POSSIBILITIES FOR GERMAN SUPPORT OF IRAQI POLICE TRAINING  REF: BERLIN 0053  Classified By: Political Military Counselor David C. Litt for reasons 1 .4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  SUMMARY.  In response to REFTEL, Post and Multi-National Security Transition Command - Iraq (MNSTC-I) welcome German initiatives to consider expanded training for Iraqi police.  Although amenable to German proposals for different training sites, the incorporation of German trainers at the Jordanian International Police Training Center (JIPTC) is advantageous for multiple reasons.  Post and MNSTC-I look forward to exploring options for German police training initiatives in more depth. END SUMMARY  2.  (C)  The desire of the German government to provide targeted training for three types of police - senior and middle management, specialists, and trainers (&train the trainers8), is understood, and further discussions will enable integration of German initiatives into the Iraqi Police Service (IPS) training framework.  Close coordination with MNSTC-I and the Iraqi Ministry of Interior on the curriculum will ensure that German initiatives are linked closely with IPS needs and priorities.  3.  (C)  While training Iraqi police in Iraq is the ideal course of action, MNSTC-I is amenable to discussions on sites outside the country, with a preference for training at regional locations.  JIPTC would be an advantageous location for German training initiatives.  This modern facility is a permanent location with a total student capacity of 3,500, with the center typically filled with 3,200 basic trainees. JIPTC currently offers two operational syllabi:  the Iraqi Basic Police Course and the Officers Tactics and Leadership School course for first-line officers.  The training at JIPTC is an international effort, with staff members from 11 countries currently instructing.  4.  (C)  Policies and procedures for instructor life support issues have already been established, making any German initiatives at JIPTC significantly easier to coordinate and more cost effective than initiating a training program in another third country. German participation in established JIPTC training efforts is encouraged; options for new training initiatives at the facility could be explored in more detail. German proposals to train Iraqi police in the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Turkey or Germany, would be open for discussion. However, any venues outside locations in Iraq, other than JIPTC, would be more difficult to coordinate with the Coalition and Iraqi Government. The start-up costs would be considerable for any new training site and the German government would be expected to negotiate all logistical basing requirements with the government of that third country.  5.  (C)  REFTEL discusses a lack of qualified Arabic trainers from Germany.  Although translators are currently employed at JIPTC, there is no excess language translation capability at the center.  Post encourages the German government to coordinate with other European countries that might provide the appropriate language support.  6.  (C)  Post and MNSTC-I look forward to working with German government representatives to translate this initiative into an effective contribution to development of the Iraqi Police Service in concert with the Iraqi Ministry of Interior,s needs and desires. Post recommends that the German government send a delegation to JIPTC in Amman to discuss steps forward on curriculum and coordination, to which MNSTC-I will send a delegation. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000293  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: MOPS, PREL, PINS, PHUM, KJUS, MARR, IZ SUBJECT: UPDATE ON DETAINEE FACILITY INSPECTIONS  REF: 05 BAGHDAD 4921  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The Iraqi Interagency Inspection Team (IIIT), created in response to the discovery of abuses at the Ministry of Interior's (MoI's) al-Jadriyah (Bunker) detention facility in November and supported by Multi-National Forces-Iraq (MNF-I), has conducted four unannounced inspections of Iraqi detention facilities: two Baghdad MoI facilities, one Baghdad Ministry of Defense (MoD) facility, and an MoI facility in Tal Afar.  All four sites had inadequate living conditions, health services, and legal access.  Detainees interviewed from three of the four sites alleged and showed signs of physical abuse.  At one site, MNF-I substantiated three reports of recent physical abuse. At another site, two-thirds of the detainees interviewed complained of past abuse and, of those seen, all showed scars consistent with being physically abused and tortured. Reports of bribery-connected releases were alleged at two facilities. Inadequate provision of food and water was noted at two of the four sites.  The Iraqi and MNF-I participants have submitted to the Prime Minister's office separate reports on the four visits detailing the findings and recommendations for follow-up actions.  Copies also have been submitted to Minister of Defense Sadoun al-Dulaime and Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr.  The next three inspections will take place over the next few weeks.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------------------- MoI Special Police Commando Detention Facility - Baghdad ----------------------------  2.  (SBU) On December 8, 2005, the IIIT conducted a surprise inspection of the Special Police Commando Detention facility in Baghdad (reftel).  The facility held approximately 625 detainees in four large rooms and a courtyard.  Forty-six of these detainees were actually MoD detainees who apparently had been transferred from a MoD facility.  The facility had no records pertaining to these individuals and no one managing the facility knew why MoD detainees were transferred to this MoI facility.  3.  (SBU) The detainees were held in grossly overcrowded rooms and exposed to extremely unsanitary conditions.  The rooms were dark, damp and without functioning electricity. Detainees were forced to remain in these rooms for 23.5 hours per day.  Deprived of light, most detainees had to cover their eyes from the sunlight when they exited their rooms for interviews with the IIIT representatives.  4.  (SBU) Many of the detainees complained of physical abuse.  All who did so were screened by a U.S. medical officer who was able to substantiate three cases of recent abuse.  Many detainees who complained of past abuse showed scars consistent with being physically abused and tortured.  These claims included being raped, beaten with hoses and wires, hung from the ceiling, and burned with cigarettes.  Many also claimed to be victims of abuse at other facilities in the past and at their points of capture.  5.  (SBU) Detainees complained of inadequate access to medical care.  Thirteen were injured to such a degree that they needed immediate medical care beyond what the U.S. medical officer could provide and so were hospitalized. Injuries included severe bruising consistent with being beaten, broken bones, burn marks, dislocated shoulders, and infections within wounds.  6.  (SBU) All detainees complained of inadequate food and water.  Detention authorities confirmed that detainees were fed approximately twice a day with servings consisting of one half-slice of pita bread, a small piece of cheese, and a small portion of rice.  7.  (SBU) All detainees complained of lack of access to courts or attorneys and alleged that the only way for them to be released from detention was to have their families bribe the judge and the detention facility commander.  That the judge released 50 detainees who admittedly had not been investigated and cleared by an investigative judge lends credence to this allegation.  ----------------------------------- MoD Iraqi Army Intelligence Service Detention Facility - Baghdad -----------------------------------  8.  (SBU) On December 20, the IIIT conducted a surprise inspection of the MoD Iraqi Army Intelligence Service Detention Facility.  This facility held approximately 324 detainees in overcrowded but not severely sub-standard conditions.  They were housed in seven rooms, each with its own latrine and shower.  Although the rooms were free of dirt, there was neither adequate air circulation nor heaters or air conditioners.  All rooms were dim and reeked from the stench of body odor.  Detainees slept on blankets and foam mats.  9.  (SBU) Unlike detainees at the first MOI site inspected December 8, Iraqi Nation Intelligence Service (INIS) detainees were reasonably well-fed and did not claim or show signs of recent physical abuse.  However, two-thirds did claim past physical abuse and/or torture.  Many claimed that this abuse occurred at the point of capture or in other detention facilities.  Many detainees had scars consistent with being physically abused and tortured.  10.  (SBU) Although there was a doctor on-site, three detainees suspected of having tuberculosis were simply quarantined to a separate room and were not receiving proper medical care.  We were told that if detainees at this facility are in need of hospital care, they can receive only one-day treatment due to the lack of secure facilities at area hospitals.  11.  (SBU) There was little evidence that these detainees had been integrated into the Iraqi judicial system; most claimed to have been detained for more than three months, and most said they had not seen a judge or lawyer.  Many detainees alleged that they did not know the charges against them. According to the facility warden, a judge from the Central Criminal Court of Iraq (CCCI) has reviewed each case.  (NOTE: MOD does not appear to have a legal basis for security detention under Iraqi law, and MNF-I has put significant effort in the Baghdad area into introducing due process to the cases of detainees captured by Iraqi Army units.  END NOTE.)  --------------------------------- MoI Detention Facility - Tal Afar ---------------------------------  12.  (SBU) On December 28, the IIIT conducted a surprise inspection of an MoI detention facility in Tal Afar.  This facility housed nine MoI detainees. Required records were up-to-date and contained an accurate accounting of all MoI-detained persons.  However, the team was told that MoD forces dropped off four detainees at the facility on December 27.  These detainees were not properly entered into the detention facility's records, and MoD forces removed the four detainees from the facility prior to the arrival of the team.  MoD officials claimed that they frequently use the facility as a temporary holding cell until they can transfer detainees to an MoD detention facility.  That MOD detainees are moved through the facility without any recordkeeping concerned the IIIT.  13.  (SBU) The rooms housing the detainees were substandard in that they lacked proper running water, heat, and bedding other than cardboard boxes on the cement floor.  The detainees appeared to be well-fed, were not apprehensive about communicating with the inspectors, and neither displayed signs of abuse nor claimed to have been physically abused.  14.  (SBU) Due to the facility's close proximity to the local court, the IIIG was able to interview the four judges responsible for detainees.  These judges acknowledged that they did not have an adequate system for ensuring that detainees' cases were properly reviewed in a timely manner or that all detainees were being reported properly to the court.  The judges stated that they would coordinate with the detention facility officials to initiate a system whereby the judges would routinely visit the detention facility to inspect its records and to account for the detainees.  ---------------------------------------- MoI Detention Facility at the Major Crimes Unit Headquarters - Baghdad ----------------------------------------  15.  (SBU) On January 19, the IIIT conducted an unannounced inspection of the MoI detention facility within the Major Crimes Unit Headquarters in Baghdad.  This facility housed 214 detainees.  Compared to other Iraqi detention facilities inspected by the IIIT, this facility was slightly cleaner and provided better ventilation and heating.  Detainees were housed in groups of 11-15 per cell or 60-73 per cell.  Space was well below minimal international standards for humane treatment of detainees, with detainees barely being able to lay down at the same time within each cell.  Detainees slept on blankets.  There was one toilet and one shower per cell. One group of detainees was located on an outdoor, open-air patio, and was moved into a central hallway during inclement weather.  The facility was relatively clean and had no evidence of trash or human waste on the floors.  16.  (SBU) Detainees reported receiving three small portions of porridge daily (approximately 150 grams per portion) and tap water from the bathroom.  They appeared to be well nourished and did not complain of lack of food or water.  17.  (SBU) Detainees consistently reported a lack of medical care at the facility, which was confirmed by guards. Detainees and guards reported that no doctor had visited the facility in more than three months. Care was being provided in one cell by a detainee who is an Iraqi anesthesiologist. Detainees were provided medications by their families but reported that most medications were confiscated by the guards.  There were no obvious cases of serious illness or injury warranting emergency evacuation.  18.  (SBU) Many detainees complained of being tortured at other facilities before they were transferred to the present facility.  Limited, direct examinations of approximately 20 detainees were conducted by the U.S. medical doctor on the team.  No detainees claimed or displayed physical injuries consistent with recent torture or abuse.  However, some injuries observed were consistent with claims of prior torture and included poorly healed extremity fractures, burns, scars from whipping, anal injury with incontinence, foot deformity from being suspended upside down and repeatedly struck on the bottom of the feet, and inability to speak after blows to the head.  All examined detainees reported that they had not been offered or provided medical care at any time for their injuries.  19. (SBU) COMMENT: The mistreatment discovered at the four inspected facilities inspected to date encompasses a handful of corroborated cases of deliberate torture, multiple uncorroborated allegations of previous torture weeks or months prior to interview, and widespread neglect and mistreatment severe enough to merit categorization as abuse. It is likely that both categories of abuse will prove difficult to eradicate.  Deliberate infliction of physical injury during interrogation is a long-embedded feature (perhaps the central feature) of Iraqi investigative practices.  Indeed, neglect and casual mistreatment of detainees are not only considered culturally acceptable, but are an inevitable and near-ubiquitous result of basic, systemic features of the current Iraqi detention system (such as unclear legal authorities, overcrowding, poor management of support contracts, judicial under-capacity, and corruption).  20. (SBU) COMMENT CONTINUED: The work of the IIIT is going well to the extent that Iraqi participants from various ministries are attending meetings and the inspections.  They also appear to work well together and take their duties seriously.  However, the pace of the inspections is not going as quickly as anticipated.  We also fear that the momentum of the inspections and the composition of the team could be affected adversely during the government transition.  Above all, our foremost concern is that PM Ja'afari lacks the political will or ability to address the widespread abuse and lack of due process characteristic of Iraqi detention operations.  Early engagement on this issue with key figures in the incoming government will be critical in this regard. END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000294  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2026 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: ALLAWI SAYS SCIRI FEARS FADHILA/SADRIST FLIGHT  REF: BAGHDAD 0195  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASON 1.4 (b).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Allawi told the Ambassador on February 1 that the Shia Coalition is confused, with SCIRI fearing a Sadrist and Fadhila pullout.  Allawi claimed that Mohammed Ridha Sistani is exerting efforts to hold the coalition together, but has limited influence over the Fadhila Party.  Referring to sharp public criticism Tariq al-Hashimi (IIP) had directed at the MOI February 1, Allawi said that he would try to restrain Tawafuq's leadership from making inflammatory comments.  He also claimed that Talabani is under growing pressure from Tehran to support SCIRI's Adil Abd' al-Mahdi for the premiership.  Allawi and Barzani both said that a government led by al-Mahdi would tilt too far toward Iran. In a separate conversation, Fadhila party insider al-Shamiri told PolCouns that he doubted Fadhila could risk pulling out of the Shia Coalition in the end, although it could threaten to do so.  Ultimately, Fadhila could not risk the wrath of the Najaf clerical establishment which probably would work to hold the Shia Coalition together.  Al-Shamiri predicted that if the Shia Alliance could not reach a compromise on PM selection, the matter would be brought to a membership vote. END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------------ ALLAWI'S READ: SHIA COALITION WOBBLY ------------------------------------  2. (C) At a February 1 lunch with the Ambassador, Dr. Ayad Allawi described the situation within the Shia Coalition as "very confused."  He said Coalition members are still fighting and are scared about what the Fadhila Party might do.  He claimed that SCIRI is afraid that the Coalition might fall apart, with the Sadrists ready to leave the Coalition if Fadhila departs first.  He added that SCIRI is sending him messages to support Adil Abd' al-Mahdi for PM because, if Fadhila left, Abd' al-Mahdi's candidacy would be doomed. Dr. Allawi also told the Ambassador that Ayatollah Sistani's son (Muhammad Rida) is exerting efforts to hold the Coalition together and that Sistani is aware of the nature of these discussions.  However, Dr. Allawi said Sistani has limited influence on Fadhila because Ayatollah Yaqubi (whom Fadhila looks upon as its spiritual leader) is continuing to support party chief Nadeem al-Jabiri.  The Ambassador stressed the importance of getting a clear understanding from al-Jabiri; Dr. Allawi said al-Jabiri will consult with them when he returns to Iraq.  --------------------------- ALLAWI CAUTIONS ON TALABANI ---------------------------  3. (C) Dr. Allawi agreed with the assessment that Tariq al-Hashimi's February 1 public statement criticizing MOI was too powerful and not helpful to the formation of a national unity government.  Dr. Allawi said he will try to restrain Tawafuq.  Dr. Allawi stated that President Talabani is trying to please both the United States and Iran, and agreed that Talabani has made too many commitments.  He added that Talabani is under growing pressure from Iran (NOTE: to support Adil Abd al-Mahdi for PM.  END NOTE.)  Dr. Allawi said neighboring Arab countries have bought into the Erbil Agreement and are willing to help with its implementation. Dr. Allawi said they could help pressure President Talabani to distance himself from Iran.  ---------------------------------------- BARZANI: KURDS INSIST ON ALLAWI BEING IN ----------------------------------------  4. (C) At a February 1 dinner with the Ambassador, Dr. Ayad Allawi and KRG President Massoud Barzani said that Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim hosted a lunch February 1 with all of the major political parties.  Barzani stated that no agreement has been reached within the Shia Coalition on a Prime Minister candidate.  He added that he told the Shia Coalition that the Kurdish Alliance will not participate in a new government without the Iraqi National List.  Dr. Allawi confirmed a written agreement between Tawaffuq, the Iraqi National List, and the National Dialogue Front to form one bloc.  He denied statements from Jalal Talabani to Barzani that Tawaffuq had withdrawn from this bloc.  ------------------------------------- ALLAWI, BARZANI CAUTION ON IRAN ANGLE -------------------------------------  5. (C) Both confirmed their preference for Nadeem al-Jabiri as Prime Minister.  Both said they would prefer Jafari if a choice had to be made between Jafari and 'Abd al-Mahdi.  'Abd al-Mahdi is personally a better choice, but it would be a  strategic mistake for Iraq because the new government would be too close to Iran.  Dr. Allawi specifically cited 'Abd al-Mahdi's lack of an Islamist constituency and his subsequent dependence on Abdul Aziz al-Hakim for direction and guidance.  He also pointed to 'Abd al-Mahdi's strong personal relationship with Jalal Talabani, who is also close to Iran.  Barzani said SCIRI, Jalal Talabani, and Iran have had a long-time close relationship.  Barzani declined to speculate on what he would do if 'Abd al-Mahdi became the PM candidate and Fadhila did not leave the Shia Coalition.  He stated that "in all circumstances," the government program must be clear, although he added that such a situation could split the Kurdish Alliance.  Dr. Allawi and KRG President Barzani agreed to meet separately with Nadeem al-Jabiri within the next two days.  --------------------------------------- MORE CAUTIOUS READ FROM FADHILA INSIDER ---------------------------------------  6. (C) Fadhila Party Political Bureau Chief and Jabiri confidante Shaikh Hassan al-Shamiri told PolOffs that that the Shia Islamist Coalition is edging closer to deciding to decide about the premiership.  Ideally, he said, the Coalition would make its decision on the basis of consensus. Shamiri asserted that Jafari and Abd al-Mahdi would cancel each other out, leaving Jabiri as the compromise choice.  (He stated that, on the basis of his meeting January 31 evening with Sadrists, Jafari's support among Sadrists appears still strong.)  If no consensus within the Coalition is possible, ultimately the prime minister decision will come to a vote among the Coalition parliamentarians.  He opined that the vote would take place initially with all four candidates in play; the lowest vote-getter would be eliminated in the first round.  Voting rounds would continue until one candidate remained with a majority.  He thought such a vote would occur by the middle of next week.  7.  (C)  Al-Shamiri told PolCouns that the Fadhila Party is unlikely to quit the Shia Islamist Coalition if Jabiri is not chosen as the Coalition's prime minister candidate.  He noted that quitting the Coalition carried big risks, especially from Najaf.  Recalling that the Najaf clerical establishment had strongly backed unity of Shia Islamist Coalition in the transition government, Shamiri anticipated that Najaf could launch a withering verbal blast at Fadhila that would be very harmful to the party.  Shia voters, he commented, are "simple" and do not understand politics.  They only understand what the Najaf establishment tells them.  Risking Najaf's wrath, he concluded, would be an "adventure" that Fadhila could not risk.  Shamiri then added that Jabiri could, of course, threaten to leave the Coalition without actually doing so.  8.  (C)  Shamiri was upbeat about Jabiri's chances inside the Coalition on the basis of the broader support it could claim outside the Coalition.  He stated that Jabiri would work to reunite all Iraqis and therefore has support from the Sunni Arab Tawafuq Front.  Later, however, Shamiri brushed aside reports of Tawaffuq complaints about excesses committed by the Interior Ministry as mere political gamesmanship. (Shamiri later displayed a similar lack of acuity when discussing fuel price reforms.  He rejected market reforms in general because, he claimed, Iraqis cannot absorb more price shocks.  Instead, the government should promote industrialization to create jobs.)  ---------- NEXT STEPS ----------  9. (C) Ambassador will join the lunch hosted by President Talabani for Iraqi political leaders.  Around February 3 the Ambassador will meet with Dr. Allawi and Barzani to assess issues in light of the political party meetings scheduled in the next few days.  The goal is to reach agreement in the next 2-3 days on the inclusion of the four groups and the formation of working groups to discuss the specifics of the government program. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000300  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  AMMAN FOR REFCOORD CLAIRE KANESHIRO CAIRO FOR REFCOORD GERRY CHEYNE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2016 TAGS: PREF, PTER, PINR, PINS, PREL, IZ, IR, JO, UNHCR, PRM SUBJECT: (U) QUSHTEPE OFFICIALS COMMENT ON AL TASH RELOCATION  REF: A. BAGHDAD 277      B. 05 STATE 180059      C. 05 BAGHDAD 3918      D. 05 KIRKUK 188      E. 05 AMMAN 6270      F. 05 AMMAN 297  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  On January 25, RefCoord accompanied UNHCR to Kawa to monitor and evaluate the PRM-funded, UNHCR-implemented relocation of Iranian Kurds formerly resident in the Al Tash refugee camp near Ramadi in Al Anbar governorate.  Ref A covered assistance work at the camp.  En route to the site, RefCoord and UNHCR called on the Mayor of Qushtepe and the Qushtepe Chief of Police, whose mandates extend to Kawa, to explore the local government perspective on the Kawa project.  Although the local government officials made vague allegations about links between former Al Tash residents and insurgents, they indicated that Erbil remained committed to accepting up to 2,000 Al Tash Kurds and would take in the remaining Al Tash populations barring specific information that could be linked to individuals.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------------ (SBU) BACKGROUND ON AL TASH RELOCATION ------------------------------------  2. (SBU) The Al Tash Refugee Camp for Iranian Kurds in Al Anbar is no longer viable.  Security concerns have undermined provision of adequate humanitarian assistance and protection.  The Government of Jordan has been anxious to see the camp moved out of Al Anbar to northern Iraq.  Hundreds of refugees from Al Tash have already flooded into Jordan; the GOJ is concerned about future flows (refs E and F).  Ninety-seven percent of the Al Tash Kurds wanted to go to Sulaymaniyah, to join several thousand former Al Tash residents who had previously been relocated.  The Department and UNHCR sought and won agreement from KRG-Erbil (KRG-E) to relocate 2000 Al Tash Kurds to Erbil.  The KRG-E offered an acceptable site above the green line at Kawa (refs C and D).  3.  (SBU) As of January 25, almost all of the Al Tash Kurds have relocated.  1273 have traveled to Kawa with UNCHR assistance; the remainder has spontaneously migrated to Sulaymaniyah without objection from KRG-S. UNHCR does not have a firm figure for Iranian Kurds left in Al Tash camp proper, but estimates approximately 150. Another 189 Al Tash Kurds remain on the Jordanian border hoping that they will be admitted to Jordan and referred for third country resettlement.  UNHCR is seeking better information about how many individuals remain at each location, who they are, whether they are UNHCR recognized refugees, and why they have not yet accepted relocation to Kawa.  --------------------------------------------- ---- (SBU) VIEWS OF QUSHTEPE MAYOR AND CHIEF OF POLICE --------------------------------------------- ----  4. (C) Before visiting the Kawa relocation site to monitor assistance levels (SEPTEL), RefCoord and UNHCR met with the Qushtepe Mayor and Chief of Police (COP) to explore the local government's view of the project.  Both indicated they had security concerns about the Kurds remaining in Al Tash.  The COP asserted that all people who live two or three years in Ramadi have some involvement with terrorist groups.  He said the 50 families remaining in Al Tash don't want to move North because they are involved in terrorist activities.  The COP claimed to have information that terrorist attacks had been planned in the camp.  (Note: MNF-I is following- up.)  5. (C) The Mayor was uneasy about travel back and forth between Ramadi and the Kawa site.  He noted that a number of the refugees at the Kawa site had legitimate business to settle in Ramadi.  However, he expressed concern that traveling to and from Ramadi might "create an opportunity that the terrorists can exploit."  The refugees at the Kawa site are allowed to travel to Ramadi, conditional on a police investigation including interviews with the police before and after the trip.  Visitors to the Kawa site from Ramadi and Iran are required to register with  BAGHDAD 00000300  002 OF 002   the Qushtepe authorities.  6. (C) UNHCR asked whether the refugees at the Kawa site posed a security problem.  The Mayor said that in dealing with security issues, it is prudent to always suspect and investigate.  However, he noted that the refugees at the Kawa site were allowed into Erbil without an investigation.  The COP confirmed that in principle the local government has no problem with the remainder of the Al Tash Kurds coming North.  He said that if he had any solid evidence of anything, they would not be allowed, but he did not have any such evidence.  The COP said that they had specific information implicating one refugee leader in an alleged bomb preparation incident in December, and they would arrest him if he came north. UNHCR asked if the Mayor and COP knew of Iranian government activity in Kawa; they said no.  7. (SBU) The Mayor said that ID cards from Ramadi are being accepted in Erbil.  Students are attending local schools and universities.  One refugee is working as a shuttle bus driver.  Some refugees have shops in neighboring villages.  The Mayor indicated he wanted the refugee population at the Kawa site to be locally integrated.  He said 205 families would be given ID cards indicating they were refugees in Qushtepe.  Per the COP, these ID cards would serve as residence permits, and would be valid for six months "so if they are resettled in third countries we will know who has left."  As to the time frame, the Mayor said "we are working on it" and expressed a desire for the IDs to be issued as quickly as possible.  8. (SBU) According to the Mayor, the refugees are free to work anywhere.  The COP said a contractor regularly hires day laborers from the Kawa site.  Per the COP, the refugees can get driver's licenses through the same process as the local people.  9. (SBU) According to the Mayor, all of the refugees at the Kawa site will get new Ministry of Trade ration cards in 2006, but the cards will be issued in Ramadi. Transferring the cards from Al Anbar to Erbil will take some time.  The Mayor remarked that ration cards are a general problem throughout Iraq.  10. (SBU) UNHCR informed the Mayor about its hopes to persuade the 189 Al Tash Kurds on the Jordanian border to move to Kawa.  UNHCR is trying to organize a delegation of local officials and refugee representatives to tell the 189 at the border about the Kawa site.  The Mayor indicated he would be willing to join the delegation, if the Ministry of the Interior and the Erbil Governor agree.  The Mayor reiterated that the KRG-E is committed to accepting 2,000 Al Tash refugees.  So far only 1273 have moved to Kawa; KRG-E remains willing to take an additional 727.  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  11.  (C) UNHCR's relocation of the Al Tash refugees to northern Iraq is thus far a success.  The refugees, now out of harm's way, are beginning the process of locally integrating; the reported access to education and work are positive signs.  The reports of bad apples remaining at Al Tash and a limited number of refugees traveling between Al Tash and Kawa are bear monitoring.  The local authorities' security concerns about Al Tash Kurds (paras 4 and 5) seem to conflict with continued KRG-E willingness to accept relocation of more of them to Kawa. The Mayor and COP's motives to espouse these contradictory positions were not clear, but may be laying the groundwork to justify limiting the refugees' freedom of movement.  Although the officials claimed there were no such limits per se, and promised to help resolve existing problems, they could use security concerns as an excuse later for not following through.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000306  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/03/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: TAWAFUQ CRITICISM OF MOI CONTINUES; UIC NEGOTIATING ELECTION MECHANISM  REF: BAGHDAD 294  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) .  1. (C) The Ambassador attended a February 2 luncheon hosted by President Talabani that drew together all major elected parliamentarians.  The elaborate luncheon, complete with an honor guard, closed with a widely-attended press conference. Leading Tawafuq bloc figure Khalaf al-Ayan made news during the press conference by supporting a unity government but calling for the Prime Minister to halt raids on Iraqi homes. Al-Ayan went so far as to call for U.S. forces to accompany Iraqi forces in the event that such raids were deemed absolutely necessary, a highly unusual position for a figure who has denounced the MNF-I presence in Iraq.  The Ambassador met separately with Fadhila Party leader Nadeem al-Jabiri in the evening (see septel).  In short, Jabiri said he was sticking with his candidacy but felt under threat.  President Talabani and Minister Barham Salih approached the Ambassador to deliver a message from Adel Abd al-Mahdi.  Mahdi, Salih said, would work favorably with the U.S. on other issues if the U.S. convinced Jabiri to withdraw his candidacy and swing his party's vote to Mahdi.  2. (C) In separate conversations, UIC 555 contacts -- Dawa's Ali Adeeb, Fadhila's Hassan al-Shamiri, SCIRI's Haitham al-Husseini and independent Sami al-Askari -- briefed us on a coalition meeting that took place February 2 at Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim's home.  Askari said that the group had agreed on a mechanism for choosing a Prime Minister: there will be three rounds of voting, with each round eliminating one of the four candidates.  Askari predicted the following results in the first round: Jafari, 55; Abd al-Mahdi, 30-35; Shahristani, 22-25; and Jabiri, 15.  Askari said that once Jabiri and Shahristani have been eliminated, the race would come down to whether their supporters move behind Abd al-Mahdi or Jafari.  Askari predicted that most Fadhila members would vote for Abd al-Mahdi.  Husseini indicated that he expected the vote to take place on February 11.  Jabiri gave a different account of the UIC PM debate, saying that members were still pushing for the PM decision to be made by consensus and would only choose the three step voting process as a last resort. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000310  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: PM JAFARI ON FOREIGN FIGHTERS, SADDAMISTS AND "RESISTANCE"  REF: BAGHDAD 283  Classified By: POL Couns Robert Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1.  (C) During a January 31 discussion, Prime Minister Jafari told the Ambassador that Tekfiris (religious fanatics) and criminal Saddamists must be stopped at all costs.  Jafari referred to the TNA anti-terrorism law that should be justly applied to these groups.  There could be no negotiations with such groups, he underlined.  Jafari, however, differentiated between those groups and the so-called resistance - groups that protest Coalition support or Iraq's new government.  He opined that breaking down the resistance requires getting at its popular base and perhaps communicating with some of its leaders.  He suggested by giving disaffected youth opportunities for education and employment, there would be no need for them to join the resistance or look to foreign states for support.  2.  (C) Comment:  Jafari has a sense of some of the realities that drive alienated Iraqis to arms. He is more inclined than most in the Shia Islamist Coaliton to seek an honorable deal with the Sunni Arab political leadership and give a positive signal to alienated Sunni Arabs.  That said, we have not seen him move with alacrity to address the problems that he recognizes aggravate the insurgency.  Notably, we have not seen him move aggressively to investigate allegations of Ministry of Interior abuses or move to stop abuses. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000315  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2016 TAGS: PGOV, ECON, ELAB, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: FADHILA MEMBERS DISCUSS SOLUTION TO INSURGENCY  REF: BAGHDAD 275 AND 310  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (C) SUMMARY:  In a February 1 meeting with PolCouns, Fadhila Party members Hassan al-Shamiri and Mohammed Ismael al-Khuzai argued that rebuilding Iraq's economy is key to ending the insurgency.  Many insurgents join armed groups because they have no jobs and feel they have no future in the new Iraq, they argued.  Once a government is formed, the government's first priority should be to tackle Iraq's rampant unemployment problem, al-Shamiri said.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------------------------- The Unemployed:  Insurgents in Waiting --------------------------------------  2. (C) Al-Shamiri told PolCouns that unemployment will be high on the list of priorities of the next government. Unemployment, he argued, feeds the insurgency.  The insurgency, and militias, are supported by simple people who often lack jobs, al-Shamiri said.  The next government must reach out and help create jobs for them.  These people sometimes join the insurgency for the "amusement value," he said.  Others join because people like Abu Musab al-Zarqawi reach out to them and convince them that joining him will lead them to paradise.  This is especially convincing to young men with little hope of establishing a family.  3. (C) PolCouns said that to help jumpstart the economy and create jobs Iraq needs more foreign direct investment. Shamari cautioned that Iraq could not absorb quickly a major dose of economic reforms.  Instead, the government should help build big factories to generate employment.  ------- Comment -------  4. (C) Our contacts' comments echo that of other Iraqi leaders, including Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'fari (reftels).  GOI officials, NGO heads, academics, and community leaders all argue that unemployment is crippling Iraq's efforts to move forward.  It remains to be seen if the next Iraqi government will push through the necessary legislation and reforms to foster growth and stability.  5. (SBU) BIONOTE:  Sheikh Hassan al-Shamiri graduated from Baghdad Law School in 1992.  He then served in the army. Al-Shamiri went on to study with Ayatollah al-Yacoubi in Najaf for seven years before joining the Fadhila Party. Eventually, al-Shamiri says he wants to return to his religious studies and someday become an Ayatollah.  Sheikh Hassan is a newly elected member of the Council of Representatives. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000317  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/03/2016 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PINS, KJUS, IZ, KU SUBJECT: UPDATE ON KUWAITI DETAINEES IN COALITION CUSTODY  REF: KUWAIT 34  Classified By: Counselor for Political-Military Affairs David C. Litt for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) In response to Embassy Kuwait's inquiry in reftel:  * Kuwaiti national ABDULRAHMAN MOBARAK MESHAKHAS AL BATHALI (ISN 157245) is currently held in the legal and physical custody of Coalition Forces at the MNF-I Fort Suse detention facility near Suleymaniyah. His case is under review for possible referral for trial at the Central Criminal Court of Iraq (CCCI); should he be referred and attend an investigative hearing before an Iraqi judge, he will at that point enter Iraqi legal custody (but will remain in Coalition Forces' physical custody pending his trial).  * Kuwaiti national ALI AWAD FARAJ FARJEE AL HARBI (ISN 166970) was tried by an Iraqi judge under Iraqi law at the CCCI on 24 August 2005. He was convicted of illegal border crossing and was sentenced to fifteen years' imprisonment. On 7 September 2005, he was transferred by Coalition Forces to an Iraqi Ministry of Justice prison facility in the Abu Ghraib neighborhood of Baghdad to serve his sentence. He is now in Iraqi legal and physical custody. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000318  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/03/2016 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PINS, KJUS, IZ, FR SUBJECT: FRENCH REQUEST TO INTERVIEW FOUR IRAQI DETAINEES  REF: PARIS 552  Classified By: Counselor for Political-Military Affairs David C. Litt for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) SUMMARY: In response to Embassy Paris's query in Reftel: the Chief Investigative Judge of the Iraqi High Tribunal (IHT), Judge Ra'ad, has indicated that he is receptive to the GOF's request to interview four Iraqi detainees awaiting trial at the IHT, under certain conditions (which we discussed with French Deputy Chief of Franck Gellet on 18 January). Judge Ra'ad intends to respond formally to the GOF's request through diplomatic channels, although he has not provided a firm timeframe. END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------------------ POST OUTLINES IHT CONDITIONS TO FRENCH DCM ------------------------------------------  2.  (C) On January 18, French DCM Gellet met with Pol- MilCouns, RCLO, and MNF-I Task Force 134 to discuss IHT willingness to permit GOF interviews of Saddam Hussein, Taha Yasin Ramadan, Tariq Aziz, and Amir Muhammad Rashid, all in Iraqi legal (albeit MNF-I physical) custody. RCLO noted that:  * Judge Ra'ad of the IHT is amenable to granting the GOF request under certain conditions;  * The IHT intends to appoint an investigating judge to conduct the interviews;  * The IHT expects the GOF to submit questions in advance, in Arabic;  * Any documents to be used in the interview will also need to be submitted in advance, in Arabic;  * Questioning will be conducted in Arabic by an Iraqi judge from the bench;  * A French representative is welcome to attend, but must sit in the gallery.  DCM Gellet was appreciative of the progress made, saying that these were positive developments. He also noted that:  * The French judge in attendance would likely want the opportunity to ask follow-up questions; * It might be necessary for a French government interpreter to be present at the interview;  * The French judge in attendance might prefer to sit at the bench during questioning.  --------------------------------------------- - POST CONSULTS AGAIN WITH IHT ON FRENCH REQUEST --------------------------------------------- -  3.  (C) On January 19, RCLO met with Judge Raad at his office to discuss the previous day's meeting with French DCM Gellet. Judge Ra'ad shared some preliminary thoughts on the French request, while saying that he intended to respond formally through diplomatic channels. He noted that:  * He did not object in principle to a French judge attending questioning as the French representative;  * He did not object to the presence of a French government interpreter during questioning;  * Follow-up questions could be submitted to the Iraqi judge in writing and in Arabic during the session;  * The French judge in attendance would not be allowed to sit at the bench.  Judge Ra'ad was firm on the last point, which he considered an issue of law and sovereignty; he did  BAGHDAD 00000318  002 OF 002   say, however, that the hearing room was small and that the French judge and translator would have a good view of the bench. He also stated that he intended to respond to the French request as soon as possible (we are aware, however, that Ra'ad is extremely pressed for time given the ongoing pressures of the ad Dujail trial).  4.  (C) Pol-MilCouns conveyed Judge Ra'ad's responses to French Ambassador Frank Gellet by telephone, and advised the Ambassador that the IHT intended to respond directly to the GOF through diplomatic channels. He also noted that we would immediately inform the French Embassy of any additional information conveyed to us informally by Judge Ra'ad, and would be happy to be present to assist on the day of the questioning session. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000319  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ, UN SUBJECT: IECI COMMISSIONER SAFWAT ARGUES FOR DELAYED PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS, CLAIMS NO NEED FOR INTERNATIONAL COMMISSIONER   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: IECI Commissioner Safwat told poloffs February 1 that provincial elections should be delayed until at least midyear to give the IECI more time to prepare.  He added that the IECI would need changes and improvements, with priorities including revamping the voter registry and reforming the commission structure.  Safwat said that given the experience gained by the IECI over the past 15 months, a UN-appointed international commissioner may no longer be necessary.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------------------------------- ARGUING FOR DELAYED PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS ----------------------------------------  2. (C) Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq (IECI) Commissioner Safwat Rasheed Sidqi told PolOffs February 1 that provincial elections should be delayed until at least midyear.  He said that the IECI would need time to prepare for the provincial vote, the commissioners are tired as a result of the electoral pace in 2005, and that there was no reason to rush forward to change current provincial councils.  Safwat noted that the proposed Provincial Election Law, passed by the Transitional National Assembly (TNA) in 2005 and calling for elections on February 11, was never approved by the Presidency Council.  He argued that the new law would need to address provincial council authority and responsibilities and be consistent with the new constitution.  Safwat said that Shi'a politicians are still pushing for early elections, but warned that elections held too soon would likely result in sectarian violence as coalitions fracture at the local level.  He feared that the formation of government would delay the establishment of a solid security apparatus that would be able to maintain control in the period leading up to the elections.  ------------------------- TIME TO OVERHAUL THE IECI -------------------------  3. (C/REL UN) Safwat said that the IECI should consider lessons learned from the three electoral events in 2005 and review IECI structure and operations.  He said that review should include the make-up of the IECI Board of Directors -- currently eight Iraqi commissioners and one UN-appointed international expert.  He said that based on the experience gained over the past 15 months, the commissioners could move forward as a fully Iraqi board.  However, he maintained that the IECI would still require the support from the International Electoral Assistance Team (IEAT).  He said that the December elections exposed weaknesses in the voter registry that need to be addressed before any electoral event is conducted in 2006.  Safwat also indicated that IECI computer systems need upgrading, that the Governorate Electoral Office role in the provincial elections needs to be better defined, and that procedures need to be reassessed.  ----------------- STATUS OF APPEALS -----------------  4. (C) Safwat said that the Transitional Electoral Panel (TEP) has already decided on one appeal and was forging ahead with the other cases.  (NOTE: Safwat did not indicate on which case the TEP had reached a decision.  However, we heard from a UN source February 2 that the case involved a minor party which argued that it deserved a seat because of all the good it had done for Iraq.  Of greater significance, the same source advised that the TEP began hearings on the UIC 555 appeal on February 1 and on the Allawi list appeal February 2; reportedly these hearings will continue on February 5 and 6 respectively.) Safwat was cautiously optimistic that the TEP would complete the hearing process in a timely manner and decide in favor of the IECI in all instances.  Regarding the UIC 555 and Kurdish appeals on the Council of Representatives governorate seat allocation formula, Safwat reaffirmed his confidence that the formula described in the electoral regulations would be upheld by the TEP.  ------- COMMENT -------  5. (C/REL UN) Safwat, a Kurd, is only one of eight Iraqi commissioners; several of his colleagues will likely be more responsive to reported Shia pressures as to the timing of provincial elections. We will seek their views as well.  BAGHDAD 00000319  002 OF 002   Regarding his suggestion that an international commissioner is no longer needed, we must ensure that the ultimate decision not compromise the effectiveness of the IECI.  At a minimum, there will remain a need for the UN to continue to lead the election assistance effort and to have direct access to board members after International Commissioner Craig Jenness departs. (NOTE: Jenness has indicated that he plans to leave Iraq after the Commission wraps up its work related to the December 15 election.) KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000320  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ, UN SUBJECT: IECI COMMISSIONER SAFWAT ARGUES FOR DELAYED PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS, CLAIMS NO NEED FOR INTERNATIONAL COMMISSIONER   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: IECI Commissioner Safwat told poloffs February 1 that provincial elections should be delayed until at least midyear to give the IECI more time to prepare.  He added that the IECI would need changes and improvements, with priorities including revamping the voter registry and reforming the commission structure.  Safwat said that given the experience gained by the IECI over the past 15 months, a UN-appointed international commissioner may no longer be necessary.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------------------------------- ARGUING FOR DELAYED PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS ----------------------------------------  2. (C) Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq (IECI) Commissioner Safwat Rasheed Sidqi told polOffs February 1 that provincial elections should be delayed until at least midyear.  He said that the IECI would need time to prepare for the provincial vote, the commissioners are tired as a result of the electoral pace in 2005, and that there was no reason to rush forward to change current provincial councils.  Safwat noted that the proposed Provincial Election Law, passed by the Transitional National Assembly (TNA) in 2005, was never approved by the Presidency Council.  He argued that a new version of the law would need to address provincial council authority and responsibilities and be consistent with the new constitution.  Safwat said that Shi'a politicians are still pushing for early elections, but warned that elections held too soon would likely result in sectarian violence as coalitions fracture at the local level.  ------------------------- TIME TO OVERHAUL THE IECI -------------------------  3. (C/REL UN) Safwat said that the IECI should consider lessons learned from the three electoral events in 2005 and review IECI structure and operations.  He said that review should include the make-up of the IECI Board of Directors -- currently eight Iraqi commissioners and one UN-appointed international expert.  He said that based on the experience gained over the past 15 months, the commissioners could move forward as a fully Iraqi board.  However, he maintained that the IECI would still require the support from the International Electoral Assistance Team (IEAT).  He said that the December elections exposed weaknesses in the voter registry that need to be addressed before any electoral event is conducted in 2006.  Safwat also indicated that IECI computer systems need upgrading, that the Governorate Electoral Office role in the provincial elections needs to be better defined, and that procedures need to be reassessed.  ----------------- STATUS OF APPEALS -----------------  4. (C) Safwat said that the Transitional Electoral Panel (TEP) has already decided on one appeal and was forging ahead with the other cases.  (NOTE: Safwat did not indicate on which case the TEP had reached a decision.  However, we heard from a UN source February 2 that the case involved a minor party which argued that it deserved a seat because of all the good it had done for Iraq.  Of greater significance, the same source advised that the TEP began hearings on the UIC 555 appeal on February 1 and on the Allawi list appeal February 2; reportedly these hearings will continue on February 5 and 6 respectively.) Safwat was cautiously optimistic that the TEP would complete the hearing process in a timely manner and decide in favor of the IECI in all instances.  Regarding the UIC 555 and Kurdish appeals on the Council of Representatives governorate seat allocation formula, Safwat reaffirmed his confidence that the formula described in the electoral regulations would be upheld by the TEP.  ------- COMMENT -------  5. (C/REL UN) Safwat, a Kurd, is only one of eight Iraqi commissioners; several of his colleagues will likely be more responsive to reported Shia pressures as to the timing of provincial elections. We will seek their views as well. Regarding his suggestion that an international commissioner is no longer needed, we must ensure that the ultimate decision not compromise the effectiveness of the IECI.  At a minimum, there will remain a need for the UN to continue to  BAGHDAD 00000320  002.3 OF 002   lead the election assistance effort and to have direct access to board members after International Commissioner Craig Jenness departs. (NOTE: Jenness has indicated that he plans to leave Iraq after the Commission wraps up its work related to the December 15 election.) KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000326  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PHUM, IZ SUBJECT: SUNNI ARAB POLITICIANS TELL CODEL SHAYS  VIOLENCE MUST STOP   Classified By: Political Counselor Robert Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) Tawafuq coalition representatives Professor Hassan Bazzaz and Dr. Ala'a Makki told Congressman Shays and his delegation February 4 that ending violence is their number one priority; adjusting the Constitution can wait.  Bazzaz told Representatives Christopher Shays, Virginia Brown-Waite, Katherine Harris and John Doolittle that the Sunnis are paying a high price for political participation.  They are now targeted by the insurgency, the Iraqi government and Coalition troops.  Claiming that Sunni Arabs are 35% of the population in Iraq, they asserted that they were cheated in the December 15 elections. Nonetheless, they said Sunni parties have made the decision that violence is not the solution and that they will participate in the political process to end the occupation.  2. (C) Bazzaz charged that the Ministry of Interior has launched a campaign of terror against the Sunni Arabs to prevent them from participating in the political process.  He added that the de- Ba'thification process is being used to purge the government of all Sunni.  He provided the CODEL with a report concerning alleged human rights violations by the Ministry of Interior (MOI).  Bazzaz stated that the Shia, encouraged and led by Iran, want a civil in Iraq.  How can we sit down and form a government with them, he asked.  The US is powerless, he said, it won't act against the Shia.  He said that firing Interior Minister Bayan Jabr could pave the way for Sunni participation in government.  He argued that the Sunnis could not discuss positions until the violence stops.  3. (C) Bazzaz concluded by telling the CODEL that there will be no stability in Iraq without the Sunni Arabs.  We have the power, education and experience, he boasted.  Both he and Makki said that they do not want the Coalition to leave Iraq for now.  Bazzaz claimed that the Kurds will secede from Iraq as soon as they "take" Kirkuk. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000328  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: SECURITY DISPUTES AND PRIME MINISTERIAL COMPETITION DOMINATE TALKS  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: An Iraqi leadership luncheon at the Ambassador's residence February 4, bringing together the four largest blocs in the parliament, produced a heated argument over Ministry of Interior raids and alleged abuses.  Prime Minister Ja'afari argued to a group of dubious Tawaffuq leaders that ongoing Interior Ministry raids were necessary security steps.  He pleaded for patience and help building "our state", but Tariq al-Hashimi insisted that the government halt its stepped up security operations around Baghdad.  The four UIC candidates for prime minister were all in attendance at the lunch, and each made clear in private conversations that they were sticking in the race and did not expect an internal vote until the end of the week.  Fadhila Party leader Nadeem al-Jabiri claimed privately to us that he has received a direct threat from Iran demanding he quit the prime minister race.  He urged the Ambassador to convince President Talabani to work with Barzani, the Sunnis and Allawi to form a counter-bloc larger than the Shia alliance. Such a bloc, he said, could re-take control of the government formation process from Iran, ensure a representative government, and nominate a UIC figure for the prime ministership.  In other conversations Jabiri offered Poloff assurances of a compromise with the Sunni Arabs on federalism and de-Ba'athification in the government plan.  Three top members of the Allawi, Shia Islamist and Kurdish blocks voiced strong support for a national leadership council to represent the supreme political authority.  END SUMMARY.  ----------------- A Heated Luncheon -----------------  2. (C) An Iraqi leadership luncheon bringing together the four largest blocs in the parliament devolved into a heated argument over security issues at the Ambassador's residence February 4.  Tawaffuq leaders Shaykh Khalaf al-Ayan and Tariq al-Hashimi accused Prime Minister Ja'afari of allowing Ministry of Interior forces to conduct mass arrests, detentions, and extrajudicial killings in Sunni Arab neighborhoods of Baghdad.  They claimed that such operations were underway as they spoke.  Vice President Adel Abd al-Mehdi responded dismissively to the allegations.  "We are under attack too," he said.  "Our people are being killed." Ja'afari then spoke at length, arguing that the government has seen a rise in assassinations and insecurity every time it lessens up such operations.  He argued that it was not fair to expect complete security from a young government in a country still trying to pull itself together after the Saddam era, war, and occupation.  Hashimi gave no ground.  He noted previous Ja'afari promises for help on investigations that were unfilled.  The Sunni Arabs underlined that the government should "stop" the raids.  -------------------------- All Candidates in the Race --------------------------  3. (C) Side-bar conversations at the lunch affirmed that all candidates are still in play in the Shia alliance's prime ministerial debate.  Husayn Shahristani said that he had not withdrawn his candidacy and did not expect to make a further decision before Wednesday.  He said he expected that the bloc of some 26 independents would largely vote for Abd al-Mehdi if he withdrew.  ------------------- Jabiri Under Threat -------------------  4. (C) Fadhila Party leader Nadeem al-Jabiri met privately with the Ambassador after the meeting and told him that he would not withdraw or allow a vote on the subject until Thursday or Friday.  Jabiri said that he had sent an envoy to Iran to confront the Iranian government over its inappropriate meddling in the prime ministerial competition. Jabiri said his aide then conveyed to him from Iran what amounted to the most severe threat he has yet received.  The Iranians, he claimed, sent the following message: "Nadeem al-Jabiri is an important and influential Shia personality whose well-being should be preserved.  He should act to preserve his well-being and that of his religious marja'iya (i.e., Shaykh Ya'acubi) and party and withdraw his candidacy.  He has until Sunday to do so."  Jabiri said he was taken aback by the threat, and the Ambassador again voiced a readiness to help with his protection.  Jabiri said he was convinced that the UIC was under Iranian control.  -------------------------------  BAGHDAD 00000328  002 OF 002   The Argument For a Counter-bloc -------------------------------  5. (C) Jabiri said he would not be cowed by the threat and still believed a "more mature, representative" government could be achieved if a counter-bloc larger than the Shia alliance were formed and then took the bridge-building step of nominating a UIC candidate such as himself for the prime ministership.  Jabiri said he believed the Shia street would respect this step because it would be clearly constitutional, and he predicted the UIC might become more compliant after it is taken.  He agreed to consult Masoud Barzani further and to meet with the Ambassador again February 5.  Jabiri said it was clear to him that Talabani's reluctance to form a counter-bloc was the clearest obstacle to this strategy.  He advised the Ambassador to meet with Talabani and attempt to convince him to take this course of action.  --------------------------------------------- - Reconciliation and Aggression on the Sidelines --------------------------------------------- -  6. (C) Jabiri told Poloff on the side of the luncheon that he favored holding off on regional entity formation for a significant period of time and easing toward federalism through administrative decentralization.  Poloff asked Jabiri whether he thought a compromise on de-Ba'athification might be agreed to whereby the de-Ba'athification law remains in place but the de-Ba'athification Commission itself is dissolved, and enforcement of the law is turned over to the judiciary.  Jabiri said he would back such a compromise.  7. (C) Separately -- and far less encouragingly -- Tawaffuq leader Shaykh Khalaf al-Ayan told Poloff that he considered the Shia leaders gathered at the lunch to be Persians.  He brushed off their election as due to voter fraud and told Poloff that he was confident that the people of Najaf would vote for Tawaffuq if they were given the freedom to vote their conscience without militia and Iranian intimidation. Al-Ayan said that believed the Iraqi "resistance" was legitimate self-defense by Sunnis.  He said all terror attacks against Iraqi civilians were carried out by Zarqawi, who was entirely an Iranian agent.  ----------------------- National Policy Council -----------------------  8.  (C)  Transition Assembly Speaker al-Hassani told PolCouns on the luncheon's margin that he strongly supported the idea of a committee that brought the top political forces together into one room to hash out political differences.  It should have the "state institutions" of President, Prime Minister, and their deputies, he opined.  It also ought to include the leaders of the political blocks if they do not occupy one of the top government posts already.  Nadhim Jabiri joined the conversation and also endorsed the concept as a way to widen conversation between different political forces.  Kurdish official Barhem Salih then joined in and said the idea of a council was a good one, but it had to have the top leaders to be useful.  It needed to represent, he said, a political "marji'yah" (source of authority).  Salih, Hassani and Jabiri all agreed it should be the final policy authority, over the Prime Minister.  If it were merely advisory, Salih predicted, the top leaders would decline to participate.  Hassani and Jabiri nodded in agreement.  PolCouns observed that if the council had genuine line authority the constitution might need to be amended.  Hassani waved this off, noting that, if the top political leaders agreed on it, the amendment would not pose a big problem. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000330  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PINS, PNAT, IZ, KDEM SUBJECT: ABD AL-MAHDI CLAIMS HE IS HIS OWN MAN   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  At a February 3 dinner hosted by Minister of Planning (and senior Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) official) Barham Saleh, Deputy President Adel Abd al-Mahdi told the Ambassador that, if chosen to be Prime Minister, he would not be beholden either to SCIRI head Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim or Iran.  Abd al-Mahdi explained that, although Iraq needs good relations with its neighbors, concerns about growing Iranian influence are the result of propaganda designed to smear SCIRI.  Iraq must work with the U.S., he noted.  Abd al-Mahdi also said that he has accepted the Ambassador's idea of a national unity government consisting of Shia, Kurds, Sunni Arabs, and secular Iraqis from the bloc led by former PM Ayad Allawi.  Abd al-Mahdi said he also is in favor of dividing government ministries into three baskets:  security, economics, and services, each to be headed by a Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) or a special assistant to the PM.  When the Ambassador pushed for the adoption of a program that would unite the next Iraqi government, Abd al-Mahdi agreed.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- -- Questions Regarding Abd al-Mahdi's Independence --------------------------------------------- --  2. (C) At a February 3 dinner hosted by Minister of Planning Barham Saleh, Abd al-Mahdi asked the Ambassador to help convince Fadhila Party General Secretary Nadeem al-Jabiri to drop out of the race for PM.  Abd al-Mahdi said that Shia independent Hussein Shahristani already has decided to drop out of the race and that Shahristani's supporters would throw their weight behind Abd al-Mahdi.  With the Fadhila Party's support, Abd al-Mahdi said, he would almost certainly become PM.  3. (C) The Ambassador replied that there are concerns about a possible Abd al-Mahdi premiership.  Ambassador said that there is a perception that, if Abd al-Mahdi were to become PM, SCIRI head Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim really would be the one running Iraq, and Iranian influence in Iraq would increase. The Ambassador asked Abd al-Mahdi what kind of assurances he could offer that this would not occur.  4. (C) Abd al-Mahdi countered strongly, arguing that his relationship with Hakim was such that he could be frank with Hakim.  Abd al-Mahdi said he sometimes has disagreed publicly with Hakim during Governing Council meetings.  Furthermore, Abd al-Mahdi claimed, concerns about Iranian influence in Iraq are the result of propaganda designed to smear SCIRI. Abd al-Mahdi argued that Iraq needs good relations with its neighbors, but must work with the U.S. as well.  For example, a possible U.S. withdrawal from Iraq would not be in the interests of either Iraq or Iran.  Abd al-Mahdi also said that, if it were true that Iran is arming and supporting terrorists, he would confront the Iranian government.  -------------------------------- The Shape of the Next Government --------------------------------  5. (C) Abd al-Mahdi said he has accepted the Ambassador's idea of having the various government ministries divided up into three baskets:  security, economics, and services, each to be headed by a DPM or special representative of the PM. Abd al-Mahdi said, however, that he doubts the Kurds would accept this.  Abd al-Mahdi recommended that Barham Saleh should be a DPM, and he agreed with the Ambassador's idea that Iraq should have a National Security Council -- but argued that it should be an advisory rather than a decision-making body (reftel).  6. (C) Abd al-Mahdi told the Ambassador that he supports the Ambassador's plan to form a national unity government comprising Shia, Sunni Arabs, Kurds, and secular Iraqis led by former PM Ayad Allawi.  The UIC 555 coalition, Abd al-Mahdi said, also would accept Allawi's participation in a national unity government.  When the Ambassador suggested that Allawi might be appointed DPM in charge of security, Abd al-Mahdi balked.  Although he personally would not object, Abd al-Mahdi said he did not believe the rest of the UIC 555 coalition would accept this.  Instead, Abd al-Mahdi suggested that Allawi could be Minister of Defense (MOD).  Abd al-Mahdi said that Grand Ayatollah Sistani does not object to Allawi's participation in the government, despite the former PM's Ba'athist roots.  7. (C) Barham Saleh added that the Iranian Ambassador had met with TNA speaker Hajim al-Hassani and told him that Iran would not object to Allawi's participation in the next GOI. Abd al-Mahdi argued, however, that if Allawi becomes MOD,  BAGHDAD 00000330  002.2 OF 002   then the Minister of Interior (MOI) should be someone who has the support of the UIC 555 coalition.  Qassim Daoud would make an excellent MOI, Abd al-Mahdi said.  He asked the Ambassador to discuss this with Qassim.  8. (C) The Ambassador said that the Embassy is working on a program of action for the unity government.  Abd al-Mahdi agreed that this would be a good idea and suggested that the Ambassador pass the proposals to Saleh, who could then build upon them.  ------- Comment -------  9. (C) COMMENT: How a possible PM Abd al-Mahdi would be perceived by Sunni Arabs, Kurds, or secular Iraqis remains an issue.  Questions remain about his independence from Hakim and his willingness to stand up to Iran.  Thus far, however, Abd al-Mahdi has said the right things.  He appeared to the Ambassador to be sincere when he said Iraq needed to cooperate with the U.S.  10. (C) COMMENT CONT'D: Allawi's apparent willingness to accept some other job in the government besides PM should be viewed as a positive development.  At a lunch hosted by PM Ja'fari on February 3, Allawi told the Ambassador that he had met with Hakim the previous day.  Allawi described the meeting as very positive. Allawi said that he has had a long-standing relationship with the Hakim family, and he recounted to the Ambassador how he used to travel from his home in Baghdad to visit the holy shrines in Najaf.  While in Najaf, his family would visit the Hakim family home and young Ayad would kiss the hand of Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim's father, the late Grand Ayatollah Mohsin al-Hakim.  It remains to be seen if this long-standing relationship can help foster an effective, cross-sectarian government.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000332  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/01/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PINS, MOPS, MARR, EAID, ECON, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: FALLUJAH: NEW YEAR, NEW CHALLENGES -- SAME HIGH STAKES  Classified By: Robert S. Ford, Political Counselor, reasons 1.4 (b), (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Fallujah faces ongoing security and rebuilding challenges despite hard-won progress throughout 2005.  Attacks directed against Marines and Iraqi Security Forces continue, including an IED explosion in January 2006 targeting local police (native Fallujans).  Intermittent sniper activity has resulted in Marine casualties.  Marines have implemented new procedures with greater involvement by local police that should lessen tension.  For the last two weeks, Fallujah's municipal council suspended work.  This will likely be temporary, and appeared intended for show and a degree of self-protection in the face of insurgent intimidation.  The new-year, however, promises to be decisive.  Key decisions soon need to be made by the Iraqi government, coalition, and municipal leaders that will shape the city's long-term trajectory, including: whether to ensure robust police support and improved capabilities; whether Fallujah's leaders will be both stronger and accountable; whether the government will provide further compensation for Al Fajr damages and economic rebuilding; whether to maintain civil-military engagement inside the city; and how long to maintain the Marines' presence.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------ SECURITY: MORE FRICTION; NEW PROCEDURES IN PLACE ------------------------  2. (C) While Fallujah is largely stable (especially in comparison to other Anbar cities), small-arms fire and IEDs targeting Marine and Iraqi Army convoys and to a lesser extent police -- who are drawn from local residents -- reflect continued insurgent activity.  At the end of 2005 and early 2006, sniper activity led to Marine casualties and calls by CF for greater cooperation among city leaders.  The assassination of Fallujah's revered mufti, Sheikh Hamza Abbass Al-Issawi, in late November 2005 shook city clerics as a group and the city population as a whole.  Imams have yet to name a replacement, with only a temporary mufti identified so far (the city's leading candidate fled to Syria).  3. (C) Iraqi police forces in Fallujah continue to grow and are mentored by Marines and International Police Liaison Officers.  Improved police performance and self-sustainment via more effective Ministry of Interior support will allow for eventual Marine unit departures from the city.  A larger unit of U.S. Army police trainers recently arrived in Fallujah.  Currently one company of Marines is located within the city limits, 1,700 police (of which 500 are in training), alongside three Iraqi Army battalions.  Marines provide local police with fuel and other logistical support.  The police chief, BGen Salah Al Ani, often states that the "Marines provide everything."  -------------------- CITY COUNCIL BOYCOTT --------------------  4. (C) Fallujah city leaders have generally advocated engagement and cooperation with CF and Fallujah PolOff throughout 2005.  Weekly reconstruction and FCC sessions have sustained dialogue since the period just after Al Fajr in the autumn of 2004.  Separate sessions with tribal leaders and junior imams have likewise reinforced pro- active civic engagement, even while tribal sheikhs have recently begun to criticize openly the city council as weak.  Fallujah leaders have stressed that CF engagement from inside the city at the Civil-Military Operations Center symbolizes important continued U.S. and Marine engagement at a fragile time.  (COMMENT:  At some point in 2006, these functions will need to transition fully out of the city in order to prevent a dependency relationship from developing.  Fallujans also need to understand that coalition attention and resources will increasingly be directed toward the provincial capital, Ramadi.  Too quick a departure, however, and insurgents will likely view the move as a retreat and residents would see it as a lack of U.S. resolve and commitment to the city's longer term success.  END COMMENT.)  5. (C) In an FCC session held January 24, Mayor Dhari, and FCC Chairman (and senior imam), Sheikh Kamal Shakir Al- Nazal, accused the Marines of abusive behavior towards citizens.  Until the situation improved, they said council members would "suspend" all future meetings.  The Marine  BAGHDAD 00000332  002 OF 002   Regimental Commander and PolOff urged the leaders to remain in the session to work through issues; they agreed. (COMMENT:  The boycott threat appeared to be mainly for show; city leaders had assembled local media for the announcement -- later carried by Al Jazeera with headlines that Fallujah leaders refuse cooperation with Marines. Most claims usually prove to be exaggerated, or false, although some have been substantiated and later addressed. Marine leaders and PolOff have pressed the city council to do a better job vetting them or forfeit credibility.  END COMMENT.)  6. (C) In subsequent meetings, Marines and the city leaders agreed to employ new procedures for ongoing counter- insurgent operations.  Iraqi police (locally recruited, trained in Jordan) will take on a more active role interfacing with residents, which should help reduce tension.  Police Chief Salah supported these efforts and told Marine Regimental Commander, Marine FAO and PolOff January 31 that he expects city leaders to return to the job.  (NOTE: The current council and mayor were selected by leading city constituencies in June 2005; the new-year provides an opportunity to reexamine the body's composition in order to ensure the strongest leaders represent the city.  This effort likely will need to follow Provincial Council elections.  END NOTE.)  ------- COMMENT -------  7. (C) Recent friction between CF and Fallujah residents can largely be explained by the increased tempo of operations and rotation of units combined with a council that sought self-advantage in overstating and publicizing the situation.  The new Marine procedures -- with greater local buy-in and police involvement -- should help improve the dynamic, as would greater cooperation among residents and more active leadership by the FCC.  The decision by city leaders to suspend work will likely prove temporary. Residents increasingly expect basic services from leaders, who, as a group, largely have not delivered; in turn, the council claims to be powerless to satisfy city needs. Mayor Dhari and Sheikh Kamal often lay blame in what they perceive to be a dysfunctional provincial government, unresponsive central ministries and the general flux in Baghdad regarding the new government's formation -- a somewhat valid litany, but one that does not include their own shortcomings and innate tendency to highlight problems versus work toward solutions.  8. (C) While overall progress in Fallujah has been steady, but slow, it remains contested turf fifteen months after Operation Al Fajr.  The city could slip back into its more troubled past.  2004's key military events (April and November Marine-led battles), followed by 2005's primary political markers (January, October and December elections and referendum with increasingly high turnout), will need to be followed by real gains in economic development and Iraqi army recruitment among Sunni Arabs Anbar-wide in order for positive traction in Fallujah to be sustained. 2006 represents a decisive period for U.S. efforts in our now extensive and always complex Fallujah engagement.  As we increasingly reduce our profile in the city -- the CF military presence, as qualified ISF/police stand up and, in the political sense, as local governance solidifies -- our challenge will be not to see the city slip backwards in terms of security.  Fallujah's trajectory could still shift from stable or up, to a spiral downward.  If so, the associated media headlines -- not terrorist propaganda, but based on reality -- would mark a strategic loss for us and a strategic win for the patient terrorists who want to call Fallujah home again.  The demonstrated will to succeed by all sides will be as important throughout 2006 as the amount of resources and/or pressure applied.  A "good enough" -- let alone happy -- ending in still-challenged Fallujah is by no means yet guaranteed. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000338  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2026 TAGS: PNAT, PREL, IR, IZ SUBJECT: ALLAWI SAYS IRAN STRONGER IN IRAQ THAN U.S.  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (S) At a February 1 dinner with the Ambassador, Dr. Ayad Allawi said that there is "unchecked Iranian involvement in Iraq."  Allawi specifically cited the new constitution's provisions on federalism and decentralization as well as Iranian institution-building within the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) as examples of Iran's influence.  Allawi stated frankly that it is "too late to stop Iran."  ------------------------------------ IRAN: STRONGER THAN THE U.S. IN IRAQ ------------------------------------  2. (S) Allawi claimed that Iraqis are unsure as to U.S. policy toward Iran.  Although Allawi said he would welcome Iran as a constructive power, he added that Iran interferes in Iraq's internal affairs.  Iran is stronger on the ground than the US, Allawi concluded, with more assets, resources, and people.  He then stated that Iran is creating a favorable environment for itself in Iraq through its support of media outlets (television and radio stations).  3. (S) Allawi said that the vanishing middle class, failing government institutions, and stagnant economy in Iraq have paved the way for further Iranian intervention.  This has affected the Iraqis' perception of the US, he told Ambassador, adding that the situation has been exacerbated by the growth of Shia militias, excessive de-Ba'athification, and political use of corruption allegations.  ---------------------------- SISTANI: DIVIDER, NOT UNITER ----------------------------  4. (S) Allawi said he respects Ayatollah Sistani's role, but he described him as divisive and not a unifier.  Sistani, Allawi argued, has divided Iraqi Shias into two groups: a silent majority of secularists and a vocal minority of Islamists.  He told the Ambassador that the silent majority is too afraid to cross Sistani.  Allawi alleged that Iran is a major force behind Sistani, pointing out that the Badr Corps provides the outer ring of security to Sistani's headquarters in Najaf. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BAGHDAD 000343  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS/NEA; NEA/SA/EX; NEA/I; OES/STC (MGOLDBERG); OES/IHA (DSINGER and NCOMELLA) DEPT PASS TO USAID FOR ANE AND GH STATE PASS TO HHS USDA FOR FAS/PASS TO APHIS CAIRO PASS NAVY MEDICAL RESEARCH UNIT  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMED, AMGT, CASC, ASEC, EAGR, EAID, TBIO, KFLU, KPAO, IZ SUBJECT: EMBASSY BAGHDAD AVIAN INFLUENZA TRIPWIRES AND RESPONSE PLAN  REF A. 05 STATE 202102 B. 05 STATE 219189 C. STATE 1175  1. The Embassy Baghdad Avian Influenza (AI) Working Group (AIWG, which included MED, ECON, Health Attache, IRMO, USAID, USDA/FAS, MGT, PAO, and MNF-I), met on January 18, 2006 to discuss Embassy tripwires and possible responses.  Based on this meeting, the Embassy Health Unit drafted AI Tripwires and an Embassy response plan.  References for these tripwires included tripwire reports prepared by other U.S. Missions in the region, an MNC-I draft AI response plan, and the DOS/MED http://med.state.gov/influ_plan.htm.  The AIWG agreed that the location of a tripwire event - in a neighboring country, or near or within the city where an Embassy mission is located - is an important factor to consider.  All tripwire responses have been formulated by the Health Unit under the assumption that an effective human vaccine will not be available, that evacuation may not be possible, and that Level III care may be inadequate in spite of MNF-I support. Personnel movement will be coordinated between MNF-I and JASG (who works jointly with the MNF-I and the Mission)  Any of the tripwires could occur independently of another.  It is also possible that two or more tripwires could occur sequentially or simultaneously.  ------------ TRIPWIRE ONE ------------  2. TRIPWIRE ONE: A spike in the number and/or broadening geographic spread of animal-to-human cases or sustained human-to-human transmission through close, prolonged contact in a neighboring country: Iran, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Jordan, and Syria.  Embassy Actions in response to Tripwire One:  -- The AIWG meets to confirm that the tripwire has been met, assess the risk to the Mission in Iraq, review the tripwire responses and make recommendations to the Emergency Action Committee (EAC).  -- The EAC considers restricting civilian travel to the affected country or affected areas within the country, except for CDC or other personnel involved in possible investigation/containment efforts.  -- Mission Iraq coordinates with the U.S. Mission in the affected country regarding its plans for public announcements, warden messages, or plans for evacuating personnel.  -- Mission Iraq Health Unit provides briefings for staff (Americans and FSNs) and prepares written notices, as appropriate.  -- Mission Iraq Consular Section ensures that any public announcements or travel warnings issued by neighboring posts are transmitted to American citizens (AMCITS) and publishes the updates on the Consular  BAGHDAD 00000343  002 OF 005   Section's web site.  ------------ TRIPWIRE TWO ------------  3. TRIPWIRE TWO: A spike in the number and/or broadening geographic spread of animal-to-human cases or sustained human-to-human transmission through close, prolonged contact in Iraq.  Embassy Actions in response to Tripwire Two:  -- The AIWG meets to confirm that tripwire has been met, assess the risk to the Mission in Iraq, review the tripwire responses and make recommendations to the EAC.  -- The EAC meets regularly and coordinates closely with REOs to determine next steps as tripwire circumstances develop.  -- The EAC considers restricting travel by civilians to Iraq or affected areas, except for CDC or other personnel involved in possible investigation/ containment efforts.  -- The Mission Health Unit pushes additional Tamiflu to the affected REO or PRT areas.  -- The Mission coordinates with MNF-I regarding their levels of support in the affected area.  -- In coordination with the Department, the Consular Section issues public announcements, Warden Messages, or a travel advisory, and updates the Consular website.  -- The Mission's Public Affairs Section provides press guidance for the potential use of the Mission, REOs, the Department, and concerned government agencies and coordinates public affairs and media activities with DOD.  -- The Mission Health Unit provides briefings and written guidance for staff.  -- The EAC recommends that the Mission maintain full service operations in some areas and consider authorized departure in posts that are near the reported areas, as appropriate.  -- The Mission Health Unit implements home quarantine of any staff member who has been in close contact with a person confirmed to have an AI infection for a period of 10 days after exposure.  -------------- Tripwire Three --------------  4. TRIPWIRE THREE: Efficient and sustained human-to- human transmission in a neighboring country.  Embassy Actions in response to Tripwire Three:  -- Those responses mentioned in Tripwire Two as well as the following:  BAGHDAD 00000343  003 OF 005    -- Embassy staffs and equips a situation room and a call center for inquiries from American public and the press using cleared material to respond to press inquiries.  -- The Mission maintains normal Consulate and Embassy operations, but continues close monitoring of the situation.  -- The Health Unit identifies and trains personnel to prepare for possible screening of Post visitors for flu-like symptoms.  ------------- Tripwire Four -------------  5. TRIPWIRE FOUR: Efficient and sustained human-to- human transmission in Iraq.  Embassy Actions in response to Tripwire Four:  -- In addition to tripwire two and three responses:  -- The EAC examines the feasibility of Mission personnel working from remote locations, as well as a reduction of Embassy services and operations.  -- The EAC considers having employees remain in their quarters or implements authorized or ordered departure for all but those American and FSN staff designated essential.  -- The EAC considers restricting movement of Mission personnel to mission-critical activities only.  -- The Mission provides meals, MREs, and water at trailers.  -- The RSO splits the Marine Security Guard Detachment into two separate and independent units.  (In the event individuals in one unit acquire the disease, the other unit can still ensure proper coverage of classified materials.)  -- The Mission restricts visitors' access to Mission buildings.  If entry is necessary to conduct business, visitors must be screened for Avian Flu symptoms including the taking of temperature, and completion of a questionnaire- by personnel designated and trained during Tripwire number three.  -- The Health Unit maintains and updates its database of Embassy American employees hospitalized, quarantined, or ill at home.  -- The HU staff reviews with MNF-I the availability of medical/hospital facilities and support available should the Mission become affected.  -- The EAC considers a recommendation to the COM to request NEO operations from MNF-I. In order to consider an evacuation, assuming transportation is available, the destination country must be willing to accept the persons and have no pandemic of its own.  -- In coordination with MNF-I, the EAC considers  BAGHDAD 00000343  004 OF 005   closure of all or some of the REOs with special consideration of those closest to the involved areas of reported cases.  -- The Mission coordinates with ISU Amman the preparation of all required travel documents in anticipation of an authorized departure.  -- The Health Unit considers administering Tamiflu to staff that is likely to come in direct contact with potentially infected persons and those who have had close contact with those potentially infected persons.  ------------- Tripwire Five -------------  6. TRIPWIRE FIVE: Human AI infection-affected patients in the Mission.  Embassy Actions in response to Tripwire Five:  -- HU personnel will take immediate action to provide appropriate care and isolation to the affected patient(s).  -- The senior HU staff member evaluates if the case definition of AI illness has been met and discusses the case(s) with the AIWG to confirm that the tripwire has been met.  -- Management will coordinate meetings with the EAC and MNF-I and the Operations Center for Crisis Management.  -- The RMO or senior DOS HU provider will inform MED in Washington and provide input as requested.  -- The EAC determines avenues of communication, including MNF-I, which will play a key role in patient care and disposition, and confers with the appropriate agencies.  The following will be options:  A) Closure of Embassy with Shelter-in-Place. B) Operation of the remaining posts in Iraq. C) Evacuation of non-affected members after a 5-10 day observation in an isolated setting period if logistically possible and medically indicated.  --------------------------------------- IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND ACTIONS COMPLETED ---------------------------------------  7.  During the AIWG meeting, it was apparent that certain actions need to take place now, before any tripwires are established.  This report lists (A) actions that require immediate attention and (B) actions completed.  (A) Actions to be taken immediately:  -- AIWG and EAC review Tripwire plan with:  (i) USAID representatives: Due to USAID's presence in northern Iraq, it may have early opportunity for detection of changing AI Activity. (ii) RSO, CA, and GSO to assure that the specific issues are incorporated in the Tripwire responses.  BAGHDAD 00000343  005 OF 005    -- The Health Unit develops a skills bank.  --Mission prepares a draw-down list and a list of minimum essential personnel.  -- Regional Embassy Offices(REOs):  Coordinators integrate the specific needs of the REOs.  -- The Consular Section posts an AI advisory and Wardens message on the Baghdad Website  -- The Health Unit receives the DOS-promised Tamiflu, Oseltamivir to increase coverage for Mission personnel to 40 percent.  (B) Actions already taken by the Mission Health Unit:  -- Updated Administrative Memo to Mission personnel.  -- Inventoried and secured 9500 Tamiflu doses at the HU and 100 doses at each of the REOs.  -- Procured 500 N95 masks.  -- Fit-tested all HU personnel for the N95 masks.  -- Provided in-service training to HU regarding the management of suspected AI cases.  -- Posted trilingual hand washing and cough etiquette posters (English, Spanish, Arabic).  -- Briefed the medical staff at the 10th CSH on January 27, 2006.  -- Gave a presentation at the IZ town hall meeting held January 28, 2006.  8.  We look forward to the Department's comments on Mission Baghdad's strategy for responding to a possible outbreak of Avian Flu.  Best regards.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000344  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PTER, MOPS, ENRG, EPET, IZ SUBJECT: MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE FOR NATIONAL SECURITY DISCUSSES SECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE INTEGRITY  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (A), (B), an d (D).  1. (C//REL GBR AUS) SUMMARY: The Iraqi Ministerial Committee for National Security (MCNS) met on February 3 and addressed the following:  -- The MCNS acknowledged the work of the Joint Committee to Transfer Security Responsibility (JCTSR) and directed that its Working Group continue steps toward implementation.  -- Both the Ministers of Defense and Interior reported that the overall security situation in Iraq is improving.  -- The Prime Minister ordered a close examination of the security plan for Ashura as well as a publicity campaign that: warns Iraqis of the possibility of violence during celebrations of this Shia holiday; calls for nonviolence during this period; and states that many who attack Iraq are foreign.  -- The Prime Minister directed the Minister of Interior to study allegations reported to the PM by private sources of security problems in Ba'qubah and to come up with a plan to deal with them.  -- Concerning critical infrastructure integrity, the PM's staff maintained that DPM Chalabi has been given additional authorities over the energy ministries as discussed at the last MCNS meeting.  -- A proposed security plan for al-Anbar Province was briefed by the Minister of Defense, and it was agreed that the PM will meet this week with Anbar notables to respond to their concerns.  -- The Prime Minister tasked Deputy Prime Minister Jaburi with studying and addressing allegations of complaints by Sunni leaders about heavy-handed Coalition Force (CF) and Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) raids;  -- GEN Casey expressed concern about the recent shift of authority over the National Joint Operations Center (NJOC) and the Provincial Joint Coordination Centers (PJCCs) from the Ministry of the Interior (MOI) to the Minister of State for National Security Affairs.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari convened the MCNS at his residence on the evening of February 3.  Committee members present included Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr, Minister of Defense Saadoun Dulime, National Security Advisor Mowwafak al-Rubaie, MNF-I Commanding General Casey, Ambassador Khalilzad, and British Ambassador Patey. MNF-I Deputy Commanding General Houghton and PM's chief of staff also were present.  Minister of State for National Security Affairs Karim al-Anzi was absent.  Ambassador Khalilzad had to depart early due to a previously scheduled engagement.  ----------------------------------- TRANSFER OF SECURITY RESPONSIBILITY -----------------------------------  3.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  The MCNS agreed to acknowledge the work done to date by the JCTSR, and it directed that the committee's Working Group continue to develop an implementation plan.  Later in the meeting, it was noted that Memoranda of Agreement have been prepared among MNF-I and the Ministries of Defense and Interior pertaining to command and control relationships once the transfer of security responsibility begins.  -------------------------- GENERAL SECURITY SITUATION --------------------------  4.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Minister of Defense Dulime said that in his view the security situation nationwide is improving. According to him, attacks are down, intelligence capabilities are improving, and Iraqi Security Force (ISF) defenses and counterattacks on insurgents are becoming more effective.  In Baghdad, he noted, raids, checkpoints, and searches have improved security.  In addition, Dulime reported, intelligence-based operations conducted against insurgents in areas other than Baghdad have had an impact on the enemy's ability to carry out operations in the capital.  Dulime said  BAGHDAD 00000344  002 OF 004   that the level of cooperation among MOD, MOI, and MNF-I forces is excellent and getting better all the time.  With regard to trouble spots, Dulime reported that the area on the Tigris near Taji remains a problem because there are no security forces operating there and insurgents who have been forced out of other regions are fleeing there.  5.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Minister of Interior Jabr agreed with Dulime that ISF now have the initiative.  Jabr repeated the plan that he described at the last MCNS meeting to fortify fixed checkpoints in Baghdad, and he reported that operations against insurgents have increased following a lull during the election period.  It had been hoped, he said, that the number of attacks on police would decrease as insurgents turned increasingly to the political process, but this did not happen.  6.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  National Security Advisor Rubaie said that he believes attacks are down because the 80 percent of the insurgents who are rejectionists are beginning to play a more active role in politics, leading to fewer people bearing arms against the ISF and Coalition Forces (CF).  British Ambassador Patey agreed with Rubaie's assessment, cautioning that as more rejectionists join the political process it is important that continuing security measures do not inadvertently undermine the political progress.  All present agreed that although attacks by rejectionists seem to be declining, attacks by the terrorists and Saddamists on the fringes result in the most casualties.  7. (C//REL GBR AUS)  The PM agreed that progress has been made on security since the Iraqi Transitional Government (ITG) took office in May.  However, he said, major security challenges remain, especially attacks on critical infrastructure and assassinations of political, governmental, and academic personalities.  The PM directed that a plan be prepared within the next five days to deal with the situation in the Taji area and elsewhere.  -------------------- ASHURA SECURITY PLAN --------------------  8. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ja'afari said he remains concerned about the potential for violence directed at religious pilgrims and gatherings related to the upcoming Ashura observances.  He pointed out that more than two million pilgrims will come to Karbala, mostly on foot.  Suicide vest bombers, car bombs, and indirect fire attacks on large crowds of people should be anticipated, he said.  Repeating a concern he raised at the last MCNS meeting, the PM said he remains worried that the insurgents may try to poison the food and water sold to marchers.  Rubaie stated that reports indicate an increase in the number of foreign fighters who have been entering Iraq, mainly from Syria.  The worst-case scenario must be considered, he warned, and until these reports are proven false it must be assumed that foreign fighters are entering Iraq to carry out attacks during Ashura.  9.  (C//REL GBR AUS) The MOI has prepared a security plan, which was passed to Rubaie with directions from Ja'afari to study it and report back.  In the meantime, it was agreed that a publicity campaign should be launched to sensitize the public to the threat of attack during the celebration and to ask for cooperation in spotting and reporting suspicious persons or circumstances.  GEN Casey suggested that Ja'afari call on the leaders of all factions to join with him to call publicly for a peaceful Ashura and to emphasize the message that an attack against anyone during this period is an attack on Iraq.  GEN Casey explained that this will put the terrorists in a lose-lose situation: they lose if they are prevented from launching attacks, and they lose if they launch attacks that are universally condemned by all sectors of Iraqi society.  He added that foreign fighters who have been captured entering Iraq with the intent to attack Ashura celebrations must be put on television so that Iraqis will see that these attacks come from outside Iraq.  Ja'afari agreed to work with the Sunni Waqf to make a common appeal for nonviolence, and he directed Rubaie to coordinate.  -------- BA'QUBAH --------  10. (C//REL GBR AUS) Ja'afari said that he had received a "very important report" prepared by private sources on people  BAGHDAD 00000344  003 OF 004   and places in Ba'qubah that are involved in the insurgency. The PM turned this report over to Jabr with instructions to review it and to come up with a plan to respond.  --------------------- ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE ---------------------  11. (C//REL GBR AUS) Ja'afari asked if there have been any recent developments with regard to the energy infrastructure problems discussed at the last meeting.  GEN Casey and Ambassador Patey said that they understand that DPM Chalabi has not yet been given the added authorities over the energy ministries agreed upon at the last meeting, and that the GOI therefore has taken no significant actions to address this problem.  Chief of Staff Tamimi reported that the order giving Chalabi extra authorities had been signed and delivered to him within the past day or two.  -------------- ANBAR PROVINCE --------------  12. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ja'afari asked about the status of replies to the petitions he received during his visit last month to Anbar province, noting that he owes a response. Dulime reported he has been working with GEN Casey on formulating a security plan for the province in response to the petitions.  It was agreed that the governor and other notables from the province would be called to Baghdad on February 7 to discuss the plan with Ja'afari.  Dulime reported on the plan's outline to the group, which is based on five basic principles and has sections that address the police, the army, and detainees as they relate to Anbar. (NOTE: The basic principles are that everyone will agree to condemn terrorism and violence; all will work to find solutions that are acceptable to the people of the province; all will work to create the conditions whereby the ISF will be capable of taking responsibility for the security of the province; that when this occurs CF will withdraw from the cities to bases in unpopulated areas; and that a committee will be formed of all interested parties to agree on a proposed timeline to implement the plan.  END NOTE.)  At Ja'afari's request, GEN Casey agreed to assist with contacting the governor and transporting him and other members of the delegation to Baghdad.  -------------------- COALITION OPERATIONS --------------------  13. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ja'afari said that he recently has heard complaints about the conduct of CF during raids and other operations.  The PM directed that a committee headed by DPM Abed Mutlaq al-Jaburi be formed to study and respond to these complaints.  Ja'afari also expressed displeasure concerning a recent operation in Sadr City that resulted in the death of a woman and child, complaining that he knew nothing about it and was embarrassed when it came up during a press conference.  GEN Casey explained that the raid was a well-planned operation targeting known Ansar al-Sunna terrorists who had come to Sadr City from Mosul.  When the operation commenced, people from two nearby houses opened fire on the soldiers and return fire was necessary.  It was regrettable that innocent lives had been lost, GEN Casey noted, but the targets of the raid were successfully captured.  (NOTE: Ja'afari has been reminded in the past that he should rely on his Situation Room staff to keep him fully briefed on military operations  of this nature.  END NOTE.)  --------------------------- CONTROL OVER NJOC AND PJCCs ---------------------------  14. (C//REL GBR AUS)  GEN Casey raised the subject of who controls the National Joint Operations Center (NJOC) and the network of Provincial Joint Coordination Centers (PJCCs) that report to it.  These bodies had always fallen under the control of the MOI, but two weeks ago, GEN Casey said, he learned that authority over them had been transferred to Minister of State for National Security Affairs al-Anzi. Ja'afari played this down, first claiming that this arrangement dated back to the Allawi administration and then saying that the current government only has a short time left and that it would be embarrassing to al-Anzi to remove the  BAGHDAD 00000344  004 OF 004   NJOC and PJCCs from his control.  GEN Casey replied that the MOI official who had overseen the NJOC and PJCCs was fired two weeks ago and only then did he learn that al-Anzi was exercising control.  Ambassador Patey further objected that the realignment of responsibilities for such important institutions was inconsistent with the actions of a caretaker government, and he urged that whatever changes had taken place in the last few weeks be undone.  Ja'afari said (without much conviction) that he would "take care of this issue." KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000351  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2026 TAGS: PINS, PTER, PINR, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: CONTINUING TO REACH OUT TO THE SUNNIS: DEMOCRACY IS THE ANSWER  REF: BAGHDAD 0071  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C)  SUMMARY: In a follow-up meeting on January 30, 2006, the Ambassador met with Sheikh Khamis Hawaz al-Sidiq, a former Iraqi Army Major General from Hillah and senior Shammar tribal figure.  Sidiq criticized the US for depending on expatriate Iraqis when it launched the war, and he defended the resistance as legitimate.  He also bitterly criticized the Kurds for causing problems with the Arabs in northern Iraq.  The Ambassador underlined that democracy was the way to address the problems facing Iraq.  Sheikh Sidiq ended the meeting by indicating that he would cooperate and support non-violence.  We received word of his arrest on early February 6 - a development that will not encourage like-minded tribalists to trust the government.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C)  Sidiq began forcefully by complaining that the United States had planted sectarianism and had not come to the Iraqis who could make decisions.  According to Sidiq, those Iraqis that came in from abroad, such as Hakim and Jafari, do not care for Iraq and want to divide it.  He said that he loved Americans, but not those here with guns.  Sidiq claimed that resistance is a legitimate right - "how can we accept that Iraq be divided by federalism?  We will not allow Iraq to be divided."  Sidiq claimed he had 600,000 fighters under his orders, but was only using 20,000 now.  "Funny that you are fighting in the sands.  We will tire you, wear you out.  The solution is fixing mistakes. We are one country."  3.  (C)  Sidiq then spoke of his view of the Kurdish problem.  He said, "The problem is between the Kurds and the Arabs. Let the Arabs reach an understanding amongst themselves. Kurds have a state, an army, and ministers. They are stable. While the Kurds exist, we will not resolve the problems."  4.  (C)  The Ambassador explained in detail that the best way to address these problems is through democracy and by respecting each others' views.  He stated that the answer is not to have one group take over and tell the others what to do but to get those who do not participate to participate. All Iraqis could be well off if Iraqi is successful, and one day Iraqis should see each other for what they can do, not what religion they believe in.  5.  (C)  Despite his complaints, Sidiq ended the meeting by acknowledging that the political process offered opportunities; he even said he would join the government if asked (Comment:  likely one of the reasons for his visit. End Comment.)  He added that, of the current prime minister candidates, he supports Jabiri, but he cautioned that the United States should listen carefully and sift through the candidates' words.  As he finished he said, "We will put down our arms."  6.  (C)  COMMENT:  We have never heard of Sheikh Sidiq as a powerful force in the resistance, although it is easy to believe that he would know tribal kinsmen involved in insurgent activities.  This conversation shifted from bellicose to conciliatory by the end of the meeting. Sheikh Sidiq was likely uncertain as to what course to follow - reject the formation of new government or join the process - when he arrived for the meeting and therefore chose an aggressive approach at first.  By the end of the meeting, he appeared to be convinced by the Ambassador's argument and to buy into the Iraqi political process, leaving the meeting in an upbeat mood.  This is representative of many of the Sunni rejectionists who still need to be convinced that becoming part of the political process is in their best interests.  We received word of Sidiq's arrest on early February 6 - a development that will not encourage like-minded tribalists to trust the government.  (NOTE: He will be released later on February 6.  END NOTE.).  END COMMENT.  7. (SBU)  Biographic information: Sheikh Khamis Hawaz al-Sidiq claims to be the head of the Shamar tribe with four million Iraqis under him.  He stated that he is 67 years old and has been in politics for the last 50 years, dating back to the time of Gamal Abdel Nasser.  His son Mohammad accompanied him to the meeting. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000352  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KJUS, KCRM, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: DE-BAATHIFICATION AND THE IRAQI HIGH TRIBUNAL  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (S) SUMMARY:  On February 4, 2006, Ambassador and Regime Crimes Liaison Kevin Dooley met with Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Chalabi to discuss how the January 18, 2006 order of the High National Commission of De-Ba'athification (HNCD) - which declared Judge Sa'eed Mousa Alhamash as subject to exclusion from public sector employment - would impact the IHT process.  The purpose of the meeting was to convince Dr. Chalabi to exert his influence with the HNCD to reverse the January 18, 2006 order and to cease HNCD action against the court.  Without such action, it is feared that the HNCD will continue to exert political pressure on the IHT such that its independence will become compromised and the court may cease to function properly.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ---- Background of Political Interference with the IHT --------------------------------------------- ----  2. (S) During the week of July 17, 2005, the HNCD sought the dismissal of four IHT investigators from the court.  In addition, while RCLO has not seen any order listing names, the IHT advises RCLO that the HNCD was targeting 19 IHT judges and prosecutors for removal (including Chief IHT Investigative Judge, Raid Juihy).  In response, RCLO understands that the United States Government brokered a compromise with the ITG whereby the HNCD agreed that it would not interfere with the IHT judiciary -- i.e., judges, prosecutors, and investigators.  The HNCD was granted authority to remove from the IHT any administrative personnel who were linked to the Ba'ath party.  As a result of this intervention, all public efforts by the HNCD to remove IHT judges and prosecutors ceased.  3. (S) In late 2005, however, IHT personnel learned privately that the HNCD might renew its efforts to remove certain judges and prosecutors.  At the urging of the IHT, on December 15, 2005 Dr. Khudhair Fadhil Abbas (the Secretary General of Iraq's Council of Ministers) issued a notice which stated that the Council of Ministers was the sole entity with authority to enforce any HNCD decision.  The notice also prohibited the HNCD from sending de-Ba'athification notices directly to any ministry or government entity, requiring that that all HNCD notices be issued through the Council of Ministers.  4. (S) On December 29, 2005, Dr. Abbas issued another notice which stated that the judges and prosecutors of the IHT were not subject to the jurisdiction of the HNCD.  In that notice, Dr. Abbas stated that IHT administrative employees were subject to the HNCD's jurisdiction, but only after the IHT submitted information about such persons to the Council of Ministers.  ------------------------------------------- Immediate Attempts to Interfere Politically -------------------------------------------  5.  (S) On January 9, 2006, the presiding judge of the Ad-Dujayl trial, Judge Rizgar Amin, submitted his letter of resignation to the IHT.  The next most senior judge on the Ad-Dujayl trial chamber, Judge Sa'eed Mousa Alhamash, assumed the position of acting presiding judge while the Prime Minister considered whether to accept Judge Rizgar's resignation.  6. (S) On January 18, 2006, the HNCD submitted a notification directly to the IHT which stated that Judge Sa'eed was not eligible to serve as a public sector employee because he had been a member of the Ba'ath party.  On the morning of January 22, 2006 (two days before trial was set to recommence), the President of the IHT, Judge Jamal (a Kurd), issued an order which removed Judge Sa'eed (a Shiite) from Trial Chamber 1, placed Judge Sa'eed on Trial Chamber 2, and appointed Judge Raouf Abd Al-Rahman (a Kurd) in his place.   (COMMENT.  While the IHT President arguably has the authority to transfer judges from one panel to another, there is no legal authority in the IHT Statute or IHT Rules of Evidence and Procedure which grants the IHT President the authority to name a permanent Presiding Judge.  Rather, a Presiding Judge is elected by his colleagues on the trial chamber. END COMMENT.)  7. (S) RCLO informed Judge Jamal of its serious concerns about his decision to enforce the HNCD order against Judge Sa'eed.  RCLO warned Judge Jamal that, if he continued to allow the HNCD to manipulate the IHT and the political tampering with the judiciary that it represented, the RCLO may be required to withdraw support from the IHT.  Later that evening, Judge Ra'id met with Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and HNCD supporter Ahmed Chalabi, whose nephew Salim Chalabi was  BAGHDAD 00000352  002 OF 002   removed as IHT President by then-Prime Minister Ayad Allawi in 2004.  Judge Ra'id advised RCLO that Ahmed Chalabi would permit Judge Sa'eed to return to the Ad-Dujayl Trial Chamber if he did not serve as the presiding judge.  8. (S) On January 24, 2006, the Ad-Dujayl trial was set to continue without the presence of Judge Rizgar.  Because of the unresolved political situation regarding Judge Sa'eed and the HNCD, the U.S. Embassy advised RCLO to delay trial for at least one day in order to resolve the matter.  After negotiations among the IHT President, Presiding Judge Ra'ouf, and RCLO, trial was adjourned until Sunday, January 29, 2006.  9. (S) Concurrently, Mr. Dooley and Judge Ra'id met with Judge Jamal to reach a compromise over the matter.  Rather than continue the dispute, Mr. Dooley explained to Judge Jamal that the IHT and RCLO would work together to reach a solution.  Judge Jamal agreed and confirmed with Mr. Dooley that an acceptable compromise to the RCLO would include the return of Judge Sa'eed to Trial Chamber 1, but with Judge Raouf remaining as Presiding Judge.  10. (S) Judge Jamal also advised Mr. Dooley that Judge Sa'eed was required to resolve the matter directly with the HNCD and that Judge Jamal was not a party to that dispute.  Judge Jamal continued that Ahmed Chalabi had the power to resolve the matter and that, if the allegations against Judge Sa'eed were dropped, Judge Jamal would reinstate him to the Ad-Dujayl Trial Chamber.  11. (S) Between January 24, 2006 and January 29, 2006 RCLO and U.S. Embassy officials made repeated unsuccessful attempts to contact Dr. Chalabi, who had left Iraq for Davos.  Despite the lack of any resolution on the political interference issue by January 29, 2006, the RCLO decided that trial should continue without Judge Sa'eed.  As a result, the Ad-Dujayl trial recommenced then and continued on February 1 and February 2 even though Judge Sa'eed was not present.  ------------------------------------- Direct Discussions with Ahmed Chalabi -------------------------------------  12. (S) On February 4, 2006, U.S. Chief of Mission Zalmay Khalizad, Mr. Dooley, and several others met with Ahmed Chalabi to discuss several matters, including the HNCD actions against the IHT.  Dr. Chalabi stated that the HNCD lacked the power to remove anyone from the IHT and that its sole responsibility was to advise Iraqi government agencies of evidence that certain employees were former Ba'athists. Dr. Chalabi also stated that the HNCD was obligated to do this so that defense attorneys could not challenge any IHT conviction on the ground that it was issued in violation of Article 33 of the IHT Statute.  (COMMENT.  Article 33 of the IHT Statute prohibits any member of the Ba'ath party from serving on the Court.  END COMMENT.)  Besides Judge Sa'eed, Dr. Chalabi stated that the HNCD had "solid evidence" of Ba'ath party ties against fourteen other IHT judges. Pointedly, Dr. Chalabi mentioned by name Chief Investigative Judge Ra'id Juhy but did not explain why the HNCD had not sent letters against Judge Ra'i d or any other judges.  13. (S) In response, Mr. Dooley explained that, under Articles 131 and Article 1 of the IHT Statute, the IHT was independent and that the HNCD lacked jurisdiction over it. Mr. Dooley also stated that, in view of the fact that Judge Sa'eed had sat on the court for 20 months, the timing of the HNCD's order against him was suspicious.  Mr. Dooley reiterated that, if political attacks on the IHT continue, the court may cease to function.  Mr. Dooley demanded that the HNCD stop these attacks and issue an order acknowledging its lack of jurisdiction over the IHT and stating that it lacked any evidence against Judge Sa'eed.  Dr. Chalabi stated that he would resolve the matter with respect to Judge Sa'eed and that the HNCD would not issue letters against IHT judges in the future.  Dr. Chalabi stated further that he would meet with the HNCD the next day and that the matter would be resolved within one week. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000356  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: ELECTORAL PANEL TO START FINAL DELIBERATIONS FEBRUARY 7  REF: BAGHDAD 320  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (C) Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq (IECI) UN International Commissioner Craig Jenness and UN Legal Adviser to the IECI Jose Maria Aranaz told poloffs February 5 that the final court decisions on the appeals could be completed as early as February 8.  Aranaz explained that the Transitional Electoral Panel (TEP) expected to complete formal hearings by February 6, and would start deliberating on final decisions February 7.  He added that of the original 24 appeals that were submitted to the IECI, only 13 were eventually filed with the TEP.  Of this number, one appeal was rejected outright by the TEP, and two other minor cases were decided in favor of the IECI.  Jenness was not surprised that about half of the appeals ended up at the TEP, offering that the pre-TEP review by the IECI likely gave pause to some appellants to reassess the value of moving their respective appeals forward.  He added that he did not expect the TEP to accept any more appeals, and that the judges appeared intent on completing their work without any delay.  2. (C) Jenness said that given the current timeline, the IECI could be able to issue certified results as early as February 12.  Both Jenness and Aranaz noted that the most important appeals still await a final decision, including the UIA List 555 appeal on the formula used to allocate governorate seats.  This, and similar appeals filed by other parties, would have the greatest impact on the election outcome, if upheld by the TEP.  Both Jenness and Aranaz said they remained cautiously optimistic that the TEP would rule in favor of the IECI.  3. (C) Comment: The most significant appeals were submitted by 555, Iraqi Turkoman Front List 630, and  the Kurdistan Gathering List 730.  Although the IECI must await a final decision before announcing certified results, various IECI officials have repeatedly expressed confidence that the election seating allocation will not be affected by the ultimate TEP decisions. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000357  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2026 TAGS: IZ, PGOV, PNAT SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: SHAHRISTANI SAYS GAP NARROWING IN PM RACE; HASHIMI SAYS SUNNIS PONDERING GOVERNMENT POSITIONS  Classified By: POL Couns Robert Ford, reason 1.4 (d)  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. (C) Shia Independent PM candidate Shahristani told visiting DAS Godec February 6 that the gap has narrowed considerably in UIA 555 discussion on PM candidates.  Both Shahristani and Shia Independent Sami al-Askari told us February 6 that the Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) would put the matter to a vote on February 11.  Askari also claimed that al-Jabiri has dropped out of the race amidst internet chatter that the Fadhila leader published pro- Saddam articles in the 1980's.  SCIRI insider and MFA official Hamid Bayati told us February 6 that Jafari is merely delaying the List 555 PM decision to wring concessions from SCIRI.  In particular, Bayati claimed, Jafari wants to be named the head of the List 555 block inside the parliament - a position now held by SCIRI head Abdel Aziz al-Hakim.Tawafuq's Tariq al-Hashimi said the Sunni coalition should have a list of cabinet candidates to share with the Embassy in a few days, noting that both he and Muslim Brotherhood's Osama al-Tikriti are potential presidency candidates.  We report these discussions not because of landmark decisions but rather to demonstrate the thinking and occasional weird stories that we find among political contacts now.  Talks between the blocks are still at an early stage:  we lack final election results which might matter for List 555 if the race between Abd al-Mahdi and Jafari is down to a few votes.  In addition, we don't have a clear List 555 leader for program negotiations which the new PM should be.  Discussions will shift into a higher gear after February 11 when we could have a List 555 PM nominee and final election results.  END SUMMARY  ----------------------------------- SHAHRISTANI: ADMITS LIMITED SUPPORT -----------------------------------  2. (C) During a February 6 meeting with NEA/DAS Godec, TNA Deputy Speaker and Shia Prime Minister candidate Hussein al-Shahristani explained that the Shia Islamist Coalition is still trying "very hard" to reach consensus on a candidate and that the gap has been narrowed considerably. As a result, the Shia Coalition postponed the Prime Minister vote until Saturday, February 11.  Shahristani said that the Coalition fears that a close vote could exacerbate its internal tensions.  He added that members are prepared to vote if no agreement can be reached. Although Shahristani has not conceded the race, he admitted that he currently does not have support from any group outside the independents.   Shahristani said that the Shia coalition would be happy to negotiate with Tawafuq and Ayad Allawi's Iraqi National List as a combined bloc (if it comes to fruition) or separately with each party.  He also noted that the Shia Islamist Coalition is readying a political program that includes heavy accents on security, national economic reconstruction and employment.  ------------------------------------------- ASKARI SAYS BOTH SHAHRISTANI AND JABIRI OUT -------------------------------------------  4. (C) Independent UIC 555 coalition member Sami Al-Askari, however, told poloff February 6 that Shahristani has in fact told other Shia independents that he has decided to drop out of the PM race.  Askari said the Shia coalition will vote to decide who will be Iraq's next Prime Minister February 11. He claimed that Fadhila Party leaders had asked that the vote take place on this date because it is considering backing Prime Minister Jafari rather than Deputy President Abd al-Mahdi.  Askari alleged that there is internet chatter that Jabiri published articles under a pseudonym in the 1980's praising Saddam Hussein.  Askari claimed that Fadhila spiritual leader Ayatollah Yaqubi is considering backing Jafari, and the party is awaiting his final decision.  Al-Askari also claimed Nadeem al-Jabiri has dropped out of the race.  (Comment:  we have not heard such a thing from Jabiri himself, and February 6 press reports show his aides insisting the PM issue is not yet decided.  End Comment.  We report this, therefore, mainly to show the kinds of chatter on the Baghdad circuits now.)  5. (C) SCIRI Council of Representatives members Abdul Kareem al-Nakeeb and Abdul Jabar Rehaif al-Abudi echoed Askari's views in a separate February 6 conversation with poloff.  They said there had been an agreement to hold a vote that day, but that it was decided that no decision  BAGHDAD 00000357  002 OF 002   could be made until after the IECI announced the final, certified election results.  Nakeeb and al-Abudi were confident that Deputy President Adel Abd al-Mahdi would be chosen as the next Prime Minister.  6.  (C)  Another SCIRI insider, Deputy Foreign Minister Hamid Bayati, told us February 6 that Abd al-Mahdi will get the PM nod from the Shia Coalition.  He said that Jafari is merely delaying the outcome hoping to secure concessions from SCIRI.  In particular, Bayati claimed, Jafari wants to be named the head of the Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) inside the parliament - a position now held by SCIRI head Abdel Aziz al-Hakim.  Bayati with a wry smile predicted SCIRI would not be accommodating and could accept the February 11 vote outcome without a pre-cooked deal.  ---------- SUNNI LIST ----------  7. (C)  In a separate February 6 meeting with DAS Godec, Sunni Arab Tawafuq Front leaders Adnan al-Dulaymi and Tariq al-Hashimi dismissed out of hand the possibility of Qassim Daoud taking over a security ministry.  Dulaymi was equally dismissive of Mithal Alusi ("he's not one of us!"). Hashimi said that making sure that non-sectarian professionals with no ties to the militias are in charge of the security ministries is a Tawafuq red line.  Hashimi told Poloff that Sunnis are putting together a list of possible candidates for senior government positions and should have a list to share with the Embassy in a few days. Hashimi said that he or the Muslim Brotherhood's Osama al- Tikriti would be likely Tawafuq candidates for the Iraqi Presidency should Tawafuq seek that position.  8. (C) Separately, Salih Mutlak told Poloff that there is no truth to published reports that his Iraqi National Dialogue Front (with 11 seats) had joined the List 555 coalition.  Mutlak said he had no projection on the outcome of the PM sweepstakes saying only that Jafari and Abd al- Mahdi are close.  Mutlak met Jafari on February 6 but claims he was not offered a position nor did he offer Jafari his support.  Mutlak said that leaders of the MARAM front, formed after the election to protest the results, met on February 5 and decided that the Front will continue to exist as a political coalition, with a head to be elected at a later date.  ------- COMMENT -------  9.  (C)  As our reporting over the past several days shows, the Iraqi political class is hard at work chewing over possibilities.  In typical Iraqi fashion, there is more attention to personalities winning cabinet seats than there is to agreed government programs.  We have heard from more thoughtful members of the political elite, such as Fuad Masum and Hussein Shahristani, that they have started drafting out government program proposals.  We are starting to lay out ideas as well.  Above all, the talks are still at an early stage:  we lack final election results which might matter for List 555 if the race between Abd al-Mahdi and Jafari is down to a few votes.  In addition, we don't have a clear List 555 leader for program negotiations which the new PM should be.  Discussions will shift into a higher gear after February 11 when we could have a List 555 PM nominee and final election results.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000359  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2016 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, EPET, ETRD, MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PREL, PTER, TU, IZ SUBJECT: CHALABI BULLISH ON FUEL PRICING, DOWNCAST ON EXPORT POTENTIAL  REF: A. BAGHDAD 219      B. BAGHDAD 241  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C/REL GBR AUS) SUMMARY: Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi told the Ambassador on February 5 that a letter issued by PM Ja'fari empowering Chalabi to oversee fuel supplies to Baghdad was wholly inadequate to the task of restoring domestic refined product supplies and exports.  The Ambassador followed up February 5 with the PM to secure a broader mandate for Chalabi.  Chalabi appeared heartened by the market response to higher fuel prices mandated by the IMF.  He reported that Baghdad demand for gasoline is down sharply, putting total domestic consumption within range of domestic refining capacity plus a reduced level of imports. Negative news centered on ramifications of a February 2 explosion and fire at the Kirkuk oil processing (desulfurization) facility.  Initial estimates indicate that complete repair work will take up to a year -- a severe blow to hopes of restoring northern oil exports.  Finally, Chalabi briefly touched upon oil arrears negotiations with the Turkish government, noting that he had spoken to the Turkish Ambassador about clearing the arrears and putting the refined products trade on sounder footing.  In response, the Ambassador offered broad-based assistance, including contacts with suppliers to speed up delivery of essential repair parts; intervention with the PM and other senior personnel; and increased cooperation to ensure completion of vital oil and electricity sector projects.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------------------------- Chalabi Lacks Authority as Energy Czar --------------------------------------  2.  (C/REL GBR AUS) DPM Chalabi told the Ambassador on February 4 that, although he had received a letter from the PM empowering him to oversee the activities of the Ministries of Oil and Electricity, the letter in fact does little. (COMMENT: The letter only vaguely defined his authority and referred only to fuel supplies for Baghdad.  In addition to ignoring consumption needs of the country at large, it did not touch upon the need to bring export capacity back on line.  END COMMENT.)  Chalabi ascribed the poor follow-through to bad staffing rather than any disagreement within the GOI.  The Ambassador promised to follow up with the PM to ensure that the powers as promised (reftel A) are authorized ASAP.  3.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Taking immediate steps to resolve the situation, on February 5 the Ambassador delivered to PM Ja'fari more comprehensive language to include in the letter empowering Chalabi as "Energy Czar."  Ja'fari said he is receptive to the Ambassador's argument, promising to sign a modified version of the letter on February 6.  ---------------------------------------- Making the Most of Consumption Reduction ----------------------------------------  4. (C/REL GBR AUS) Chalabi told the Ambassador that demand in Baghdad had dropped to about 4 million liters of fuel per day from a high of about 8.5-10 million liters (24 million liters countrywide) before the December 18 price increases that mandated by the IMF Stand-By Arrangement (SBA).  He put national consumption following the price increase at about 20 million liters per day, of which Iraq could produce 13 million liters with reasonable certainty (2.5 million liters from Daura refinery, 3 million liters from Basrah, and 8.5 million liters from Bayji).  Iraq thus requires imports, he added, of some 6 million liters per day -- a goal possible to meet under the 2006 monthly import limit of $150 million (NOTE: This figure allows for a monthly payment of approximately $50 million on Iraq's arrears, on top of the $150 million.  END NOTE.)  Although he called the 13 million liters of domestic production "sustainable," Chalabi readily acknowledged that meeting this target required Bayji refinery remain on-line and accessible.  "They are 60% of our capacity," Chalabi said, "and right now we are getting nothing."  --------------------------------------------- -- Impact of the Kirkuk Processing Plant Explosion --------------------------------------------- --  BAGHDAD 00000359  002 OF 002    5. (C/REL GBR AUS) Iraq Reconstruction Management Office (IRMO) Deputy Director MG Heine then briefed DPM Chalabi on the status of the year-old Kirkuk oil processing facility since a February 2 explosion and fire there.  Although the exact cause of the blast is not yet known (the fire has not yet been extinguished), MG Heine reported that the facility could, by our first estimate, be out of commission for up to a year.  Many of the parts required for repair are special order and not readily available, he said.  MG Heine added that IRMO hopes to have a more complete assessment o/a February 9, and then will be better able to judge whether the facility may be brought back in line in stages.  The old facility, currently processing 150,000 BPD, could be brought up to a rate of 500,000 BPD over the course of the next month.  With 350,000 BPD going to feed the Bayji refinery, the GOI would be able to export a maximum of 150,000 BPD from the north once the 40" pipeline is repaired.  6. (C/REL GBR AUS) Chalabi was visibly distressed, saying that this news "knocks a big hole in my expectation."  He stated that Iraq has to export no less than 1.57 million BPD in order to meet IMF budget expectations, leaving aside domestic refining needs.  (NOTE: The actual IMF projection is somewhat higher than 1.57M BPD but is pegged at a lower price per barrel than currently obtained.  END NOTE.)  Chalabi said that his goal is to reach 3 million BPD by the end of 2006 -- a goal that, in theory, is achievable with improved security and projects due to come on-line this year.  He expects a production increase of 200-300,000 BPD from 60 USG-financed well workovers in the south, due to begin in April and be completed in six months.  Chalabi said that the explosive charges necessary for this project had arrived in Iraq on January 18.  Another 230 wells would benefit from workovers, he added, but would require additional gas oil separation (GOSP) capacity before the new oil produced could be processed.  Chalabi also asked for U.S. help to procure pipeline valves, stressing that these are essential to installing every 10 kilometers to avoid draining a damaged pipeline before effecting repairs (Comment: One of MoO's initial objections to repairing the currently down 22" product line was that they could not afford to waste the fuel - the line would inevitably be hit again as soon as it filled up, spilling thousands of liters of irreplaceable product. End Comment).  -------------------------------- Turkish Arrears -- Initial Steps --------------------------------  7. (C/REL GBR AUS) Chalabi said that he had spoken to the Turkish Ambassador to Iraq about Iraq's outstanding debt to Turkish fuel suppliers and finding a way forward for future deliveries.  According to Chalabi, Iraq had paid the Turks $150 million in January; another $700 million is still owed, which Iraq proposes to pay over the next year.  He said he stressed that Iraq's total monthly expenditure on fuel could not exceed $200 million/month.  The Turks favor a six month repayment schedule, Chalabi said, adding that "we'll work this out."  ----------------------- Offer of USG Assistance -----------------------  8. (C/REL GBR AUS) The Ambassador stressed that the U.S. is eager to work with Chalabi as an effective GOI interlocutor to achieve our shared goals in the energy sector.  He offered personnel to assist in the DPM's office; assistance urging suppliers to make a priority delivery of parts for repairs in Kirkuk; intervention with the Prime Minister and other senior GOI officials when necessary; and increased cooperation/intervention to ensure timely completion of electricity and oil sector projects. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000360  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KJUS, KCRM, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: TRIAL OF SADDAM HUSSEIN - SESSION 9  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The ninth session of the Ad-Dujayl trial was delayed on February 1 as five of the eight defendants refused to comply with the Court's order to appear before it.  After only three defendants complied, the Court heard testimony from two complainants and three witnesses.  The defendants' private defense team, which had walked out of the January 30 session, provided the Court with a list of demands, and the Court responded with its own list for the defense team.  The new presiding judge, Judge Raouf, has introduced an increased level of procedural discipline and decorum that have made the process more orderly and focused. END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) The ninth session (2/1/06) of the Ad-Dujayl trial was delayed as five of the eight defendants refused to comply with the Court's order to appear before it.  Prior to the opening of the session, the presiding judge announced that the session would begin as a closed session.  At 1145, the Court ordered the detainees to be brought to the courtroom; however, only three defendants had voluntarily complied by 1310.  The presiding judge recessed the court to permit additional time for the remaining defendants to comply.  The session resumed at 1350 in an open session, although no additional defendants were present.  The court heard testimony from the two remaining complainants and the first three of five "at-large" (those not detained) witnesses. (NOTE: Testimonies from injured parties (complainants) are heard prior to evidence from other sources. END NOTE.)  -------------------------- Defense Attorney Wrangling --------------------------  3. (SBU) The defendants were represented by their Iraqi High Tribunal (IHT)-appointed attorneys.  The private defense team had been barred from returning to future court sessions after its walkout on January 30. On February 3, the Court received a letter from the private defense team that set the following conditions for their return:  -- The Court should be just, impartial, and in accordance with the law;  -- The Court should apologize to the defense attorneys and cancel the session held without them;  -- Chief Judge Raouf Abdul-Rahman should resign due to his partiality resulting from past persecution by Saddam's former regime;  -- The Iraqi Ministry of Interior should ensure the safe travel of the defense attorneys while they are in Iraq, but actual protection of the attorneys and their families should be provided by the U.S. military;  -- Adjournments should not be less than one month to accommodate defense attorneys traveling from outside Iraq; and  -- Only the defendants should have the right to replace their counsel, not the Court.  4. (SBU) The Court informed the private defense team that they would be required to: a) submit a public written apology; b) agree to comport themselves properly in court sessions; and, 3) observe decorum standards by wearing the appropriate legal robes for defense attorneys.  (COMMENT: RCLO attorneys advise that these requirements appear both prudent and consistent with the Court's responsibilities. There was no indication of any predilection to compromise by either side.  END COMMENT.)  ----------------------------------- Judge Raouf Abdul-Rahman, Presiding -----------------------------------  5. (SBU) COMMENT: The eighth and ninth sessions provided the clearest example yet of the climate change resulting from the replacement of Judge Rizgar Amin by Judge Raouf Abdul-Rahman as presiding judge.  The Court sessions were previously characterized by time consuming diatribes by Saddam Hussein and his co-defendants, obfuscating dialogue by the defense, and procedural confusion.  Judge Raouf has introduced an increased level of procedural discipline and decorum that have made the process more orderly and focused.  After this session, no one doubts who is in charge.  END COMMENT.  6. (SBU) Judge Raouf's objectivity was challenged by the expelled defense attorneys' letter of demands in which they questioned the impact of Raouf's personal and familial grievances with the former regime.  These grievances were  BAGHDAD 00000360  002 OF 002   said to include his sentencing twice to life in prison and active membership in Kurdish partisan politics.  7. (SBU) COMMENT: Although the defense team's allegations were not immediately verifiable, Judge Raouf stated that he would pursue appropriate legal remedies against the defense team for making these claims.  The Judge advised the RCLO that his encounters with the law occurred before Saddam came to power and were tied to his previous membership during the 1960s in the Iraqi Communist Party.  END COMMENT.  8. (SBU) Unconfirmed press reports indicate that Judge Raouf was born in Halabja and that several members of Judge Raouf's family were killed in the chemical gas attack which occurred there in 1988. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000362  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2016 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: DPM CHALABI: 6000 MEGAWATTS BY SUMMER   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (C/REL GBR AUS) SUMMARY: Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi told the Ambassador February 4 that, as deputy to Prime Minister Ja'fari in the newly-created Electricity Committee, he intends to see power generation reach 6,000 MW by the summer of 2006.  PM Ja'fari is "not engaged" on energy issues, Chalabi said.  He also said that there are several "questionable" contracts at the Ministry of Electricity that he is looking into.  Chalabi and the Ambassador agreed to work closely in coming months to ensure that higher power generation goals are met. END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Chalabi - Power Behind the PM's Electricity Throne --------------------------------------------- -----  2.  (SBU) In a meeting with the Ambassador, IRMO Deputy Director, Acting Pol/Mil Counselor and Econoff February 4, Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi said that he is the operational head of a new GOI committee overseeing all aspects of electricity generation, transmission and distribution; Prime Minister Ja'fari is the titular head. At the lowest point, of the 850 MW available in Baghdad, 700 MW was devoted to essential services (hospitals, police stations, etc.), according to Chalabi.  This left only 150 MW available to provide power for Iraqi homes and businesses.  Chalabi added that the committee, under his leadership, will increase Baghdad's supply to 1200 MW, of which 500 MW of power will be available for private citizens.  Chalabi said he intends to achieve 6,000 MW of electricity generation by summer 2006.  ---------------------- New "Zoning" In Effect ----------------------  3.  (SBU) Chalabi said that the committee had divided Iraq into five zones.  Zone 1 encompassed power generation within Baghdad: Quds, Daura, Baghdad South and Taji. Chalabi said that he would get 1200 MW of power from plants at the named locations, despite the fact that Daura turbines 3 and 4 are "limping along" and producing only 70 MW each.  The number five turbine had restarted and was producing 100 MW of power; Number 6 would re-start once the final boiler check was completed.  (Note.  Rebuilding Daura #5 and #6 was USG funded.  Efforts have been delayed by failure of the Ministry of Electricity to complete final installations.)  4.  (SBU) Moving on to Zone 2 (Mussayib), Chalabi said that a letter of credit (L/C) for $23 million had been opened at the Trade Bank of Iraq, with the money available in the U.S. via JP Morgan.  This should clear the way for U.S. company Southeast Texas to fulfill their contract and complete work on the Mussayib plant.  The thermal plant is producing only 340 MW of its 1200 MW capacity.  Chalabi said he thought the plant could be brought up to 700 MW "pretty easily."  Adding Mussayib to the power being produced in Baghdad, Chalabi calculated that he could produce a total of 1900 MW; Baghdad would then need only bringin 500 MW of power to meet the summer peak demand of 2400 MW.  5.  (SBU) The power plant in Nasiriyah (Zone 3 is "south of Baghdad"), has a capacity of 840 MW, but is currently producing less than 300 MW.  Hartha has two boilers left to install before that facility can come up to speed.  Chalabi said that he will meet with managers from the two plants February 8 to review status.  He complimented the U.S. on the U.S.-financed, newly commissioned Kohr al-Zubayr (KAZ) gas powered plant.  Chalabi said that the Bayji thermals (Zone 4) are "about to shut down," as they are in serious need of reconditioning.  6.  (SBU) In Chalabi's view, the Haditha hydro plant, in Zone 5, was not a problem.  (NOTE:  Haditha needs major refurbishment which should be accomplished now, during the current low water period.  END NOTE.)  The plant at Taza, however, was completely off-line because the amount of condensate in the gas supply had skyrocketed from 20 parts per million to 200.   Although the plant was equipped with gauges to monitor the gas quality, the spike went unnoticed and has required that the lines be cleaned out, a process that will take another week.  The plant is switching to a new gas source to ensure a steady supply of the dry, sweet gas the plant requires.   BAGHDAD 00000362  002 OF 002   ----------------------- "Funny Business" at MoE -----------------------  7.  (C) Chalabi asserted at several points in the conversation that he is aware of and taking steps to deal with questionable dealings at MoE.  Chalabi said he has concerns about both the contract for work at the power plant in Hartha and the Italian company working on the Bayji thermal plant.  At Bayji, Chalabi said that some $37 million is at stake.  He also asserted that MoE Dr. Muhsin Shalash was persisting in what Chalabi called long-standing efforts to award a contract for a gas-powered generation plant to an unspecified favored company.  -------------------------------------- Working Together to Sustain the Effort --------------------------------------  8.  (C) Chalabi said that Prime Minister Ja'fari was not engaged on energy issues and requested U.S. assistance to extract from the PM necessary support to sustain recent progress on electricity.  While appreciative of U.S. efforts, Chalabi pointed out that only  a fraction of the newly installed generating capacity was fully on line and available.  Chalabi agreed to work closely with the U.S. ensure that projects are completed and power added to the grid, keeping pace with (as much as possible) Iraq's ever-growing demand. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000374  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PTER, IZ, KDEM, KWMN SUBJECT: SHARIA COURTS UNDERMINE EFFORTS TO REBUILD IRA  REF: BAGHDAD 262 AND 292  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  In separate conversations on January 22, 23, and 24, Shia imam Sheikh Ayad al-Ekabi and Sadr City District Advisory Council (DAC) members Ali Suadi and Mustafa Jasim told PolOff and Pol/FSN about extra- judicial sharia courts operating in Sadr City and other parts of Baghdad, and how they undermine efforts to rebuild Iraq.  As the followers of Muqtada al-Sadr grow stronger, these illegal courts proliferate.  A network of informants and mobile squads kidnap Iraqi men and women whom they believe violate Islamic sharia law, cooperate with Coalition Forces (CF), or oppose the Sadrists. Sometimes these courts are used to commit extortion and intimidation.  The failure of MNF-I and Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) to shut these courts down has led some Iraqis to question CF commitment to maintaining the rule of law.  Indeed, some even accuse CF of complicity.  Our contacts agree that to solve the problem, the ISF must be purged of members of militias such as the Sadrist-backed Jaysh Al-Mahdi (JAM).  Only then can the Iraqi Police (IP) be trusted to arrest those who run these illegal sharia courts and uphold the rule of law.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------- System of Vigilante Justice ---------------------------  2. (C) Our contacts told us that informants and mobile kidnap squads are criminals and thugs who work together to target individuals who they feel have committed crimes against Islam or Muqtada al-Sadr.  The mobile squads usually consist of several armed men who ride in a car and kidnap suspects off the streets.  They then deliver their captives to the illegal Sharia courts for prosecution.  Most of these squads, according to our contacts, work for the Sadr Bureau, but some, such as the Punishment Group, operate independently.  3. (C) According to our contacts, most of these courts are located in houses, schools, and even some mosques, such as the Al Hikma mosque in Sadr City.  The judges are usually members of the Sadr Bureau, although some non- Sadrist sharia courts do exist.  Other neighborhoods in Baghdad, such as Al-Shaab, Al-Habibiya, Hey Ur, and Jamila have such courts as well.  Most of these courts vary their location frequently, but some have an established venue known to many.  ------------------------------------------ The Crimes for Which Iraqis Are Prosecuted ------------------------------------------  4. (C) These illegal sharia courts, our contacts assert, often prosecute people for acts which are not crimes according to Iraqi law.  Drinking alcohol in the privacy of one's home, selling compact discs, insulting members of the Sadr Bureau, cooperating with MNF-I, and having a western-style haircut were examples of "crimes" subject to sharia court prosecution cited by our contacts. Punishments can be draconian.  Defendants are often beaten or killed.  Those killed in Sadr City have their bodies dumped on the outskirts of town.  Sheikh Ayad al- Ekabi told PolOff that one young man he knows was tried and, once found guilty, had both of his legs broken because he flirted with women.  5. (C) Sometimes people who are the victims of crime feel the Iraqi Police cannot help them, and so turn to these sharia courts for justice.  Sheikh Ayad told PolOff about a man whose house was robbed.  He petitioned an illegal sharia court, which then rounded up the three main suspects and tortured them until one of the suspects confessed to the crime.  6. (C) Women who are thought to have stained their honor are often prosecuted in these sharia courts.  If it is rumored that a woman has had sex outside of marriage, for example, she may be tried by a sharia court.  Women are also tried in sharia courts for wearing pants, not wearing the hijab, and consorting with males not related to them.  Our contacts report that these women often are beaten and sometimes killed after being convicted by the courts.  7. (C) This extra-judicial system also is used to commit acts of extortion and intimidation.  According to our contacts, Sadr Bureau members sometimes threaten to have people arrested and taken to a sharia court unless they  BAGHDAD 00000374  002 OF 002   pay an extortion fee.  Mustafa Jasim told PolOff that his youngest brother was tried by one of these sharia courts and was tortured with electrical shocks in an effort to convince Mustafa to quit serving on the Sadr City DAC.  -------------------------- Questioning Our Commitment --------------------------  8. (C) Our contacts told us they have reported these sharia courts to MNF-I, but nothing has been done. According to them, the inability or unwillingness to shut down these courts has cost CF and GOI credibility.  They tell us that MNF-I appears weak or, even worse, complicit in these human rights abuses.  Prime Minister Ja'fari, argued our contacts, is seen as part of the problem as well, as his government has done little to stop these abuses and is seen as supporting the Sadrists.  Even children, said our contacts, notice that MNF-I appears unable to uphold the rule of law.  ------------------------ Iraqis Propose Solutions ------------------------  9. (C) The first step toward eliminating the problem, according to our contacts, is to establish a credible police force. Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM) members must be removed from the ISF, they urged.  Only then can the people who operate these courts be arrested and prosecuted for their crimes.  The presence of a robust, uncorrupted police force in places that have a problem with these courts, such as Sadr City, must then be established on a permanent basis to prevent illegal sharia courts from reappearing in the future.  ------- Comment -------  10. (C)  The descriptions of the sharia courts above very much resemble the one operated by Sadrists in Najaf that was dismantled only after CF entered the old city and physically shut it down.  (The bodies of several dozen victims were discovered near the premises.)  The illegal sharia courts we now hear about in Baghdad are a serious black mark against CF and GOI in the eyes of our contacts.  There is, however, a larger problem:  these sharia courts represent elements of a state (or states) within the Iraqi state.  It will be essential to address this bigger problem if Iraq is to establish strong government institutions trusted by all its citizens.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000375  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2016 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EPET, KPAO, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: ECONOMIC-REFORM PUBLIC EDUCATION:  PUSHING FOR SPEED AND GOVERNMENT CREDIBILITY  REF: A. BAGHDAD 311      B. BAGHDAD 244 (NOTAL)      C. BAGHDAD 216      D. BAGHDAD 4559  Classified By: Economic Section Minister Counselor Thomas Delare, reaso ns 1.4 b/d  1.  (SBU) Summary:  The joint Economic-Reform Public Education Working Group (PWG) agreed February 5 that final messages and delivery strategies for a short-term public-education campaign on economic reform and anti-corruption efforts -- to include fuel price increases -- must be complete by February 10, and that the new Social Safety Net must be linked to economic reform in the public mind.  In addition, GOI officials agreed that lack of government credibility among average Iraqis is a serious hindrance to effective public education and must be addressed, though they noted the current GOI leadership needs to be convinced of the importance of public trust.  During the meeting, the GOI appointed a coordination person to champion efforts of Embassy, British Department for International Development (DFID), and GOI public affairs officials.  GOI officials disagreed on the likelihood of March fuel price increases, as required by the IMF Standby Arrangement (SBA).  End summary.  2.  (SBU) The joint Economic-Reform Public Education Working Group (PWG), co-chaired by Embassy Econ and the Ministry of Finance, met for the third time on February 5 (ref B). Present for the GOI were the Ministries of Finance (MoF), Planning (MoP), Transportation (MoT), Oil (MoO), Electricity (MoE), and Labor & Social Affairs (MoLSA), and the State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO).  Present for the USG were Embassy Econ, Public Affairs (PAS), and USAID.  The British Department for International Development (DFID) also attended.  --------------------------------------------- The Need for Public Affairs Capacity-Building ---------------------------------------------  3.  (SBU) PAS and DFID told the PWG that at their February 2 meeting at the Iraqi Government Communications Directorate (GCD), the Iraqi public-affairs officials agreed to take our proposed list of public messages to their respective policy advisors for input and approval.  (Note:  The February 2 meeting was the first time all Iraqi public affairs entities met to discuss a strategy for a public-education campaign on economic reform and anti-corruption efforts (ref A).  It had become apparent during this meeting that Iraqi public affairs officials are not informed on basic economic policy issues. End note.)  During our February 5 PWG meeting, however, it was clear that ministerial policy staff had not been briefed on the "proposed message" by their public affairs counterparts.  Furthermore, the GCD, although appointed to lead the public-education campaign for the GOI, failed to appear at the PWG meeting.  While possibly complicating our efforts, it underscores the real need for institutional public affairs capacity-building within ministries and government offices (ref C).  ------------------ The Need for Speed ------------------  4.  (C) Dr. Kamal Field, MoF Deputy Minister, stressed the need for immediate public-education efforts on fuel price increases, but then hedged himself by recommending economic and social impact studies.  We noted the utility of such studies, but said it would be difficult to develop reliable conclusions for at least another few months.  We tried to steer participants to agree on immediate public-education action, stressing that USG funds must be committed now.  The Iraqis agreed that final messages and delivery strategies must be completed by February 10, to coincide with the hoped-for bid deliveries of Iraqi public-relations companies.  Even if the next round of fuel price hikes is delayed to June, we stressed that messaging needs to start now.  ------------------------------------------ The Need to Link the New Social Safety Net ------------------------------------------  5.  (C) The Iraqis appointed Dr. Kadhum Shemki Amer, MoLSA Director of International Relations, to be the GOI coordinator who will work with USG, DFID, and Iraqi public affairs officials to develop and deliver short-term public messages.  (Note:  Kadhum has worked with USAID recently to develop MoLSA's Social Safety Net public-education strategy, which the World Bank (WB) plans to fund.  WB funding for Social Safety Net public education will likely not be disbursed until June.  End note.)  The new Social Safety Net  BAGHDAD 00000375  002 OF 002   (ref D), launched in December 2005, is intended to protect the poorest Iraqis from the shock of economic reforms.  Iraqi counterparts generally believe that their countrymen will not support any further belt-tightening unless they see payments from the new Safety Net and believe that it will work.  For this reason, it will be critical to link the new Social Safety Net to GOI economic reform actions in the public mind.  Kadhum's appointment as the GOI coordinator should help to ensure that this happens.  ----------------------------------- The Need for Government Credibility -----------------------------------  6.  (SBU) We suggested that average Iraqis want to hear facts, vice promises, and have these facts explained via interactive interviews with government leaders.  The Iraqis agreed but were skeptical of their leaders, inclinations to submit to such questioning.  The Iraqis eventually agreed that a good starting point would be a seminar to convince the GOI leadership of the necessity of a public-education campaign in which they play a central role to convey these tough messages to the Iraqi public.  (Comment:  GOI officials know that the public does not trust them, and many of them frankly seem not to care.  A significant part of our efforts will be to convince them that in a democratic society, public trust does matter.  Reforms will be empty if not based on GOI credibility and trust.  End comment.)  --------------------------------------------- ----- The Need for March Fuel Price Increases Questioned --------------------------------------------- -----  7.  (C) Deputy Minister Kamal suggested that the March fuel price increase -- required under the IMF Standby Arrangement (SBA) -- should only occur if there is statistical support that it is not harming too many citizens.  Further, MoO and SOMO representatives disagreed on the need and advisability of March fuel-price increases.  Ahmed Al-Shamma, Deputy Minister of Refining and Gas Processing, said that the GOI should not increase fuel prices again until they can show tangible benefits and ensure that the new Social Safety Net sufficiently protects the poorest Iraqis.  He does not think fuel prices can be raised again until June, and even this might be too soon.  SOMO Director General Musab Al-Dujaili disagreed:  "For heaven's sake, what are we doing?  We have to raise prices now, and we must liberalize the market.  We don't have the money to pay for continued imports."  8.  (C) Comment:  MoO Deputy Minister Ahmed agreed that the fuel market needs to be liberalized, and said he supports the voucher/fuel-rationing program as outlined by Finance Minister Allawi.  SOMO DG Musab notwithstanding, the general Iraqi consensus was that March is too soon for another fuel price increase.  They agreed, however, that messages are needed now to educate and prepare the public for future subsidy reductions.  End comment.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000382  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, PTER, PHUM, IZ SUBJECT: SUNNI LEADERS TELL DAS GODEC VIOLENCE MUST  STOP  REF: BAGHDAD 195  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).   1. (C) NEA DAS Robert Godec met on February 6 with key leaders from the Sunni Tawaffuq coalition at the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) headquarters.  Dr. Adnan Dulaymi, Tarik al-Hashimi, Sheykh Khalaf Al-Ayan and Professor Hassan Bazzaz told DAS Godec that the security situation is their main concern.  The leaders protested what they called U.S. inaction to curb alleged Ministry of Interior (MOI) raids, arrests and human rights abuses against the Sunni Arabs.  DAS Godec pushed back saying that the USG opposes violence in Iraq by all parties - militias, terrorists, insurgents and people who masquerade as police.  The Sunni leaders must do their part to stop the violence, he said.  Al-Hashimi acknowledged this and recalled that the Tawafuq Front and the Iraqi Islamic Party had condemned terrorism, including attacks against Shia. Bazzaz commented that it is unfair to compare violence by the government to violence by insurgents.  Hashimi added that Tawafuq's constituency wants proof that participation in the political process was worth it. He asked what Sunni Arabs have to show so far for their participation.  2. (C) Dr. Adnan Dulaymi asked why action has not been taken to raid secret prisons that were previously identified.  PolCouns responded that most Sunni Arab reports and complaints lack the necessary information that would allow for a proper investigation.  We need better information.  To address that problem the Embassy has established a group to track these complaints and military investigators will be provided to interview witnesses.  But it is not enough to charge wrongdoing, said PolCouns, the Sunnis must provide some evidence.  The complaints would have greater credibility both among the Shia and the international community if neutral sources, like human rights NGO's, were also raising these cases instead of just political parties, added DAS Godec.  The Shia think that Sunni reports of human rights violations are just political propaganda to gain advantage in the government formation talks, said PolCouns.  He urged them to find ways to build greater interest and concern in these reports.  3. (C) The Sunni leaders alleged such violence was meant to drive Sunnis out of Baghdad and out of Iraq; entire areas of the country are now ruled by Iran or its intelligence agents.  Hashimi claimed to have a "secret" Da'wa party letter proving that Iran is financing Zarqawi terror.  DAS Godec noted that there is a lot of Sunni money financing terror also, which the leaders did not deny.  Godec also asked that they provide any direct evidence of Iranian financing of terror in Iraq.  (Comment: There was a great deal of spluttering and hyperbole here.  They were unable to provide the letter or any other documentation supporting their charges or Iranian influence.  The exaggeration notwithstanding, there are real human rights issues and these issues are driving Sunni Arab politics now.  End Comment.)  4. (C) Commenting on the government formation talks, Hashimi said that the Sunnis must play a part in the decision making and implementation process in government.  The Prime Minister cannot have sole authority over the government.  The platform signed by Ayad Allawi and Kurd leader Barzani (reftel), with its National Security Council with all political leaders, provides just such a framework.  Red-lines for the Sunnis include ensuring that the Interior, Defense and Intelligence agencies are not run by ministers with ties to militias or political parties.  Ministries that have undergone major purges of Sunnis, like Health and Education, will need to be restructured. The Sunnis have traditionally formed the governing, educated, technocratic class said Hashimi.  5. (C) Comment.  The Tawafuq leaders clearly appreciated the chance to host an official from Washington at their headquarters in the Red Zone (this was the first such visit to their headquarters by a Washington-based official that we can remember). Their blustering and hyperbole aside, they also clearly want American help to balance what they perceive to be inordinate Shia influence in the  BAGHDAD 00000382  002 OF 002   emerging new government.  End comment.  6. (U) DAS Godec cleared this cable. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000383  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, PINS, PHUM, IZ SUBJECT: NEW SCIRI PARLIAMENTARIANS TALK ABOUT MOI, MILITIAS, AND GOVERNMENT FORMATION  REF: BAGHDAD 195  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.    (C) Summary.  In a February 6 introductory meeting, two newly-elected SCIRI parliamentarians rejected Sunni complaints about MOI abuses and stated that Minister of Interior (SCIRI) Bayan Jabr is doing an excellent job. They added that the Shia Coalition will insist on retaining the MOI in government formation talks and reported that the Coalition is debating whether the proposed National Security Council (reftel) should have any legislative or executive authority.  In addition, they claimed that Embassy's Sunni outreach efforts have gone too far, alienating many in the Shia camp.  End Summary.  ---------------- SCIRI's Platform ----------------  2.    (C)  Abdul Kareem Al-Nakeeb said that SCIRI's political platform has not changed - security and reconstruction. Al-Nakeeb welcomed USG support in fighting the insurgency.  With training and equipment, the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) can fiercely patrol the Syrian and Jordanian borders.  Abdul Jabar Rehaif al-Abudi told PolOffs that part of SCIRI's security platform is for militias to be integrated into the ISF.  Al-Abudi said that in 2003 the Badr Organization submitted lists to CPA of Badr Corps members who were available to join the ISF. "Nothing's changed and nothing's moved forward," he said. Al-Abudi blamed PM Jaafari and MOI's administrative staff for not believing in this project, hindering the process, and letting the whole effort languish.  ------------------------- MOI Abuses and the Sunnis -------------------------  3.    (C) Al-Nakeeb claimed that he is mystified why the USG is dissatisfied with MOI's performance.  Al-Nakeeb added that if there are any MOI abuses, the USG is partially to blame since it "supervises" MOI operations.  He also blamed the Sunni Arab Tawafuq Front, and in particular its leader Tariq al-Hashimi's recent accusations in the press about MOI abuses for exacerbating sectarian tension. Al-Nakeeb justified MOI random searches and raids in Sunni neighborhoods because an overwhelming evidence of weapons storehouses and bomb-making workshops exists. He claimed that the Sunnis in al-Jihad neighborhood recently blew up their own mosque when testing car bomb explosives. Al- Nakeeb said he considered "recent USG comments" (i.e., concerning the Jadriya MOI bunker Jadriya) in the press about MOI abuses to be inflammatory and premature since the investigative report has yet to be issued.  Al-Nakeeb added that the top levels of MOI management (like Adnan Thabit) were in place before long Bayan Jabr became Minister.  He therefore questioned why the USG believes MOI's personnel to be sub-par.  ---------------------------------- Suicide Bombers Should Be Executed ----------------------------------  4. (C) Al-Nakeeb argued that the Iraqi judicial system must be more robust.  The courts are inefficient and too lenient in their enforcement of justice.  He gave the example of one criminal who is responsible for the deaths of 65 people.  This person, al-Nakeeb lamented, is still awaiting trial.  Violent criminals, such as suicide bombers, should be swiftly executed, al-Nakeeb argued.  -------------------- Government Formation --------------------  4.    (C) Al-Nakeeb told PolOffs to expect the Shia Coalition to retain the MOI in government formation talks. Both al-Nakeeb and al-Abudi declined to offer MOI candidate names but stated that Bayan Jabr was doing an excellent job in the position.  He added that not only is the Alliance debating who will be its PM candidate, but whether the proposed National Security Council (reftel) should have any legislative or executive authority.  In his opinion, the proposed National Security Council was a ploy to allow undeserving politicians like Ayad Allawi high-level government positions.  Al-Nakeeb added that the Embassy's Sunni outreach efforts had gone too far.  He argued that  BAGHDAD 00000383  002 OF 002   the U.S. is trying to cheat the system by pushing Sunnis into positions they should not have.  Al-Nakeeb reported that many Shia Alliance members feel that the USG does not respect the results of the December elections that the International Monitoring of Independent Elections (IMIE) judged free and fair.  5.    (C) BIONOTE:  Abdul Kareem Abdel Saheb Mohamed al- Nakeeb graduated from Mosul University in 1981 and then entered the military academy.  A year later he became an artillery officer.  From 1982-2002 al-Nakeeb spent much of his time shuttling back and forth between Kurdistan and Iran.  In 1985-6 he joined the opposition with Jalal Talabani in the northern city of Qara Dagh. From 1995-1999 he remained in Iran. From 1999-2001 al-Nakeeb spent time in both Syria and Lebanon.  In 2002 he returned to Dukan Kurdistan to take part in the liberation. He spent 2003 in Wasit and 2004 in Kut.  Al-Nakeeb lays claim to helping establish SCIRI, in particular its media committee.  Owing to his military training al-Nakeeb said he was also involved in the standing up SCIRI's military organization, the Badr Corps. His immediate family has settled in Karbala.  He still has extended family in Iran.  6.    (C) BIONOTE:  Abdul Jabar Rahaif al-Abudi graduated from Baghdad University in the sciences.  Like al-Nakeeb, al-Abudi has a military background and spent a similar amount of time in Kurdistan and Iran.  He said that he had studied IT programming in France.  Due to his military background, al-Abudi said he was heavily involved with standing up Badr Corps and plays and executive role with the organization. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000390  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: JABIRI PUSHES FOR COUNTER-BLOC TO SHAKE UP UIC AND GET NOMINATION   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Fadhila Party leader Nadim al-Jabiri told the Ambassador February 7 that he plans to push off the Shia alliance vote on the premiership until February 10.  Jabiri said that he is convinced that Iraq is heading toward anarchy, not democracy, and that he believes that the nomination of SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi or Dawa's Ibrahim al-Jafari could eliminate the chance for unity.  Jabiri added that he would be prepared to withdraw from the Shia alliance if the Kurds, Allawi, Tawafuq and others formed a counter-bloc and nominated him for the premiership.  Jabiri predicted that such a move would shake up the United Iraqi Coalition (UIC, the Shia alliance) and cause other elements in the Shia alliance to back him. President Talabani told the Ambassador later in the day that he would not consent to form such a counter-bloc, believing it would antagonize the Shia and only produce a stalemate.  2. (C) SUMMARY CONTINUED: Ayad Allawi told the Ambassador separately that he is only a few seats short of a coalition that could bloc the Shia and Talabani from achieving a two-thirds majority.  Allawi said he would need only Jabiri or Masoud Barzani to break ranks in order to complete his blocking coalition.  Barzani separately told the Ambassador that he could not accept the combination of a Talabani presidency and an Abd al-Mahdi premiership.  Barzani said that, if Abd al-Mahdi receives the nomination, he might be ready to break ranks during the secret ballot on the presidency in order to prevent Talabani from winning a two-thirds majority.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------------------------- Jabiri Sticking With His Candidacy ----------------------------------  3. (C) Fadhila Party leader Nadim al-Jabiri told the Ambassador February 7 that he remains committed to his own candidacy for PM and that he plans to push off a UIC vote on the issue until Saturday, February 11.  Jabiri said that neither of his competitors -- Abd al-Mahdi and Jafari -- are unifying figures, and both, he added, could push Iraq toward civil war.  "There is a fine line between anarchy and democracy and we have crossed it in the direction of anarchy," he said.  Jabiri, showing his background as a political science professor, cited Plato and said that anarchy breeds tyranny and that tyrants rarely emerge from the majority.  In Jabiri's opinion, Iraq could be heading toward another Sunni Arab tyranny.  "They have the experience and the people," he said.  Jabiri said that both Abd al-Mahdi and Jafari have offered him major inducements to back their candidacies, but he said he has rebuffed them because he believes the stakes are too high.  -------------------------------- Jabiri Pushes For a Counter-Bloc --------------------------------  4. (C) Jabiri argued again that the way to boost his candidacy would be for all parties outside the UIC to form a counter-bloc.  This bloc, larger than the UIC, would have the right to nominate its candidate for prime minister.  If that bloc nominated Jabiri, he said, it would defuse the situation and demonstrate a sincere desire to build bridges.  At that point, Jabiri said, he would turn to his colleagues on the UIC and ask them to accept this nomination.  If they refuse, he would argue that they simply had taken an anti-Fadhila position.  At this point he could withdraw and the street would understand, he said.  More importantly, he noted, his nomination alone would shake up the UIC and allow him to draw in more supporters.  5. (C) The Ambassador warned that if such a large counter-bloc formed it would be more likely to nominate someone from its own ranks, like Allawi.  Jabiri, the Ambassador pointed out, is waiting for the nomination to be served up to him rather than working for it.  Jabiri could tell the UIC that he will withdraw if not nominated by their bloc and use that as an excuse to pull out when the UIC ignores his demand.  Jabiri said that he has to study the "production" of such a film and that he would be back in touch.  He also lamented that sectarianism is now so rife in the Shia community that Shia seem more concerned about the unity of the UIC coalition than they about the unity of the country.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Talabani Pushes Accepting Abd al-Mahdi With Conditions --------------------------------------------- ---------  6. (C) President Talabani told the Ambassador later on  February 7 that he does not believe that Jabiri has a serious shot at the premiership.  Talabani said he doubts that Jabiri could ever assemble a two-thirds coalition behind him.  This means, he added, that the formation of a counter-bloc that nominates Jabiri would only lead to a stalemate.  More importantly, Talabani doubted that the Fadhila Party's spiritual leader, Shaykh Ya'acubi, would ever actually permit Jabiri to withdraw from the UIC.  Ya'acubi, Talabani said, is still bound by the broad dictates of the marja'iya, which would oppose such a move.  Instead of going about this approach, Talabani argued that all sides should put conditions on Abd al-Mahdi's candidacy and support him on that basis.  Talabani also noted, however, that Jafari has a very real shot at the job, especially since Talabani said he has heard that Iran has made clear that it does not object to his candidacy.  ------------------------------------ Allawi Works on a Blocking Coalition ------------------------------------  7. (C) Ayad Allawi told the Ambassador separately that he is only a few seats short of a coalition that could bloc the Shia and Talabani from achieving a two-thirds majority. Allawi said that he has gathered a bloc of some 88 seats but needs at least 5 more to reach 93 -- the magic number to bloc a two-thirds majority.  Allawi noted that he needs only Jabiri or Masoud Barzani to break ranks in order to complete the blocking coalition.  8. (C) The Ambassador separately heard that leaders of the Tawafuq Front, Allawi's list, and the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) met on February 6 and concluded that they cannot accept the combination of an Abd al-Mahdi premiership and a Talabani presidency.  One of the two men would have to go, they concluded.  Barzani had told the Ambassador that he might be ready to break ranks during the secret ballot on the presidency and thereby prevent Talabani from winning a two-thirds majority. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000391  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: FM ZEBARI UPDATES DAS GODEC ON REGIONAL  RELATIONS  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) In a February 6 meeting, Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari told DAS Robert Godec and PolCouns that several ambassadorial assignments await the PM's approval.  "We are all like planes in a holding pattern waiting to land," commented Deputy Foreign Minister for Bilateral Relations Hamid al-Bayati.  Al- Bayati said that he has been waiting for Iraq's UN Ambassador Samir Sumaidaie to transfer to Washington, DC so that al-Bayati can get PM Jafari's OK to move to New York and take his place at the UN.  Zebari added that Cairo has sent a request for agrement for Deputy Foreign Minister for Multilateral Relations Muhammad Hamoud Bidan to become Ambassador to Egypt, but that this assignment also awaits PM approval.  Zebari said a similar situation affects the Iraq's Ambassador to Bahrain who has received Saudi agrement to become Ambassador in Riyadh.  2.  (C) Zebari added that the MFA has decided to push back on its Arab neighbors that have recently asked to set up missions in Iraq. "The situation is too unsettled at this time," commented Zebari.  In addition, Zebari reported that GOI has decided to postpone the Arab League-sponsored National Accord Conference that was tentatively scheduled for mid- February.  Zebari said the conference should take place in Baghdad only after the permanent government has formed. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000393  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2016 TAGS: PHUM, KDEM, KJUS, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI ISLAMIC PARTY SEEKS USG ASSISTANCE ON DETAINEE ISSUES.  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) SUMMARY: Members of the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) Human Rights Committee lodged complaints January 28 about the alleged abuse of human rights of MOI and MOD detainees.  IIP presented to EmbOffs lists of detainees held by MNF-I, Ministry of Defense and Ministry of Interior.  The IIP Committee claimed that detainees held by MOD are denied family visits and access to legal representation. In addition, the Committee is unable to locate detainees held by MOI.  IIP leaders claimed that both the Ministers of Defense and Interior have refused to meet with them on these issues.  The IIP leaders said they sought USG assistance on detainee matters as well as acquiring information on 332 missing persons. END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------------------ Allegations lodged against Iraqi Security ------------------------------------------  2.  (C) Newly elected Council of Representatives member Muhammed Abdel Moula Khalif told PolOff that the US military must stop joint operations that allow for MOI to take prisoners, because it is nearly impossible to find out the status of an MOI detainee.  IIP Human Rights Committee Chair Omar Al- Jabouri recalled in December he previously had solicited USG assistance and met with the Commanding General of MNF-I Detainee Operations, General Jack Gardner to express concerns about Ministry of Interior prisoners. (NOTE: Task Force 134 provides logistical support for Iraqi-led detention facility inspections. END NOTE) Al-Jabouri presented PolOff a list of 332 missing persons who they assumed have been taken by MOI forces.  This list consisted of missing academics with masters and doctorate degrees. Khalif emphasized that neither the IIP activists nor the families of the detained have been able to get information about the cases brought to the IIP.  ----------------------------------------- MOD denies access to Legal Representation -----------------------------------------  3.  C) Al-Jabouri presented a separate list of 252 detainees which he said had been held by MOD for greater than 15 months. The list was compiled by family members of the detainees. These detainees have been denied family visits and access to legal representation.  (Comment: In these cases at least, the families know where their relatives are. End Comment)  IIP sent the list to MOD Army Chief of Staff Zebari and MOD Advisor Ammar al-Hachem and received no response to the request for family visits and legal representation. Although the Minister of Defense Sadoon al-Duleimi refused to meet with IIP members, al-Jabouri reported that he did meet with MOD Public Relations Director Hamid Showkat al-Duleimi and Major General Mohammed Hikmat.  Again, according to al-Jabouri, there has been no response to the IIP's request.  Khalif said the families are at their wits' end.  In an attempt to pressure MOD to grant access to the prisoners, IIP may organize a tent protest in front of the MOD gates.  --------------------------------------------- -- Fate of 11,000 - denied right to a timely trial --------------------------------------------- --  4.  (C) Al-Jabouri claimed to PolOff that there are only two investigative judges reviewing the cases of 11,000 prisoners (8,000 in Baghdad, 3,000 in Kut and Babil prisons). According to al-Jabouri, Judge Khalid Ibrahim (who works on Palestine Street) and Judge Magdhil al-Araji (who works at the Yarmouk Prison in Akhademiya) only work 5 days a month on these cases resulting in a huge backlog.  In addition, al-Jabouri said detainees' families are forced to pay a USD 2,000 USD - 10,000 bribes in order to transfer the case to the courts.  ------------------------- Questions about MNF-I Too -------------------------   BAGHDAD 00000393  002 OF 002   5.  (C) Al-Jabouri presented PolOff with a list of detainees (with detainee reference numbers) which he said were held by MNF-I.  Both al-Jabouri and Khalif questioned why detainees who have been held the longest are not the first released.  PolOff explained that detainee release is not based on length of detention but on evidence in each individual case.  ------- Comment -------  6.  (C) IIP's concerns about the negative impact of MOI detention practices, Iraqi court backlogs, and judicial corruption on Sunni trust in the Iraqi government's will and ability to provide due process are real.  Speaking at a February 1 press conference on behalf of the Tawafuq Front leadership IIP leader Tareq al-Hashimi criticized bitterly the Ministry of Interior and its handling of arrests and prisoner processing.  There are real problems in the MOI system.  However, some of the numbers the IIP cites for Iraqis in detention and judicial capacity in Baghdad have been exaggerated. IIP has acknowledged that some of the human rights abuse reports are inflammatory and lack credibility, but they feel obligated to submit them to USG officials since they come from IIP members.  7.  (C) The IIP also has raised allegations of MNF-I units committing abuses that also are being investigated.  Politically, IIP is a key Sunni player in the new government formation negotiations. As part of our Sunni Arab outreach efforts, we are trying to demonstrate our seriousness with respect to improving transparency and accountability in detention operations both in MNF-I and at the MOI and MOD to keep IIP, and Sunni Arabs more broadly, engaged in the political process.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000396  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/08/2016 TAGS: PBTS, PGOV, PINS, PREL, IZ, IR SUBJECT: SHIA INDEPENDENT:  WHO WILL DEFEND IRAQ WHEN  U.S. LEAVES?   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) independent parliamentarian Sami al-Askari asked PolOff in a February 6 meeting, "Who will defend Iraq after coalition forces (CF) leave?"  Al-Askari said he is concerned that the U.S. will withdraw its forces soon because of its domestic political situation.  This is despite the fact that most Iraqis privately say they want CF to stay in Iraq until peace is restored.  Iraqis, however, do not want permanent U.S. bases in Iraq, he said.  2. (C) PolOff replied that CF is currently training Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) to defend Iraq.  Al-Askari countered that Iraq cannot afford a large army.  Iranian gunboats have already killed Iraqis, so it is conceivable that fighting could break out between Iran and Iraq in the future.  Al-Askari proposed a defensive alliance between the U.S., the U.K. and Iraq to deter Iraq's enemies from attacking.  3. (C) Comment:  Al-Askari's comments are not entirely representative of the majority of the population from southern Iraq (he is from Nasiriyah).  Polling data we have seen suggests confidence in the Iraqi Army in the South is relatively high.  Al-Askeri, however, is certainly more educated than the average man on the street.  In addition, he is more informed about Iraq's relations with Iran.  The funeral for the Iraqi coast guardsman killed by the Iranians got a fair amount of publicity in the Iraqi media.  not only highlight the real concern for security that many Iraqis have, but public opinion polls also suggest that many Iraqis are nervous about the capabilities of the ISF.    End Comment.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000397  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/08/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, PINS, PREL, IZ, IR SUBJECT: BADR CORPS TELLS GEN. CASEY IT SUPPORTS HUMAN RIGHTS  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Badr Organization General Secretary Hadi al-Amari, Badr Organization Deputy Secretary for Protection Tahsin al-Azawi, and SCIRI parliamentarian Sheikh Dhiya al- Fayyad told MNF-I Commanding General Casey and PolCouns in a February 7 meeting that the Badr Organization fully supports human rights, democracy, and the Iraqi constitution.  The U.S. may not like Badr, al-Amari began, but the U.S. will have to work with it.  The Badr Organization will have 15 or 16 members in the next Council of Representatives (CoR), and has no need to assassinate its political opponents, he stated flatly. The best way to ensure respect for human rights and democracy takes root in Iraq is for GOI and coalition forces (CF) to cooperate, according to al-Amari.  2. (C) When GEN Casey asked al-Amari about the Badr Organization's ties to Iran, al-Amari replied that the Badr Organization is not working to make Iraq an extension of Iran.  Iraqis may want good relations with Iran, but that does not mean they are Iranian puppets. Al-Amari said many members of Badr Organization and SCIRI have family in Iran because they moved there after they fled Saddam, just as many Iraqis fled to the United Kingdom.  Iraqis, like al-Amari, are Arabs, not Persians. Indeed, al-Amari said that, despite spending over 20 years in Iran, he speaks no Farsi.  He added that his family has deep roots in the Arab peninsula.  The Badr Organization, he said, takes no money from Iran; the Hakim family finances the organization from the Hakim's access to donations from the Shia faithful (khoms).  The Badr Organization, he said, opposes terrorism from all sources, including Iran.  When asked about former Badr Corps member turned insurgent leader Abu Mustafa al- Sheibani, al-Amari said that he had been a Badr Corps member once, but he had not heard from him since the fall of Saddam Hussein.  3. (C) Comment:  Hadi al-Amari's comments reflect the standard SCIRI/Badr party line.  While we doubt the veracity of some of his statements, such as his claim that the Badr Organization takes no money from Iran, he did declare his support for upholding human rights.  As more such meetings occur, MNF-I and Post will work to convince al-Amari that such statements should be made publicly in conjunction with CF.  End Comment   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000399  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/08/2016 TAGS: IZ, PGOV, PINS, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: CODEL SHAYS MEETS WITH IRAQI INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS   Classified By: Acting Counselor for Political-Military Affairs Evan G. Reade for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On February 4, Iraqi National Security Adviser (NSA) Muwafuq al-Rubaie, accompanied by representatives of Iraq's security services, briefed the CODEL Shays delegation on the overall structure of the intelligence and national security community in Iraq. The briefing began with a slideshow set to stirring music that depicted Iraqis voting in the December 15 National Election.  2.  (C)  Rubaie described how the various Ministries interacted, highlighting the roles played in the interagency process by the Ministerial Council on National Security (MCNS), the Deputy,s level MCNS and the two intelligence committees, namely the National Intelligence Coordination Committee (NICC) and the National Joint Intelligence Analysis Center (NJIAC).  3.  (C)  According to Rubaie and his colleagues, the most significant challenge they face is building institutions that will withstand sectarian divisions. Rubaie opined that a lack of vision about how to build these institutions is holding back their bureaucratic development, depriving the country of effective, permanent institutions capable of serving all Iraqis.  4.  (C)  Rubaie stressed to the CODEL that the political process is diminishing the ranks of the insurgency as many of those in the middle are being convinced to play a role in the process, rather than fighting it with violence. Nevertheless, the terrorists and foreign fighters on the extreme fringes of the insurgency are still responsible for spectacular attacks that cause significant casualties and attract media coverage. The CODEL heard from each of the Iraqi intelligence officials present, each of whom stressed that American troops are still needed in Iraq to ensure stability. Congressman Shays stated that America owes it to Iraq to stay the course, and the other members of the CODEL agreed.  5. (U) Congressman Shays (R-CT) was accompanied by Rep. Virginia Brown-Waite (R-FL), Rep. Katherine Harris (R-FL), and Rep. John Doolittle (R-CA).  They did not have the opportunity to clear this cable before departing Iraq. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000400  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2016 TAGS: EAGR, EAID, ECON, ETRD, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: DPM REQUESTS ECONOMIC ADVICE ON AVIAN FLU RESPONSE  REF: A. BAGHDAD 254       B. BAGHDAD 216  Classified By: Economic Section Minister Counselor Thomas Delare, reaso ns 1.4 b/d  1.  (C) Summary:  EconMinCouns on February 8 accepted Deputy Prime Minister Rowsh Shaways's invitation to discuss Avian Influenza (AI) economic issues.  EconMinCouns suggested to DPM Shaways that the current all-encompassing ban on poultry imports might encourage Iraqi farmers to sell questionable poultry on the open market, increasing the risk of spreading H5N1.  EconMinCouns also noted that the ban might contribute to malnutrition as people consume less poultry, thus cutting out a significant source of protein and putting a strain on Iraq's livestock industry.  DPM Shaways agreed on the necessity of an effective compensation plan for farmers who lose flocks to culling.  He said he will encourage the Council of Ministers, who currently oppose compensation, to enact a plan and encouraged EconMinCouns to enlist the Ambassador's assistance.  The current AI situation in Iraq presents the GOI with an opportunity to build much needed credibility with the Iraqi public.  To date, the GOI has not effectively seized the initiative.  End summary.  2.  (C) Deputy Prime Minister Rowsh Shaways (DPM) invited EconMinCouns February 8 to discuss AI-related economic issues.  During the meeting, the DPM said the three most negative aspects of the current AI situation in Kurdistan are:  -- The potential for huge economic losses to poultry farms and secondary businesses due to culling;  -- The lack of protein in Iraqis' diets because many of them have stopped eating chicken; and,  -- Rising prices of red meat and the effects of its increased consumption on the Iraqi livestock industry.  DPM asked EconMinCouns for his advice on how to respond to these concerns economically.  ----------------------- Unintended Consequences -----------------------  3.  (C) The DPM confirmed that he had authorized the recent ban on all poultry imports, regardless of origin, as a way to protect Kurdish poultry farmers from foreign competition if their flocks are culled, and to encourage Iraqi farmers to raise more chickens.  EconMinCouns suggested that the all-encompassing ban -- besides being out of compliance with World Organization for Animal Health trade guidelines -- would have an opposite effect.  By indiscriminately stopping all poultry imports, the GOI will create a severe supply shortage.  Exacerbated by culling operations, the supply shortage will in turn cause poultry prices to increase significantly and strain Iraq's livestock industry as Iraqis turn to red meat as an alternate source of protein.  In addition, the increasing retail prices would put chicken further out of reach of poor Iraqis, contributing to protein deficiencies.  Shortage-induced high prices will also indirectly encourage Iraqi poultry farmers to sell potentially ill chickens on the open market, rather than submit their flocks to government inspection and possible culling.  EconMinCouns suggested that the best approach would be to allow imports of safe poultry.  (Note:  Embassy Health Attache, also present, informed the DPM that all frozen poultry is safe because the freezing process destroys the H5N1 virus.)  4.  (C) EconMinCouns asked the DPM if the GOI had established a compensation plan to reimburse farmers (and possibly secondary businesses) affected by government culling operations.  The DPM said the KRG has a compensation plan, but the GOI does not have an Iraq-wide plan because the Council of Ministers (CoM) currently "refuses to compensate."  (Note:  USAID/Irbil said they received a copy of KRG's compensation plan February 8 and are currently translating it.)  The DPM explained that the Ministry of Finance opposes a compensation plan because the GOI is currently a "caretaker" government and not authorized to commit to such a plan, and because the 2006 budget does not have sufficient funds built in to handle the potentially huge outlays. EconMinCouns stressed the importance of a compensation plan as a means to induce Iraqi poultry farmers to report potential Avian Flu outbreaks and cooperate in culling operations.  The DPM said it would be helpful for Ambassador Khalilzad to engage the Prime Minister about the need for an effective compensation plan.  He said he would also encourage the CoM on February 9 to implement a plan as soon as possible.   BAGHDAD 00000400  002 OF 002   -------------------------------- Comment:  Missing an Opportunity --------------------------------  5.  (C) Embassy officials have on several occasions asked GOI officials about culling and compensation plans, and whether or not they have performed economic impact studies.  The DPM's admission that there is no Iraq-wide compensation plan goes against previous statements of the Minister of Agriculture, who told Embassy officials as early as October 2005 that his ministry was working on a plan (but never subsequently provided details).  The GOI's response to Avian Flu continues to appear uncoordinated (ref A) in comparison to KRG actions.  6.  (C) USG sources in Kurdistan report that farmers there are taking part in government culling operations in the confidence that the KRG will adequately compensate them later.  This citizen confidence in government services contrasts sharply with the rest of Iraq, where the average Iraqi reportedly does not have faith in the GOI to consistently provide even the most basic of essential public services (ref B).  The GOI appears to so far be squandering the opportunity (presented by the potential AI crisis) to increase its credibility among average Iraqi citizens through an effective AI response. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000401  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2026 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: SHIA COALITION MEMBERS DIVIDE ON PM, CAUTIOUS ON NEW NATIONAL COUNCIL   Classified By: POL COUNS ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  In separate February 8 conversations with PolOffs, two Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) members expressed opposition to the proposed National Security Council.  One of them, independent Taha Dera' al-Saadi, said that the entity would be anti- constitutional and could undermine the Council of Representatives. Deputy FM Al-Bayati (SCIRI) told PolOff that Jafari has privately indicated a readiness to give up the PM race in exchange for leadership of Shia Coalition and the Dawa party's ability to select the Minister of Interior.  Al-Bayati said that SCIRI has no objections to Dawa's Jawad al-Maliki becoming Minister of Interior and admitted that SCIRI Bayan Jabr encountered problems in his reign as Interior Minister because he was inexperienced and a weak administrator.  Bayati's remarks are interesting because they give a sense (a) of SCIRI optimism that we hear elsewhere and (b) the possible trade-off for Jafari finally to concede.  We stress, however, that most of our Shia contacts are careful not to try to call the prime minister race yet.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) Shia Alliance Independent Taha Dera' al-Saadi (number one on the List 555 Diyala list) told PolOffs February 8 that he was against the proposed National Security Council because it is anti-constitutional and lessens the Council of Representatives' authority. "This is not the type of government that the Iraqis voted for," stated al-Saadi.  (Many of our Shia Alliance contacts have told us that the National Security Council should only be an advisory council.) He added it is a positive statement that the Coalition has four candidates to offer the Iraqi people.  Al- Saadi did not expect voting for PM would be divisive since the decision to use this method would have been reached democratically.  He indicated that if the leadership of the seven factions of the Shia Islamist Coalition reach consensus before February 11, a vote will not be necessary.  3. (C) Current TNA and Shia Alliance Dawa member Mu'ayid al-Ubaydi echoed similar sentiments on the proposed National Security Council.  As for the Prime Minister race, al-Ubaydi said the majority of the Shia Coalition prefer PM Jafari, adding that Jafari has the support of Dawa, Dawa Tanzim, the Sadrists, and the majority of the independents. He cited Jafari's many positive attributes, including his ability to solve crises and his "administrative experience".  (Note: Al-Ubaydi was not elected to the Council of Representatives (CoR) - he was number 50 on the Baghdad list.  He claimed that he will be the first Dawa member to be appointed to the Council of Representative when any current Dawa CoR member is appointed minister.  End Note.)  4. (C) In contrast to the Da'wa member, SCIRI official and Deputy Foreign Minister Hamid al-Bayati told PolOff February 8  that PM Jafari told Abdul Aziz al- Hakim that he is willing to give up the PM race in exchange for heading the Shia Alliance and for Dawa's getting to fill the Interior Minister post.  Al-Bayati stated that SCIRI has no objections to Dawa's Jawad al-Maliki becoming Minister of Interior.  (Bayati admitted that SCIRI's Bayan Jabr encountered problems in his reign as Interior Minister because he was inexperienced and a weak administrator.)  Al-Bayati added that the Alliance has no objections to Sa'adun Dulaymi continuing as Minister of Defense.  He said that the Fadhila Party will no longer have control of the Ministry of Oil.  "There is even a place for Ahmed Chalabi, if he performs well on the oil crisis," al- Bayati said.  5. (C)  Al-Bayati said that he supported having a unity government as long as the make-up reflects the election results (meaning the Shia Coalition gets about half the major government jobs).  He envisioned that the proposed National Security Council could include experienced leaders who are no longer part of this elected government. He confirmed that the Coalition's political committee is hotly debating whether the National Security Council should have any authority.  In his opinion, it should not have either legislative or executive powers, especially if it that would require a constitutional amendment.  He warned that the majority of the Alliance would reject the Salah ad-Din agreement if there is a push for a  BAGHDAD 00000401  002 OF 002   National Security Council with executive authority.  6. (C)  Comment:  Bayati's remarks are interesting because they give a sense (a) of SCIRI optimism that we hear elsewhere and (b) the possible trade-off for Jafari finally to concede.  We stress, however, that most of our Shia contacts are careful not to try to call the prime minister race yet. End Comment.  KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000402  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: SHIA ISLAMIST PM CONTENDERS: NO PERFECT CANDIDATE  REF: A. BAGHDAD 148      B. BAGHDAD 294  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, reason 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (S) SUMMARY:  None of the contenders for the Shia Islamist Coalition's prime minister nominee is ideal, and we will need to convince whoever the nominee is to construct a good set of structural agreements and program plans to address Iraq's deep problems.  SCIRI's Adil Abd' al-Mahdi appears to have the best executive skills, based on his performance as Minister of Finance in the Allawi Government.  However, Sunni Arab political leaders would prefer Shia Islamist Fadhila Party candidate Nadeem al- Jabiri over Abd al-Mahdi.  In addition, the Kurdish KDP, worried about Iranian influence, does not want Abd al-Mahdi as Prime Minister coupled with Jalal Talabani as President. Moreover, Ayad Allawi has stated his unwillingness to serve in a government headed by Abd al-Mahdi.  2.  (S)  SUMMARY CONTINUED:  Incumbent PM Jafari's performance in office has offered little to justify his continued tenure.  Nonetheless, he enjoys strong public support based on his excellent communication skills.  While Jafari has always been open to listening to what USG officials have to say and is not pro-Iranian, he rarely follows through on politically difficult requests. Fadhila's Nadeem al-Jabiri appears to have the broadest cross-sectarian appeal and has demonstrated a readiness to consult closely with the United States.  However, al-Jabiri has weak support among the general public, the Shia Coalition, and even his own party.  TNA Deputy Speaker Shahristani appears to have a smaller chance of being the Shia Coalition nominee.  If the Coalition cannot agree, we could imagine influential Dawa figure Jawad al-Maliki emerging as a new contender.  Both Shahristani and al- Maliki support an especially hard line against Sunni Arab insurgents, and the premiership of either could increase sectarian differences.  None of the Shia Islamist Coalition candidates for premiership presents an obvious quick fix to Iraq's political dysfunction.  The next prime minister will play an important role in Iraq's political transition, but the future government's success will depend on the institutions of the new government as well as the individual at its helm (septel).  END SUMMARY  ---------------------------- ABD AL-MAHDI:  BEST EXECUTIVE? ----------------------------  3. (S) Adil Abd al-Mahdi could potentially act as a stabilizing influence in government if his performance as Prime Minister matched that of his ITG tenure as Minister of Finance.  Embassy Baghdad found Abd al-Mahdi to be an effective Minister of Finance during the Allawi government. As a technocrat, he has worked well with the U.S., especially on economic issues when he was Finance Minister. He worked closely with the Embassy's Economic section on restoring Iraqi relations with the IMF and the Tokyo Donors Conference, and assisted U.S. political goals during the constitution negotiations.  He is a senior member of the driving force in the Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555), the SCIRI party.  He has the support of Iraqi President and Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) leader Jalal Talabani. Sunni Arab leaders like Tariq al-Hashimi and Khalaf al- Ayyan tell us that they prefer the Fadhila Party candidate, Nadeem al-Jabiri, over Abd al-Mahdi, but they prefer Abd al-Mahdi over incumbent PM Jafari.  -------------------------- DRAWBACKS FOR ABD AL-MAHDI --------------------------  4.  (S)  However, Kurdish President and KDP leader Barzani fears Iranian influence and does not want Abd al-Mahdi as Prime Minister if Jalal Talabani is President.  Moreover, former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi has privately told Ambassador that he would not serve under Abd al-Mahdi. There also are questions about Abd al-Mahdi's standing within SCIRI; a PolOff who worked closely with Abd al-Mahdi during the constitution drafting process reported that he consistently deferred to SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim on major decisions.  5. (S) Abd al-Mahdi's key difficulty is the public perception of SCIRI as being too closely tied to Iran -- a cause for concern to the major political forces outside, and some within, the Shia Islamist Coalition.  He appears to enjoy a good relationship with Tehran ? PolOffs report that during a recent trip to Iran President Ahmedinejad referred to him as "his professor on Iraq."  The extent to  BAGHDAD 00000402  002 OF 004   which he would push back against hard Iranian pressure is not clear.  Compared to either Hakim or Jafari, Abd al- Mahdi has a low public profile.  A recent poll among Shia regions showed that 77 percent of respondents preferred Jafari as Prime Minister; only two percent preferred Abd al-Mahdi.  6. (S) In addition, questions remain as to whether he could effectively control the Badr Organization; it is not clear if Abd al-Mahdi could compel Badr Organization head Hadi al-Amari to relent on his militia's activities.  Given SCIRI's links to Badr Corps, we doubt Abd al-Mahdi would encourage serious investigations of alleged human rights abuses at the Interior Ministry.  SCIRI's holding the Prime Ministry would lessen its claim to have a security minister slot; this could give it less influence over day-to-day operations than it has now with the Interior Minister Bayan Jabr.  However, in any real internal government conflict, the prime minister holds the top cards.  7.  (S)  As Prime Minister, Abd al-Mahdi likely would support al-Hakim's desire to move ahead rapidly on establishment of at least one federal region in southern Iraq.  Such a move would set the stage for a divisive clash with the Sunni Arabs.  If Abd al-Mahdi could generate more SCIRI outreach to Sunni Arabs he could alleviate some (not all) Sunni Arab concerns about Iranian manipulation of SCIRI.  -------------------------------------- PM JAFARI:  GOLDEN TONGUE, LEADEN HAND ----------------------------------------  8. (C) Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari has demonstrated an unwillingness or inability to unify Iraqi political parties except in their opposition to him.  The Kurds have publicly expressed their disappointment with his leadership; he and Kurdish President Jalal Talabani had difficulty working together.  Jafari is an ineffective manager who has underperformed as Prime Minister: he failed to deliver on a promised USD 50 million to Tal?Afar for reconstruction, to reform the public distribution system, and to abide by IMF preconditions by pushing through the fuel import liberalization law (exacerbating the fuel crisis).  During his administration, Jafari has been unready to engage on Shia militia issues.  His inability to manage his ministers became apparent when six of them disobeyed his direct order to remain in-country and chose instead to leave with President Talabani to attend the UNGA.  He is unwilling to make hard decisions on important issues, preferring to push them further down the road.  9.  (S)  Jafari's best asset is his ability to speak to the Iraqi public.  He regularly appears in the media and IRI polling data indicates that Jafari is the most popular politician in Iraq.  He has excellent public speaking skills, and a poetic command of Arabic.  On a recent trip to Ramadi (see ref a), he used his rhetorical skill to sway a skeptical Sunni Arab audience.  10. (C) We have seen no evidence that Jafari is heavily influenced by Iran; he once asked Iran for compensation for the Iraq-Iran war.  He has also shown no willingness to engage Iran on a renegotiation of the 1975 Shatt al-Arab agreement.  While Jafari has always been open to listening to what USG officials have to say, only on a few occasions has he responded to difficult requests from us.  For example, he reluctantly authorized Ahmed Chalabi to run the energy ministries and was lukewarm on instituting an increase in gas prices.  He ignored our requests about de- Baathification, sensing the Shia political wind was blowing in the opposite direction.  He was also willing to completely reorganize the top levels of the MOD and reassign division commanders right before the election on sectarian/partisan grounds.  11. (C) With a renewed Jafari administration, SCIRI would probably insist on heading one of the security ministries. His debt to the Sadrists for their support will also guarantee their control of the prominent service ministries and make it unlikely that Jafari would crack down on the Mahdi Army (just as it is difficult to imagine Abd al-Mahdi cracking down on Badr "Organization" abuses).  Jafari?s record on investigating current allegations of SCIRI- affiliated MOI abuse of detainees was weak and ineffectual. Sunni Arabs are more likely to balk on supporting a Jafari government and could therefore seek to draw out the negotiations on ministerial candidates.  In fact, the Sunni Arabs, SCIRI, and the Kurds could probably promote harder- line candidates to take advantage of what would widely be perceived as weak Prime Ministerial leadership.  BAGHDAD 00000402  003 OF 004    ------------------------------------------- AL-JABIRI:  GOOD INSTINCTS BUT STRONG ENOUGH? -------------------------------------------  12. (S) Fadhila Party General Secretary Nadeem al-Jabiri is a dark horse UIC candidate with the strongest cross- sectarian appeal.  He was the first UIC Prime Ministerial candidate to reach out to members of the Sunni Arab Tawafuq coalition.   Kurdish President Barzani and former PM Allawi both support al-Jabiri.  His candidacy would, however, cause great unhappiness among some elements of the Shia Coalition.  Fadhila's roots lie in the rivalry between the party's spiritual leader, Ayatollah al-Yaqubi, and Muqtada al-Sadr over the claim to the mantle of succession to the latter's esteemed father Mohammed Sadiq Sadr.   Muqtada's supporters would  likely oppose al-Jabiri's candidacy.  13. (S) Nadeem al-Jabiri is, however, a weak man who does not command much support in Iraqi national politics, the Shia Coalition, or even his own party.  While the Fadhila Party backs his candidacy, we do not sense among his cadres any desire to break with the Shia Islamist Coalition to help al-Jabiri win the prize (see ref b).  Instead, al- Jabiri's hints appear to be, at a minimum, bargaining.  The Shia clerical establishment in Najaf would almost certainly not support Fadhila splitting from the Coalition.  He has kept a rather low profile and has not made himself accessible to the Iraqi public.  He does not score well in IRI opinion polls.  Within the List 555 coalition his Fadhila Party is small in comparison to SCIRI and Dawa, and does not have nearly as large a support base as Abd al- Mahdi or  Jafari.  Within the Fadhila party, leaders such as Basrah Governor Mohammed Mossibh al-Wahili have seemed beyond the control of al-Jabiri's dictates.  Certainly, if Ayatollah Yaqubi withdrew his support al-Jabiri's political career would end.  Given these limits to al-Jabiri's influence, it is hard to imagine him making tough political decisions, such as reforming the Ministry of Interior, without huge backing from the United States.  14. (S) Nadeem al-Jabiri has proven willing to consult closely with us, however.  Jabiri has expressed unease with Iranian influence in Iraq, and shows no evidence of close ties to Iran - a reason Sunni Arabs like him.  For his part, Ayatollah Yaqubi is known to dislike Iranian-backed Ayatollahs in the Najaf Hawza.  Jabiri has often billed himself as an Iraqi patriot who did not move to London or Tehran during the Saddam regime.  (Instead, he remained in Iraq where he was a political science professor at Baghdad University.)  15. (S) Jabiri's reluctance to move far ahead on federalism would be helpful in calming Sunni Arab concerns.  He says the right things about containing sectarian conflict, but we are not certain about his ability to deliver.  Notably, if al-Jabiri becomes PM, we can expect SCIRI to lay claim to a good share of the sovereignty ministries, including the Ministry of Interior.  The Sadrists may prove testy and demand more than their fair share of ministries in exchange for supporting a government led by a party they view as archrivals.  Fadhila's Sadrist ideological roots, which include a version of "Islamic economics" based on social justice, could make al-Jabiri a weak partner in our efforts to encourage Iraqi economic reform.  -------------------------------------- SHAHRISTANI ? SCIENTIST WITH BIG AMBITIONS --------------------------------------  16. (C) Deputy TNA Speaker nuclear scientist Hussein Al- Shahristani is the weakest PM candidate, with little perceived support outside some of the Shia Coalition independents.  His very hard line on security issues would make it difficult for him to have a productive relationship with Sunni Arabs.  As part of the Shia Coalition's "security committee," he has criticized Coalition forces for hindering MOI security operations.  On the other hand, Shahristani has effectively and efficiently managed the TNA during the frequent absences of the Speaker, particularly during the waning days of the last session when he shepherded the 2006 Budget Law to passage.  He has extreme views on Islam as the fundamental source of law, and is rumored to believe in the Khomeini-inspired doctrine underpinning Iran?s theocratic state, vilayet al-faqih.  We have seen no evidence of close ties to any foreign countries, although he spent significant time in Iran after his escape from Iraq in 1991.  He is very articulate during meetings with U.S. officials, but he perceives the United States often to have interests in Iraq that do not match Iraq's.  As an example, he expressed reservations on the  BAGHDAD 00000402  004 OF 004   timing and necessity for a fuel import liberalization law. He also let wither three bilateral economic agreements in order to focus on other issues.  ------------------------------------- DARK HORSE CANDIDATE: JAWAD AL-MALIKI -------------------------------------  17.  (S)  Jawad al-Maliki (AKA Nuri Kamil or Abu Isra) could emerge as a dark horse candidate for the prime minister slot if opposition hardens against Adel Abd al- Mahdi and Jafari rises but fails to cement his position. Politicians on all sides fear the rise of SCIRI, but many fear more a repeat of Jafari's incompetent tenure.  They could push for the Dawa Party to lead the government through Maliki instead of Jafari and attempt to convince Jafari to play a role similar to that of Abd al-Aziz al- Hakim.  Jawad al-Maliki is already the official spokesman of the Shia Alliance and a member of a triumvirate (with Ali Adeeb and Jaafari) that runs the Dawa Party.  As the former deputy speaker of the Iraqi Interim National Council and the chairman of the National Assembly's Security and Defense Committee,  Maliki is considered one of the leading statesman of the National Assembly and one of the Iraqi government's most tireless operators.  18.  (S)  Maliki has deep concerns about expanding Iranian influence in Iraq learned during a career that has seen him often in conflict with the Iranian regime.  He is also a hardline De-Baathification advocate, however, and often clashes with Sunni Arabs on that front.  He is the deputy chairman of the De-Baathification Commission.  His deep unease about Iranian intervention is matched only by his unease about the possibility of another Baathist Coup.  As such he has worked tirelessly to double-check the work of the Jafari government and claims to have stopped several efforts to install Baathists into leading positions and alleged conspiracies to put unreliable Sunni Arab recruits into sensitive security positions in or around the Green Zone.  He also advocates a hard fist against the Sunni Arab-dominated insurgency even at the expense of human rights violations.  He cooperated strongly with U.S. diplomats to head off Sadrist efforts to create a Sovereignty Committee in the National Assembly that would have called for an immediate MNF-I withdrawal.  In part due to Maliki's intervention, the committee was created and then defanged before any public damage could be done.  ------- COMMENT -------  19 (S)  None of the List 555 candidates for premiership presents an obvious quick fix to Iraq's political dysfunction.  The above discussion raises questions about which at present we can only speculate: would the benefits of Abd' al-Mahdi's presumed effectiveness outweigh the disadvantages of a PM perceived as linked to Badr Corps and Iran?  Could Abd al-Mahdi be prevailed upon to take a tough stand against his own party's militia?   Would the unquestionable cost of Jafari remaining in office, with his well known track record of ineffectiveness, be greater than the risks of the comparatively unknown al-Jabiri?  Would the right mix of competent ministers, representing all sectarian/ethnic groups, be able to manage around Jafari in his second term?  20. (S)  What is clear is the importance of our continuing to stress principles of governance -- inclusiveness and qualified technocrats in key jobs such as the security, oil and finance ministries. Moreover, the next PM's relationship with his cabinet will depend on rules established during the negotiations to stand up the next government.  (They will have to decide, for example, how much authority to vest in deputy prime ministers.)  The individual who leads the government as prime minister will play an important role in Iraq's political transition, but the future government's success will depend on the institutions of the new government as well as the individual at its helm.  Septel will provide thoughts on the kinds of principles and procedures of governance that we should seek.  KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000403  SIPDIS  SIPDIS, SENSITIVE  LONDON FOR ARAB MEDIA UNIT  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: EPET, EFIN, ECON, KCOR, KPAO, OPRC, IZ SUBJECT:  IRAQI MINISTRIES AGREE -- AD REF -- ON MESSAGE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE CAMPAIGN ON FUEL PRICE HIKES  1.  (SBU) Embassy Media Development Officer attended a February 6 meeting convened by Mohammed al-Asadi, director of the Government Communications Directorate (GCD), to continue discussions of a public "message" for government reductions in fuel subsidies.  (Note:  Messages would eventually encompass overall economic reform, but initially we are focusing on fuel subsidies, the hot-button political issue at this time.)  The ministries of electricity (MOE), oil (MOO), finance (MOF), labor and social affairs (MOLSA), transportation (MOT), and Planning (MOP) were represented. Phil Malone, DFID advisor to the GCD, and Olga Zatepilina, International Republican Institute Country Director, and Samir Zedan, USAID Public Affairs Advisor, also attended. Iraqi participants repeatedly veered off course to speculate what kinds of reforms/new benefits might accompany the price hikes, i.e., what might be the best carrot to bring people along.  We reminded them that such "deliverables" might have to await phase two of the campaign: right now the government must explain the need for general reforms.  2.  (SBU) After much hesitation, participants agreed that the fuel price message should be linked to the message on MoLSA's expanded social safety net, but MoLSA could not provide firm assurance that payments would be available to coincide with the price hikes.  The most the government could do at this point (for the initial public campaign) was inform citizens they could register for the expanded safety net program at their provincial councils, and explain that the program would soon serve 1 million families.  (Comment: In a separate meeting, MoLSA officials had said that 1 million families should be covered in March.  USAID sources indicate that June would be a more realistic timeframe.) They also agreed to include at least one message containing the anti-corruption hotline, though the details were not ironed out.  At the end of the meeting, PAS pulled GCD director aside to ask him to begin working with key TV and radio outlets to suggest they provide free air time for this public service effort.  (COMMENT:  This will no doubt be difficult.)  Processing the Message ----------------------  3.  (SBU) The group created about 10 "test" messages for TV and radio spots; subsequent negotiations among the Iraqi players extended the themes.  Embassy is further distilling these messages, and we will provide them to IRI, which agreed to submit them to some focus groups to see how they are received by regular Iraqis.  The Iraqi public affairs officials agreed at the end of the meeting to vet the messages with their ministry policy officers, while the embassy began vetting capabilities and prices of local contractors.  4.  (SBU) Messages in hand, embassy PAS co-hosted a meeting with GCD for prospective bidders on February 8; due to extensive security procedures instituted for Ashura, only one of four companies and one of three Iraqi government officials (GCD) were able to reach the International Zone.  5.  (SBU) The lone contractor who attended said it would take 15-20 days to produce six radio and six TV spots (30 seconds each).  When asked to comment on the overall task, one of the contractor participants said that it would be very difficult to sell any message that implied fuel price increases without explaining what was happening to government income from crude oil exports.  If there was clear evidence the government was easing severe hardships, the message might be credible.  Another contractor participant said that no one would understand why the subsidies should be eliminated, and not the funds they all now believe are being diverted by ministries charged with spending oil revenues.  No one had seen where reconstruction aid had gone; no one had seen where oil income had gone; and no one believes they will see the "savings" the government says it will realize from subsidy reductions.  Nonetheless, the contractor was prepared to work with the government to further develop scenarios for the campaign.  The owner of the PR company said that, given the likely extreme distaste for the message (people were absorbing higher prices for all goods after the last price hike), the campaign will have to try and create a new dynamic between government and citizen. To succeed, it will have to be an "intellectual message wrapped in an emotional package."  6.  (SBU) Embassy is making some revisions to the technical requirements for the TV spots and intends to distribute them to all bidders in a meeting on February 12.  By then, we  BAGHDAD 00000403  002 OF 002   expect that Ashura security precautions will have been fully dismantled, again permitting relatively free access to our meeting site.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000405  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2016 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ENRG, EPET, KCOR, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: POLITICAL POWER - AND REVENUE - GRAB AT OIL MINISTRY; SOMO ASKS FOR HELP  REF: BAGHDAD 390  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C/REL GBR AUS) SUMMARY: Dr. Musab al-Dujayli (strictly protect), Director General (DG) of the State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO), asked the U.S. and UK embassies February 8 to intervene with the Prime Minister to prevent new Minister of Oil Hashem al-Hashimi from abrogating SOMO's current crude oil export and oil product import contracts in favor of contracts with Fadhila party-supported partners. Al-Dujayli claims that the Fadhila party, which has control over the Ministry of Oil in the current GOI political alignment, seeks revenue for the party through kickbacks it will receive on each contract.  According to Al-Dujayli, Fadhila is willing to commit Iraq to purchase more than double the amount of imports currently budgeted in the party's search for cash; DGs who balk are being threatened with removal.  Post Econ Section is working with the UK Embassy on language for a letter from the Prime Minister to the Minister of Oil ordering him to cease all activities that violate the PM's earlier directive to ministries to refrain from undertaking substantive obligations during this caretaker phase of the ITG.  Econ Counselor will recommend that DPM Chalabi use these points with PM Ja'afari and, if necessary, the Ambassador will directly urge the PM to issue a new directive that will put an end to Fadhila's illegal activities at MoO. END SUMMARY.  -------------------- Ministry of Oil Coup --------------------  2.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Speaking to representatives of the UK and U.S. embassies February 8, Dr. Musab al-Dujayli (strictly protect), Director General (DG) of the State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO), said that Hashem al-Hashimi, widely acknowledged as having been brought into the Ministry of Oil (MoO) at the behest of the Fadhila party to replace Ibrahim Bahr al-'Ulum several weeks ago, brought with him as advisor, Kedem al-Yacoubi, nephew of Fadhila spiritual leader Ayatollah al-Yacoubi.  Kedem, a low-level engineer at SOMO and former shoe-shop owner in Damascus, recently had been rejected as the Fadhila candidate to replace al-'Ulum. Al-Hashimi, according to al-Dujayli, issued a memo February 2 fully empowering Kedem with all the authority enjoyed by the minister - in effect a Fadhila coup d'etat (NOTE: this is confirmed by several other directors general at MoO.  END NOTE.)  ----------------- Fattening Fadhila -----------------  3.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Kedem, according to al-Dujayli, has wasted no time in making his agenda at MoO crystal clear: providing revenue for the Fadhila party.  Al-Dujayli said that a committee of some 12-15 Fadhila members, none of whom have any experience in MoO, have "spread throughout the oil sector," pressuring DGs to "do something financially for Fadhila."  DGs that resist are being threatened with being fired. Al-Dujayli said that Fadhila apparently has decided that being awarded "control" over a ministry as political spoils of government formation entitles them to the ministry's wealth, and they are acting accordingly, taking advantage of the interim period to make their move. Al-Dujayli said that Iraq had only/only $213 million to spend per month on fuel imports.  Fadhila is pressuring him to spend twice that, either canceling existing fuel contracts and re-awarding them to Fadhila favorites or, at the very least, signing additional contracts.  Contracts signed now, al-Dujayli confirmed, would be binding for months to come.  ------------------- Milking Time at MoO -------------------  4.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Al-Dujayli recounted a February 5 event during which he claimed that some 15 "youngsters" from the Fadhila party demanded entry to his office.  The two al-Dujayli agreed to see reiterated earlier demands for financial "help" for Fadhila: "You know how to do it." They insisted that al-Dujayli, as head of SOMO, immediately sign several contracts favored by the party to import gasoline in the south.  According to al-Dujayli, Fadhila's kickback from the favored supplier would be, for example, $50,000 on a contract to import 200,000 tons of fuel.  When al-Dujayli objected on the grounds that it would be against the public  BAGHDAD 00000405  002 OF 002   interest to commit public money, since Iraq could not afford to pay, the party members replied, "We are the public."  The demand vis-a-vis exports is that SOMO immediately cancel all existing crude oil export contracts so that they can be bestowed instead on purchasers to be determined by Fadhila - presumably with suitable remuneration for the party for the favor.  5.  (C/REL GBR AUS) When first approached by party members, al-Dujayli said he recommended they finance themselves the way most other Iraqi organizations and parties do: "form a company and get contracts."  He reported that he was told, "You are not stronger than al-'Ulum, and we sent him home." Al-Dujayli called Ayatollah al-Yacoubi an "agent of pressure," adding that Prime Minister Ja'afari is reluctant to stand against Fadhila so long as he seeks their support to retain the prime ministership in the next government. Fadhila, al-Dujayli opined, wants his signature as legal cover for their looting of what he called the ministry's assets.  ------------------------ U.S. a Shrinking Violet? ------------------------  6.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Al-Dujayli claims to have received a lukewarm reception when he briefed Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Chalabi on the situation February 6.  Chalabi called Kedem's appointment to MoO illegal but did not say he would take any specific action; hence al-Dujayli's decision to ask for U.S. and UK assistance.  "You have been too shy of putting (U.S. and UK) ideas (on the new government) to the Iraqis," al-Dujayli said.  He recommended that the US intervene directly in the choice of a new minister of oil, claiming that MoO employees - himself included - are "petrified" that MoO will remain in Fadhila hands.  7.  (C/REL GBR AUS) COMMENT: As long as Fadhila does not retain control of the ministry in the next government, al-Dujayli admitted that this could be a short-term problem. Many of our Shia Alliance contacts have told us that the Fadhila Party will not retain control of MoO because of how poorly it managed the ministry.  If Nadim al-Jabiri is successful at his bid for the premiership, Fadhila will not have control of any ministry (reftel). Iraq, however, cannot afford the consequences of even a short-lived interregnum of financial mayhem at MoO.  With the conviction of the newly-converted, al-Dujayli spoke vehemently of his budget limitations, and, although he may have other (possibly political) agendas of which we are unaware, he appeared sincere in his request for our help. Post Econ Section is working with the UK Embassy on language for a letter from the Prime Minister to the Minister of Oil ordering him to cease all activities that violate the PM's earlier directive to ministries to refrain from undertaking substantive obligations during this caretaker phase of the ITG.  Econ Counselor will recommend that PM Chalabi use these points with PM Ja'afari and, if necessary, the Ambassador will directly urQ the PM to issue a new directive that will put an end to Fadhila's illegal activities at MoO. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000406  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SECRETARY AND S/I  SIPDIS, SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: MARR, PINS, ODIP, OFDP, PREL, IZ  SUBJECT: MESSAGE FOR THE SECRETARY: AGRIBUSINESS FUNDING NEEDED IN FY06 SUPPLEMENTAL  1. (SBU) I appreciate all the work you and the Department have done in getting a strong supplemental request for assistance to Iraq.  It was good news to see that OMB had agreed to include the funding for national capacity development.  2. (SBU) I believe we are in good shape, with one exception - funding for agribusiness development.  We have talked a lot about the importance of agriculture development as an employment generator in Iraq.  Many in Congress also have shared their sense of the importance of facilitating the development of this sector.  3. (SBU) Restoration of the agriculture sector is critical to stabilization in Iraq, both for employment and revenue generation.  Agribusiness in particular needs to be a key focus of our activities.  There is little Iraqi capacity to process, package, market and distribute agribusiness foods and services.  The result is that Iraq ends up importing many processed goods that it could provide itself and loses the employment and revenue.  4. (SBU) We also need to focus the next government on subsidy reduction.  We can expect a number of allies in this effort, but it will continue to be politically challenging.  Success in reducing food subsidies will depend, in part, on increasing production and availability of processed goods in the domestic market.  5. (SBU) I understand the OMB logic of preferring to put these types of programs in regular appropriations bills.  However, we did not get the funding for which we asked in the regular FY06 appropriation, and FY 07 funding is unlikely to be available for another year.  After the first OMB passback, we already cut our supplemental request in half.  6. (SBU) I am concerned about missing this opportunity.  I believe that revitalizing the private agriculture sector and generating new employment can play a key role in our efforts to undermine the counterinsurgency.  7.  (SBU) I recommend appealing this one item with OMB.  If you like, I would also be willing to call Josh Bolton to reinforce the point.  Thanks, Zal  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000407  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2016 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: RAIDS AND RANSOMS: UNIFORMED MEN SPREAD FEAR IN BAGHDAD'S ADHAMIYAH DISTRICT   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (C) Summary: Residents of Al-Adhamiyah District in Baghdad told Poloff, February 8, that several organized raids had taken place over the past few months in which uniformed men had taken family members from their homes at night. Many of their family members, they said, were ransomed for release, and, in one case, were later found dead at the morgue. Residents appeared to be fearful to reveal who they believed was behind these abuses, but their statements pointed to Iraqi security forces. Many residents requested private interviews with Poloff saying that they were too afraid to give details in front of others. Due to the time constraints on the red zone visit, Poloff was unable to do so, but is following up on these requests.  End Summary.  2. (C) Poloff met with 15 individuals who claimed that their family members had been picked up in raids by groups they believed to belong to Iraqi security forces. Thekayat Ahmed from the Sabakhar neighborhood said that early in the morning on June 3, her section of the neighborhood was cordoned off while several house raids were performed resulting in the extraction of 11 individuals, including her husband, Osama Salman Abdul Hadi.  3. (C) Thekayat said these individuals, who were dressed in camouflage-type uniforms, ransacked her home, put a gun to her head, and took her husband. She added that she had not seen or heard from her husband since then, and that family members of those taken from their homes were later contacted to pay $4,000 in ransom for their release.  A second female participant who would not identify herself or her husband, confirmed this story, adding that the people who took away her husband in that same raid all drove the same blue and white vehicles, reminiscent of police vehicles.  4. (C) Another woman who identified herself as Hannan Abbas said that at 6 am on September 4, another sectioned-off raid of Sarafiyah neighborhood had occurred with nine people removed  from their homes. Hannan said the group wore dark green uniforms and drove red and white vehicles with no license plates.  Hanan said that the family members were later called for a ransom which some paid. Days later, she said, two of the nine kidnapped individuals were later found dead at the local morgue.  5. (C) Others at the table told similar stories of raids/ransoms.  One elderly gentleman, who did not identify himself, said his son was taken in a separate raid and claimed that he too was called for a ransom.  Unlike the others, however, he was able to see his son who he said appeared safe. This gentleman said he paid US $1,700 for the right to visit his son in a detention facility.  6. (C) Comment: Given the time constraint for this red zone visit, PolOff was unable to collect full data on these allegations.  What was most evident was the palpable fear that these residents exhibited. The residents appeared very jittery and spent a substantial amount of the conversation conveying to Poloff their fears of retribution for sharing details ) in some cases saying that they would prefer that no follow-up be conducted for fear of what would happen to their family members. Poloff assured residents that all information was confidential and offered to meet with residents individually to pursue further details.  PolOff will follow up on these reports. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000409  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: IECI ANNOUNCES CERTIFIED ELECTION RESULTS  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (U) At a February 10 press conference, the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq (IECI) formally announced the certification of results for the December 15 Council of Representatives elections.  The press conference was called to order by IECI Chairman Izaddin Hindawi who thanked all contributing authorities and the Iraqi people for a successful election.  His remarks were followed by other commissioners who read details of the final election results, summarizing the complaints and appeals process, and presenting the names of candidates who would fill the Council's 275 seats.  Missing from the list were three Allawi list candidates who were excluded after being named by the National De-Ba'athification Commission.  2. (C/REL UN AND MNFI) Following the press conference, International Commissioner Craig Jenness told PolOff that the Prime Minister's office, and then Jafari himself, had contacted the Commissioners just before the press conference, and asked the board to refrain from mentioning the names of the winning candidates in order to allow an opportunity for changes if the courts or the De-Ba'athification Commission were to rule in favor of the affected candidates.  Jenness said that the board had denied the requests, as they were too late and "without foundation".  Furthermore, Jenness claimed the board felt unauthorized to take such a step. Acknowledging the  Embassy's concerns about the lack of transparency in the de-Ba'athification action, Jenness said that if Jafari had really wanted to keep the three candidates on the list, he should have approached the board before the morning of the announcement of certified results. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000410  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, MOPS, PINS, EPET, ENRG, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE FOR NATIONAL SECURITY DISCUSSES ASSASSINATIONS, OIL INFRASTRUCTURE, OTHER TOPICS  REF: A. A. BAGHDAD 328      B. B. BAGHDAD 212      C. C. BAGHDAD 344  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (A), (B), (D )  1.  (C//REL GBR AUS) SUMMARY: The Iraqi Ministerial Committee for National Security (MCNS) met the evening of February 6, 2006 at the residence of Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari.  -- MNF-I Commanding General Casey urged the members to address the issue of kidnappings and assassinations about which members of the Sunni political leadership have been complaining; he warned that failure to deal with this issue could jeopardize the progress being made on political inclusion.  The members decided to form a committee to investigate these allegations and directed the Ministry of Interior (MOI) and Ministry of Defense (MOD) to Continue to investigate allegations of such events as they become aware of them.  -- Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi gave another presentation on the current oil infrastructure situation.  Earlier in the day the Prime Minister had signed an order giving Chalabi authority to take necessary measures to assure the flow of oil and fuel products.  After discussion, the committee determined that the threat to the oil infrastructure constitutes a matter of national security and that the Iraqi Government (IG) should approach MNF-I to request that Iraqi Army assets be redirected to provide security to oil infrastructure facilities.  -- Following up on an issue raised at the previous meeting concerning which Ministry exercises control over the National Joint Operations Center (NJOC), it was concluded that NJOC falls under the Minister of State for National Security but that its recently fired commander should be given the opportunity to refute the corruption charges that led to his dismissal.  -- The MCNS approved the MOI security plan for Ashura.  -- Discussion of a security plan for the Tigris River area near Taji was postponed, as it is not yet fully formulated.  -- Ja'afari briefly addressed the issue of Anbar, stating that it makes sense to consider working with tribal leaders in addition to the governor and his security council.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari convened the MCNS at his residence the evening of February 6.  Members of the committee present included Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr, Minister of Defense Saadoun Dulime, National Security Advisor Mowwafak al-Rubaie, Minister of State for National Security Affairs Karim al-Anzi, Ambassador Khalilzad,  MNF-I Commanding General Casey, and British Ambassador Patey. Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Chalabi and MNF-I Deputy Commanding General Houghton also were present, as were the Prime Minister's chief of staff and military advisor. Ambassadors Khalilzad and Patey, along with GEN Casey, departed early due to previously scheduled engagements.  -------------------------------- SUNNI CONCERNS RE ASSASSINATIONS --------------------------------  3. (C//REL GBR AUS)  GEN Casey requested that the MCNS consider and address the allegations made by Sunni leadership figures that members of their community are being systematically kidnapped and executed by men wearing police uniforms and driving what appear to be police vehicles. These complaints were raised most recently at a luncheon hosted by the Ambassador on February 4 (REF A.)  GEN Casey noted that since January 1 there have been nearly 90 murders in the Baghdad area, and it appears that at least half of them were executions.  Ja'afari recounted the discussions from the Ambassador's lunch, calling it a frank exchange and noting that the Sunni leaders were very concerned by these killings.  Ja'afari said that he shares their concerns but rejected any allegation that government officials were responsible, despite the use of what appear to be police uniforms and vehicles.  Although he acknowledged that it is possible that  BAGHDAD 00000410  002 OF 004   low-ranking members of the security forces may be committing crimes on their own, he argued that there is no evidence to show that this is a policy condoned or promoted by high-ranking members of the government.  He mentioned the case of a Shia who had been kidnapped and killed by persons wearing police uniforms, intimating that this is not just a Sunni problem.  4.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Minister of Interior Jabr reported that he had met with a Sunni leader to discuss the reports of eleven people being killed in a vehicle and fourteen others who had been found murdered.  Jabr claimed that the eleven were killed by Coalition Forces (CF), a statement with which GEN Casey took issue, asking that Jabr clarify and provide details.  With regard to the fourteen, a committee has been formed to investigate such crimes. Minister of State for National Security al-Anzi said that, since January 1, over 1480 innocent civilians have been killed, and he wondered why everyone was so concerned with this particular group of fourteen people.  5.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Minister of Defense Dulime, himself a Sunni, dismissed many of the Sunni leaders as complainers. For example, he said that Ayad Samarie of the Iraqi Islamic Party had called on him, upset because one of the party's buildings was being raided by CF and Iraqi Security Forces (ISF).  Dulime said he investigated and learned that: a U.S. soldier on patrol in the area had been shot by a sniper; the area had been cordoned; and all buildings had been searched for the shooter.  In the IIP building, ISF found hand grenades, explosives, remote control and communications devices, as well as a sniper rifle with empty shell casings. "They complain about us, but look what we find in their building."  Dulime also asserted that the Sunni leaders always make claims of groups of people being rounded up but are unable to provide names or details when asked.  "If an accusation is made, evidence must be provided.  If the allegation is false, the one making it should be punished."  6.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ambassador Patey told the Iraqis that they were missing the point, particularly al-Anzi and his remark about the large number of innocent civilians killed: "We know who killed them - terrorists - and we are fighting them.  Even though many of the Sunni's claims may be fabricated, you still have a duty to listen and to investigate."  Ambassador Khalilzad concurred and emphasized that the seriousness of the matter derives from the fact that it is the government that is being accused of killing people.  These claims must be investigated and, if false, refuted. Ja'afari replied that it is his job to defend his government, and he will not accept as true allegations without evidence that members of his government, including Ministers, are involved in killings.  He concluded by stating that the committee to investigate these allegations will look into them and that the Ministries of Interior and Defense have a duty to investigate all such allegations that come to their attention.  ------------------ OIL INFRASTRUCTURE ------------------  7. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Following up on a presentation he made to the MCNS on January 22 (REF B), Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi reported again on the status of Iraq's oil infrastructure.  He reviewed the fact that crude oil exports are declining and spoke of the recent attack on the new Kirkuk oil processing plant, calling it the most serious attack on oil infrastructure since the liberation and explaining that it will put a major hole in Iraq's oil export plans and forecasts.  No oil is flowing from the Kirkuk fields to the Bayji refinery due to pipeline interdictions; Bayji is shut down; and no fuel products are flowing from Bayji to Baghdad.  In the south, security is not an issue, but a shortage of tug boats, among other things, is preventing Iraq from exporting the maximum possible quantities of oil.  In short, Iraq is failing to meet the International Monetary Fund's standard that it export at least 1.57 million barrels per day, and, at best, Iraq's northern oil imports will be half what had been anticipated, according to Chalabi. With regard to the creation of rapid repair teams, Chalabi told the MCNS that the government, due to opposition from the Ministry of Oil, has failed to establish such teams despite the fact that MNF-I has made arrangements to house them and protect them.  He also  BAGHDAD 00000410  003 OF 004   lamented the government's failure to heed his advice months ago to install valves on the pipelines that would enable repairs to be made more quickly.  8.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ambassador told the MCNS that the USG is committed to helping solve this problem.  MNF-I Deputy Commanding General Houghton emphasized that the IG must recognize the seriousness of this issue.  It is a critical issue that threatens both the credibility of the government and the economic health of the country.  If no oil flows, the country will have no income and will not be able to pay for its army or police, which are required for the security of the nation.  He also urged the Iraqis to recognize that the problem is not simply one of security.  Iraq must achieve a secure and resilient system so that terrorism, corruption, and equipment failure cannot make it fail.  Houghton asserted that the IG must acknowledge the criticality of infrastructure integrity and take action by telling MNF-I that this is a major priority that justifies the reassignment of Iraqi Army units to protect oil infrastructure facilities.  He urged that Chalabi be empowered to direct the non-military aspects of this effort, which involves several non-security ministries.  (NOTE:  At the meeting, Chalabi was provided with a revised order signed by the Prime Minister giving the new committee that Chalabi heads authority to "take all necessary measures" to assure that at least 1.6 million barrels per day are exported.  It is not contemplated by anyone that this gives Chalabi authority to direct troops.  END NOTE.)  The MCNS agreed that the security priorities of the government must be rebalanced to raise infrastructure integrity to a higher level.  There was a brief discussion of what army units should be deployed where, but Chalabi and Houghton successfully urged the group to leave these decisions to the military authorities.  ------------------------------------------- CONTROL OF NATIONAL JOINT OPERATIONS CENTER -------------------------------------------  9.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  At the previous MCNS meeting (REF C) GEN Casey had expressed concern that Major General Ghazi, the Iraqi general commanding the NJOC, had been fired and that the NJOC had come under the control of Minister of State for National Security al-Anzi (MSNS).  Rubaie explained that the NJOC had, since the Allawi administration, fallen under the MSNS.  This might not have been readily apparent due to the fact that the NJOC was staffed by employees from a variety of ministries.  Rubaie argued that, because the NJOC is an interagency operation, it is logical that it should be under the control of the MSNS.  Al-Anzi justified the firing of Ghazi by citing allegations of financial mismanagement and corruption, and he claimed Ghazi had refused to cooperate with investigators leaving no choice but to remove him.  He added that Ghazi's replacement is a fine officer who is doing well and should be left in place, and he asserted that running the NJOC is the most important function of his ministry.  10. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ja'afari expressed concern that GEN Casey had raised this issue and was no longer present to discuss it.  (NOTE: GEN Casey had departed the meeting prior to this discussion, for a higher-priority prior engagement. END NOTE.)  Minister of Interior Jabr speculated that GEN Casey was concerned because an officer he was comfortable working with had been removed without prior notice.  Ja'afari also pointed out that questions might arise because Ghazi is a Christian, and some might think he had been removed for this reason.  Al-Anzi assured Ja'afari that this was not the case and pointed out that Ghazi had been offered a very good high-ranking position following his dismissal from the NJOC. Nevertheless, Ja'afari concluded that Ghazi must be given the choice of vying for reinstatement.  To do so he must contest the corruption allegations made against him.  If it is found that evidence is lacking, Ghazi should be given his old job back.  Alternatively, he may choose not to fight the charges and accept the new job he has been offered.  -------------- SECURITY PLANS --------------  11. (C//REL GBR AUS)  Jabr provided copies of the MOI's security plan for Ashura, which was approved by the MCNS. The MCNS agreed to postpone discussion of the security plan (which Ja'afari had requested at the last meeting) to deal  BAGHDAD 00000410  004 OF 004   with problems in the Tigris River region near Taji, as the plan is not yet completely formulated.  -------------- ANBAR PROVINCE --------------  12.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  Ja'afari advised the MCNS that he would meet the next day with the governor of Anbar Province. He said he had received a letter from fifteen Anbar sheiks who wrote that their views about the province should be considered as well as the Governor's.  Ja'afari said the sheiks seemed to be respectable and made some good points; so he will consider whether to deal with them in addition to working with the governor.  ------- COMMENT -------  13.  (C//REL GBR AUS)  The apparent reluctance of the MCNS to take seriously the allegations made by Sunni leaders about kidnappings and assassinations, true or not, is troubling. We will continue to work to convince Ja'afari and his ministers that, if these allegations are unfounded, the best way to put them to rest is to convincingly investigate and refute them.  If they are true, then immediate steps must be taken to put a stop to them and to punish those responsible. With regard to energy infrastructure, the delegation of additional powers to Chalabi is encouraging, as is the determination to reorder security priorities to move infrastructure higher up the list.  However, we can't help but think that members of the MCNS still fail to grasp the reality of the situation they face.  During the meeting, the lights flickered and went out, plunging the room into darkness for a few minutes. The conversation continued as if nothing were amiss. Several minutes later, Chalabi received a note telling him an explosion, possibly a car bomb, had just detonated near the Doura power station.  He made a call and announced that the electrical system had tripped and the entire country was blacked out.  (NOTE:  MNF-I was unable to confirm that an explosion had occurred.  Later reports indicated the system was tripped due to a line malfunction caused by a combination of wind, dust, and corrosion.  END NOTE.)  Rubaie joked that Chalabi was an "alarmist", and he and Jabr argued that a nation-wide blackout is simply impossible.  Until the Iraqi leadership opens its eyes to the situation it faces, attempts to get the IG to take real action to address the infrastructure problem will remain difficult. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000411  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  AMMAN FOR ISU AND REFCOORD CLAIRE KANESHIRO CAIRO FOR REFCOORD GERRY CHEYNE STATE FOR PRM/ANE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ASEC, OTRA, PREF, SMIG, SY, IZ SUBJECT: REQUEST COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR BAGHDAD REFUGEE COORDINATOR CAMILLE HILL  REF: A. STATE 21922       B. STATE 19344  1. Country Clearance is requested for the February 19- March 4 travel of Baghdad Refugee Coordinator Camille Hill to Jordan and Syria.  RefCoord is joining PRM/ANE Office Director Richard Albright and PRM/ANE Iraq Program Officer Liana Brooks-Rubin for meetings in Amman and Syria February 22 to March 3.  Ms. Hill has already has filed an electronic country clearance request for Jordan with ISU-Amman including requests for assistance with necessary hotel, regional air, and ground transportation arrangements, and is coordinating hotel arrangements in Syria with Amman Refugee Coordinator Claire Kaneshiro. No additional Embassy assistance is required.  2. While in Jordan, Ms. Hill will meet with officials from UNHCR, CENTCOM, EUCOM, and Embassy Ankara, and PRM/ANE to discuss the future of Iraq's Makhmour Refugee Camp.  Ms. Hill and PRM/ANE will have separate meetings with UNHCR and IOM to discuss future USG support for the Iraqi Ministry of Displacement and Migration.  Ms. Hill will also consult with Amman-based UNHCR and IOM officials working on other PRM-funded projects for Iraqi refugees and with ISU-Amman budget officials.  If time permits, Ms. Hill will monitor and evaluate ICMC's PRM- funded project for Extremely Vulnerable Iraqis (EVIs) in Jordan in coordination with Amman RefCoord.  3.  While in Syrian, Ms. Hill will join the meetings arranged for Mr. Albright and Ms. Brooks-Rubin.  They will consult with government officials and representatives from UNHCR and NGOs working on refugee issues and returnee policies and programs.  4.  Ms. Hill's proposed itinerary is as follows:  February 19 - depart Baghdad and arrive Amman on Royal Jordanian flight TBD with ISU Amman February 20-21 - consult with IOM, UNHCR, Amman RefCoord and ISU Amman.  Monitor and Evaluate ICMC EVI project when possible. February 22 - Meeting on Makhmour Camp February 23 - Meeting on MODM Capacity Building February 24-25 - Tour of UNHCR refugee camps and facilities February 26-28 - continue consultations February 28 - 20:30 depart Amman for Damascus on Royal Jordanian 435 February 28 - 21:25 arrive Damascus March 1-2 - Syria visit March 3-4 - Depart Damascus for Baghdad via Amman with overnight in Amman if schedule requires; details TBD with ISU Amman  5.  Ms. Hill holds a TS clearance. Ms. Hill will be traveling to between Baghdad and Jordan on tourist passport no. Z7997731 since her diplomatic passport was sent to Washington for a Syrian visa.  PRM/ANE will deliver her diplomatic passport to her in Amman and she will continue to Syria on diplomatic passport no. 900347751   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000414  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2016 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: INSURGENTS DISABLE ANBAR TELEPHONE NETWORK   Classified By: Tom Delare, Economic Counselor, for reasons 1.4 (b), (d).  1. (C) Summary.  From State Embedded Team Ramadi. Attacks on a Ramadi telecommunications office have left much of the province without landlines (no cell phone network has survived in the troubled province.)  Local officials speculate that beyond satisfying the terrorist's goal of creating chaos, their intent may have been to disrupt citizens' ability to inform the CF of insurgent activity.  Given the damage, it will be several months before any phone service (conventional) can be restored.  The series of attacks on infrastructure continues to plague the life of Anbar's long-suffering civilians, but it is unclear whether the disruptions will foment a backlash against the extremists.  The central government has an opportunity to prove its mettle by devising and implementing solutions, which would pay dividends in this crucial province.  End Summary.  2. (C) Ministry of Telecommunications' representative in Anbar, Engineer Mahmood Adelgabar Mutlaq, told PolOff on February 5, that insurgents had destroyed the second of two vital telephone switch facilities in Anbar a day before.  According to Mahmood, to circumvent the tightly secured first floor of the Ramadi telecommunications facility insurgents utilized ladders to access second floor windows through which they poured quantities of gasoline and ignited the blaze.  The ministry worker reported that two Ramadi city fire trucks responded to the fire, managed to extinguish the flames for a short period, but due to the large quantity of flammable liquids, the fire re-ignited and destroyed the facility. The Ramadi switches provided service to over 20,000 homes across Anbar.  --------------------------------------------- ---------- Coordinated: Second Telecommunications Site Hit Earlier --------------------------------------------- ----------  3.  (C) Engineer Mahmood, en route to Baghdad to appeal for help from his minister, described the second attack on Anbar's communication network.  He said the insurgents had simply blown up a second switching facility in Khalidiya, located between Fallujah and Ramadi.  As with many difficult queries, Anbari officials replied with a question; in response to PolOff's query what did the attackers seek to gain from destroying the majority of landlines in the province, Mahmood asked "why do they try to kill you, why do they try and kill me?"  He answered himself, "terrorism".  The engineer stated his intention to lobby the Minister of Telecommunications for assistance in procuring a wireless switching system to replace the obliterated network.  Even if the equipment could be moved immediately to the troubled province, the engineer estimated it would take one to two months to install.  --------------------------------- Isolated Before, Isolated Further ---------------------------------  4. (C) Communicating in Anbar has been historically difficult.  After a national cell phone network briefly established limited service west of Fallujah Summer 2005, insurgents quickly destroyed the newly erected towers. Few Anbaris own satellite phones, and Governor Ma'moon Sami Rasheed al Alwani noted that now even the terrorists cannot telephone a doctor if their relatives take ill. The governor interpreted the attack as not only an attempt to throw the province into further chaos, but to prevent Anbaris from communicating with the Coalition Forces (CF).  He suggested the attack was related to the 'TIPs' line the CF maintains for citizens to report on noted insurgent activity.  He remains concerned that establishing a cell phone network would facilitate insurgent communications more than civilians'. Ma'moon emphasized the restoration of landlines to the capital and affected cities west could prove the struggling government was dedicated to serving their constituents.  5. (C) Comment.  The successive attacks on the province's weak communications could possibly presage further infrastructure attacks on the aging series of Euphrates barrages or fragile electricity grid.  It could be months before telephone lines are functioning again in Ramadi and the regional cities and towns.  It's an even bet whether the long-suffering Anbaris will blame and turn on the extremists or succumb to the paralysis of intimidation.  The central government's bold and rapid response to Anbar's war (on terror) damage could win valuable points among hard-bitten Sunnis.  It would be so entirely unexpected.  End Comment.  BAGHDAD 00000414  002 OF 002     KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000417  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2016 TAGS: PREL, UNSC, PGOV, ASEC, IZ SUBJECT: UN U/SYG VENESS AND DCM DISCUSS IZ TRANSITION PLAN  REF: NEW YORK 00104  Classified By: DCM David Satterfield for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Visiting UN U/SYG for Safety and Security David Veness called on the DCM on February 10 to discuss plans for the transition of the International Zone (IZ); short- and longer-term UN security and logistical arrangements; the development of Iraqi Security Forces (ISF); and the current threat situation in Iraq.  The DCM assured the U/SYG that we have confidence in the security status of the UN's current quarters in the al-Rasheed Hotel as it transfers to Iraqi management in May 2006.  DCM urged the UN, however, to make progress in identifying and preparing more permanent quarters in the old U.S. Embassy Compound or elsewhere.  The current MNF-I IZ transition plan, DCM noted, assumes that by the end of 2007 the ISF will bear principal responsibility for security in and around the IZ; still, the plan will be subject to regular revalidation.  Post will continue to engage UN/Iraq closely on the transition plan, DCM said, in order to avoid UN opposition to the Coalition's transfer of control of the IZ  to the Iraqis.  The U/SYG emphasized his conviction that UN/Iraq needs to begin making progress regarding its long-term presence.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C) Visiting UN U/SYG for Safety and Security David Veness called on the DCM on February 10 to discuss plans for the transition of the International Zone (IZ); short- and longer-term UN security and logistical arrangements; the development of Iraqi Security Forces (ISF); and the current threat situation in Iraq.  U/SYG Veness explained that he was tasked to provide to the UNSYG by February 21 "an open-ended assessment of the situation in Iraq in 6, 9, 12, 18 , 24 months."  DCM strongly urged Veness to receive a briefing on the current IZ transition plan from the Joint Area Support Group Commander, Colonel Kenneth Dahl, who was present at the meeting.  (NOTE: This briefing took place later the same day.  END NOTE.)  3. (C) DCM underscored that the IZ transition plan's assumptions -- principal among them that the ISF would assume primary control of the IZ and surrounding areas by the end of 2007 -- would be revalidated regularly so that MNF-I does not take irreversible steps to withdraw that would jeopardize security of the IZ and its occupants.  It is essential, DCM noted, that the Embassy remain closely engaged with the UN in the assessment of IZ security so that, in mid-2007, a situation does not arise in which MNF-I is prepared to turn over control to the Iraqis while the UN opposes MNF-I's departure.  4.  (C) DCM urged the UN to make progress in planning and carrying out its own transition to a long-term presence. Veness and DCM agreed that the GOI had granted the UN permission to establish its permanent presence in the old U.S. Embassy Compound adjacent to the current Palace Complex.  Veness expressed concern about the security status of the al-Rasheed Hotel, which houses many UN staff members, when MNF-I turns over management of the hotel to the Iraqis in May 2006.  Veness cited the fact that USG personnel no longer reside in the hotel as an indication that the USG may not consider it safe.  COL Dahl assured Veness that the security posture of the hotel would remain fundamentally the same with the transition to Iraqi management, noting that JASG still has two people residing there.  COL Dahl also noted that JASG has been working closely with UN/Iraq to find a more suitable interim location for UN staff prior to a move into a permanent facility.  Various IZ locations, he added, are under consideration, and it is likely that a move to an interim site will take place in October 2006.  Veness said that he is pushing vigorously for the UN to plan and implement UN/Iraq's "progression" to interim and permanent sites and acknowledged the need for greater self-reliance, noting that it would require "a great deal of help" from the UN's friends to get UN/Iraq to that point.  DCM suggested that the UK Mission, rather than the U.S. Embassy, might provide a more relevant model for UN consideration.  5.  (C)  During a brief review of the aviation support issue, which Veness described as a potential "showstopper," the DCM suggested that the UNSYG reach out personally to certain governments such as the Germans and the Italians.  The USG, DCM said, is disappointed that other offers have been  BAGHDAD 00000417  002 OF 002   withdrawn due to competing requirements, but he also highlighted that this means prompt UN action is necessary when offers present themselves. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000420  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2036 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, ECON, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: MODERATE SHIA ISLAMIST SAYS PM RACE IS DEAD HEAT.  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (S/REL UK) Summary.  In a February 10 meeting, independent moderate Shi'a Islamist Ali al-Dabbagh told Poloffs that the two leading United Iraqi Alliance (UIA) candidates for Prime Minister, Ibrahim Jafari and 'Adil 'Abd al-Madhi, are in a dead heat, with eight or more Alliance members still undecided.  Based on this, Fadhila Party Nadim al-Jabiri is negotiating for the best package, indicating that his 15 votes could determine the next PM.  Dabbagh said the Sadrists plan to vote February 11 in a way likely to ensure that all their votes go to Jafari.  Al-Dabbagh hinted that both Jafari and 'Abd al-Madhi have asked him to be spokesperson. Al-Dabbagh confirmed that the formula for choosing cabinet ministers will be the same as last time, in which the party that gets the prime ministership is not likely to get any major ministries.  He also recommended that the USG and GOI "recognize" Moqtada al-Sadr in an effort to keep him calm and controllable. End Summary.  -------------------------- Shia Independents Weigh In --------------------------  2. (C/REL UK) Independent moderate Shi'a Islamist Ali al-Dabbagh, a member of the Transitional National Assembly, formerly a spokesman for the United Iraqi Alliance (UIA), and disappointed candidate for the Council of Representatives (CoR), told Poloffs February 10 that the UIA independents were likely to divide their votes: 15 votes for Deputy President 'Adil 'Abd al-Madhi and 5 votes for Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari.  According to al-Dabbagh, the Sadrists plan to have their members turn in their votes separately, so that all 30 or so members will, in the name of party unity, have their votes cast for Jafari.  ------------------------- Determining the Breakdown -------------------------  3. (C/REL UK) Al-Dabbagh stressed that efforts were underway on Friday to reach consensus without a vote.  If there is a vote, Al-Dabbagh saw the race as a near dead heat, with the remaining 8-10 votes unknown.  60 For Jafari: 25 Da'wa Party and Da'wa Tanzim al-Iraq 30 Sadrists  5 Independents  45 For 'Abd al-Mahdi: 30 SCIRI and Badr Organization 15 Independents  15 swing votes: 15 Fadhila Party  ------------------- Fadhila Still Vying -------------------  4. (C/REL UK) Community leader Mustafa al-Kadhimi, who hosted the meeting with al-Dabbagh, told Poloffs that Fadhila Party leader Nadim al-Jabiri knows his 15 votes can make or break either PM candidate, so he is using this to negotiate the best package out of both of them.  According to al-Dabbagh, al-Jabiri said if he does not get what he wants from either 'Abd al-Madhi or Jafari, he would leave the Alliance. However, al-Dabbagh reported that Fadhila spiritual leader Shaykh al-Yacubi in Najaf told him that he wanted Fadhila to stay in the Alliance.  ------------------------ Jafari vs. 'Abd al-Madhi ------------------------  5. (C/REL UK) Al-Dabbagh had a realistic appraisal of both Jafari and 'Abd al-Mahdi.  He said that there is no guarantee of success with Jafari as PM.  "He will only last two years in the job because Jafari does not have the ability to listen and learn from others.  Besides, his relationship with the Kurds will do him in," commented al-Dabbagh.  Al-Dabbagh said he believed that Jafari, in his heart, wants to do the right thing.  Al-Kadhimi added that Jafari rid himself of most of his first-term advisors, leaving only Falah Fayadh.  (Note: Former Jafari spokesman Laith Kubba recently praised Fayadh to Emboff as one of Jafari's most capable advisers. End note.)  Al-Kadhimi said Jafari went as far as to request a meeting with secular Allawi supporter Rend Rahim to get her  BAGHDAD 00000420  002 OF 003   perspective on how to organize his office.  Al-Dabbagh claimed Jafari is serious about reforming his inner circle, but he will also continue to listen to several of his old-line Da'wa supporters.  6. (C/REL UK) In comparison, al-Dabbagh said that 'Abd al-Mahdi had surrounded himself with solid advisors (Farid Yassen, Zuhair Hamudi, Mohammad al-Hakim, Thamir Ghadban and others).  Al-Dabbagh hinted that both Jafari and 'Abd al-Madhi had approached him about accepting the position of spokesperson.  ----------------- Iranian Influence -----------------  7. (S/REL UK) Al-Dabbagh was concerned about the extent of Iranian influence over the next government, whoever led it. Neither Jafari nor 'Abd al-Mahdi would sacrifice relations with Iran, he said.  He reasoned that Jafari is willing to make a deal with anyone to become a success, making him much more susceptible to Iranian offers.  Al-Dabbagh admitted that 'Abd al-Madhi will have difficulty going against SCIRI/Badr. "'Adil can refuse some requests from (Hadi) al-Ameri and Badr," al-Dabbagh said, using the argument that anything Badr gets, Sadr will want, too.  However, 'Abd al-Madhi aspires to eventually strengthen himself away from SCIRI, but relies entirely on Hakim as his power base.  8. (S/REL UK) Outside the capital, however, al-Dabbagh acknowledged that Iranian influence is increasing. Al-Dabbagh said that Iranian intelligence (he used the Persian word Etellat, but did not specify whether he had in mind the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Quds Force or the Ministry of Intelligence and Security) was now more powerful than ever, and was having an influence over the security arm of Badr.  "Badr said it was a humanitarian organization" a year ago, al-Dabbagh said.  "Now Badr says it will protect rallies -- how can it do that if it is a humanitarian organization?"  Badr is forming new organizations:  "Friends of Badr" and "Friends of SCIRI," with vague and potentially menacing mandates.  "People like me are facing people who have money and (their own) security," he said.  "This is misused by the Iranians."  In Karbala, he said, "when you start talking against Badr, you are killed."  Badr, al-Dabbagh said, was "behaving like the Sadrists."  ----------------- Cabinet Formation -----------------  9. (C/REL UK) "The formula for choosing cabinet ministers will be the same as last time," said al-Dabbagh, with the party that gets the Prime Ministership not getting any of the other major ministries. He added that the Sadrists will not give up any of their ministries. Al-Dabbagh predicted that Fadhila will offer the Oil Ministry to South Oil Company head Jabar Ali al-Luhaybi, and Hoshyar Zebari will remain as Foreign Minister.  Al-Dabbagh thought Tawfiq al-Yasiri would make a good Minister of Defense and Barham Saleh could resume the job of Deputy Prime Minister. Al-Dabbagh considered Qassim Daoud an excellent choice for Minister of Interior except for his poor health.  (Note: Daoud had heart surgery in late 2005 with a follow-up procedure in early 2006.  End note.)  10. (C/REL UK) Al-Dabbagh has been a public advocate for the proposed National Security Council.  Al-Dabbagh said the Council should not have executive authority.  He envisioned a Council that would decide strategies for the country, i.e. negotiate with the insurgency, decide Iraq's relations with neighboring countries, promote national reconciliation, and outline constitutional review issues.  The Council should have ten members, one of whom, al-Dabbagh said, should be former PM Ayad Allawi.  11. (C/REL UK) SCIRI head 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Hakim has no objection to Allawi, al-Dabbagh said; the problem is Muqtada al-Sadr.  Al-Dabbagh said he had talked recently to Allawi, Hakim and Sadr supporters about Allawi's participation in the government.  Sadr's top aides may be softening, al-Dabbagh said -- they are saying now that "they can't say yes yet," because Sadr himself is in Syria.  Al-Dabbagh said he believed that relations between Allawi and Sadr could be worked out, but that Allawi should take some symbolic step to show respect to Muqtada; he need not offer him anything substantive.  A visit by Allawi to Muqtada would be useful, al-Dabbagh said, but Allawi had indicated such a visit was unlikely.   BAGHDAD 00000420  003 OF 003   --------------------- Muqtada Wants Respect ---------------------  12. (C/REL UK) Al-Dabbagh warned that the rivalry between Hakim/Badr and Muqtada Sadr could become more and more violent.  Al-Dabbagh suggested the USG open a channel to Sadr, who has 28-30 seats, as a legitimate player on the political scene. "Recognition and legitimacy will keep Muqtada more calm and predictable," commented al-Dabbagh. "He wants to be assured people are listening to him."  In response to Poloffs' question, Dabbagh said Muqtada listens to Mustafa al-Yaqubi, Riyadh al-Nuri, and Jafar Muhammad Hamid Bakr al-Sadr.  ---------------------------- Reforming the Economy Is Key ----------------------------  13. (C/REL UK) Reforming the economy is the key to Iraqi political recovery, al-Dabbagh (a businessman) said.  Asked what his advice would be to an incoming Prime Minister of Iraq, he said, "Give the private sector in Iraq a chance." Al-Dabbagh advocated getting the banking system up and running -- which he indicated would take one to two years. The construction industry could lead the economic recovery. The Basra port needed to be improved and Sadrist corruption in the port needed to be stopped.  Insurance needed to become more available, and the Iraqi government-run insurance company needed seed capital of several million dollars to get going quickly.  Agriculture required help, too, and old industries should be privatized with help given to 800,000 industrial workers likely to be made redundant to find new jobs.  14. (C/REL UK) Al-Dabbagh said the Iraqi budget was sufficient for this year, but needs substantial new funds for 2007, when donor funds dry up.  There should be considerable new investment in the Iraqi oil and gas industry now in order to create revenues for 2007.  ---------------------- Role of the Marja'iyya ----------------------  15. (S/REL UK) Al-Dabbagh, who thought he was close to Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani until Sistani's all-but-open December endorsement of the UIA doomed al-Dabbagh's independent candidacy, said that Sistani was being drawn too far into politics in recent months.  Dabbagh said that Ayatollah Sistani's son, Sayyid Muhammad Ridha al-Sistani, was getting too involved in the details of government, at the behest of Hakim and Husayn Shahristani.  "People in Baghdad" (referring to Hakim and Husayn Shahristani) "were pulling Muhammad Ridha down and using him in the details." Al-Dabbagh said he hoped to go see his close friend Jawad Shahristani, Ayatollah Sistani's son-in-law in Qum, Iran, to urge the marja'iyya to stay above the political fray lest their reputations be diminished by involvement in day-to-day politics.  16. (S/REL UK) Al-Dabbagh assured Poloffs that Sayyid Muhammad Ridha respects the United States for what it has done in Iraq.  He said that Muhammad Ridha was concerned, however, about reports of recent contacts between U.S. officials and insurgents.  He reportedly fears this is the first step towards the return of Ba'thists to political life and then to power.  Al-Dabbagh said that Muhammad Ridha also believes that Allawi has surrounded himself with the worst of the former Ba'thists, instead of others whose presence would not give rise to concerns that the Ba'thists might be using Allawi as a means to return to power.  Poloffs assured al-Dabbagh that the United States would never countenance a return of the Ba'thists to power in Iraq, and that it was important for the Ba'thists to be persuaded to lay down their arms, participate in the democratic political process, and renounce violence.  Al-Dabbagh said that it would be helpful for Muhammad Ridha to be re-assured from time to time that the Shi'a would not lose the benefits of democracy.  17. (C/REL UK) Comment.  Ali al-Dabbagh was not elected to the Council of Representatives, but remains a Shia insider who is in direct communication with people close to Ayatollah Sistani.  Al-Dabbagh commands a strong media presence and is likely to stay visible in Iraqi politics, as the next PM Spokesperson or as a television commentator on Iraqi politics. PolOffs view al-Dabbagh's proposed approach toward a calmer and more predictable Muqtada as thought provoking, but dubious.  End Comment. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000421  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D C O P Y (CLASSIFICATION TO SECRET)  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: (U) PROMINENT KURDISH POLITICIAN MAHMUD  OTHMAN SAYS NONE OF THE PRIME MINISTER CANDIDATES  ARE "FIT TO LEAD"  BAGHDAD 00000421  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR Robert Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (S) Summary:  In a February 8 meeting, outspoken Kurdish negotiator Dr. Mahmud Othman bitterly criticized the Prime Minister candidates as unfit to lead and claimed that the Shia Islamist Coalition's delay naming its prime minister candidate had made Iraq look foolish.  Othman urged the U.S. government to increase the pressure on the Shia Coalition to begin serious negotiations.  He proclaimed that Fadhila's Nadim al-Jabiri would be the best choice, although SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi would be more capable.  According to Othman, during working level meetings on government formation with the Shia Coalition on February 7, the Shia delegation had informed the Kurds that there were five non- negotiable issues for the Shia: (1) excluding former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi from participating in the new government, (2) de-Ba'athification, (3) counterterrorism, (4) preventing any changes to the Constitution, and (5) federalism for the south. Othman also brought up the problems of terrorism and corruption in Iraq, which he claimed both the U.S. and the Iraqi Government had inadequately addressed. PolOff pushed back on Othman's recent interview on the U.S presence attracting terrorists to Iraq - Othman claimed the paper had twisted his words - and urged that Othman be more careful in the future. End Summary.  ------------------------ (U) "They're All Unfit!" ------------------------  2. (C) In a February 8 meeting, Dr. Mahmud Othman, a member of the Kurdish government negotiation team, stated that none of the prime minister candidates were fit to lead Iraq.  He angrily claimed that the Shia Coalition had made Iraq a laughingstock in front of the world.  The government formation negotiations, he asserted, could have started fifty days ago.  "The people are suffering from lack of security and services, and the leadership only goes from party invitation to party invitation - how are any of them fit to lead?" he asked.  The Shia are unwilling to make the difficult decisions, he said, and therefore refuse to select their Prime Minister candidate.  Othman urged the U.S. government to increase the pressure on the Shia Coalition.  The Shia street is likely to revolt soon if progress is not made, he predicted.  3. (C) Othman proclaimed that Fadhila's Nadim al- Jabiri would be the best choice, although SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi would be more capable.  Abd al- Mahdi's ties to Hakim make him very dangerous, Othman opined.  Current Prime Minister Ibrahim Ja'afari is problematic for many Iraqis, especially the Kurds.  The Kurds had had too many disappointments with Ja'afari's leadership, he stated.  Al-Jabiri, on the other hand, is non- sectarian, free from Iranian ties, and has an open point of view.  Unfortunately, he is too weak and would be too dependent on others to lead effectively.  ------------------------------------- (U) Government Formation Negotiations -------------------------------------  4. (C) According to Othman, during working level meetings on government formation with the Shia Coalition on February 7, the Shia delegation had informed the Kurds that there were five non- negotiable issues for the Shia: excluding former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi from participating in the new government, de-Ba'athification, strong measures against terrorism, preventing any changes to the Constitution, and federalism for the South.  (Othman wryly noted that the Shia defined any who disagreed with them as "terrorists.")  Those who did not agree with the Shia Coalition's position on these five issues would not be allowed in the cabinet, Othman told us.  (Comment:  Senior KDP official Rowsch Shaways on February 9 confirmed to us that the Shia had raised these issues with the Kurds on February 7.  See septel.  End Comment.)   BAGHDAD 00000421  002.2 OF 002   5. (C) There will also be difficulty with the Shia over ministries, said Othman.  The Shia delegation claimed during the talks on February 7 that the Ministry of Interior position belonged to the Shia, and they would not allow a Sunni Arab or a non- partisan person to have it.  The Shia are too vengeful, lamented Othman.  After the No-Fly Zone was negotiated in 1991, Othman continued, the Kurds forgave the two Iraqi divisions who surrendered to the Kurds and sent them home with honor.  The Shia will not show similar mercy, he said.  --------------------------------------------- --- (U) Terrorism and Corruption - Iraq's twin evils --------------------------------------------- ---  6. (C) PolOff then confronted Othman about his interview with the London-based Arabic newspaper Asharq al-Awsat on February 7, in which he accused the U.S. Government of encouraging terrorists to come to Iraq to fight the U.S.  Othman immediately denied saying this, and claimed the paper misrepresented his position.  He explained that under Saddam Hussein Iraq used to fear only state- sponsored terrorism.  While Iraqis were grateful for liberation from Hussein, the increasingly complicated social and political landscape in Iraq now included several different groups of terrorists with varying agendas.  Some view themselves as "freedom fighters," some object to the current Iraqi Government, and yet others are committed only to fighting the Americans wherever they can.  PolOff suggested that he explain his comments more fully in press interviews to avoid this confusion in the future.  7. (C) The problem of corruption is also rampant, said Othman.  Unfortunately, there was some corruption during the CPA administration, and definitely the three Iraqi administrations - the Governing Council, the Allawi government, and the Ja'afari government - suffered from widespread corruption, he alleged.  Corruption is as bad for Iraq as terrorism, Othman said.  Both the U.S. Government and the Iraqi Government have inadequately assessed these situations, Othman said, and the Iraqi people have suffered as a result.  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  8. (C) Othman is a longtime Kurdish political figure who is more respected in the community for his past association with Mulla Mustafa Barzani (current Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Masud Barzani's father) than his current political influence.   He has, however, been named to the Kurdish negotiating team on government formation talks, and is known and trusted to some extent by both the KDP and the Talabani-led Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK).  Othman is the nominal independent; he formed his own party, the Kurdistan National Struggle Organization, in the late 1970s.  He, like Presidency Council Chief of Staff and Talabani aide Kamran Karadaghi, has the advantage of being an insider while retaining some veneer of independence from the two main parties.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000422  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: (U) KURDISH NEGOTIATOR SHAWAYS FRUSTRATED  AT DELAYS IN SERIOUS GOVERNMENT TALKS  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for   Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C)  SUMMARY:  Deputy Prime Minister and senior Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) member Rowsh Shaways told PolCouns and PolOff on February 9 that he was pessimistic that government formation negotiations would be finished anytime soon. Shaways expressed frustration at the bickering inside the Shia and Sunni Arab coalitions.  He predicted the government would not be ready until April.  Meanwhile, Kurdish President Barzani had business to attend in the North but is waiting for progress in Baghdad before returning to Kurdistan. (Shaways was referring to the unfinished merger of the two Kurdistan Regional Governments (KRGs) in Erbil and Sulymaniyah.)  Notably, in our February 9 meetings with Shaways we did not hear much complaining about Abd al-Mahdi as Prime Minister, even though Shaways' boss Barzani so far has told us he is uncomfortable with Abd al-Mahdi's perceived Iran connection.  We think some of the Kurds are starting to ponder whether a bigger shake-up at the top of the Iraqi Government would be useful.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------- Shia Talks with the Kurds -------------------------  2. (C) Shaways reported that the Kurdish government formation negotiating team - of which he is a member - met with members of the Shia Coalition on February 7.  Shaways said that Hussayn Shahristani, Abu Isra (also known as Jawad al-Maliki or Nuri Kamel) and a representative from SCIRI and from the Sadrists told the Kurds that the Shia would not accept former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi or his Iraqi National Accord List as members of the new government.  He said the Shia Islamist Coalition also wanted a government program that would facilitate launch of federalism in the South, take a hard line on security and keep constitutional changes to a minimum.  Shaways said the Kurds want Allawi and his people in the government; he thought that within the Shia Coalition only the Sadrists rejected Allawi. The rest of the Shia proposals were quite acceptable to the Kurds, Shaways opined.  Indeed, he concluded, it would be relatively simple for the Kurds to conclude a government program with the Shia Islamist Coalition.  ------------------- And the Sunni Arabs -------------------  3.  (C)  According to Shaways, the Kurds met next with a Sunni Arab delegation on February 8, which only the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) negotiators attended for Tawafuq.  According to Shaways, the IIP told the Kurds that they had been approached by Allawi to form an opposition coalition to challenge the Shia Coalition's grip on the Prime Minister position, but that the IIP would refuse to join Allawi if the Kurds agreed to ally themselves with the IIP, rather than the Shia.  Shaways expressed puzzlement with the Sunni Arab tactics and reiterated support for the four-block unity government.   A big problem, Shaways continued, is that the Sunni Arabs are so fragmented that they themselves did not know whom they wanted to nominate, said Shaways.  ------------------------ America Should Intervene ------------------------  4. (C) In a separate discussion with PolOff on February 8, Shaways chided the Americans for not having done more to direct the parties in selecting candidates for the present administration.  He urged the U.S. not to repeat its hands-off approach of spring 2005.  The Iraqis would not have had to suffer under current Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr if the U.S. had spoken against him, he scolded. Prime Minister Ja'afari, for example, would be a very poor choice to continue on in his post, he said; SCIRI candidate Adil Abd al-Mahdi would be a better choice.  As for Minister of Interior, either Nuri Badran or Tawfiq al-Yasiri would be good  BAGHDAD 00000422  002 OF 002   choices.  He liked Shia candidate Qassem Daoud personally, but was concerned about Daoud's health problems.  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  5. (C)  Shaways referred obliquely to Kurdish President Barzani having business to attend in the North while he is waiting for progress in Baghdad before returning to Kurdistan.  (Shaways was referring to the unfinished merger of the two Kurdistan Regional Governments (KRGs) in Erbil and Sulymaniyah.)  6.  (C)  Shaways confirmed reports from one of the other Kurdish negotiators, Dr. Mahmud Othman, that the Shia have not agreed with Allawi's participation in the new government (see septel).  Shaways is often well-connected into Barzani's thinking, and his apparent acceptance of Abd al-Mahdi - at least in principle - is interesting; Barzani's son Masrur is saying similar things to us in private.  Clearly, some in the KDP, up to Barzani, realize that Abd al- Mahdi may be the choice of the Shia and are pondering what steps to take in response.   A few are even wondering out loud to us whether Talabani should remain as President if Abd al-Mahdi, perceived as pro-Iranian, is the Prime Minister. This thinking leads the Kurds to new questions.  The intra-Kurdish agreement had stipulated that other senior PUK leaders - like Barham Saleh  would be limited as to what they can be offered because of Talabani's position as President of Iraq.  That deal would be nullified if Talabani goes, opening up opportunities that would significantly alter the government formation game - and Kurdish politics. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000423  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, ECON, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE:  VERY CLOSE COUNT  ON THE SHIA ISLAMIST PRIME MINISTER RACE  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Summary:  In the competition for Iraq's Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) to name a prime minister nominee, we estimate that incumbent Prime Minister Jafari has a slim lead on challenger Adil Abd al-Mahdi, but the race is too close to call.  On February 11, Shia Coalition members decided to postpone until the following day a decision on their candidate for Prime Minister. The Sadrists called a meeting on February 11 to affirm their bloc's choice for PM; they appear to be consolidating their bloc's support for Jafari.  Sadrist Minister of State for Civil Society Affairs told PolOffs that most of the Shia Islamist Coalition leaders were afraid to allow a vote because they supported Abd al- Mahdi, but if there were a vote Jafari would win. Backers of Abd al-Mahdi were announcing that a major group within the Shia Coalition, the Fadhila Party, would back Abd al-Mahdi - throwing him vital support.  However, two Abd al-Mahdi aides told us late February 11 in private that Fadhila leader Jabiri has not made up his mind as to which of the two lead candidates to support. Abd al-Mahdi has to have Fadhila's support as well as that of the majority of List 555 independents to win. Jafari can win without Fadhila, but he needs a large minority of the independent deputies of List 555 to back him to win.  The race is exceptionally close, with every one of the 128 List 555 deputies' votes counting.  End Summary.  ----------------------- List 555 News Conference -----------------------  2. (U) In a February 11 news conference broadcast on Al Iraqiya TV, TNA Constitutional Drafting Committee Chair and senior SCIRI leader Sheikh Humam Hamudi, senior Dawa Party leader Jawad al-Maliki, and Badr Organization leader Hadi al-Ameri announced that one of the groups within the Shia Islamist Coalition had asked that for a delay in a decision on PM until February 12.  (Note:  A vote will take place if the Coalition parties do not reach a consensus before the February 12 meeting.  End Note.)  Sheikh Hamudi, a support of fellow SCIRI party member Abd al-Mahdi for prime minister, also announced that the Shia Coalition's Fadhila Party would support Abd al-Mahdi in the race.  Late February 11 Abd al-Mahdi appeared on SCIRI's al-Furat TV claiming he had the support for Fadhila and the List 555 independents.  -------------------- An Offer for Fadhila --------------------  3. (C) President Jalal Talabani told the Ambassador on February 10 evening that SCIRI has offered to make Fadhila Party General Secretary Nadeem al-Jabiri a Deputy Speaker of the Council of Representatives (CoR) and give Fadhila control of two ministries in return for Fadhila's support of Abd al-Mahdi.  Likewise, Haitham al-Husseini, SCIRI Chief-of-Staff, told PolOff in a February 11 phone conversation that Fadhila would support Abd al-Mahdi for the PM position.  However, the Baghdad rumor mill was saying February 11 that Jafari's offer was higher than SCIRI's.  ------------------- Sadrists For Jafari -------------------  4. (C) Nasser al-Saadi of the Sadr Bureau announced on Al Iraqiya TV that the Sadrists support PM Jafari, but they will not withdraw from the Coalition if Jafari is not elected.  According to a variety of reports, the Sadrists held a meeting on February 11 to decide whom they will support.  5. (C) Sadrist State Minister for Civil Society Affairs Ala'a Khadim al Safi told PolOffs February 11 that most of the Shia Coalition leaders back Abd al-Mahdi. However, most of the 128 deputies would vote for Jafari, and hence the Coalition leaders were delaying a vote.  He predicted that Jabiri dropping from the competition would result in Abd al-Mahdi picking up Fadilah votes.  ---------------------------------- Independents to Back Abd al-Mahdi? ----------------------------------   BAGHDAD 00000423  002 OF 002   6. (C) According to SCIRI's Haitham al-Husseini, most independents will vote to back Abd al-Mahdi.  Qassem Daoud, one of the 26 independents, also told us the same thing on February 11.  One story making the rounds is that the independents would vote as a single bloc. However, Sami al-Askari, a 555 independent, predicted to us on February 11 that the independents would split their votes.  Most would go for Abd al-Mahdi, but he stated that he and some others would vote for PM Jafari.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Abd al-Mahdi Advisors Think It's Too Close to Call --------------------------------------------- -----  7. (C)  In a February 11 meeting, two of Abd al-Madhi's advisors, Fareed Yaseen and Zuhair Humadi, told PolOffs that the prime minister race is still too close to call. Humadi said that Fadhila Party's Nadim al-Jabiri had not yet made up his mind on which candidate to support. Yaseen said he was unaware that the Sadrists held an internal vote today and surmised that it was the reason the Coalition did not announce the premiership.  8. (C)  Regarding cabinet positions, Humadi was confident that Barham Salih would become a Deputy Prime Minister and Hussayn Shahristani would be appointed Deputy President.  Yasseen said Abd al-Mahdi would insist the Oil Ministry would not go to Fadhila next time.  Instead, it would go to a qualified technocrat like Thamir Ghadban.  Humadi suggested that Qasim Daoud would make a good Interior Minister.  Most notably, Humadi said there would be no role for Jafari -- he could accept a deputy speaker position or go back to London, Humadi said.  ------------- The Scorecard -------------  9. (C) Assuming, however, that Fadhila does back Abd al- Mahdi, the vote would be as follows:  For DP Mehdi:  15 SCIRI 15 Badr 15 Fadhila Total: 45  For PM Ja'fari:  12 Dawa 13 Dawa Tanzim 28 Sadrists Total: 53  ------- Comment -------  10. (C) The figures above leave 26 independents and four "entities with no Coalitions," such as tribal sheikhs, to decide the race.  Jafari must have the support of 12 independents/entities to win a 65 vote majority.  Abd al- Mehdi would need the support of 20 independents/entities. In our checking with various Shia political sources, we hear that Jafari is likely to win somewhere around 8 - 12 independents.  The numbers above assume that all Coalition  members are in Baghdad to vote.  We believe some may miss the vote.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000432  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: INITIAL REACTION TO JAFARI NOMINATION: MUTED ENTHUSIASM  REF: A. BAGHDAD 374      B. BAGHDAD 402  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Summary:  The Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) February 12 voted 64-63 to renominate incumbent Ibrahim Jafari as Prime Minister.  Jafari was supported by his Dawa Party, Dawa Tanzim, the Sadrists, and some independents in the Coalition.  Jafari's challenger, Deputy President Adil Abd al-Mahdi, got the support of SCIRI, the Badr Organization, the Fadhila Party, and the majority of the Coalition independents.  Two other challengers, Fadhila Party's Nadeem al-Jabiri and independent Hussein Shahristani, dropped out of the race prior to the vote.  By delivering the nomination to Jafari, Moqtada Sadr's party has increased its status within the Shia coalition. Abd al-Mahdi's SCIRI, still the largest party in UIC 555, will likely to seek to keep its current ministries, particularly the Ministry of Interior.  SCIRI leader Abd al-Hakim will seek to retain his position as head of Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555).  The Fadhila Party and the independents who supported Abd al-Mahdi must also struggle to find their place in the new government, as they can no longer rely on Abd al-Mahdi's patronage to secure the positions they desired.  The Kurds and Sunni Arabs were not enthused about the Shia decision.  Jafari has much work ahead to build a coalition government with them.  End Summary.  ------------------------------- Jafari's Stubbornness Pays Off -------------------------------  2. (U) PM Jafari of the Dawa al-Islamiya Party survived a tough struggle against Adil Abd al-Mahdi of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Republic in Iraq (SCIRI) to win renomination for Prime Minister.  At a meeting in a mosque near SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim's Baghdad compound, UIC Council of Representatives members voted 64-63 to nominate Jafari.  Dawa, Dawa Tanzim, Sadr supporters and a handful of independents gave Jafari his majority, while SCIRI/Badr, Fadhila, and the bulk of UIC independents cast their votes for Abd al-Mahdi.  3. (C) Shia independent Taha Der'a al-Saadi told PolOff February 12 that SCIRI and Badr Organization members were outwardly happy after the vote was announced and that al- Hakim and Abd al-Mahdi were the first to congratulate Jafari after his victory.  After the election, List 555 leaders appeared at a press conference and talked about party unity and the need to move Iraq forward.  Even Ayad Allawi stalwart Safiya Suhail al-Tamimi told Poloff she was impressed by the way the losers in today's election appeared gracious in front of the cameras.  4. (C) The other two candidates early on in the process -- independent hard-line and TNA Deputy Speaker Islamist Hussein Shahristani and former Baghdad University professor Nadeem al-Jabiri of the Fadhila party -- dropped out in the days before the vote after receiving assurances that if they voted for Abd al-Mahdi, they would get a Deputy President and a Deputy Speaker position, respectively. With Jafari's victory, all deals SCIRI was offering are now off.  -------------------- Sadrists Major Force --------------------  5. (C) By delivering decisive support to Jafari, the Sadrists have, at least for the near term, increased their standing within the List 555 coalition.  At a minimum, we expect the Sadrists to increase the number of service ministries they control.  The Sadrists may also initially demand that Jafari not allow Ayad Allawi into the government.  President Jalal Talabani announced February 12 that the Kurdistan Alliance would not support the new government unless Allawi's party was included in the government.  Jafari may finally press the Sadrists to back off in order to form a government, since he needs additional support for his coalition government.  Owing his premiership to this staunch Sadrist backing, we can expect Jafari to oppose or at least seek to stall any Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) action against the Sadrist-backed Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM).  -------------- Whither SCIRI?  BAGHDAD 00000432  002 OF 003   --------------  6. (C) Having lost the PM race, SCIRI will likely seek to increase its ministerial positions, while holding on to key portfolios such as the Ministry of Interior.  Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Deputy Foreign Minister for Bilateral Affairs Dr. Hamid al-Bayati told PolOff February 12 that he was extremely disappointed in the results of the vote.  He said he expects Abd al-Mahdi will remain Deputy President and that SCIRI will retain control of the Ministry of Interior (MoI), in addition to seeking other ministries such as the Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the Ministry of Oil (MoO).  Some of the technocrats who had come to surround Abd al-Mahdi might find themselves elevated to ministerial rank, instead of being in the kitchen cabinet of an Abd al-Mahdi premiership that is not to be.  7. (C) If SCIRI retains control of MoI, we expect it to put Bayan Jabr's name forward to continue as minister, or to at least use him as a bargaining chip.  Neither the Sunni Arabs nor Allawi are likely to join a government with Jabr at MOI.  Once they make their position clear, SCIRI could seek to slip in a "compromise" candidate such as Qassim Daoud, hoping that he would face less opposition if presented as an alternative to Jabr.  8. (C) Former Oil Minister Thamer Ghadban, however, wondered aloud to PolOff on February 12 whether SCIRI would stay in the Shia Islamist coalition.  Withdrawing from it would risk incurring the wrath of Sayyid Muhammad Ridha al- Sistani, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani's son.  While a split is unlikely, SCIRI may try to engineer a vote of no confidence against Jafari in the future.  It would take only 138 votes to bring down the government, and the Kurds, Allawi and the Sunnis have nearly that on their own without SCIRI prodding them forward.  ---------------------------- Fadhila:  The Would-Be Giant ----------------------------  9. (C)  After campaigning for the premiership himself, Nadeem al-Jabiri was able to strike a deal with Abd al- Mahdi to become Deputy Speaker of the Council of Representatives in exchange for supporting Abd al-Mahdi's candidacy.  Abd al-Mahdi also offered Fadhila control of two ministries.  Under PM Jafari, Fadhila can reasonably expect one ministry.  Nadeem al-Jabiri's fate remains uncertain, but he may have to resign himself to being a UIC backbencher in the Council.  10. (C) Potential Interior Minister Qassim Daoud told PolOff on February 12 that while most Fadhila Party members voted for Abd al-Mahdi, some may have cut a deal with Jafari so that Fadhila can retain control over the Ministry of Oil.  On the other hand, as Ghadban told PolOffs and EconOff today, Fadhila's performance in the Oil Ministry to date has been so dismal that there will be strong voices calling for the Oil Ministry to go to someone else, with Ghadban himself the most likely alternative.  -------------------------- How the Independents Voted --------------------------  11. (C) The independents did not vote as a bloc.  Taha Der'a al-Saadi told PolOff on February 12 that Shahristani, after withdrawing from the PM race in favor of Abd al- Mahdi, could not persuade the independents to cast their votes for Abd al-Mahdi.  Our best estimate of the secret ballot is that about 18 independents voted for Abd al-Mahdi and 12 voted for Jafari.  At this time it is unclear if any side deals were made; we may be able to deduce this once candidates for the ministries are announced.  -------------------------- Kurds Divided Over Outcome --------------------------  12. (C) PM Jafari and President Talabani's relationship, never very close to begin with, has becoming increasingly strained in recent months with their private arguments often spilling over into the public sphere.  We can expect this to continue, assuming both are returned to their current positions.  President Talabani evinced no great enthusiasm with the Ambassador February 12 (septel). Even Masoud Barzani's KDP will now probably support increased Presidential powers for rival Talabani, in part to pressure Jafari on key issues for the Kurds such as Kirkuk, regional control over natural resources, and  BAGHDAD 00000432  003 OF 003   protecting the Constitution's provisions on federalism. (COMMENT: Barzani previously told the Ambassador that if SCIRI candidate Adil Abd al-Mahdi became the Shia nominee, that the KDP would not support Talabani's renomination for President, fearing that Abd al-Mahdi and Talabani's close relationship would give Barzani's rival too much power in Baghdad.  END COMMENT.)  ------------------------ Sunni Arabs Disappointed ------------------------  13. (C) Sunni National Dialogue Council figure Abd al- Nasser al-Janabi predicted to PolOff February 12 that a weak Jafari may have difficulty getting his programs passed in the Council of Representatives.  Janabi said he would have preferred Nadeem al-Jabiri as the PM.  His second choice was Abd al-Mahdi because he expected that Abd al-Mahdi would have moved against Hakim if he was PM. Moreover, Jafari, with his ties to the Sadrists, is just as bad as Abd al-Mahdi with Iran, al-Janabi opined. Separately, Professor Hassan al-Bazzaz, political advisor to Adnan Dulaimi's Gathering of the Iraqi People, also called the Jafari nomination bad news, "worse" than Abd al- Mahdi.  Jafari, he told Poloff February 12, was a disaster as PM when he had the full backing of both the Kurds and the Shia.  Bazzaz wondered what he could do from a weaker political position.  The Sunnis, with a weak PM, will now seek more assurances, in terms of getting their people into key ministries.  Both Janabi and Bazzaz conceded that Jafari's views on federalism are better than Abd al-Mahdi's but they both would have preferred the pragmatic Abd al- Mahdi to Jafari.  ------------- The Scorecard -------------  14. (C) According to our information, the support for each candidate was as follows:  63 For DP Mahdi:  15 SCIRI 15 Badr 15 Fadhila 18 Independents  64 For PM Jafari:  12 Dawa 13 Dawa Tanzim 27 Sadrists 12 Independents  Sadrist Hassan Tuma was not present for the vote, but most likely would have voted for Jafari.  ------- Comment -------  15. (C) Comment:  Despite Jafari's dismal track record as Prime Minister (ref b), he was able to pull together enough votes to win renomination.  One bright side of the day was that the Shia Coalition resolved a gridlock with a democratic election.  Much of the problem with Iraqi governing processes to date has been the unwillingness to put issues to a vote and move on.  Whether this outcome will be seen as beneficial is still an open question to the Iraqi political class.  Also, the closeness of the vote underscores the tensions within the Shia List 555; we are hearing some political wags wonder if some of the List 555 members might not join in an anti-Jafari coalition.  Jafari has far to go to unite List 555 behind him, bring in the Kurds, Sunni Arabs, and Allawi, and form a true national unity government.  End Comment. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000436  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: OTRA, APER, IZ, JO SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE REQUEST FOR LCDR DANIEL STODDARD TO TRAVEL TO AMMAN, JORDAN, 22 FEB TO 26 FEB, 2006   1.  Request country clearance for LCDR DANIEL STODDARD who will visit Amman, Jordan on February 22, 2006, and depart on February 26, 2006, to return to Iraq.  The purpose of the visit is to conduct several Post Award contracting meetings with contractors who will be performing work in Iraq.  Due to security reasons the contractors are not allowed to meet in Baghdad.  This is an urgent requirement as failure to start the contract in time may result in a lack of electricity transmission for Iraq.  Information is as follows:  LCDR Daniel Stoddard Project and Contracting Office - Iraq 448-86-8046 P214880207, date of issue 06 Sep 2005 Secret  SIPDIS  2.  For Amman:  LCDR Daniel Stoddard will arrive in Marka Airport on 22 Feb 2006 on Military Aircraft, from Baghdad.  LCDR Stoddard will depart Amman on 26 Feb 2006 on Military Aircraft from Marka Airport to Baghdad.  3.  Point of contact in Iraq is LtCol Steve Wilson, 703-544-6759 or 914-822-1410.  4.  Points of contact in Amman: Hassan Aziz, Office Manager, Iraq Power Alliance, Office 00962-6-5865607/08 or Mobile 00962- 795351119 or Milorad Vukojevic, IPA Amman Manager, mobile 00962- 796193346.  5.  Thank you for your assistance.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000441  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: TALABANI SAYS JAFARI NOT YET A LOCK FOR PRIME MINISTER   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) President Jalal Talabani informed Ambassador on February 12 that the Shia Coalition had narrowly voted in favor of current Prime Minister Jafari to remain in his post by a count of 64 votes to SCIRI candidate Adil Abd al-Mahdi's 63 votes, with one Sadrist absent.  Da'wa, Da'wa-Tanzim, and the Sadrists have refused to work with former PM Ayad Allawi and his Iraqi National Accord list in the new government, according to Talabani.  However, he continued, the Kurds have already stated publicly that any national unity government must include Allawi.  2. (C) Talabani then claimed that Jafari's re-election as PM is not definite -- if Fadhila and SCIRI could be persuaded to join a separate coalition.  An alliance of the Kurds, all of the disparate Sunni Arab lists, and Allawi's list would equal 142 seats; if Fadhila and SCIRI join, Talabani said, it would be the end of the Shia Coalition.  He added that such a coalition could challenge Jafari's nomination as not being truly representative of the people's will.  Talabani reported that he would talk to Abd al-Mahdi about this.  Ambassador stated that the U.S. supports the democratic process in Iraq and that it seems as though Jafari had fairly won the Shia nomination.  3. (C) COMMENT: Appearing angry and forceful, Talabani made clear in a press conference after the meeting that the Kurds would not accept a cabinet that excluded Ayad Allawi's party.  Talabani's press conference ratcheted up the political posturing in government formation.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000442  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PINS, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: FALLUJAH CITY COUNCIL CHAIRMAN ASSASSINATED  Classified By: Robert S. Ford, Political Counselor, reasons 1.4 (b), (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Assailants assassinated Sheikh Kamal Shakir Al-Nazal. Fallujah City Council (FCC) Chairman and senior city imam, on February 7, 2006 in central Fallujah.  He had generally pursued a cooperative relationship with coalition forces.  Sheikh Kamal, along with other Fallujah imams and city leaders, encouraged political participation in the October referendum and December election, and urged residents to join the police and Iraqi army.  Their calls were heeded.  Sheikh Kamal, along with the city's mayor, had unsuccessfully run as a candidate in the December 15 election.  Sheikh Kamal's death marks the latest in a series of attacks against senior Fallujah leaders.  The city's revered mufti, Sheikh Hamza Abass Al-Issawi, was murdered in late November 2005; in September 2005, attackers unsuccessfully targeted Mayor Dhari Abdul Hady Irsan Al- Zobaie.  Formal FCC meetings have been suspended.  One contact told PolOff that another city imam had already fled the city, with other clerics largely intimidated. Sheikh Kamal's death represents an immediate blow to governance building efforts in the city, but could also serve to galvanize residents over the long term against extremists.  Fallujans continue to look to the Coalition for sustained security support and civil engagement, while warily watching developments in Baghdad as the new Shia-dominant government forms and key cabinet ministers are designated.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------- ASSASSINATION BLOW TO LOCAL GOVERNANCE --------------------  2. (C) Sheikh Kamal's assassination represents an immediate loss to overarching local governance objectives in Fallujah.  The Fallujah City Council, which he led, had consistently met since spring 2005 and was comprised of key city groups.  The council had generally adopted a constructive approach, even though in recent weeks they had suspended work and pressed Marines regarding alleged abuses (largely unfounded or exaggerated).  In a private meeting held February 7, just after Sheikh Kamal's murder, Mayor Dhari told PolOff that the FCC would not meet until "the situation calmed down."  He complained that security plans proposed by him had not been adopted (moving police to stationary checkpoints in various parts of the city, and the possible introduction of Iraqi Army units from Fallujah). (NOTE:  Fallujah's police chief, BGen Salah Al-Ani, considers his force to be too small and ill-equipped; city police number 1,200, with another 500 in training.  He has requested additional support from the MOI.  Two police officers told PolOff February 8 that they had not received pay for the last two months. END NOTE)  3. (C) Mayor Dhari described the current situation in Fallujah as tense, noting "we can't tell who our enemy is any more."  He urged that Fallujan Iraqi Army recruits be trained more quickly and possibly be stationed for duty in Fallujah proper.  Longstanding frustration with the lack of Ministry of Interior support for the city's police force also drew sharp criticism.  Mayor Dhari stressed that reconstruction projects mattered little when security remained the overriding -- and debilitating -- concern, remarking "we do not need a third bridge (across the Euphrates); we need security, and with it, we can build many bridges.  Take that money and pay more police instead."  --------------- LASTING IMPACT? ---------------  4. (C) The murder of Sheikh Kamal, and reports of more aggressive intimidation of other Fallujah leaders (tribal and civic), will likely stall local governance and related civil engagement efforts.  Whether Mayor Dhari decides to stay on the job -- he survived an assassination attempt in September 2005, shooting one of his attackers, and then showed up for the city council session two hours later -- will send an important and immediate signal to residents and other leaders.  PolOff and Marine leaders have urged him to continue to function in his role, even if future meetings need to be held privately.  The resumption of more normal city governance will largely depend on renewed leadership, additional steps to protect city council members, and pro-active coalition engagement efforts at the civil military  BAGHDAD 00000442  002 OF 002   operations center.  5. (C) Reactions in the city will be hard to gauge until the official mourning period is over.  Initially, residents appear to be have signaled condemnation of extremist elements.  Two Fallujah Iraqi policemen told PolOff February 8 that while residents were clearly unnerved, they viewed the assassination as an affront to their city -- the same sentiment that followed the November 2005 assassination of Sheikh Hamza. Still, the intimidation seems to have expanded.  A local traffic police officer told PolOff February 9 that FCC member and senior imam, Sheikh Abdul Sittar, had fled to Syria.  He added that many residents believed the mayor had already, or soon would, quit.  ------- COMMENT -------  6. (C) Sheikh Kamal's assassination will set back our local governance efforts in Fallujah, at least in the short term.  The number of leaders willing to continue in or assume top leadership jobs in the face of renewed threats remains unclear; the Fallujah bench, however, is not deep.  Unconfirmed reports of imams fleeing the city do not bode well.  As a group, they have generally been cooperative, or at a minimum, preached messages of stability.  Other intimidation efforts in spring and summer 2005 effectively silenced senior tribal leaders. Following Sheikh Kamal's assassination, all other groups, including the area tribal sheikhs council, mukhtars (neighborhood watch-type individuals and resident advocates), and junior imams in Fallujah who had regularly interacted with CF and PolOff, decided to suspend any further meetings.  A prolonged city leadership and civic engagement vacuum would heighten citizen unease.  A new Marine regiment assumes control of security operations in the city within two weeks.  This transition comes at an especially sensitive time and will need to be carefully orchestrated.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000443  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: (U) KDP AND PUK ALLIANCE NOT ALL SMILES  REF: A. KIRKUK 22      B. BAGHDAD 390  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for   Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Summary:  During a February 8 dinner party at Iraqi Minister of Planning (and senior PUK Politburo member) Barham Saleh's house, Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) Intelligence Chief Masrur Barzani revealed deep-seated suspicions of the rival Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), confirming that the merger of the two Kurdistan Regional Governments (KRGs) in Erbil and Sulymaniyah may be more cosmetic than actual.  Barzani complained at length about the PUK.  He reacted in a surprisingly defensive manner about reports of increased KDP presence in Khanaqin and on the investment initiatives for Sulymaniyah in the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) report.  His negative reaction to the PUK, however, appears to confirm other rumors that the alliance between the PUK and the KDP is difficult to manage. End Summary.  --------------------------------- (U) Kurds Can Work With Anyone... ---------------------------------  2. (C) During a February 8 dinner party at Iraqi Minister of Planning (and senior PUK Politburo member) Barham Saleh's house, Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) Intelligence Chief Masrur Barzani claimed that, while the delay by the Shia Coalition in naming their Prime Minister candidate is regrettable, the Kurds could work with any of the four choices.  Upon questioning, Barzani admitted that the KDP had had its problems with current Prime Minister Ja'afari, but emphasized that the Kurds would not dream of dictating to the Shia whom they should choose for Prime Minister.  He added, somewhat ominously, that he expected the same consideration from the other groups when it came to selecting candidates for the Kurdish-led ministries.  ------------------------------------- (U) ...As Long As It's Not Each Other -------------------------------------  3. (C) Barzani displayed a surprising defensiveness, however, when queried about issues involving the PUK.  When PolOff asked about rumors that the Kid's intelligence wing (Asayish) was moving into Khanaqin, Barzani immediately said, "Who told you that? Was it the PUK?  Was it the Arabs? I bet it was the PUK, wasn't it?"  Without waiting for a response, Barzani launched into a twenty minute tirade about how a KDP member had legitimately won the Chief of Police position in Khanaqin.  The PUK, he said, always claimed falsely that they were the ruling power in Khanaqin when the KDP historically had a higher presence there.  In addition, Barzani said, the purported "KDP march to Khanaqin" consisted of just one man - the new Chief of Police.  4. (C) After a pause, Barzani brought up the Overseas Private Investment Corporation's (OPIC) initiatives to promote private investment in Iraq. He asked for a meeting with EconMinCouns to discuss why the OPIC projects favored Sulymaniyah.  "I know why the initiatives focus so much on Sulymaniyah," Barzani said, "It's because Barham Saleh is close to Robert Mosbacher (OPIC President) and he influenced the decision in favor of the PUK behind the scenes." Erbil, he continued, was much more advanced and more suitable for private investment.  (COMMENT: We are arranging a meeting with Barzani and the EconMinCouns.  END COMMENT.)  ------------------------------------ (U) Dr. Nadir's Arrest Was a Mistake ------------------------------------  5. (C) In response to PolOff's query on the status of Dr. Kamal Qadir, the Austrian citizen who was sentenced to 30 years for defamatory comments about the Barzani family (reftel), Barzani stated that the arrest should never have happened.  Masrur said that if he had been in Erbil when it occurred he would have prevented it.  He hinted that the authorities in Erbil had no choice but to prosecute once the other victims of Qadir filed a lawsuit.  Qadir is a  BAGHDAD 00000443  002 OF 002   mental case who only wanted attention, claimed Barzani.  "He admitted to me in person that he only did this to ensure that everyone knew his name," claimed Barzani, "and he admitted that everything he said was a lie."  While it was unfortunate the western press picked up the story, Barzani insisted that the judiciary in Kurdistan had to deal with the issue in its own time; the Barzanis could not demand that the courts just release Qadir without going through the appropriate procedures.  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  6. (C) Masrur Barzani is the son of KDP leader and Kurdistan Region President Masud Barzani; he is well-informed about senior KDP thinking.  A smooth political operative, he presents a mild face to the world.  It is possible that Barzani was posturing for effect during his conversation with PolOff; the intensity of his instinctive response on the PUK, however, suggests that his reaction was spontaneous. His attitude confirms previous report (reftel B) that the KDP retains suspicions about PUK leader Talabani.  The KDP is rumored to be uncomfortable with the bargain struck with the PUK - KDP support for Talabani as President of Iraq in exchange for recognition of Barzani's preeminence in Kurdistan - and the KDP fears that it would give the PUK too much power in Baghdad.  In fact, many KDP members have told PolOff that they feel the KDP has been shortchanged in power positions in Baghdad.  The Kurds have been singularly powerful in Baghdad during the past two years by working as a bloc; the problem has historically been their inability to maintain unity even in the face of a common enemy. Our sense is that the PUK- KDP relationship remains a difficult one to manage.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000444  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: KURDISH MINISTER SAYS DON'T ASSUME PM FIGHT IS OVER  Classified By: Pol Couns Robert Ford, reason 1.4 (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY On February 13, the day after the Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) decision on PM nomination, Minister of Planning and Development Cooperation Barham Salih cautioned poloffs against assuming that Jafari now has a lock on the premiership.  Salih said he would push for Thamir Ghadban to be returned to his former position as Minister of Oil.  SCIRI representatives described to us the point system for government seat allocations, claiming that Fadhila leader al-Jabiri is fighting with members of his own party over how whether to use Fadhila "points" for three ministries or a single, high-level position within the government for himself. Council of Ministers SYG Emad Dhia told poloffs that Jafari has started reorganizing his immediate staff at the prime ministry.  Jafari had made no specific promises to other Shia Coalition members to beat rival Abd al-Mahdi.  Dhia said the Sadrists mainly want money as they ponder ministerial slots.  National Iraqi List member Husayn al-Sha'lan and Shia Coalition Independent Sami al-Askari told poloffs that action to establish a southern region should be deferred. END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------- BARHAM: DON'T ASSUME ITS JAFARI -------------------------------  2. (C) Minister of Planning and Development Cooperation Barham Salih told Poloffs February 13 that Jafari was not a shoe-in for PM.  Salih predicted that PM Jafari would be presented by the Kurds and others (presumably the Sunni Arabs and Allawi) with a three-part package of a government program, a set of ground-rules for governmental mechanics, and a list of specific positions sought.  He thought that Jafari would be forced to take this back to Muqtada al- Sadr, and that, after a couple of weeks, if Jafari accepted, the result would be promising; if Jafari refused, he would not be able to form a government.  (Salih showed no regret about the latter prospect.)  He was extremely concerned about Iraq's financial situation, and blamed DPM Ahmad Chalabi for failing to improve Iraq's oil production. He said he was contemplating asking at the Council of Ministers meeting on February 14 for PM Jafari immediately to re-appoint former Minister of Oil Thamir Ghadban. Salih, who was once supposed to be Jalal Talabani's nominee for Minister of Oil, said he was not interested in the job now, and that Ghadban was the man Iraq needed in this important, sensitive job.  (Comment:  Chalabi in our view has proven decisive at critical moments on infrastructure security issues.  Bureaucratic follow-up inside the Iraqi government has been mediocre.  End Comment.)  --------------------------------------------- ------ Jabiri vs. Fadhila Members on Government Positions? --------------------------------------------- ------  3. (C) In a separate February 13 meeting, SCIRI Chief of Staff Haitham al-Husseini and party member Jawad Taki al- Ismail described to poloffs the anticipated point system for distributing government positions.  Reportedly, the premiership will be valued at 15 points (with points reflecting seats held by each party).  While Husseini and Taki did not provide points for lesser positions, they indicated they would be ranked in the following descending order: deputy prime ministers, deputy presidents, sovereign ministers (e.g., finance, oil, interior, defense, and foreign affairs), and ordinary ministers.  4. (C)   The SCIRI representatives said that the Fadhila membership wants the party to get three ministries in the new government, and would likely have enough for one sovereign and two other ministries.   Taki said that there is a brewing conflict within the Fadhila party because Nadim al-Jabiri wants to use the points to attain the highest position for himself as opposed to three ministries for his party.  5. (C) Taki told PolOffs that SCIRI leader Abdul Aziz al- Hakim is in favor of a unity government but advised that Ayad Allawi needs to reach out to the Sadrists to help with this process.  When asked if SCIRI was helping to facilitate meetings between Allawi and the Sadrists, al- Husseini snickered and said that Allawi has left this task to Talabani.  --------------------------------------------- -- JAFARI AIDE CLAIMS PM MADE NO SPECIFIC PROMISES --------------------------------------------- --   BAGHDAD 00000444  002 OF 002   6.  (C) Council of Ministers Secretary-General Emad Dhia al-Khirsan (formerly head of the CPA Iraqi Reconstruction and Development Council) told Poloffs that PM Jafari had made "no specific promises" to get votes to win the Shia nomination for PM, but he had made a number of general commitments.  Indirectly referring to the Sadrists, he said, "They want to make money."  Dhia said he had asked, and had received, PM Jafari's blessing to sit on DPM Ahmad Chalabi's contracts committee.  He said that PM Jafari was reorganizing his office to give more authority to technocrats.  Dhia said Adnan Ali al-Kadhimy was coming back to be PM Jafari's Chief of Staff.  Dhia hoped that former political allies like 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Tamimi would be moved out of powerful roles.  He asked for specific help in bringing Iraqi-American technocrats into the Council of Ministries secretariat (septel).   ------------------------------------------- Sha'lan and Askari Agree on Southern Region -------------------------------------------  7.  (C) Shaykh Husayn 'Ali al-Sha'lan, National Iraqi List's only Council of Representatives member from Qadisiyah (Diwaniyah) ran into Sami al-Askari, Shia Islamist Coalition independent and one of the bridges between Sadr and Da'wa, in the Convention Center in the presence of Poloffs.  Sha'lan and Askari talked about their shared interest in preventing any action towards a Shia federal region for at least the next 2-4 years.  Sha'lan told Poloffs afterwards he believes in federalism, but thinks any southern region should be deferred 2-4 years because such a region would need people who are efficient and more capable than many of the people running the provincial governments.  He said Askari is strongly opposed to federalism of any kind.  ---------------- Shabak on Jafari ----------------  8.  (C) Shia Alliance Independent and leading Shabak representative Dr. Hunain al-Qaddo (The number 2 on the List 555 Ninewa List) told PolOffs February 13 that both Abd al-Mehdi and Jafari each signed letters before the February 12 PM vote indicating a readiness to resign as PM after one year if his job performance was deemed lacking. Without actually saying who he voted for, al-Qaddo said he was suspicious of Abd al-Mehdi, who would be inclined to be easy on the Kurds with regard to Mosul and Kirkuk.  He described PM Jafari as "honest and clean," but his advisors as "not so good" and possibly corrupt.  He characterized the independent bloc within the Shia Coalition as fragile and divided, adding that Hussein al-Shahristani does not have the leadership qualities to lead them (in order for the bloc to be more forceful and demanding).  9. (C) He suspected that government formation negotiations would take at least two months.  He said that most Shia reject Ayad Allawi's participation in the government because he does not represent any community in Iraq besides the Ba'athists.  He stated that Shia blame Allawi for the security failures and that Ba'athists should be brought into the political process slowly.  He said federalism should be applied fairly - to all Iraqis and not just a privilege for one part of Iraq (i.e., Kurdistan). KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000451  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2016 TAGS: PREL, PNAT, UNSC, PTER, PHUM, IZ SUBJECT: UN DISTRESS OVER STAFF HOUSING AVERTED  REF: A. USUN 104      B. USUN 45  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: UN Special Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) Ashraf Qazi met Ambassador Khalilzad on January 26 and hinted that the UN would re-evaluate its presence in Iraq if security concerns for housing of its staff in Baghdad were not addressed.  Qazi said the UN was concerned about security in the Al-Rasheed Hotel when MNF-I turns over control to the Iraqi Government in early May. SRSG Qazi raised similar concerns on January 23 with MNF-I General Casey.  MNF-I agreed to minor changes that would address Qazi's main concerns.  On February 1, UN staff met with PolOff and advised that, with adjustments to the planned security posture at the Al-Rasheed, Qazi on January 29 had accepted UN continued presence at the Al-Rasheed hotel for the next six to eight months.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ------ UN Unhappy with Planned Al-Rasheed Security Changes --------------------------------------------- ------  2. (C) SRSG Qazi told Ambassador on January 26 that he was concerned about recent changes in security around the Al-Rasheed Hotel, where most of the UN staff in Iraq are housed.  Qazi said his staff members were getting nervous as they saw the concrete "T" walls coming down and more Iraqi traffic in the area.  He said the new UN facility at the old U.S. Embassy would take 18 months to prepare, and an alternate site would be needed in the interim.  Qazi said the proposal to have UN staff occupy dedicated floors at the Al-Rasheed when MNF-I transfers control to the Iraqi government in May, and U.S.-contracted security is withdrawn, would be unacceptable.  He said the UN would stay at the Al-Rasheed only if given control over the entire property.  A different dedicated site would also be a possibility despite JASG reports that no site would be available before October 2006.  3. (C) SRSG Qazi outlined these same concerns on January 23 in a meeting with MNF-I General Casey and General Lynch. Following this meeting, and in consultation with UNAMI staff, MNF-I agreed to minor changes that would address Qazi's main concerns.  PolOff met with senior military advisor to UNAMI Col. Tucker on February 1, who reported that the JASG/RSO will leave the U.S.-contracted security inside the Al- Rasheed after May 1 to meet the UN's requirements.  JASG will pay for the security for the remainder of the contract (through October 2006), and the UN will reimburse all costs. After October 2006, JASG does not intend to renew the contract, and the UN will have to make its own arrangements. JASG agreed to assist UNAMI in identifying alternative locations for the 120 UN residents currently at the Al-Rasheed.  4. (C) As reported in ref A, Qazi confirmed that U/SYG Veness would travel to Baghdad in early February to assess the UN security situation.  A report and recommendations to SYG Annan will be made on February 28.  With the housing problem apparently resolved, the UN presence in Iraq should not be threatened.  Ambassador told Qazi that the USG wants the UN to stay in Baghdad and be helpful. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000454  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: GROUPS INSIDE AND OUTSIDE SHIA COALITION PONDER APPROACH TO JAFARI   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  The Kurdish leadership, Ayad Allawi, and Tawafuq leaders met the morning of February 13 to consider their reaction to Ibrahim al-Jafari's nomination to the premiership.  Their discussions included two options: (a) forging a contract with Jafari on the basis of a clear government program, the inclusion of the four leading parliamentary blocs, and agreement on a decision-making mechanism drawn from the Salah al-Din principles; and (b) forming a bloc that would be larger than the Shia alliance and could put forward its own PM nominee.  Shia coalition member Nadeem al-Jabiri, leader of the Fadhila Party, told the Ambassador February 12 that he thinks the groups outside the Shia alliance should unite to block the Jafari nomination.  Jabiri recommended that these groups nominate Ayad Allawi for the premiership and then offer to settle on a compromise candidate - namely himself.  Leaders of Tawafuq appeared interested in such an approach at the February 13 meeting, but all sides agreed to study the issue further and then meet February 14 to determine their stance.  END SUMMARY.  ----------------------- The Opposition Convenes -----------------------  2. (C) The Kurds, Allawi, and Tawafuq leaders met on the morning of February 13 to consider their reaction to Jafari's nomination to be PM.  The Ambassador, President Talabani, Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Masud Barzani, and Tawafuq leaders Adnan al-Duleimi and Tariq al-Hashimi attended.  The participants quickly restated their determination to see the Salah al-Din Principles guide the formation of the government -- i.e., to place independents in the security ministries, to include the four leading lists in the government, and to establish a leadership body that aims for consensus on key decisions.  Talabani emphasized to Allawi and the Tawafuq leaders that the Kurds would not "leave (them) behind."  Barzani asked the Tawafuq leaders to be reasonable in their government demands, asking them not to "embarrass us."  3. (C) The group contemplated the possible benefits of forming a larger coalition in order to nominate someone to challenge Jafari.  All agreed that they have the ability to draw together a bloc of some 144 parliamentarians, significantly larger than the 130-member Shia alliance. Salah al-Mutlak's 11 members would be sure to join them, Hashimi said, and Allawi reported that Mishan Jaburi's 3 seats also are ready to join the alliance.  Along with the Kurdistan Islamic Union and a few other individuals, such a bloc would be larger than the Shia alliance by a safe margin.  Tawafuq leader Adnan Duleimi led the push for the group to form such a bloc and prevent Jafari from returning to office.  Duleimi bluntly asked the group how much conviction it has in Jafari, which elicited laughter from the room and an agreement to study whether practical alternatives are truly available before reconvening on February 14.  ---------------------------------- Jabiri Outlines a Counter-Maneuver ----------------------------------  4. (C) After Jafari's nomination on February 12, Fadhila Party leader Nadeem al-Jabiri met with the Ambassador and recommended that an effort be made to bloc the Shia coalition nominee.  Jabiri said that he hopes the remaining parties in parliament will form a larger bloc and put forward their own nominee for prime minister, as allowed under the constitution.  Jabiri said that the counter-bloc should nominate Ayad Allawi while expressing a readiness to agree to a compromise candidate.  Jabiri explained that such an announcement would send the Shia coalition into flux, at which point he (Jabiri) would be able to emerge as the compromise candidate for PM.  Jabiri predicted that SCIRI and others, upset over Jafari's return to power, would be prepared to back Jabiri at that point.  Jabiri said that he would not be willing to break with the Shia coalition as a first step, preferring instead to emerge as a compromise choice in order to avoid giving the Shia community any impression that its rights were under attack.   ------------------------- Gauging the Shia Reaction -------------------------  5. (C) The Ambassador expressed concern that any effort to work against the Jafari nomination nevertheless could provoke  BAGHDAD 00000454  002 OF 002   a strong negative reaction in the Shia community.  Jabiri disagreed, arguing that a clearly constitutional maneuver like the one he described would be understood for what it is: a fair challenge in parliamentary politics.  Jabiri emphasized that the counter-bloc should make clear that it is looking for a compromise, not a showdown.  The Ambassador asked whether this action might provoke the Sadrists -- who are betting on a Jafari premiership -- to resort to violence.  Jabiri responded that the Sadrists could resort to violence at any moment anyway and that opposing parties cannot let such threats determine their actions.  ----------------------------- Atmosphere During the PM Vote -----------------------------  6. (C) Recounting the Shia coalition vote on the premiership, Jabiri said that Jafari succeeded amidst an atmosphere of threats and fear.  Jabiri opined that all sides felt that Adil Abd al-Mehdi had secured the nomination the evening of February 11 when he won over the Fadhila Party's support.  At that moment, however, a cloud of pressure fell over the independents in the coalition, he said.  Jabiri said the Sadrists may have threatened some of the independents to vote for Jafari.  The final vote count indicated that the support of several independents allowed Jafari to pull off his victory.  -------------------------------------- Jabiri Ready to Consider Security Slot --------------------------------------  7. (C) Jabiri asserted that he remains convinced that neither Jafari nor Abd Al-Mehdi is the right man for the job.  He said he had been swayed toward Mehdi by the promise of ministries and a slot as Deputy Speaker of parliament. Jabiri told the Ambassador, however, that he would be willing to serve as a security minister if his premiership chances evaporate and all sides consider him the only acceptable candidate for such a job.  He noted that Iraqis usually expect a military man for such a job when in fact a skillful politician might be best equipped to handle its rigors.  --------------------------------------------- -------- Fahdila Spiritual Leader's Cousin in the Oil Ministry --------------------------------------------- --------  8. (C) The Ambassador asked Jabiri whether rumors were true that Fadhila Tourism Minister Hashim al-Hashimi had authorized a relative of Fadhila spiritual leader Ayatollah Muhammad Ya'acubi to undertake all work in the Oil Ministry. Jabiri said that it is true but the circumstances are not as nepotistic as they seem.  First, Jabiri said, Hashim al-Hashimi is attempting to direct both the Tourism Ministry and the Oil Ministry following the dismissal of Oil Minister Ibrahim Bahr al-Uloom.  This is an extremely large burden, he pointed out.  Second, he added, the Fadhila Party initially had nominated Kathem Ya'acubi, the relative in question, to serve as Oil Minister in the early stages of forming the transitional government.  Jabiri claimed that Ayatollah Ya'acubi had actually rejected that nomination himself because Kathem is his cousin.  Hence, Kathem only assumed the post of Director General in the Oil Ministry.  Lastly, Jabiri said, Hashim al-Hashimi only authorized Kathem to take on ministerial responsibilities for a short period while Hashimi traveled on the Hajj.  The Ambassador thanked Jabiri for the explanation but warned that the whole affair cast Fadhila in a negative light and that it would be best not to repeat it in the future. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000455  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: COMMITTEE TO ADDRESS SUNNI HUMAN RIGHTS CONCERNS ?  REF: BAGHDAD 328  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1.  (C)  SUMMARY.  On February 7 Deputy Prime Minister Abid Mutlaq Hamud al-Jabburi told us that Prime Minister Jafari had given him oral instructions to form an investigative committee to address human rights issues and complaints lodged against the Iraqi security forces. The Prime Minister referred to this committee when he tried to placate angry Sunni Arab leaders over lunch at the American Ambassador's on February 4 (ref).  As of 13 February, however, the Prime Minister had not give Jaburi formal instructions.  The idea has some merit if it moves forward.  An active investigation led by a credible Sunni Arab could help address Sunni Arab concerns about human rights violations that are likely to impede government formation talks.  END SUMMARY  ----------------------- HUMAN RIGHTS COMPLAINTS -----------------------  2.  (C)  The Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Abid Mutlaq al- Jabburi, told PolCouns February 7 that he continues to receive complaints of Iraqi government human rights violations from many organizations, including the Iraqi Islamic Party, the head of the Sunni Waqf, and others in the Sunni Arab Tawafuq coalitions.  The majority of these complaints are vague and overly general and do not provide enough detail to support an investigation.  The Deputy Prime Minister has asked each of these groups to provide further details to enable an investigation (to date, only the Iraqi Islamic Party has followed-up.)  -------------------------------- A NEW COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE ? --------------------------------  3.  (C)  Jaburi told us February 7 that Prime Minister Jafari on February 3 had given him oral instructions to form an investigative committee to look into the allegations of abuses by government forces.  The committee would include National Security Advisor Muwafaq Rubai'e and Minister of State for National Assembly Affairs Safi.  Jaburi wanted a committee made up of members from the Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Human Rights, and representatives from the Iraqi cabinet, to look into complaints against the various security forces and the associated ministries.  Jabburi told us that he sent on February 7 a formal request for written authorization to the Prime Minister.  On February 13 he reported that the Prime Minister still had not responded.  4.  (C)  The Jaburi committee would investigate each complaint received by Jaburi's office.   As Deputy Prime Minister al-Jabburi sees it, the participation of the Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Human Rights is essential to provide the technical expertise.  This committee might also request technical assistance from the United States Government, if required.  Jaburi commented that criminal investigation experts would be very useful.  However, he first wanted to form the Iraqi committee itself before seeking any foreign assistance.  5.  (C)  On February 13 Jaburi's top aide told us that Jaburi had convened Rubai'e and Safi on February 8. They sent an official request to the Interior Minister to provide copies of all arrest and detention orders on February 8 but so far they have had no response from the Interior Ministry.  6.  (C)  COMMENT.  Jaburi was elected to parliament from Kirkuk from the Sunni Arab Tawafuq List and has his own standing as a retired Iraqi Army general officer.  A Sunni Arab-led investigation, if ultimately approved, might help address Sunni Arab concerns about stories of abuses by security forces.  As we saw at the February 4 lunch, the emotions about alleged human rights abuses are very high and will certainly rise to the surface during the government formation talks.  END COMMENT.  KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000459  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: JAFARI HOPES TO FORM CABINET WITHIN 30 DAYS   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jafari told the Ambassador in a February 13 meeting that he was humbled by his re-election by the Shia coalition and hopes to build on lessons of past mistakes.  Jafari said he plans to appoint a team of negotiators to oversee the government formation process with the aim of standing up the new cabinet within 30 days.  He welcomed the Ambassador's offer of help in training his staff, better organizing his office, and in developing a 100-day plan.  Jafari said he plans to maintain the unity of the Shia coalition but appeared disinclined to offer a significant ministerial portfolio to his vanquished competitor, Adel Abd al-Mahdi.  Jafari said Abd al-Mahdi had presided as Finance Minister at a time of major corruption in the Allawi government, which made him either complicit or incompetent.  2. (C) Jafari said he considers the finance and justice portfolios to be the most important in his cabinet and will aim to build a government of law, not law-makers.  The constitution established Iraq's legal framework during his last term, he said, and it now remains for the next government to put that document into practice.  Jafari said he considers terrorism and the Ba'athist elements that feed it to be the greatest dangers facing Iraq.  He said he looks forward to a close relationship with the US because Iraq is still in a "transitional" period, even after the election of a full-term government. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000460  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2016 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, KPRV, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: MINISTRIES PURSUE AD HOC PRIVATIZATION (OR IS IT REHABILITATION?) PLANS  Classified By: Economic Minister Counselor Tom Delare for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d).  1.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Summary.  Various Iraqi ministries are leading initiatives to privatize state-owned enterprises. Recently endorsed by a Council of Ministers order, these initiatives (of which the Ministry of Industry and Minerals' plan to sell two cement companies is the most-developed) are at various levels of planning.  With current plans allowing the state to retain controlling rights over companies and with private investors accepting the liability of funding a redundant workforce, it is unclear whether any investors will express interest.  It is clear, however, that ministries are unwilling to wait until the government develops the political will to create a central privatization agency with uniform rules.  End summary.  ----------------------- MIM Leads the Charge... -----------------------  2.  (C/REL GBR AUS) The Ministry of Industry and Minerals (MIM), Ministry of Trade (MoT), and the Ministry of Housing and Construction (MoCH) have all expressed interest in increasing private sector ownership or investment in their state-owned enterprises (SOEs).  MIM, which owns the majority of Iraq's 192 SOEs, has taken the lead with an "experimental plan" to create joint stock companies out of six SOEs and two SOE-owned factories chosen primarily for their attractiveness to foreign investment and potential profitability.  With the current high demand in Iraq for cement, MIM is focusing particular attention on two cement factories in Kufa (near Najaf) and Sinjar (in Ninewah province), and has already drafted valuation studies and a proposed conversion plan.  3.  (SBU) MIM's plan calls for the government to retain at least 15 to 24 percent ownership of the cement factories after the sale, with 25 to 40 percent going to a strategic partner and up to 15 percent sold to ministry and cement company employees.  It restricts workforce restructuring (a crucial issue that any real privatization plan must address) by guaranteeing that all employees in both factories will retain their jobs and that workforce reductions will only be conducted through staff retirements and resignations.  The sale of Kufa and Sinjar will not effect the SOE status of their parent companies, the Northern and Southern Cement State Companies.  An integral part of MIM's plan is to attract foreign investment via the sale of cement company shares on the Iraqi Stock Exchange; however, foreign investment on the stock exchange will not be available until automation is complete in late 2006.  (Note:  This raises the issue of whether MIM adequately coordinated their plan with other government agencies.  End note.)  --------------------------------------------- ------ ...With the "Approval" of the Council of Ministers... --------------------------------------------- ------  4.  (SBU) An inter-ministerial committee convened in August 2005 to study the privatization and submitted a report to the Council of Ministers (CoM) at the end of October.  Comprised of the Ministers of Planning and Development Cooperation, Industry and Minerals, and Finance, the committee put forward ten recommendations, the most important of which advocated the comprehensive, centralized "rehabilitation" of SOEs via a central agency to be created by new legislation.  5.  (SBU) At the same time, however, the inter-ministerial committee embraced MIM's "experimental plan" and recommended other ministries look into similar SOE restructuring pursuant to existing laws, recognizing perhaps that, politically, it would take some time for a new privatization law to be passed and a functioning central agency to be established.  (Note: Current Iraqi Law 22 of 1997 on State Companies, Articles 35 and 36, allows for the conversion of a state company into a joint stock company upon approval by the CoM after presentation by the ministry of a financial and technical evaluation of the proposed conversion.  End note.)  6.  (SBU) On December 18, the CoM issued an order accepting the inter-ministerial committee's recommendations for a central "rehabilitation" agency, but also perversely included an endorsement of MIM's "experimental plan."  MIM is currently redoing its valuation report of the cement factories for consideration by the CoM.  ----------------------------------- ...And Others Jump on the Bandwagon  BAGHDAD 00000460  002 OF 002   -----------------------------------  7.  (C/REL GBR AUS) While MIM is in the lead with regard to ministry-led SOE reform, other ministries are beginning to follow suit, as fiscal disciplines imposed by the Ministry of Finance force ministries to look for new ways to shrink overhead.  In the past month, the Ministry of Trade created a working group chaired by the Director General for Private Sector Development, Abdul Hadi al-Hamiri, to oversee the privatization of MoT's State Company for Shopping Centers. According to Hamiri, the MoT is looking at all options under existing law, but he acknowledged that the problem of what to do with excess workers would be a major obstacle.  Similarly, the MoCH has looked at privatization but is reluctant to pursue it until the government implements a comprehensive plan to deal with redundant workers.  In the interim, the MoCH has leased several asphalt plants (and is in the process of developing tenders to lease more) to private companies that rehabilitate the plants, operate them for five years, and return them to the ministry.  However, interest in privatization at MoCH is increasing as it struggles to find a way to keep its 15 SOEs with a total of over 9,000 employees afloat.  ------- Comment -------  8.  (C/REL GBR AUS) The CoM's endorsement of both a central "rehabilitation" agency and individual ministry initiatives have left it unclear whether the GOI is committed to a comprehensive plan for genuine privatization.  Beyond the troubling use of the word "rehabilitation" in place of "privatization," the endorsement of MIM's plan means that ministries can pursue privatization at their own pace, although it does not compel them to initiate a program.  9.  (C/REL GBR AUS) With 192 SOEs employing an estimated 510,000 people, according to World Bank estimates, the budget currently running at a deficit, and oil revenues down approximately 700 million dollars in the first six weeks of 2006 alone, the GOI can ill afford to turn its back on the issue of privatization.  However, the unanswered questions are many.  Will these initiatives attract any interested purchasers?  If it occurs, will the transfer of ownership occur in a transparent manner?  How will these ad hoc plans deal with the larger issue of redundant employees, or impact central government subsidy reform or social safety net plans?  What, if anything, will compel ministries to coordinate with other government agencies?  These are questions that the Embassy is working upon as we urge the GOI to make this process less of a means to keep SOEs on life support and more a means to push the Iraqi economy into the market. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000462  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2036 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: MINISTRY OF INTERIOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS CHIEF ACKNOWLEDGES MOI HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (S) Summary: Ministry of Interior Director for Internal Affairs Brigadier General Ahmed Taha Al Mosawi (strictly protect) told Poloff February 8 that he has evidence linking MoI Commandos to widespread abductions and extra-judicial killings. Saying that he was too fearful for his life and the lives of his family members to pursue extensive action on this evidence, he did note that he had presented reports directly to the Minister of Interior, Bayan Baqr Jabr.  With his interpreter as the only other Iraqi present, General Ahmed claimed that generally little follow-up on these reports has been pursued by the Minister.  When asked to describe the type of evidence he presented, BG Ahmed was not specific. End Summary.  2. (S) BG Ahmed said he had a large amount of information implicating the police commandos, a group he described as being largely infiltrated by the Badr Corps and Jaysh al-Mahdi militia groups. BG Ahmed listed specific instances in which he says the commandos carried out ransom-motivated kidnappings as well as politically-motivated assassinations. In one case, he cited the February 7 assassination of a director of Iraqi National Intelligence.  However, when asked about the types of evidence in his control to link the commandos to these human rights violations, BG Ahmed was not specific. When asked whether any investigation was ongoing as to allegations that the MoI was involved in the targeting, illegal detention, and subsequent killing of Sunnis, General Ahmed indicated that he was uncomfortable answering that question, but claimed that he did have some "evidence."  3. (C) BG Ahmed told Poloff that he had raised many of these allegations with Bayan Jabr directly. He claimed, however, that Jabr had taken little substantive action on these reports other than moving perpetrators of these human rights crimes to serve in other areas of the country, such as the Syrian border.  4. (C) In an earlier January 18 meeting with Commanding General Civilian Police Assistance Training Team (CPATT) MG Joseph Peterson, BG Ahmed stated that when he had brought cases of corruption, detainee abuse, or Iranian influence to Minister of Interior Jabr's attention, Jabr immediately fired the individuals, and if the evidence warranted it, remanded their cases for trial.  He added that he had assigned officers to follow through with the Ministry of Justice on each of the cases being prosecuted.  On February 13, he provided documentation to CPATT officials on specific cases the office has prosecuted.  According to the document, six cases were remanded for trial and at least one officer was transferred out of 20 cases listed.  5. (S) BIO NOTE: General Ahmed, who at one point in his recent career was the Deputy Chief of Staff to the Baghdad Police Chief, took office as the head of Internal Affairs September 30.  The Internal Affairs Directorate (525 staff nationwide) was separated from the Inspector General's Office October 31 in a move widely believed to divest former Inspector General Nouri al Nouri of his administrative purview. The Internal Affairs Directorate is responsible for following up on allegations of crime and corruption among MoI staff and police while the Inspector General's Office is  responsible for inspecting prison conditions and financial audits.  Under the current arrangement, the Director of Internal Affairs reports directly to the Minister.  6. (S) COMMENT: While it is difficult to evaluate the quality and extent of BG Ahmed's evidence against the police commandos or claims of his Minister's non-responsiveness, his statements are consistent with allegations that we have heard elsewhere about police involvement in kidnappings and extra-judicial killings.  Post will continue to follow up with Ahmed and other Ministry personnel to pursue more information about available evidence. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000463  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE: HIZBALLAH LEADER SAYS SADRISTS WILL SEEK TO BLOCK ALLAWI'S INCLUSION IN GOVERNMENT; MUTLAK DREAMS HE'LL BE KINGMAKER  Classified By: POL COUNS Robert Ford, reason 1.4 (b)  1.  (C)  Summary:  Iraqi politicos are still adjusting to the victory of incumbent Prime Minister Jafari being named again by the Shia Islamist Coalition to be its prime minister nominee.  A key element of the Shia Coalition, the SCIRI party, is worried about the rising influence of the rival Sadrist group within the government.  One story making the rounds is that the Sadr-affiliated Mahdi militia intimidated some of the Shia Coalition independents to vote for Jafari.  Meanwhile, outspoken Sunni Arab politician Saleh Mutlak predicted SCIRI in its discomfort would eventually break ranks with the Shia Coalition.  The question political figures will ask over the next couple of days is whether the Shia List 555 Coalition will, in fact, hold together despite SCIRI and Coalition partner Fadhila's unhappiness with Jafari and Sadr.  End Summary.  2. (C) In a February 14 meeting with poloffs, Hizballah of Iraq movement leader Hassan Radi Khadim al-Sari predicted that unity government formation would be difficult and may face delays, especially when the Sadrists refuse to consider Ayad Allawi's participation.  He insisted, however, that dialogue will overcome any difficulties and that Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim will play an influential role in this process.  3. (C)  Sari, who is SCIRI-aligned, expressed surprise that the Shia independents did not vote as a bloc on February 12 for Adil Abd al-Madhi.  According to al-Sari, the independents met before the vote and determined that the majority of members planned to support Abd al-Madhi.  As a result, they agreed to vote as a bloc for the SCIRI nominee.  During the February 12 vote, Al-Sari described that each voting member was called one-by-one to the stage, wrote the name of his/her choice on a ballot and dropped it into a ballot box. Despite his surprise at the outcome, Al- Sari considered the vote fair and the ballot secret.  4.  (C) SCIRI senior official Shaykh Humam al-Hamudi was clearly unenthusiastic about Jafari in his late February 14 conversation with PolCouns.  He and colleague Akram al- Hakim complained about Mahdi Army intimidation of independent voters, especially women; they blamed Abd al- Mahdi's loss to Jafari partially on this.  They were wary of the Sadrists gaining more influence in the next government.  (They asserted that the Sadrists are seeking three ministries in the next government:  Transport, Trade and Labor.  The latter, they noted caustically, controls social security payments and is a plum for corrupt picking. On February 14, Defense Minister Dulime told polmiloff that the Sadrists would make a grab for the Interior Ministry.) Despite their discomfort with Sadr, these SCIRI officials also are not rushing to break ranks with the rest of the Shia List 555 bloc.  Hamudi said that he and Hakim would travel to Najaf on February 15 to consult with Sistani. Hamudi made clear he would not mind if the Kurd-Sunni Arab- Allawi bloc stopped Jafari, but he gave no indication that they would publicly encourage that bloc to do so.  5. (C)  Separately, Dialog Front leader Salih Mutlak told Poloff February 14 that his bloc's 11 parliamentary deputies' votes could prove decisive in the event that the Jafari government formation bid fails.  Mutlak said he planned to meet Muqtada Sadr in a few days to discuss the options.  Because of its unhappiness about Jafari, SCIRI will, in his view, join the Kurd-Allawi-Sunni Arab coalition and abandon plans for the quick establishment of a federal region in the South.  There are serious splits on this issue within SCIRI, said Mutlak, and Hakim will not prevail.  He noted the likely PM candidates for the coalition would be Allawi (who would be rejected by Sadr) and Nadim al-Jabiri (who would be rejected because of his inexperience and Ba'thist past).  He hinted that with his 11 seats, he would like to emerge as the consensus candidate for the PM role.  Mutlak claimed he is also leaving open throwing his support to Ja'fari in exchange for two sovereign ministry posts (e.g., Interior and Oil). He claimed to be playing it coy with Kurds, who have twice invited him to sign on to the Erbil agreement, which he has not yet done.  His advice to the USG was to keep Iraqi political parties struggling for awhile and then step in and impose a government with a strong leader at the helm (presumably Mutlaq).  "We need a dictator" he said.  The US should either fix what is wrong with Iraq or "leave us alone."  6. (C) Comment: Mutlak is mercurial and at times -- such as his prime ministerial aspirations -- provides sorely  BAGHDAD 00000463  002 OF 002   needed comic relief.  Not surprisingly, several members of Mutlak's Dialog group have told Poloff that they have signed separate deals with the rival Sunni Tawaffuq coalition.  IIP leader Tariq al-Hashimi made a similar assertion to Poloff February 13 (septel).  Mutlak is a factor in Iraqi politics, however, because he is frequently on Arabic television and people watch.  Meanwhile, Sari's assertion that the Sadrists may delay government formation in an attempt to exclude Allawi is both familiar and more realistic.  As the outcome of the February 12 Shia List 555 nomination vote continues to sink in, new rumors are circulating as to what more the Sadrists may demand of Jafari in exchange for their decisive support.  Ppolitical figures and observers will be asking whether or not the Shia List 555 Coalition will hold together or whether elements of that Coalition will signal support, direct or indirect, for the rival Kurd-Allawi-Sunni Arab bloc. End Comment.    KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000475  SIPDIS  SIPDIS, SENSITIVE  LONDON FOR ARAB MEDIA UNIT  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: EPET, EFIN, PGOV, ECON, KCOR, KPAO, OPRC, IZ SUBJECT:  GOI, EMBASSY AND DFID EXPECTING BIDS FOR TV AND RADIO ADS, MINISTRIES STILL REFINING "THE MESSAGE"  1.  (SBU) On February 12, Embassy ECON and PAS, together with the Iraqi Government Communications Directorate (GCD) and the UK's Department for International Development (DFID), met with two Iraqi production companies to present our request for proposals for TV and radio ads.  All said they had the technical capacity to do the job, even while admitting that the message was a tough one for a government that had credibility problems with most citizens.  The companies were told to provide their best quotes by February 18, along with samples of previous work.  2. (SBU) On February 13, representatives from Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA), Ministry of Finance, GCD, Embassy, USAID, International Republican Institute (IRI) and (DFID) met again to refine the public messages, making progress that included drafting possible scenarios for the ads (including proposed audio and video components).  At present, we have four "approved" scenarios (approved by the public relations gurus), and out of ten total crafted by Embassy ECON and PAS based on messages provided by the Iraqis.  Messages tended to focus on fighting smuggling, targeting support to aid Iraq's poorest, diverting subsidies to public investment, and sacrificing now for future generations.  We re-circulateD the "scenarios" by email as a package to the public affairs group on February 14.  The public affairs experts agreed in the meeting to present the package to Directors and Ministers.  Separately, EconOff made clear to the Deputy Minister of Finance, and DFID and Embassy PAS have made clear to GCD, that progress must proceed apace if the Iraqi government hopes to retain U.S. funding for the campaign.  3. (SBU) Even absent approval of the policy experts at each ministry, Embassy plans to provide the "scenarios" to IRI on February 14 or 15 to test with focus groups.  4.  (SBU) Since our first meeting with GOI officials to discuss the campaign, the process has been buffeted by media reports, government infighting, and now rumor.  In late January, Sharqiya TV reported that fuel prices might go up "ten-fold"; in the February 13 meeting, some officials noted that Iraqis now believed they would ultimately have to pay 1500 dinars per liter, rather than the current import price (750 dinars).  Also, public education has been affected by news reports February 11 that the General Director of the Oil Products Distribution Company said that LPG shortages resulted from the failure of the Ministry of Finance to settle import accounts with Turkey, Iran, and the Gulf States.  We saw immediate fallout from this comment when Radio Nawa hosted a call-in show for an hour on February 12, which PAS monitored.  Callers' views follow:  - Government negligence and administrative corruption is the problem. - The Iraqi Prime Minister and the Oil Ministry are behind this crisis. - There is administrative corruption in the Oil Ministry. - Basra is the scene of much fuel smuggling. - The cabinet is corrupt. - We must control militias which belong to some government members and are smuggling oil products. - If we cooperate with security officials, we might stop fuel smuggling. - The Iraqi government is creating this crisis on purpose to divert us from other issues (delays in government formation). - Private fuel stations smuggle fuel abroad with help of members of Iraqi government.  5.  (SBU)  When Embassy PAS shared these observations with one GCD official at the meeting, he shrugged and said the government is much weaker than Iraqi political parties and there was no bureaucratic or institutional mechanism to address the problem.  Bureaucrats were not the ones, he implied, who could close the gap and restore government credibility.  6.  (SBU)  In another example, the GCD Director, a political appointee of Ja'aferi's, has absented himself from three key meetings, even as we are trying to "empower" his institution to coordinate messages for the whole government.  His deputy -- who has had to step into the void -- is smart but obsequious and terrified of command.  Other obviously Ba'ath era traits impede progress.  The deputy stated that he was unable to engage PAS officer in a "pre-brief," he said, because all comments must be recorded, and because it was inconceivable for anyone to talk before the session had been formally "opened."  BAGHDAD 00000475  002 OF 002    7.  (SBU)  In the February 13 meeting, participants proposed reviewing individually 29 separate proposals, and seemed shocked when urged to just toss out their favorites for general dissection by others, which they finally did.  The IRI director, who has been in Iraq for over a year, and the DFID advisor, both saw Embassy frustrations with slow progress.  They praised us for attempting to give the Iraqis ownership of this campaign, and encouraged our continued forbearance in this important capacity-building effort.  Comment -------  8. (SBU)  Iraqis -- especially government employees -- even while accepting much disarray in their daily lives -- seem unable to tolerate a freestyle approach in meetings.  It took quite some prompting by the non-Iraqi participants, but the in the end, the bureaucrats bravely abandoned their formalistic approach.  The process vividly underscores that we face major voids in human resource and institutional capacity.  We also see that the current public affairs approach:  carping among ministries or silence from the most senior officials, promotes neither public trust in the government nor the credibility of a future message.  As we continue pushing the agenda with the Iraqis involved in formulating a message, the Embassy will urge Iraqi officials to keep their discussions and institutional rivalries private.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000476  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2016 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, ENRG, EPET, PGOV, PINR, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: FORMER OIL MINISTER GHADBAN ON OIL SECTOR'S FUTURE IN IRAQ  REF: A. BAGHDAD 405      B. BAGHDAD 444  Classified By: Classified by DCM David Satterfield for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1.  (C) SUMMARY: Transitional National Assembly (TNA) member and former Minister of Oil Thamar Ghadban said on February 12 that he and others in the GOI have concerns over potential corruption and improper activities at the Ministry of Oil by Fadhila party members since they took over the Ministry in January.  Widely talked about as a possible Minister of Oil in the next government, Ghadban said he has a plan for the reorganization of the Iraqi oil sector.  He asserted that new oil sector legislation -- mandating industry reorganization and authorization of foreign direct investment in the oil industry -- could be passed in the first six months of the new government.  END SUMMARY  --------------------------- POLITICS AT MINISTRY OF OIL ---------------------------  2.  (C)  During a February 12 discussion with Emboffs, TNA member and former Minister of Oil Thamar Ghadban said that he and others in the GOI are quite concerned about maintaining the Ministry of Oil (MOO) as a non-politicized ministry in the next government.  Ghadban, a moderate Shi'a who left Ayad Allawi's party (the Iraqi National List) and is now in the "kitchen cabinet" of SCIRI's Prime Minister-nominee 'Adil 'Abd al-Mahdi, said that the Fadhila Party's political takeover of the MOO after former Minister Ibrahim Bahr al-'Ulum left in January is quite disturbing (ref A).  The arrival of Acting Minister of Oil Hashim al-Hashimi (Fadhila Party member and Minister of Tourism and Archeology), Ghadban explained, has generated much resistance from the long-term senior MOO employees.  3. (C) Ghadban said that many of the Directors General (DGs) have threatened to resign due to actions by the new minister and his new senior advisor, ministry outsider Kadhim al-Yakubi (also a Fadhila member).  Yakubi, in Ghadban's view, does not have the desired expertise or knowledge to run the ministry (ref B).  Ghadban added that he is quite concerned, for example, over money being siphoned from State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO) contracts to the Fadhila Party via kickback schemes on the sales of crude oil and refined products.  Ghadban called this "a very poor situation" that would not change until the new government is in control, and then only if the MOO is not again placed in Fadhila hands.  If the present situation continues into the next government, he asserted, he will continue to raise his concerns.  Ghadban said he believes that the Minister of Oil should be above politics and should serve all of Iraq.  --------------------------------------------- ---- FUTURE OF THE OIL SECTOR -- GHADBAN'S PERSPECTIVE --------------------------------------------- ----  4.  (C)  According to Ghadban, the oil sector in Iraq needs strong, forward-looking leadership.  In addition, he said, the MOO must be reorganized, a new oil policy must be implemented, and the Iraqi National Oil Company (INOC) must be resurrected.  Ghadban suggested that INOC should be a holding company with four regional operating companies -- one for Kurdistan and one each for the north, central and southern regions.  The companies, he explained, would be responsible for exploration and production of oil in their respective regions.  He added that these companies also should be empowered to create subsidiary companies, initiate production-sharing and service agreements with the private sector, and be responsible for refining and distribution in their regions.  These companies would be the major engines of the oil sector in Iraq, he continued, and their operations would produce revenue to be shared among the regions and the central government.  The regional revenue shares would be negotiated by the legislature, most likely in the range of 10-15 percent, but could be higher if determined by the Parliament.  5.  (C)  Under Ghadban's plan, the regional areas of operation for the Iraqi regional oil companies would be determined through negotiations; however, the exact boundary of the Kurdistan Oil Company should be aligned with the negotiated borders of Kurdistan.  He said that he favors foreign direct investment (FDI) in the downstream refining, marketing, and natural gas sectors, as well as in the upstream production sector.  He predicted that, with sufficient FDI, Iraq could be self-sufficient in oil products  BAGHDAD 00000476  002 OF 002   production and distribution within five to six years.  6.  (C)  Ghadban said that SOMO should remain the marketing agent for Iraqi oil but should come under a board of directors selected from the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of Iraq, the regional oil companies, the Council of Representatives, and technical experts.  Emboffs suggested that, as the GOI looks at ways to promote foreign investment in Iraq's oil sector, it should consider ratifying the Convention on Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the New York Convention) to govern disputes.  Ghadban responded that he thought Iraq already accepted the principle of international arbitration in its agreements but that it is unclear whether Iraqi law actually recognizes international dispute settlement.  ----------------------------- FAST ACTION ON PETROLEUM LAW? -----------------------------  7.  (C)  Ghadban estimated that the newly elected legislature would pass a national oil policy and a new petroleum law during the first six months of the new government.  He said that he has a copy of the new petroleum law in draft, but he was unwilling to share it as he had not shown it to 'Abd al-Mahdi.  (NOTE:  This conversation took place minutes before the United Iraqi Coalition nominated Ibrahim Ja'fari rather than 'Abd al-Mahdi for PM.  END NOTE.)  Ghadban did say that his draft law includes: the reorganization of MOO into INOC and regional companies; language for model contracts; authorization for FDI; and a division of responsibilities for the oil sector in Iraq.  He said that FDI probably could be initiated in the second half of 2007 if the right person were selected as the Oil Minister.  However, if the MOO goes to Fadhila, he warned, FDI could be delayed several years.  ---------------- BIOGRAPHIC NOTES ----------------  8.  (C) Thamar Ghadban, a moderate Shi'a, was born in 1945 in Babil, Iraq.  He earned both a Bachelor's in Geology and a Master's in Petroleum Reservoir Engineering from the University College in London.  He was a long-term employee of the Ministry of Oil, beginning work there in 1973.  He served during the initial CPA period as the Minister of Oil from April to September 2003 and again in the Iraqi Interim Government from June 2004 to May 2005.  He was elected in January 2005 to the TNA on the list of Ayad Allawi.   He was a member of the Constitutional Drafting Committee and the Economic Committee.  He is a highly regarded oil expert in Iraq and in the international oil industry, and he is known as one of the most effective technocrats in the oil sector. He has written extensively on the oil reservoirs in Iraq, and he advocates a steady approach to economic reform in the oil sector, including market pricing for oil products and FDI. As Minister of Oil, he closely associated the need for oil infrastructure protection with successful oil production and product distribution.  ------- COMMENT -------  9. (C) COMMENT: Ghadban's plan for the future of the Iraqi oil industry is almost identical to the plan presented by Minister of Planning and Development Cooperation Bahram Salih last week.  Ref B noted Salih's musing on February 13 that he might nominate Ghadban immediately to be Minister of Oil. The possibility that Salih, as one of Jalal Talabani's top aides, and Ghadban, as one of 'Abd al-Mahdi's, apparently have coordinated a forward-looking development plan for Iraq's oil industry might be an encouraging long-term development.  It remains to be seen however, whether either of these men will have a place in the next government from which to implement their plans.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000480  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, PINS, PHUM, IZ SUBJECT: RE-ELECTED INDEPENDENT SHIA ISLAMIST PARLIAMENTARIAN RESENTFUL ABOUT USG SUNNI OUTREACH  EFFORTS  REF: BAGHDAD 0095  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) At a February 14 introductory meeting, Hassan Radi Khadim al-Sari, leader of the Hezbollah Movement of Iraq Party, repeatedly railed against the Embassy for reaching out to Sunni "terrorists" and for ignoring the Shia.  He said the U.S.-Shia relationship used to be a partnership, but that it had deteriorated because of the Embassy's Sunni outreach efforts and its criticism of the Jafari government, particularly the Ministry of Interior (MOI).  2. (C) Sari alleged that Sunni Arabs are participating in both the political process and the resistance, damaging the credibility of the U.S. and the democratic process itself.  He said most Sunni Arabs benefited from Saddam's regime, do not believe in democracy, and would like to seize power again.  PolOffs responded that the goal of Sunni outreach is to bring Sunnis into the political process and out of the resistance, but not to return Iraq back to the Saddamist era.  Poloffs said that the Embassy has reiterated to Sunni Arab leaders that they cannot participate in the political process and be in the resistance at the same time.  3. (C) Al-Sari told PolOffs that the Embassy has been overly critical of the problems at the Ministry of Interior (MOI).  He alleged that the problems were created by Ayad Allawi, who filled the MOI with Ba'athists and Saddamists.  He said that Bayan Jabr cannot remove these people without being called "sectarian."  PolOffs stressed that problems at MOI demonstrate the need for a Minister of Interior who is competent and neutral, has no ties to a militia and is acceptable to all parties.  4. (C) Comment.  We report these views as reflective of the all too common perspective in Iraqi sectarian politics which views government power as a zero-sum game. In al-Sari's case, this view is linked to the fear that outreach efforts to include Sunni Arabs in government will inevitably lead at a minimum to return to a Sunni- dominated Iraq or even to restored Baath rule.  Many of our Sunni Arab contacts still doubt the Shia are more than Persian agents.  Building national consensus will be a slow, hard process.  End Comment.  5. (C) BIONOTE: Hassan Radi Khadim al-Sari was born in Al Ammarah (Missan Province) in 1961.  In 1979, he graduated from Baghdad University with a degree in chemistry.  Al-Sari was very active in cultural groups and developed several political contacts. In 1980, he established the Hezbollah of Iraq Movement Party.  In 1987, he was arrested and sentenced to life in prison (along with his extended family).  While in prison, a group of detainees confessed that al-Sari was guilty of additional opposition activities and Al-Sari was re- sentenced and tortured.  During the 1991 Shia uprising, he was released from prison.  From 1991-1993 he helped restructure his political party and was elected General Secretary.  From 1993-1995, al-Sari hid in the marshes of  SIPDIS Missan while continuing his political activities.  For their safety, he sent his family to Iran.  Until 2003, he split his time between the marshes and Iran.  Al-Sari says he does not engage the media because he prefers to maintain a low profile and conduct programs to benefit those who suffered in his region (particularly orphans of Saddam's victims).  Al-Sari claims to have a large following in Missan. He has aligned with SCIRI, is a member of SCIRI's Advisory Council and attends general meetings.  As a previous member of the Transitional National Assembly, al-Sari was Deputy Chairman of the Marshes Committee.  He said he will seek to serve on this committee when the Council of Representatives convenes. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000481  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM SUBJECT: SCHEMING IN BAGHDAD:  SUNNI ARAB DESCRIBES PLAN TO  BLOCK JAFARI; ALLAWI LIST WONDERS IF KURDS TRULY IN  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1.  (C) SUMMARY: Allawi allies told us February 15 that the USG should urge Talabani to join with Sunni Arabs and Allawi to form a larger parliamentary bloc than that of the Shia Islamist List 555.  Separately, Sunni Arab Tawafuq Front official Mahmoud al-Mashadani speculated that Sunni and Kurdish parties could join with Allawi's list, SCIRI and Fadhilah to make Fadhilah leader Nadeem al-Jabiri prime minister.  Mashadani also maintained that there has been a sea change in the insurgency, which now fears occupation by Iran, not the U.S. END SUMMARY  --------------------------- ALLAWI ALLIES LOOK TO KURDS ---------------------------  2. (C) A number of attendees at a February 15 Allawi-list civil society event told Poloffs that the Kurds would side with them in the assembly but had not yet agreed to join them in forming a government.  Allawi allies Shaykh Adnan al-Janabi and Dr. Hatem Mukhlis said that the USG should urge "the Kurds" -- meaning Talabani -- to join with the Sunni Arabs and Allawi to form the largest parliamentary bloc.  This bloc then would be in the driver's seat for government formation.  Shaykh Adnan told Poloff that the Kurds were expressing caution, saying that to join with the Sunni Arabs and Allawi would provoke the Shia Islamists. The key, both Shaykh Adnan and Hatem Mukhlis said, was whether Hakim would be willing to break with Jafari.  If so, they said, the PM race would be wide open.  (Comment: we await the return of al-Hakim from Najaf where he went February 15 to consult with Ayatollah Sistani.  End Comment.)  -------------------------------------------- MASHADANI DESCRIBES AN ALTERNATIVE COALITION --------------------------------------------  3. (C) Mahmud Mashadani, a leader of the Tawafuq Coalition, told Poloff February 15 that his Sunni Arab bloc is considering supporting a new political coalition to counter a Jafari-led government.  Under this proposal, Tawafuq would join the Kurds, Allawi and elements of the Shia List 555, including Fadhila and SCIRI, to claim the Prime Ministership for Fadhila leader Nadim al-Jabiri.  In addition to these large parties, Mashadani said the new coalition would have the votes of Saleh Mutlak's Dialog Front  -- with or without Mutlak himself -- and a handful of the minority parties.  Mashadani suggested that the core negotiating group for this coalition should include Mahmud Barzani, Ayad Allawi, Sheykh Khalaf al-Ayan, Adb al-Aziz Hakim, Nadim al-Jabiri, Abd al-Mahdi and Barham Saleh. When asked by poloff whether Jalal Talabani should also be included Mashadani snapped "no, one Iranian at the table is enough!"  (NOTE:  It is safe to assume he meant al-Hakim.)  4. (C)  Mashadani rounded out his government post proposals by suggesting Talabani as president, Khalaf al- Ayan as Vice President, Tariq al-Hashimi as Speaker and Mashadani, himself, as Deputy Prime Minister for Security. Mashadani also suggested that Adnan Dulaymi, as the "elder statesman", would be ideal for the proposed National Security Committee.  Mashadani said that Tawaffug is united behind Tariq al-Hashimi as its leader; he is the only Sunni Arab leader who has the strategic vision, education and presence for national leadership.   Addressing concerns about the salafist base of the Sunni Tawafuq, Mashadani assured poloff that Iraqi salafists are more flexible than their counterparts in other Arab countries.   (Comment: the truth of this assertion is not self-evident.  End Comment.)  --------------------------------- IRAN, NOT U.S., WORRIES INSURGENTS ---------------------------------  5. (C) Mashadani said the U.S. had "burned" Allawi as a PM candidate, but that the former PM would be acceptable as a Deputy Prime Minister provided that Tawafuq gets the MOI and the Kurds get MOD.  Security remains the most important issue for Sunni Arabs and the MOI must be accepted by the resistance if the latter are to lay down their arms. Mashadani claimed that there has been a sea change on the part of the insurgency.  He claimed that insurgents no longer worry about a US occupation, only that of Iran.   He claimed that at a recent meeting, insurgent leaders specifically said no to Iran, no to Saddamists, and no to Al-Qaida, but accepted the U.S. presence.  BAGHDAD 00000481  002 OF 002    --------------------------------------------- - PROVINCIAL COUNCIL ELECTIONS SOONER, NOT LATER --------------------------------------------- -  6. (C) Mashadani said provincial elections should be held no later than two months after the government is formed. He confided that there would have to be movement on constitution review or the street would react.  However, he said it might be possible to delay constitution review and federalism for a year or more, as he had heard Iran has told Hakim to back off on his proposal for a southern region.  Mashadani made a plea for the USG to help provide security for the National Dialogue.  They are threatened daily by Al-Quaida and the IG and need armored cars, gun permits, and a secure compound for their party.  (Note: Embassy is assisting with these requests.  End note.)  ------- COMMENT -------  7. (C) Mashadani's expression of readiness to work across sectarian lines is encouraging; his head is in it, but we are not certain his heart truly is.  In particular, we should not rely too heavily on his professed readiness to work with SCIRI and Fadhilah.  Indeed, the Sunni Arab Tawafuq largely blames SCIRI and the Badr Corps for much of the violence directed at the Sunni Arabs.  END COMMENT   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000490  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINS, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: SADR CITY DAC MEMBERS PREDICT JA'FARI WIN WILL BOOST SADRISTS IN SADR CITY  REF: BAGHDAD 262  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Sadr City District Advisory Council (DAC) chair Hassan Shama and Sadr City DAC member Dr. Haider Jabar Ziden told PolOff in a February 13 meeting that Prime Minister (PM) Ibrahim Ja'fari's renomination to the PM post will likely boost Sadrist influence in Sadr City. Ja'fari has thus far allowed the Sadrists to intimidate their opponents and effectively control Sadr City.  Now that Ja'fari has the Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) nod, thanks in large part to Sadrist support, our contacts predict the situation in Sadr City will only worsen.  The Sadrists, they predicted, would use intimidation to win elections that are far from free and fair.  Our contacts opined that, if free elections were to be held, about 50 percent of the DAC members would be reelected.  If the Sadrists are allowed to intimidate candidates and voters as they have in the past (reftel), then they will win perhaps as many as 30 of the 41 DAC seats.  With SCIRI, Dawa, and the Fadhila Party taking the rest of the seats, there will be no room for independent candidates such as himself.  2. (C) To combat this, Shama recommended reserving 25 percent of the DAC seats for women, with an additional 25 percent of the seats reserved for Sadr City minorities, such as Kurds.  This would prevent a complete takeover of the DAC by the Sadrists, Shama argued.  This is an important goal, our contacts argued, because the DAC is the only counterweight to the Sadrists in Sadr City. MNF-I and the Iraqi Security Forces have thus far not contained the Sadrists, our contacts lamented.  3. (C) Comment:  The Shia Islamist and the Iraqi national political leadership more broadly, are still trying to understand just how influential the Sadr camp would be in a new Jafari-led government.  Down at the local level in Sadr City, Hassan Shama is a well-known contact; his opposition to the Sadrists is well-documented.  His concern that independent candidates will be squeezed out by the established political parties is shared by many on the DAC.  While some DAC members have decided to join the established political parties, others have not.  We can expect the Sadrists to resist any attempt in the national assembly to reserve a fixed number of seats for women in provincial or local elections; many Islamists are not comfortable with such quotas for women.  End Comment.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000495  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2016 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, EPET, KCOR, MARR, MOPS, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: DPM CHALABI ON OIL MINISTRY CORRUPTION AND KURDISH "SAFE HAVEN" COMMENTS  REF: A. BAGHDAD 0405      B. 2005 BAGHDAD 4309      C. BAGHDAD 0212  Classified By: Economic Minister Counselor Tom Delare for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d).  1.  (C/REL GBR AUS) Summary: Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Chalabi, newly provided with expanded authority over the energy sector, is wrestling for results with the military and civilian bureaucracies.  On other subjects, Chalabi cited a recent comment by Kurdish Regional President Mas'ud Barzani offering the KRG as a "safe haven" to indicted former Minister of Defense Hazem Sha'lan, told Economic Minister Counselor February 12 said that Committee for Public Integrity (CPI) chief Judge Hamza al-Radhi is coming under increasing political pressure.  Chalabi said that he thought politically-motivated manipulation of contracts at the Ministry of Oil (MoO) might be a short-lived problem, since widespread dissatisfaction with Fadhila's performance thus far at MoO made it unlikely they would maintain control in the new government.  End Summary.  ----------------------------- Party-based Corruption at MoO -----------------------------  2. (C/REL GBR AUS) In a meeting with Economic Minister Counselor February 12, Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi was already well-versed with the accusations of Fadhila Party-initiated corrupt activity at the Ministry of Oil (reftel).  Calling the attempts to manipulate contracts for the financial benefit of the Fadhila Party "outrageous," Chalabi said he had asked Prime Minister Ja'fari to rein in his coalition allies.  EconMinCouns recommended that PM Ja'fari send written instructions to Acting Minister of Oil Hashem al-Hashemi ordering him to refrain from undertaking any additional financial obligations at MoO during the current "caretaker" government.  Chalabi accepted a joint U.S.-UK paper with points the PM might include in his instructions, but said he thought the problem was one that might eventually solve itself: widespread GOI dissatisfaction with Fadhila's performance to date at MoO made it unlikely the party would retain control of that ministry in the next government.  If the problem persists, however, Chalabi recommended that the Ambassador follow-up directly with PM Ja'fari, Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim, and 'Adil abd al-Mahdi.  ------------------ CPI Under Pressure ------------------  3. (C/REL GBR AUS) What Chalabi described as an even more urgent issue was the increasing pressure being exerted on Commission on Public Integrity (CPI) head Judge Hamza al-Radhi.  In response, we informed him that three of the five investigative judges at CPI recently submitted their resignations due to threats and intimidation directed at them and their families.  Furthermore, Kurdistan Regional President Mas'ud Barzani had announced in an interview aired February 10 on al-Iraqiya television that "Kurdistan is open for anyone who is pursued for political reasons and who seeks protection," referring to former Minister of Defense Hazem Sha'lan who Barzani said is "under Kurdish protection."  In the interview, Barzani says that the corruption case against Sha'lan is "part of a settling of political accounts," and that "the measures taken are unjust and not legal."  Chalabi urged the U.S. to speak out against Barzani's claims that the Kurdish region is a safe haven and that the corruption case against Sha'lan (involving more than $1 billion in contracts that cannot be properly accounted for - see ref B) is politically motivated.  ------------------------- Working on Fuel Situation -------------------------  4. (SBU) On Iraq's increasingly difficult fuel situation, Chalabi said that an Iraqi delegation charged with striking a deal with the Turks to pay arrears over time and limit monthly imports to a set amount paid only by letters of credit was on the ground in Ankara.  Chalabi said that Iraq's first tender to purchase 1.5 million tons of gasoline had driven up the offering price from $193 million to $204 million from Iraq's normal suppliers.  "We will buy (elsewhere) at a lower price," Chalabi said.  -----------------  BAGHDAD 00000495  002 OF 002   "Warlord" Chalabi -----------------  5. (C/REL GBR AUS) Invited to join Chalabi's ongoing meeting with Ministry of Defense (MoD) and MNF-I officials, we observed Chalabi flexing his muscles under the recently issued letter empowering him to take all measures necessary to assure that oil and fuel products are available (ref C). Chalabi, despite having no direct sway over Iraqi Security Forces (ISF), has clear views on what he would like to see the Iraqi forces do -- and, equally clearly, remains frustrated in what he views as his efforts to get results. For example, Chalabi pointed out that the battle space of no less than four Iraqi Army divisions all converged in an area north of Baghdad where many attacks on infrastructure occur. The perpetrators, Chalabi said, are using the lack of coordination across divisional boundaries to evade capture. When Iraqi Army Chief of Staff LTG Abadi asserted that this was not the case and that the units were operationally integrated, Chalabi was dismissive: "We can't continue to call the operation successful when the patient is dead."  6. (C/REL GBR AUS) In another pointed observation, Chalabi accused MoD of looking at infrastructure security as an "auxiliary mission," rather than "the thing we must win." Chalabi said that Salahadeen, a province "manufactured" by Saddam, is home to much of the country's natural wealth (including 60% of Iraq's refining capacity at Bayji) and also its insurgent activity.  This concentration of wealth and forces uniquely positions the province to starve or otherwise threaten Baghdad, Chalabi said, adding that the disposition of Iraqi forces, spread as they are across the country - even in areas where there is little or no insurgent activity - is too diffuse to be effective in the areas where they are most needed.  ---------------------------- Pot Calling the Kettle Black ----------------------------  7. (C/REL GBR AUS) Comment: Chalabi himself has often been accused of graft and corruption, including doing from October 2003 through May 2004 exactly what he said Fadhila is doing. Many in the political leadership have reservations about making him a minister because of it -- even while some acknowledge that he is a very competent manager.  While we do not argue against Chalabi's stance on Sha'lan, it should be noted that Chalabi is hardly an impartial bystander in this issue.  His rocky relationship with his cousin and political rival, former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, colors his reaction to anything connected with Allawi and his administration. Finally, we note Chalabi's observations on "deficiencies" in the posture of the security forces -- an area in which he can request and advise, but has no operational control -- seem to come at the expense of focusing his attention on areas where he is authorized to act: within the Ministries of Oil and Electricity where he could be pushing, for example, Inspectors General to act more aggressively to root out corrupt officials responsible for both corruption and sabotage. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000496  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2016 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KDEM, KWMN, IZ SUBJECT: BAGHDAD PROVINCIAL COUNCIL MEMBERS PREDICTS GREATER FEMALE REPRESENTATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT  REF: BAGHDAD 262  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Baghdad Provincial Council member and Sadr City resident Fatima Hassan al-Muqdadi told PolOff in a February 12 meeting that her Dawa Party would like to see 25 percent of provincial and local government representatives be female.  Other political parties, she said, are actively recruiting educated women to run for office.  She told PolOff she hopes women will be able to increase their representation in local governments to a proportion that gives them a greater voice in determining the future of their communities.  2. (C) Al-Muqdadi said she feels so strongly about female representation in local governments that she has sponsored a resolution in the Baghdad Provincial Council. According to the resolution, if the Provincial Council Chair is a male, then one of the two Deputy Provincial Council Chairs should be a woman.  This resolution was passed and will take effect after the next provincial council elections.  3. (C) Comment:  Al Muqdadi's positive outlook for the future of political women stands in sharp contrast to what some other female politicians from Sadr City have told us (reftel).  That she convinced a majority of her colleagues on the provincial council to vote for a resolution aimed at achieving greater representation for women shows that politicians are willing to support women's rights, at least publicly.  End Comment.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000497  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: (U) KURDISH POLITICIAN MAHMUD OTHMAN:  KIRKUK IS THE LITMUS TEST  REF: BAGHDAD 443  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Summary:  Kurdish government formation negotiating team member Dr. Mahmud Othman told PolOffs on February 15 that he stood by his comments in Al Dustour newspaper calling on Prime Minister- elect Ja'afari to commit publicly to resolving the Kirkuk issue.  On Ja'afari nomination, Othman suggested that while the KDP was not as unhappy with the nomination as Talabani, both Kurdish parties were emphasizing that Ja'afari only had one month to form a government, or he'll lose his position.  "In that scenario, it's not certain that the Shia Coalition would get another chance to choose the candidate," he asserted.  When asked for an alternate choice, Othman replied that Allawi is obviously the next choice.  By taking this issue public before the negotiations for government positions are really underway, the Kurds are reminding the Shia and Sunni Arabs parties that they are an essential party to the eventual government formation deal.  They also aim to ensure that the Kurds get some kind of resolution on a key redline issue for their constituents while the Kurds still hold great influence over the negotiating process. End Summary.  --------------------------- (U) Need Progress on Kirkuk ---------------------------  2. (U) Kurdish government formation negotiating team member Dr. Mahmud Othman told PolOffs on February 15 that he stood by his comments in Al Dustour newspaper calling on Prime Minister-elect Ja'afari to commit publicly to resolving the Kirkuk issue in accordance with the TAL's Article 58 and the new Constitution.  There is a commission in Kirkuk that is creating a plan and a proposed budget.  The Kurds will need to work out a formula with other political leaders to ensure Ja'afari will abide by his promises, he added.  This time, the Kurds will want guarantees.  3. (C) When pressed on how exactly the Kurds would enforce this agreement when a similar plan in January 2005 had failed, however, Othman had no response.  He merely repeated that this time, the Kurds were serious.  Othman then reported that senior Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) leader Dr. Fuad Masum was currently working on a Government Plan that would include a specific timetable on Kirkuk.  ----------------------------------- (U) Negotiations Progressing Slowly -----------------------------------  4. (C) The Kurds were busily meeting with all political parties everyday, said Othman.  The Kurdish negotiating team had met with some Sunni leaders and former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi's list on February 14.  The problem is that no one would reach out to the others.  The Shia and Sunni Arabs are squabbling.  In addition, the Sadrists are blackballing Allawi's participation.  The Kurds are the only ones speaking to all sides, and "we can get nowhere like this," averred Othman.  5. (C) Othman recommended some Sunni Arab leaders for consideration for key positions in the new government.  Adnan al-Dulaymi, for example, was better than any of the others, he said.  Other good choices were Tariq al-Hashimi, Ayad Samarrai, Saleh Mutlak, and Sa'adun al-Dulaymi.  Mahmud al- Mashadani, on the other hand, had acted badly when he recently visited Kurdistan.  Othman reported that, although Mashadani is a medical doctor like himself and therefore educated, he refused to work with any Christians because they are "kafir," or "infidels."  Othman recounted that one day after the meeting, everyone went in to lunch.  As they sat down for the meal, he leaned over and said loudly to Mashadani, "You can't partake of this lunch - it was prepared and organized by the KRG-Erbil Deputy Prime Minister - a Christian.  Surely you wouldn't eat a meal prepared by a kafir?"  Othman said with satisfaction that Mashadani had had the grace to  BAGHDAD 00000497  002 OF 002   look ashamed, and that during the Kurdish meeting with the Sunni Arabs on February 14 Mashadani had been more reasonable.  6. (C) On Ja'afari nomination, Othman suggested that the Prime Minister position is not yet fixed.  While the KDP was not as unhappy with the nomination as Talabani, both Kurdish parties were emphasizing that Ja'afari only had one month to form a government, otherwise he'd lose his position.  "In that scenario, it's not certain that the Shia Coalition would get another chance to choose the candidate," he stated.  When asked for an alternate choice, Othman replied that Allawi is obviously the next choice.  7. (C) As for the Kurds, there are still some internal divisions there.  The PUK Politburo flew down to Baghdad February 11-13 for discussions with Masud Barzani's Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP). The KDP, in return for supporting Talabani as President, wanted to hold both the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister positions.  This would effectively bar senior PUK Politburo member and current Planning Minister Barham Saleh from holding a key ministry portfolio in the new government. (COMMENT:  This is not only reflective of the KDP's increasing discomfort with the PUK's higher national government profile, but what appears to be a personal dislike of Saleh by senior KDP officials like Masrur Barzani.  See reftel.  END COMMENT.) This intra-Kurd division was unfortunate, said Othman, because the KDP and PUK programs looked essentially alike - this was just a clash of personalities, rather than real differences, said Othman sadly.  ---------------------------- (U) Iraq is Moving Backwards ----------------------------  8. (C) Othman railed against the stricter social rules governing women now in Iraq.  Iraq is entering a period of "social terrorism."  Othman said he for one was not willing to accept political freedom at the expense of social freedom.  In addition to federalism, democracy, and human rights, freedom and liberty for both men and women are crucial.  In Najaf and Karbala, for example, women were not allowed to wear brightly colored clothes; only black or other dark colors were allowed.  Many intellectuals, technocrats, and other secular people were fleeing Iraq, said Othman.  A look at any of the universities and organizations showed significant "braindrain."  The decreasing educational opportunities, in addition to the stricter clothing regulations, are driving many females away from education, warned Othman.  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  9. (C)  While many Iraqi political groups have acknowledged that the Constitutionally mandated agreement on Kirkuk should be implemented, the issue is so politically sensitive that it has consistently been pushed off.  The Constitution does state, however, that a referendum should be held no later than December 31, 2007 on the future status of Kirkuk.  Before that referendum is held, a number of things should be completed: normalization of Kirkuk, including Iraq Property Claims Commission hearings on property confiscated during the Saddam Hussein years and resolving conflicting claims by the Arabization Arabs, and an accurate census.  By taking this issue public before the negotiations for government positions are really underway, the Kurds are reminding the Shia and Sunni Arabs parties that the Kurds are a force to reckon with in the negotiations on ministry positions.  Raising Kirkuk publicly like Othman did also helps the Kurds pressure for some kind of resolution on a key redline for their constituents while they still hold great influence over the negotiations.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000498  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM SUBJECT: ZEBARI SAYS JAFARI DOES NOT HAVE LOCK ON PREMIERSHIP; HAKIM VISITS NAJAF, BUT MARJAIYA POSITION UNCLEAR  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY  FM Zebari told PolCouns February 16 that Jafari does not have a lock on the premiership, although Zebari doubted SCIRI and Fadhila would leave the Shia Coalition as that would be contrary to the wishes of Grand Ayatollah Sistani.  SCIRI Chief of Staff Haitham al-Husseini, told PolOff February 16 that Abd al-Aziz al- Hakim has not yet made a decision on SCIRI's next move. Hussein said that, whatever decision Hakim makes, it would have the backing of the Marjaiya.  He did not indicate whether Grand Ayatollah Sistani had given Hakim any indication of support for a break with Jafari during Hakim's February 15-16 visit to Najaf.  We now see at least three tracks of talks underway.  One is between the Sunni Arabs and the Kurds; another is between the Shia and the Kurds; a third is between the Kurds and the Allawi-Sunni Arab group.  There are also talks between SCIRI and Fadhilah and the Sunni Arabs, although we do not know if those have touched on program or identified minister candidates.  In other February 16 conversations, PolOffs heard that Jafari has convened meetings with Sunnis and Kurds concerning government formation.  A second track of talks, meanwhile, is underway between the Kurdish Alliance, Allawi and Tawafuq.  Shia "independent" Shatha al-Mousawi told PolOff that Allawi should be excluded from the government of national unity.  Kurdish political leader Arif Taifour told PolOff that the Kirkuk issue must be satisfactorily addressed in the new government's program and that the Kurdistan Alliance would seek to keep the positions of President, Deputy Prime Minister, Deputy Speaker (which Taifour held in the TNA) and Foreign Minister.  END SUMMARY  ---------------------------------- Zebari: Jafari Prospects Uncertain ----------------------------------  2. (C) In a February 16 meeting, Foreign Minister Zebari told PolCouns that Ibrahim Jafari does not yet have a lock on the premiership. Zebari reported that on February 15 Adil Abd al-Madhi had sought his advice on whether or not the Kurds would join with SCIRI, Fadhila, Tawafuq and Allawi to block Jafari's PM nomination.  Zebari said he told Abd al-Madhi that the Kurds might join, but only after SCIRI and Fadhila break with the Shia Coalition. The Kurds would not move ahead of SCIRI, Zebari cautioned; they do not want to appear to be forcing a confrontation with the Shia Islamist Coalition.  Zebari was confident that no move would be made until SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim returned from his February 15-16 trip to Najaf.  Zebari said he doubted that the Najaf clerical establishment led by Ayatollah Sistani would want to break up the Shia Islamist Coalition by letting SCIRI and Fashilah break ranks.  SCIRI and Fadhilah would not quit the Coalition against Najaf's wishes, Zebari believed.  3. (C) Zebari reported that the Kurds have already met four times with the Shia Coalition separately to discuss government programs and ministerial selection rules.  He said that they will meet next week to finalize these plans.  Zebari described the upcoming government negotiations between parties as confusing.  He said to expect more than a four-way negotiation, because it was still unclear which Sunni Arabs would be representing which groups.  For example, the Iraqi Islamic Party might launch quiet, separate negotiations on its own.  He said that when the Kurds met with the Tawafuq negotiating team on February 14, Allawi supporters Rasim al-Awadi and Adnan al-Janabi were present.  According to Zebari, Sunni Arab negotiators Abdel Nasser al-Janabi and Mahmud Mashadani told both the Kurds and the Allawi delegates that the Sunni Arabs would "coordinate" with the Allawi team but that they were not an integrated team.  4. (C)  Zebari said that the Sadrist member of the Shia negotiating team, Qusay as-Suheil, still is arguing against the inclusion of the Allawi list in the unity government.  Qusay has argued that the parliament will need an opposition and the Allawi group could be it.  The Kurds are responding that the Shia, Sunni Arabs and Kurds should conclude a government program amongst themselves and then present it to the Allawi team if they would like to sign on and join the unity government as well.  Zebari noted that it would be much easier for the Kurds, who want to get Allawi in the unity government and are arguing with the Sadrists, if the Sunni Arabs and the  BAGHDAD 00000498  002 OF 003   Allawi group would unify into a single bloc.  ------------------------ Najaf's Position Unclear ------------------------  5. (C) SCIRI Chief of Staff Haitham al-Husseini, told PolOff February 16 that Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim has not yet made a decision on SCIRI's next move.  Husseini said that, whatever decision Hakim makes, it would have the backing of the Marjaiya.  He did not indicate whether Grand Ayatollah Sistani had given Hakim any indication of support for a break with Jafari during Hakim's February 15-16 visit to Najaf.  He told PolCouns late February 16 that Sistani had promised to back al-Hakim.  (Comment: we sense that it may, in fact, be the reverse.  Hakim may take no decision that would not have the backing of Najaf.  End Comment.)  ----------------------- Sunnis Talk with Jafari -----------------------  6. (C) Salih Mutlak told PolOff February 16 that he had met with Jafari the preceding day.  Mutalk said the PM had sought his advice on how to achieve a united Iraq, but had not offered him a job.  Mutlak said that Ja'fari is confident that he can form a government.  Sheykh Fahran Sadeed, a Sunni leader from Salah al-Din who ran in Mutlak's coalition, also was summoned to Jafari for a similar discussion.  Sadeed told PolOff February 16 that Jafari has a better than 50-50 chance of forming the government.  Mutlak, Sadeed and Allawi ally Saad Janabi individually also told PolOff February 16 that they would meet with Jabiri in the coming days.  Tariq al-Hashimi told PolOff on February 16 that talks among the Kurds, Allawi and Tawafuq on a joint negotiating position are going well.  -------------------------------------------- Shia Independent Considers Allawi a Red-line --------------------------------------------  7. (C)  In a February 16 meeting, a self-declared Shia Coalition independent Shatha Mosa Sadiq al-Mousawi expressed her disdain for Ayad Allawi, insisting that he be excluded from the new unity government.  "Dr. Allawi only represents himself and has no connection with the Iraqi people," asserted Mousawi.  She said several of her Independent colleagues side with the Sadrists who believe that Allawi will bring Ba'athists back into government. She added that Allawi abandoned many of the people who had campaigned for him.   (She mentioned Saad Saleh Jabr and Rend Rahim.)  Mousawi said that Allawi coalition member Hamid Moussa of the Iraqi Communist Party was duped into doing most of Allawi's campaign work - a thankless task.  8. (C)  Mousawi told PolOff that there should be no National Security Council created that would undermine the authority of the Council of Representatives.  She predicted that Nadim al-Jabiri's bid to leave the Shia Coalition is untenable because Najaf would not allow it. She said she resented the Embassy's Sunni outreach efforts and our insistence on including Allawi.  She warned that many Iraqis perceive an Embassy change in policy that is a slap in the Shia face.  PolOff stressed the importance to the U.S. of having a unity government that represents Iraqis and is made up of competent national leaders.  --------------------------------------------- ---------- ARIF TAIFOUR: KIRKUK IS A RED-LINE FOR KURDISH ALLIANCE --------------------------------------------- ----------  9. (C) In a February 16 meeting with PolOff, Deputy TNA Speaker Arif Taifour identified the issue of Kirkuk as a red-line for the Kurdish Alliance.  They will not negotiate with any party if this is not part of the government program.  He said the Kurdish Alliance is negotiating independently with the different parties and not as part of larger bloc.  (Comment:  Zebari confirmed this.  End Comment.)  He estimated that it would take 45 days to form the government and said the Kurdish Alliance negotiating team will remain in Baghdad until the talks are complete.  He stated that specific names for government positions have not yet been discussed in the negotiations, but that the Kurdish Alliance would like to keep the positions of President, Deputy Prime Minister,  BAGHDAD 00000498  003 OF 003   Deputy Speaker, and Foreign Minister.  He said the Kurds do not differentiate between Shia and Sunni Arabs and therefore consider themselves to be the second largest group in Iraq.  They feel entitled, therefore, to either the Presidency or Prime Ministership.  10. (C) Taifour told PolOff that he had heard a report that the U.S. wanted a Sunni Arab to be President of Iraq in lieu of Jalal Talabani.  He said he hoped this was not true.  PolOff responded that the choice of government leaders would be Iraq's, not the USG's.  Taifour said the Kurdish Alliance is in favor of the national security council idea.  When asked whether the Kurdish Alliance will push for more executive powers for the Presidency, he answered that this will largely depend on the outcome of the negotiations on the national security council.  If the council has executive powers, then the Kurdish Alliance may not push for increased presidential executive powers.  ------- COMMENT -------  11. (C)  Unlike the two-way discussions between the Shia and Kurds in the spring of 2005, this time the government formation talks are much more complicated.  We have identified at least three active tracks:  (a) a Shia List 555 discussions with the Kurds that is making some progress on a program; (b) a Sunni Arab/Allawi dialog with the Kurds to create a list larger than the List 555 list - this one is waiting to see whether SCIRI and Fadhilah jump out of the List 555; (c)  Sunni Arab/Allawi/Kurd group talking to SCIRI and Fadhilah about a possible grand coalition.  We have also heard of discussions between Shia Islamists to engage with Sunni Arab Islamists, but so far the Sunni Arab Islamists seem not too interested in a separate deal with their Shia brothers.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000499  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2036 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: INTERPRETATION OF ARTICLES 54 AND 55: COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES DOES NOT NEED TO CONVENE WITHIN 15 DAYS   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY.  Article 54 of the new Iraqi Constitution requires that the Presidency Council issue a decree within fifteen days of the certification of election results to convene the Council of Representatives (CoR).  It does not require the CoR to convene within 15 days of the certification of results ) although this is the popular interpretation among average Iraqis and the media.  It may be reasonable, moreover, for the Presidency Council to impose some delay on the CoR's convocation, if it articulates a basis for doing so (e.g. logistical and security reasons). Presidency Council Chief of Staff Kamran Karadaghi told PolOff February 13 that President Talabani is willing to do what is necessary and call to convene the CoR.  FM Zebari told PolCouns February 16 that the Kurds were in no hurry to see the CoR called into session.  According to February 16 media reports, Talabani said that he would soon ask the heads of the parliamentary blocs to attend a meeting to agree on the date for the CoR to meet.  2. (C) SUMMARY CONTINUED.  Article 55 expressly calls for the election of a Speaker and two Deputy Speakers in the CoR's first meeting.  However, widespread political support to postpone the election of the Speaker (due to the packaging of positions in government formation) may reduce any criticism that flows from not following the legal requirement.  In addition, Chief Judge Medhat's official government transition opinion states that the TAL remains in effect until the new government is formed and implies that the TNA remains the official legislature until government formation is complete. Thus, to the extent the COR meets, it should only do so in order to take government formation decisions ) i.e., election of its Speaker and deputies, election of the Presidency Council, and vote of confidence on the PM candidate and his Council of Ministers.  END SUMMARY  --------------------------------------------- - Convening the Council of Representatives (CoR) --------------------------------------------- -  3. (C) After certification of the election results, Article 54 mandates that the Presidency Council (PC) issue a decree within fifteen days to convene the Council of Representatives. This provision also permits one fifteen-day extension for issuance of the PC decree.  Presumably, the PC would have the discretion to invoke that extension without consultation of any other governmental entities.  4. (C) The constitution is silent as to how quickly the PC actually must convene the CoR or whether the PC must state a specific date for the CoR's first meeting.  However, both the drafters' intent and the text suggest that the PC's discretion should be limited.  The drafters sought to avoid the delays that resulted from the Transitional Administrative Law (TAL) government formation process ) where there were relatively few deadlines ) by establishing a more concrete government formation schedule under the constitution.  In support of this view, the text requires a series of 15- and 30-day deadlines for most steps in the formation process. Nevertheless, because the constitution is silent, it may be reasonable for the PC to impose some delay on the CoR's convocation if necessary.  Articulating a basis for doing so (e.g. logistical and security reasons) would help justify any such delay.  5. (C) Presidency Council Chief of Staff Kamran Karadaghi told PolOff on February 13 that President Talabani is willing to do what is necessary and call to convene the CoR. Karadaghi added that the outcome of the Shia Alliance vote surprised the Talabani camp and it needed some time to re-group and decide their approach to the remaining executive and cabinet positions. He said that negotiations for the deputy prime minister and deputy president positions will be complicated.  Karadaghi acknowledged that Talabani must "call" to convene the CoR sometime before February 25.  6. (C) FM Zebari told PolCouns February 16 that the Kurds were in no hurry to see the CoR called into session. According to February 16 media reports, Talabani said, in response to a question at a press availability, that he would soon ask the heads of the parliamentary blocs to attend a meeting to agree on the date for the CoR to meet.  ------------------------------------- Selection of COR Speaker and Deputies -------------------------------------  7. (C) Articles 54 and 55 require the CoR to elect in its  BAGHDAD 00000499  002 OF 002   first meeting, which is chaired by the eldest member, the CoR Speaker and two deputy Speakers by an absolute majority.  If the positions of Speaker and deputy Speakers become intricately linked to the overall government formation process and a package of leadership positions, Iraqi political leaders may have no interest in filling these positions the first time the CoR actually meets.  8. (C) Thus, there may be a tension between the legal requirement and possible political realities.  To address this tension, Iraqi leaders might emphasize the following points: (1) this first meeting is only a symbolic "convocation" of the CoR; (2) the CoR only will meet to take government formation decisions; and (3) the first official session will take place when the government is fully formed. While this approach may not meet the straightforward legal requirement of Articles 54 and 55, widespread political support to postpone the elections of the Speaker and deputies may reduce any criticism that flows from not following these provisions.  This approach also has the advantage of meshing with Judge Medhat's theory of transition (see below).  ------------- Governing Law -------------  9. (C) By its terms, the constitution does not come into effect until government formation is complete.  Both the Embassy and the Iraqis interpret government formation to require the Prime Minister (PM) and Council of Ministers (COM) to assume office.  In addition, Chief Judge Medhat's official government transition opinion states that the TAL remains in effect until the new government is formed ) an opinion with which Embassy Legal agrees - and implies that the TNA remains the official legislature until government formation is complete.  10. (C) Thus, even after the COR has had its symbolic convocation, the TNA would appear to remain the official legislature until the PM and COM assume office.  To the extent the COR meets, it should only do so in order to take government formation decisions, i.e. election of its Speaker and deputies, election of the Presidency Council, and vote of confidence on the PM candidate and his Council of Ministers. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000500  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, MOPS, PREL, IZ, IT SUBJECT: ITALIANS AGREE TO LEAD DHI QAR PRT  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: During a February 12 meeting in Nasiriyah, Italian Ambassador to Iraq Gianludovico de Martino di Montegeiordano and Italian Joint Task Force Commander General Natalino Madeddu expressed enthusiasm to National Coordination Team (NCT) Director Greg Bates on forming and leading a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Nasiriyah.  In a separate meeting the same day, Dhi Qar Province Governor Aziz Kadum Aluan Al Aghely said he looks forward to continuing a relationship with the Italian Coalition Forces (CF) and having the USG support reconstruction and governance efforts in Dhi Qar.  END SUMMARY.  ---------------------------------- ITALIANS AGREE TO LEAD DHI QAR PRT ----------------------------------  2.  (SBU) At a February 12 meeting in Nasiriyah, NCT Director Bates briefed the PRT initiative to General Madeddu, Ambassador de Martino, and key members of the Italian Joint Task Force.  Bates asked for their participation in opening, leading, and supporting a PRT in Dhi Qar Province.  The flexibility of the PRT structure, Bates explained, allows it to be individually tailored to each province and easily integrated with existing programs.  3.  (SBU)  General Madeddu expressed enthusiasm about leading a PRT but cautioned that he must obtain final approval from superiors in Italy.  The Italians' civilian subject-matter expert team, Madeddu continued, will not be complete until early March (NOTE: Four are currently on board awaiting arrival of team leader.  END NOTE.), and he spoke of a reduction of the Italian contingent.  Nonetheless, Maddedu expressed confidence that the Italians would be ready to proceed soon with a full PRT; Ambassador de Martino promised that it would be no later than early April. Madeddu readily agreed to accept the pre-positioning of an IRMO Provincial Program Manager in early March who could begin interaction with the provincial government and assist in the establishment of the PRT. Ambassador de Martino said that the Italians will assign a civilian diplomat as team leader and expect him/her to be available in March.  4. (SBU) General Madeddu promised logistical support, housing, security, and movement support for the PRT. He identified the availability of a large logistical support staff that would more than adequately meet the needs of an operational PRT.  Maddedu said that, although the Italians do not engage in daily movements to meet Iraqi government officials, he understands that the PRT would require such movements, and he foresees no problem meeting such a requirement.  5.  (SBU) Ambassador de Martino reiterated the Italian Embassy's desire to work closely with the NCT in planning for the establishment of the Dhi Qar PRT, noting that he wishes to begin further planning immediately.  Ambassador de Martino also asked about the possibility of placing an Italian officer on the NCT.  Bates responded that the NCT would welcome Italian participation on the NCT, which would enhance existing coordination through the Ambassador's participation in Executive Steering Group meetings.  ---------------------------------------- GOVERNOR WELCOMES ITALIAN/USG INITIATIVE ----------------------------------------  6. (SBU)  In a separate meeting, Bates informed Governor Aziz of five Provincial Reconstruction Development Committee (PRDC) project approvals for Dhi Qar Province totaling $6.9M.  The USG wants to partner with the Italian contingent in working with Dhi Qar Provincial authorities in order to assist in its development efforts, Bates explained.  Bates described the PRTs as having increased civilian participation, civilian leadership, and a focus on developing and sustaining the capabilities of the provincial government.  7. (SBU) Governor Aziz thanked the USG for its support of the southern provinces and said he looks forward to Italian-USG cooperation in the PRT.  Aziz praised the Italian CF for its reconstruction assistance and spoke of the need for greater efforts in Dhi Qar.  The infrastructure is "horrendous," he said, citing major  BAGHDAD 00000500  002 OF 002   needs in the water, sewage, and electrical systems. He complained that northern provinces have received more attention and funding from the USG.  Bates pointed out that the USG has funded projects totaling more than $500M that are complete, currently in progress, or planned for Dhi Qar.  KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000501  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: LEADERS OUTSIDE SHIA COALITION DISCUSS "NATIONAL SALVATION FRONT"   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (S) SUMMARY: The leaders of the Kurdistan Alliance, Sunni Arab Tawafuq list, and Allawi's Iraqiyya List met on February 16 and agreed to work to form a united front to change the balance of power in the government formation process.  Their first goal is a "National Salvation Front" that draws in SCIRI and Fadhila, breaks the Shia alliance, and forms a national unity government to block out extremists on all sides.  If that proves impossible, they will push for a national unity government that puts tough constraints on Jafari, possibly by demanding that Sadrists be kept out of the cabinet.  All sides decided to work speedily and in parallel to win over SCIRI and Fadhila to the National Salvation Front in the next two days.  They held a joint press conference backing the Salah al-Din Principles following the meeting and agreed to reconvene on February 18.  They also agreed to convene the new Council of Representatives without delay, most likely by February 25. END SUMMARY.  -------------------------------- Salah Al-Din Principles Affirmed --------------------------------  2. (S) The leaders of the Kurdistan Alliance, Sunni Arab Tawafuq list, and Allawi's Iraqiyya List met on February 16 and agreed to work to form a united front to change the balance of power in the government formation process.  The meeting, which took place at President Jalal Talabani's residence, closed with a press conference in which all sides present voiced their support for the Salah al-Din Principles, i.e. a national unity government characterized by non-sectarian professional ministers and a national security council to bring all sides together on key policy decisions. Talabani warned that the Shia coalition seemed to be operating under the illusion that it possessed a majority in parliament and needed to be woken up.  -------------------------- A National Salvation Front --------------------------  3. (S) All sides present agreed with Barzani's suggestion that they form a "National Salvation Front" along with SCIRI and the Fadhila Party, but they remained unsure whether this would be possible.  Such a bloc would be able to complete the government formation process on its own and set Iraqi politics on a cross-sectarian track that drives out extremists like the followers of Muqtada al-Sadr and some neo-Ba'athist Sunni Arabs in the parliament.  All agreed that they had nothing less than a historic opportunity.  Even Talabani, still smarting from his ally Adel Abd al-Mahdi's defeat, paraphrased a Quranic verse to the Ambassador and acknowledged, "'One may hate something that is in fact good for him.'" Talabani suggested that the Kurds put the idea of a "National Salvation Front" forward publicly as their own and call upon the Sunni Arabs and Shia coalition to study it.  Such a step would avoid giving the Shia the impression that the plan was hatched against them.  4. (S) The group decided to meet again on February 18 after working in parallel to draw out SCIRI and Fadhila, particularly following Hakim's return from consultations with the Marja'iya in Najaf.  Talabani said he believed that SCIRI and Fadhila would agree to secretly support a new front but might stop short of  breaking with the Shia alliance. Barzani rejected that idea, warning it could lead to a showdown with the Shia alliance and fail to produce any change in the government process except ill-will with Jafari.  SCIRI had to make a historic decision, he argued, and now was the time to do it.  Talabani added that most kidnappings and assassinations in Iraq were being perpetrated by the Mahdi Army, not the Badr Corps, and the Sadrists were the enemy that needed to be eliminated.  ------------------------------------- Still Considering Working With Jafari -------------------------------------  5. (S) Allawi, Barzani and Talabani told the Ambassador in a smaller meeting following the roundtable talks that they could ultimately choose a different track if a National Salvation Front never materializes.  In that case they would work to stand by the Salah al-Din Principles and set tough conditions on any future alliance in a Jafari government. Barzani argued that they should demand that Sadrists be excluded completely from any future governing alliance. Talabani and Allawi both nodded at that demand, describing the Sadrists as "murderers and criminals" who were aiming to  BAGHDAD 00000501  002 OF 002   destroy Iraq, not build it up.  Talabani said he believed Iranian policy had taken a dangerous turn in Iraq following the start of the showdown over its nuclear development program.   Iran, he warned, has now decided to work with extremists like the Sadrists to destabilize the country permanently. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000507  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2026 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: HAKIM LOOKING TO UNSEAT JAFARI WITHOUT BREAKING SHIA COALITION   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) .  1. (S) SUMMARY: SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim told the Ambassador February 17 that he wanted to work to block Ibrahim al-Jafari's nomination without breaking the Shia coalition.  Hakim said he had met with Ayatollah Sistani in Najaf February 16 and found that Sistani was unhappy with Jafari's re-election and rising Sadrist influence but unsure about how to respond.  Hakim said that SCIRI is ready to work with groups outside the Shia coalition to reach consensus on a government program structure and the top officials in a future cabinet.  Once such an agreement is reached, Hakim suggested that the Sunni Arabs, Kurds, and Allawi forge a larger bloc and tell the Shia coalition that their nominee is unacceptable, forcing Jafari to step down rather than face the embarrassment of rejection in parliament.  The Ambassador warned Hakim that other groups might not go along with this if it is merely a maneuver to revive Adel Abd al-Mahdi's candidacy. Hakim said he would be ready to look for an independent Shia candidate all sides could find acceptable. END SUMMARY.  -------------------------------- Hakim Considers the Alternatives --------------------------------  2. (S) SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim told the Ambassador February 17 that he wanted to work to block Ibrahim al-Jafari's nomination without breaking the Shia coalition. Hakim ruled out Husayn al-Shahristani as a prime minister and also ruled out Nadeem al-Jabiri.  Hakim said Jabiri's nomination would only add insult to injury to the followers of Muqtada al-Sadr, all of whom would be reeling from Jafari's fall and consider the Fadhila Party a bitter rival. Hakim also said Jabiri was just as disorganized as Jafari. The Ambassador warned that Allawi and Barzani will not cooperate with an effort to simply shake up Jafari's nomination without knowing who might come next.  They fear they could wind up with a worse candidate.  Hakim said all sides would need to look for a Shia candidate among the independents or outside the coalition entirely.  Hakim said the search for such a candidate and for figures for each of the top government posts should be the work of a special committee including representatives from the Kurds, Sunni Arabs, and Allawi's list.  ---------------------- Opening a Second Track ----------------------  3. (S) Hakim called for a second track of talks to attempt to forge a national compact that would guide the next cabinet. That meant settling on a unified approach to the chief challenges facing the next government, particularly on security, ministerial programs, and the constitution.  Adel Abd al-Mahdi told the Ambassador February 16 that the Sunni Arabs, Kurds, Allawi list and SCIRI ought to create, in one form or another, a front that ties in their key leaders, including Barzani, Talabani, Hakim, Allawi and perhaps Tariq al-Hashimi of the Iraqi Islamic Party.  This group could hammer out the key compromises and perhaps serve as a nucleus for a national security council down the line.  ------------------------- COMMENT: Voting as a Bloc Without Forming One -------------------------  4. (S) In Hakim's vision, it may be possible to form a National Salvation Front without formally breaking the Shia coalition.  This would require backroom deals and some semantics but could be the more diplomatic approach.  The key leaders could reach an unannounced agreement on the government but still stand at loggerheads in public.  Then, just when things appear bleakest, they could bring forward their pre-worked plan as a compromise and sell it inside their respective blocs.  Jafari could step down, perhaps compensated with "leadership" of the still-standing but now damaged Shia coalition, and a new candidate could emerge. Iraq would have a National Salvation Government without a National Salvation "bloc" -- the parliament would remain divided on sectarian lines.  The trick with this plan, of course, remains managing the Sadrist backlash and finding acceptable candidates.  5.(S) Hakim may not go far enough to pursue other candidates.  We will find out in additional discussions with them in the coming days just how much each party is willing to push. The Ambassador was also to meet with Allawi and Talabani  BAGHDAD 00000507  002 OF 002   February 17 and leaders across the spectrum February 18 to push this process forward at a time when most of the leaders are still wringing their hands. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000508  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (ADDED CAPTION)  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: PM SENIOR ADVISOR PREDICTS GOVERNMENT FORMATION WILL TAKE TWO MONTHS   BAGHDAD 00000508  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (C) Summary. In a February 15 meeting, Jafari senior advisor Hassan Hamid Hassan Al-Seneid told PolOffs that the Shia Coalition has placed conditions on Jafari assuming the premiership, as well as on any other Shia Coalition holder of positions in the new government.   He estimated that government formation will take at least two months.  He argued that the creation of the proposed National Security Council, even as an advisory body, would erode democratic progress and the authority of the Council of Representatives.  Seneid considered Nadim al-Jabiri's threat to leave the Coalition as a negotiating tool to ensure a high-level government post.  He also characterized the Sadrist opposition to Ayad Allawi in government as unsophisticated and undemocratic and gave assurances that the Shia Coalition will easily resolve this issue. End Summary.  ----------------------- Shia Coalition Oversight -----------------------  2. (C) Seneid readily admitted that the Jafari Government has been a failure on many counts, particularly with respect to the PM's advisors.  As a new PM Senior Advisor, Seneid insisted that the mistakes of the past administration would not be repeated.  Seneid said he advised Jafari to build a staff that reflects society and not just party membership. Seneid mentioned that not all of Jafari's advisors will be returning, including Adnan Ali al-Khadimy.  (COMMENT: While it is clear Jafari is shaking up his staff, we hear conflicting reports as to how he plans to do so.  Council of Ministers Secretary-General Dhia told poloffs February 14 that al-Khadimy will remain in a senior position on the PM's staff.  Separately, Umma Party member (Shia progressive) Belsam al-Hilli told PolOff February 15 that she had been asked to become PM Jafari's Chief of Protocol.  She has yet to make up her mind.  )  3. (C) Seneid confirmed rumors that the Shia Coalition laid out the following set of conditions for assuming the premiership:  - PM must sign a letter of resignation dated one year from taking office that will be acted upon if the Shia Coalition reviews the PM's performance and finds it unsatisfactory. - PM must accept plans and policies put forward by the seven-member Shia Coalition leadership committee. - Each Shia Coalition cabinet minister (or deputy president) must sign a letter of resignation.  - Regarding cabinet minister selection of Shia Coalition ministries, the designated Shia Coalition party must submit three candidates from which PM Jafari could choose. Jafari has the right to veto all three candidates.  The party then has the opportunity to submit three more names.  The PM must select from this group.  If a party cannot provide three candidate names, the Shia Coalition would choose a competent candidate regardless of party.  -------------------------------------- Shia Coalition Rejects Proposed Council --------------------------------------  4. (C) Seneid said he had advised PM Jafari to reject the proposal for a National Security Council.  Seneid said that any kind of advisory body deciding the strategic vision or important issues of the country would undermine the power of the Council of Representatives.  He equated the idea with going backwards in democratic time and explained that each change in government (CPA, IGC, IIG, ITG, Council of Representatives) has brought Iraq more democracy.  Seneid charged that having a National Security Council would be like going back to the Iraqi Governing Council when an "elite committee" got to rule Iraq.  -------------------------- Forming a Unity Government --------------------------  5. (C) Seneid dismissed the Sadrists' rhetoric against Ayad Allawi's participation in a unity government.  He added that the Sadrists are young and inexperienced and easily handled by the Shia Coalition.  He added that since Allawi won 25 Council of Representatives seats, he deserves a place in the new government of national unity.  6.    (C) Seneid dismissed Nadim al-Jabiri's bid to leave the Shia Coalition and vote against Jafari's candidacy as just a ploy to secure the highest-level government position possible.  Seneid downplayed the possibility that the Fadhila party would leave the Coalition to join with the Kurds,  BAGHDAD 00000508  002 OF 002   Sunnis and secularists because several Fadhila members do not agree with this tactic.  He reasoned that it is too early for Jabiri to try and topple Jafari when the new government has no track record.  "In a year, with poor performance, it could be easy for Nadim to attempt this move," said Seneid.  ------------------------ Security is Top Priority ------------------------  7.    (C) Seneid said that the new Jafari Government's first order of business would be securing Iraq's borders with its neighboring countries.  Seneid cited the following points as requiring action:  -     1979 treaty with Iran does not specify border regulation. -     1964 treaty with Syria does not specify border regulation. -     The borders between Iraq and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait are regulated by the Arab League. -     The Kurds have an agreement with Turkey but not Iraq. -     Jordan has no international treaty with Iraq regulating and protecting its borders.  ------------------------ Truth and Reconciliation ------------------------  8 (C)  With the prospect that the trials against Saddam may last five years, Seneid said that he saw nothing wrong with keeping Saddam on television for five years so the Iraqi people would have the opportunity to hear the details of all the crimes against humanity the former dictator committed. Taking a dinner knife from the restaurant table and slicing the air while he spoke, Seneid said the only weapon of mass destruction in Iraq is Saddam.  Seneid doubted that Saddam would receive the death sentence from the Dujail trial.  He said the IHT made a mistake by starting with a trial that only concerned the Shia and not one that could have united all the Iraqi people.  9. (C)  BIONOTE: Hasan Hamid Hassan Seneid was born in Nasariya, earned a Masters degree in Civil Engineering and a PhD in Islamic History.  In 1971, Seneid joined the Dawa Party. In 1975, 1977, and 1979, he was arrested and released.  In 1980, he was arrested again, tried by the Revolution Court and sentenced to life in prison.  Six months later Seneid tried to escape from prison, was re-captured and sentenced to death.  One month later on National Day, his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment.  Seneid said he was severely tortured in prison where he suffered many broken bones, resulting in his permanent limp.  Following his release from prison in 1983, he said that Dawa (with help from the KDP) smuggled him into Turkey, then Iran.  He then spent time in the United Arab Emirates, Algieria, London, Syria, Lebanon, and Kuwait. His wife and son were also imprisoned.  His wife died before the liberation of Iraq.  In 1990, Seneid was elected to Dawa's Political Bureau, and is now a member of its leadership committee.  After the liberation, he was first an advisor to the Ministry of Awqaf and then was elected to the Transitional National Assembly. He is a newly elected member of the Council of Representatives.  Seneid has written eight collections of poetry.  He is also the author of five books and is currently writing a book on torture methods used during the Saddam Regime. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000509  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (ADDED CAPTION)  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: FADHILA MEMBER AND SUNNI ARAB SHAYKH STRESS IMPORTANCE OF INTERIOR MINISTRY IN GOVERNMENT FORMATION  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. SUMMARY: In a February 16 meeting, Fadhila Member Mohammed al-Kusai told PolOff that he doubted PM Jafari would be successful leading the new government. However, he maintained that the UIC 555 would seek to motivate Jafari to perform well.  Also on February 16, an al-Dulaymi tribal leader linked support for the insurgency to Sunni Arab fear of sectarian persecution.  Both the Dulaymi shaykh and Kusai stressed the importance of filling the interior ministry appropriately.  END SUMMARY  -------------------------------------- FADHILA MEMBER ON JAFARI'S WEAK POINTS --------------------------------------  2. (C) In a February 16 meeting, Mohammed Ismail al-Kusai, recently-elected Council of Representatives member and close aide to Fadhila Party head Nadeem al-Jabiri, told PolOff that Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari would not be successful leading the new government.  Kusai faulted Jafari for his poor relationship with the Kurds.  He added that the next prime minister's biggest challenge would be ending sectarianism in Iraq.  The best way to address this issue would be to form a national unity government, with no red lines for any party or individual to serve in a particular capacity in government. Kusai said this approach would also help end the insurgency, as more Sunni Arabs are brought into the political process and eschew violence.  He added that Jafari would have to achieve some early successes because he had signed a letter of resignation which he would have to submit one year after assuming office if his performance is not satisfactory. Kusai said, however, that this letter was meant to motivate Jafari to perform well, and that the UIC 555 wants Jafari to succeed.  3. (C) Choosing heads of some ministries, such as the Ministry of Interior (MoI), will be very contentious, Kusai said.  There are some in UIC 555 who feel the Shia Coalition should always control the MoI, he added.  Many Sunni Arabs, Kusai acknowledged, believe the Interior Minister should be an independent.  The Fadhila Party, al-Kusai said, has some good candidates for the Interior Minister post, although he declined to offer any names.  -------------------------------------- Dulaymi Tribal Leader: Interior Is Key --------------------------------------  4. (C) Shaykh Mohamad al-Dulaymi told PolOff, February 16, that new ministers, but especially the new interior minister, must be non-sectarian and nationalist.  PolOff told Dulaymi that the USG also hoped to see a cross-sectarian government. Dulaymi said a Shi'a leader could be the next interior minister, adding that there is widespread Sunni Arab support for either Ayad Allawi or Fadhila's Nadeem al-Jabiri. Dulaymi said the new interior minister must focus on accountability and transparency.  There will be a massive reaction in the Iraqi streets - either good or bad - the minute the GOI announces the new Interior Minister, he said.  5. (C) Dulaymi linked support for the insurgency to Sunni Arab fear of sectarian persecution.  He said that the small number of foreign fighters in Iraq had "brainwashed" locals so well that many Iraqi insurgents "no longer know right from wrong."  The solution, he said, would be to have an interior ministry that helped Iraqis - especially Sunni Arabs - feel safe from persecution. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000510  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, PINR, KWMN, IZ SUBJECT: DECLARED SHIA INDEPENDENT WORRIES ABOUT FRACTIOUS COALITION  REF: BAGHDAD 480  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (C) At a February 16 introductory meeting, independent Shia Coalition member Shatha Mosa Sadiq al-Mousawi expressed her strong resentment toward the Embassy for reaching out to Ayad Allawi and Sunni "Ba'thists" and for "ignoring" the Shia.  She warned that public perception about Americans is changing for the worse.  Poloff countered strongly that the Embassy was reaching out to all groups because of our belief that Iraq should have a government of national unity, which represents the interests of all Iraqis.  2. (C) Mousawi expressed her concern that the Shia Coalition is fractious and fragile, especially since the premiership was decided by only one vote. However, Mousawi doubted SCIRI or Fadhila would leave the Coalition because Najaf would forbid such a move.  Mousawi explained that political parties inside the Coalition were established "outside" Iraq's southern region (read Kurdistan or Iran). As a result, she argued that SCIRI and Dawa are inherently loyal to parties outside Iraq and will never act in the country's best interest.  In contrast, she proudly stated that Shia Coalition independents are only loyal to Ayatollah Sistani and Iraq's national interests.  "We are the only political hope for home-grown Iraqis," exclaimed Mousawi. 3. (C) COMMENT: As with comments by Hezbollah Movement of Iraq's Hassan al-Sari (reftel), Mousawi's comments about outreach to Allawi and Sunni Arabs reflect a zero-sum, sectarian view of government power.  We will continue to press against this view in our discussions with Iraqi politicians from all groups.  4.    (C) BIONOTE: Shatha Mosa Sadiq Mousawi was born to a very religious family in Najaf.  In 1980, her father was assassinated, and in the following year, two of her aunts were murdered ) all because of their religious affiliations.  In 1982, her mother and siblings were arrested and imprisoned.  Several years later, some of her siblings survived and were released.  For years, she worked with human rights organizations and established an NGO called Association for Women.  Mousawi said she managed to elude direct persecution, marry and have three children during the Saddam regime.  She returned to her language studies at the Baghdad College of Languages in 1995 and graduated with a Bachelors equivalent in 2003.  She placed her graduate studies on hold when she was elected to the Transitional National Assembly (TNA).  During her tenure as a TNA member, Mousawi served on the Martyrs and Political Prisoners Committee where she made several contacts with international and local NGOs.  Mousawi said she will seek to serve on this committee and the Integrity Committee when the CoR convenes. She wears traditional conservative dress and speaks some English. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000511  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  PLEASE PASS TO DHS HQ  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: MOPS, PBTS, ASEC, EAIR, SMIG, PARM, PBTS, IZ SUBJECT: DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS FOR CY 2006  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Multi-National Security Transition Command  Iraq (MNSTC-I) and U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Attache and Country Director have agreed to submit the following request for DHS specialists to assist the GOI in controlling its borders and ports of entry (POEs) for CY 2006.  END SUMMARY.  ---------- BACKGROUND ----------  2. (SBU) Continued support of the Customs and Border Protection (CBP) mission in Iraq from DHS remains a critical component of the Iraq border enforcement initiative.  There are 23 POEs -- 14 land (two of which are closed), five air, and four sea.  There is also a General Directorate Headquarters located in Baghdad that requires training and staff support from DHS specialists.  3.  (SBU) Two senior DHS leaders are working in the Embassy and, until recently, four 4-person teams (formerly known as Border Support Teams, or BSTs) from CBP were providing invaluable support at the following POEs: Trebil, Waleed, Rabea, and Baghdad International Airport (BIAP).  These teams historically have rotated every 90 days.  During the period from November 29, 2005, to January 6, 2006, there were 5 CBP team members who remained in Iraq, assigned to the BIAP, Trebil, Al Waleed, and Rabiah Ports of Entry.  Full DHS CBP teams started the current 90-day rotations in early January 2006.  ---------------------------- CY 2006 REQUIREMENTS DEFINED ----------------------------  4.  (SBU) LAND POE REQUIREMENTS: Three CBP teams, each comprising 4 specialists with skill sets that include primary/secondary customs and immigration inspections of vehicles and persons; examination and processing of commercial vehicles and cargo; and the collection of customs duties and fees.  Additional border enforcement skill sets may be useful within the team, but should not preclude the primary skill sets requested.  Each team should include a subject-matter expert in visas, passport control, and detecting fraudulent travel documents. These individuals will train, coach, and mentor POE personnel at POEs to facilitate the transfer of POE operations to complete Iraqi control.  Teams will be assigned to specific border areas and work with Multi-National Corps-Iraq (MNC-I).  5.  (SBU) AIR POE REQUIREMENTS: One CBP team composed of 2 specialists with experience in international airport operations, passenger processing, immigration and customs processing and inspections, cargo examination, and aircraft inspections. The team should include a subject matter expert in visas, passport control, and detecting fraudulent travel documents. These specialists will train Iraqi personnel in primary and secondary inspection techniques, to include interviewing skills and the use of databases to query suspected travelers at the international airports within Iraq.  6.  (SBU) NATIONAL OR REGIONAL ACADEMIES: One 2-person CBP team assigned to an academy.  The team will conduct train-the-trainer courses (T3) and provide oversight of Iraqi instructors and courses to include POE basic and advanced individual training and junior and mid-level leadership training.  Additionally, the team will assist in curriculum development and course instruction for other critical POE tasks.  The team will initially be assigned to the Basrah Academy.  7.  (SBU) CPATT PLANNERS: One 2-person DHS team assigned to Civilian Police Assistance Training Teams (CPATT) Headquarters.  The team requires extensive experience in working POE-related joint interagency operations. This team requires experience in port operations and management, policy development, identifying complex issues, developing solutions,  BAGHDAD 00000511  002 OF 003   briefing recommended solutions to senior leaders, and implementing the senior leader decisions.  The team requires expertise primarily in sea and land POEs. The team members will be expected to visit Iraqi ports of entry as required, and in conjunction with CPATT leader assessment visits.  The team will assist in assessing the ports, developing plans for the port way ahead, and assisting in implementing the way ahead plans.  The CBP team members may be expected to visit the Directorate of Border Enforcement (DBE) and POE Academies to assist in the development and implementation of instruction.  8.  (SBU) COMMAND RELATIONSHIPS: To support unity of command, the CBP Teams will be ADCON to the DHS Country Director, and may be detailed out or assigned as OPCON to MNSTC-I and on order TACON to selected MNC-I Multinational Divisions (MND) for specific missions or time periods.  The command relationship agreement will be defined in detail in a future MNSTC- I / DHS Memorandum of Understanding that is currently being staffed between the two commands.  ----------------------------- SPECIFIC CY 2006 REQUIREMENTS -----------------------------  9. (SBU) Requirements for CY 2006: 18 total positions. Request DHS ensure total number of specialists in country remains constant at all times.  A separate memorandum of understanding is being staffed at this time outlining specific tasks and command and control relations for the teams.  In accordance with that MOD, teams could be re-missioned based on critical needs. For the January 2006 start point the teams will be staffed and positioned as specified below:  -- 12 positions for land POEs: (three 4-person teams, one each TACON to MND-W and MND-N, to provide coverage to the Syrian, Jordanian, and Iranian borders in coordination with MND operations; and one TACON to MND-SE and, on order, MND-CS, to provide coverage to the Iranian border;  -- 2 positions for air POEs: (one 2-person team to provide coverage at BIAP, with possible rotations to other international airports as necessary);  -- 2 positions for academies: (one 2-person team to assist in program of instruction development and instruction at an academy, with possible future rotations to the other two Regional Academies as necessary);  -- 2 positions for CPATT headquarters: (one 2-person team to provide POE expertise for land and sea POEs at CPATT HQ. This team will complete at a minimum a 120- day rotation).  ------- FUNDING -------  10. (SBU) MNSTC-I currently provides funding for 16 CBP positions covering the next two rotations: January 9 to April 9 and April 9 to July 9, 2006.  MNSTC-I requires a detailed accounting of all expenses that are covered by the MNSTC-I funding no later than the end date of each 90-day rotation. Next rotation end date is April 9, 2006. The current funding provided to DHS includes the two additional positions in support of CPATT HQ which have yet to be filled. MNSTC-I understands that DHS will recruit these two individuals and deploy them to MNSTC-I as soon as possible. MNSTC-I does not provide funding for any DHS positions in support of the U.S. Embassy and its mission.  ------------------- FUTURE REQUIREMENTS -------------------  11.  (SBU) The above are validated requirements for DHS support through June 2006.  No later than March 10, MNSTC-I will determine if this initiative needs to  BAGHDAD 00000511  003 OF 003   continue beyond June. If so, a subsequent DHS support and funding request will be provided at that time to continue the force rotation.  --------------- DESIRED OUTCOME ----------------  12.  (SBU) The desired outcome of this initiative is POEs that are "able to disrupt cross-border support to insurgents and terrorists with no support from coalition forces transition teams and enablers resulting in the reduced flow of foreign fighters and enemy financial resources crossing the Syrian border" (Annex C to MNSTC-I FRAGO 05-115). Meanwhile, POEs are internally synchronized with realistic administrative procedures, operating procedures that conform to the law, technology, adequate organizational structure, trained and equipped manpower, and modem facilities. A sustainable national training system is in place that supports the professionalism of POE management and leadership.  ---------- CONCLUSION ----------  13. (SBU) DHS personnel are valuable partners to MNF-I as the Iraqi government accomplishes the difficult tasks of refining customs and immigration laws, developing policies and procedures, and building capabilities in an undeveloped part of its government apparatus.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000515  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2011 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KCOR, KDEM, KWMN, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI ISLAMIC PARTY WOMEN'S RIGHTS ACTIVISTS STRESS CONCERNS OVER CORRUPTION AND DETAINEES  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1.  (C) Summary.  Maysoon Ahmad Bekr, head of women's programs for the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP), and Shatha Abd al-Razzak, IIP member of the Council of Representatives from Salah al-Din province and a member of the Iraq's Promise (Ahad al-Iraq) movement, told Poloff February 16 that the IIP women's program office is concerned about preserving existing protections for women's rights through implementing legislation under the new Iraqi constitution.  This office and the human rights office of the IIP are also concerned about helping women whose male relatives have been detained by government and Coalition forces.  They noted that such detentions are having a devastating effect on families, and the Ministry of Interior is not cooperating in locating those who are "missing."  Bekr and Razzak also expressed concern about increasing corruption in Iraqi society, and reacted positively to Poloff's suggestion that the Council of Representatives would have the right under the constitution and principles of democracy to demand of the executive branch openness, transparency and accountability in government budgeting and contracting decisions.  End summary.  2.  (C) Maysoon Ahmad Bekr, head of women's programs for the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP), and Shatha Abd al-Razzak, IIP member of the Council of Representatives (CoR) from Salah al-Din province and a member of the Iraq's Promise (Ahad al-Iraq) movement, told Poloff February 16 that the IIP women's program office is concerned about preserving existing protections for women's rights through implementing legislation under the new Iraqi constitution.  Razzak and Bekr (who said she was likely to become a member of the CoR if other IIP members became cabinet officials) said that they did not speak for the IIP, but only for themselves.  Razzak said that existing Iraqi personal status law was satisfactory in providing, for example, for civil courts to resolve family law disputes.  They said they would propose minor changes to it, but nothing significant.  They argued that if people wanted to avail themselves of religious courts to resolve such disputes, that should be up to the couple in question. They suggested that the judge performing a civil wedding could ask the couple whether the marriage would be governed by civil law, Sunni religious law, or Shia religious law.  3.  (C) Razzak described how Iraqi child custody laws worked in practice.  As a general proposition, a child over the age of 10 years can offer an opinion whether to live with the father or the mother -- sometimes, the child will express a preference to live with a grandparent.  Custody of a child under the age of 10 is presumptively with the mother, if she wants custody.  Iraqi law gives the mother the right to stay in the family home for three years after a divorce, even if the father must pay rent on the house in the meantime.  This is considered an improvement over the minimal standards in Islamic law, Razzak said, which provides for only three months' maintenance and hopes that the couple will reconcile during that period.  ------------------------------ CONCERN OVER MISSING DETAINEES ------------------------------  4.  (C) Razzak and Bekr said that while the IIP runs a full range of women's programs, including courses on how to use computers, sewing and other skills; cultural programs and educational programs, a program getting increasing resources -- "90 percent of time in (party) headquarters" -- is helping women whose male relatives have been detained.  They said that most complaints now concern detention by Iraqi forces, not the Coalition.  Detention of the male breadwinner of a family often has devastating consequences on female relatives and children who may be dependent on the man for an income. Most complaints -- 80 percent, Bekr said -- concern the detention of a husband or a son.  They try to make sure "no woman leaves IIP headquarters unhappy," but financial support is relatively rare.  Most of the time information and an assurance that someone will look into the matter is what the women crave the most.  5.  (C) Razzak and Bekr said that the IIP gets information from women on the time and place of the detention, and a description of the people making the arrest.  They then try through political connections to find out what happened, but are unsuccessful more often than not.  "The police are not giving out information about detainees," Bekr said.  "People are starting to be desperate about not knowing the whereabouts of their men."  6.  (C) The result of the failure of the police to give basic  BAGHDAD 00000515  002 OF 002   information on the whereabouts of those detained is causing neighborhoods to polarize, with Sunni neighborhoods in Baghdad beginning to look to their own neighborhood militias to provide security that keeps out other security, i.e., the Iraqi police.  "My hope is we never reach a situation like Beirut, when neighborhoods are separated," said Bekr.  ------------------------- TRANSPARENCY IN BUDGETING -------------------------  7.  (C) Asked what they thought should be among the priorities for the CoR after government formation is settled, Razzak jumped on the issue of corruption.  "The budget should be transparent," she said, noting that right now, virtually no one -- beyond a small handful of top officials -- knows how much the government really receives, from where, and how the money is actually spent.  The average Iraqi does not know what is going on, but assumes those at the top are enriching themselves through corruption.  8.  (C) Poloff responded by pointing out that in a democracy, the executive branch is subject to the power of the legislative branch to demand an accounting of government receipts and expenditures.  In democracies that produce significant amounts of oil and gas, for example, information about reserves, production, revenues and contracting is considered public information.  The issue of openness and transparency in government budgeting and expenditure is one in which reform-minded parliamentarians may find themselves working across ethnic and sectarian lines.  CoR member-elect Razzak was interested in learning more about how she, as a parliamentarian, could become an effective advocate for greater openness and transparency in Iraqi government budgeting, contracting and expenditure.  ------- COMMENT -------  9.  (C) Comment.  Bekr, as the more senior of the two IIP women activists, manages overall IIP women's programs, and is interested in the concerns of the women who come to the IIP for help, no matter what the issue.  Razzak is one of the more promising politicians of the "next generation" in the IIP.  She expressed readiness to listen and to learn.  No woman in a party like the IIP whose roots are in the Muslim Brotherhood will have much clout today, but if her willingness to speak out continues and can be supported, she may become a force to be reckoned with.  We are hopeful that her interest in learning about how to more effectively advocate for budget transparency will be echoed by other parliamentarians.  We will pursue efforts to assist Iraqi politicians and legislators in understanding the political economy of Iraq and the effect that public integrity can have in advancing democracy and Iraq's economic development.  End comment. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000516  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2036 TAGS: PREL, ECON, KCOR, IZ SUBJECT: FORMER EXILE IRAQI BUSINESSMAN DESCRIBES CHALLENGES OF DOING BUSINESS IN BAGHDAD AND PRAISES RECENT EMBASSY PUBLIC AFFAIRS EFFORTS  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1.  (C) Summary.  Former exile Iraqi businessman Muhanned Eshaiker, cousin to Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari, described the challenges of doing business in Baghdad:  when and whether to pay bribes, the difficulty of finding qualified, energetic professional workers, and keeping up with the political gossip.  Eshaiker praised recent Embassy public affairs efforts to convey USG views to the Iraqi people via television, and encouraged U.S. officials to maximize visibility on Iraqi television talking to the Iraqi people. End summary.  2.  (U) Muhanned al-Eshaiker, cousin to Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari al-Eshaiker, gave Poloffs a slice of life in Baghdad business circles.  Eshaiker was a prominent leader of the Shia-American community in Southern California before the liberation, and was a leader of the Iraqi Forum for Democracy, a grass-roots Iraqi-American advocacy organization.  After the liberation, he worked briefly for a contractor, but then opted to go into the construction business in Baghdad.  His firm has won subcontracts from USG and Iraqi firms.  ----------------------------------------- BRIBERY AS A FACT OF LIFE FOR MOST IRAQIS -----------------------------------------  3.  (C) Eshaiker recently moved back into his family's house in central Baghdad after having lived since the liberation in a rented house elsewhere in the city.  He said that his family home had been lived-in for more than 10 years by someone associated with Saddam's security services, who demanded payment from Eshaiker to leave the house in which he was illegally squatting.  The courts were not a feasible option, Eshaiker said, because bribes are routinely required in property dispute cases.  In addition to the cost of bribing the judge, the police would not evict a squatter without being paid further bribes, so it was simpler and no more expensive to pay the squatter 5,000 USD to leave, which he did.  Eshaiker did not receive any rent on the property from his squatter.  He described his experience as typical, in that local businessmen cannot rely on the courts to settle property and contract claims fairly or promptly.  ------------------------- GOOD HELP IS HARD TO FIND -------------------------  4.  (C) Despite high unemployment in the country as a whole, Iraqi businesses like his face real problems in getting good help to work for them, Eshaiker says.  He recently needed three engineers to work on a contract, and offered 1,000 USD a month -- a generous salary by Iraqi standards.  However, the applicant pool was either (a) young, with computer skills, but lacking in professional experience, or (b) older, lacking computer skills, lacking in a solid work ethic, and "self-defeated" by growing up during wars and uprisings under Saddam Hussein.  He particularly criticized Iraqis in the 38-42 year-old age range (i.e., born 1964-1968) as having "lost interest in their lives."  He was impressed with the younger generation of Iraqis, who grew up in an Iraq without personal computers but had caught up quickly in the use of technology since the liberation.  He said he has no trouble hiring young Iraqis who are self-taught in Microsoft Word, Excel and PowerPoint, essential tools in a professional engineering firm like his.  5.  (C) Since his cousin PM Jafari's selection as the nominee of the United Iraqi Coalition (UIC), Eshaiker says he has been receiving numerous requests from potential job-seekers wanting jobs in the government.  He has been disappointed that many of these people do not have the requisite skills or expertise that the Iraqi government needs, and most are not willing to work hard.  This culture of job-seekers in Iraq needs to change, he said.  ------------------------------------ EMBASSY PUBLIC AFFAIRS SUCCESS STORY ------------------------------------  6.  (SBU) Eshaiker praised recent Embassy public affairs efforts in which Americans talk directly to the Iraqi people.  He described a recent television interview in which an Arabic-speaking Embassy official was asked why the United States was talking to the insurgents.  The official explained cogently that the United States talks to everyone in Iraq, and when the interviewer asked if the United States was  BAGHDAD 00000516  002 OF 002   trying to bring back the Ba'th party, the official made a forceful presentation that the Ba'th were never coming back. This kind of outreach and clarity is effective with the Iraqi people, Eshaiker said, because they will believe messages from American officials directly.  It does not matter as much if American officials do not speak Arabic -- voiceover translation is effective, he said -- but American officials need to be more visible on Iraqi television talking to the Iraqi people.  ----------------------------------- IRAQI POLITICS AS THE PEOPLE SEE IT -----------------------------------  7.  (C) The Iraqi people, Eshaiker said, now want a strong government even more than they want a democratic government. Chaos and corruption were increasing, he said.  Electricity, fuel and jobs top the list of Iraqis' needs, though the water supply is doing better.  Iraqi politics has become very difficult, he said, and he did not regret going into business rather than going into politics in Iraq after the liberation.  8.  (C) Eshaiker, who is Shia, said that one of the most decisive events in the electoral campaign was the apparently inadvertent appearance on Al-Jazeera of a Palestinian critic of the Shia, who had appeared along with an Iraqi Shia.  The Palestinian said the Shia were backwards, and criticized Grand Ayatollah 'Ali al-Sistani.  This had caused the Shia participant to become outraged on the air, and this, in turn, outraged the people.  Riots ensued.  "It was as if people were saying, 'You insult our Sistani, so we are going to vote for 555.'"  9.  (C) Another pivotal campaign event in Eshaiker's view was an interview given by Ammar al-Hakim, son of 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Hakim of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI) in which he used rhetorical devices such as saying that because Grand Ayatollah 'Ali al-Sistani had endorsed the United Iraqi Coalition (UIC) when they were list number 169 in the January campaign, this meant he endorsed the UIC when they were list 555 in the December campaign. Eshaiker said that people believed this false claim because there was nobody effectively countering Hakim's message.  -------------------- HIGH SCHOOL MEMORIES --------------------  10.  (C) Eshaiker, a graduate of Baghdad College, a Jesuit-run high school famous for many other illustrious alumni, including former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, Deputy Prime Minister Ahmad Chalabi, and Vice President Adil Abd al-Mahdi, offered up stories about a classmate:  Mithal al-Aloosi, elected in December to the Council of Representatives from Baghdad.  Aloosi, who was for a time the head of the Supreme De-Ba'thification Commission, was at one time a Ba'thist himself, Eshaiker said.  Eshaiker claimed that when the Jesuit fathers were kicked out of Baghdad college after the Ba'thists took power in 1968, Aloosi's father was put in charge of the high school.  Eshaiker said that Mithal al-Aloosi started a chapter of the Ba'th party in the school, visibly carried a gun, and threw his father's political weight around.  In the 1969 student body election, a number of "parties" ran for student government positions. Lists of candidates were posted on a wall in the school. Eshaiker said that Aloosi and his party tore down all the other party lists, then claimed that only one party was running -- his -- and therefore claimed victory in the election.  Eshaiker said he was not, therefore, surprised at the non-transparent way in which Aloosi handled the work of the De-Ba'thification Commission. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000517  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: KIU OFFICIALS SAY THEY,RE JOINING KURDISTAN ALLIANCE  REF: A. BAGHDAD 4892      B. BAGHDAD 4924      C. KIRKUK 21  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  During a February 15 meeting, Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU) head Salah ad-Din Baha al-Din informed Ambassador that the KIU decided to join the Kurdistan Alliance (KA) after weeks of pressure from the two main parties, the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK).  Baha al-Din said, however, that the KIU had conditions: a name change from Kurdistan Alliance to "Kurdistan Bloc"; addressing the issues of human rights and corruption in Kurdistan; a role in government formation negotiations; and one national ministry, among other things. The merger would boost the Kurdish Alliance group in the parliament from 53 to 58 seats, and, in theory, could enable the Shia Islamist Coalition to cut a separate deal with the Kurds to form the government without the Sunni Arabs.  So far, however, that does not appear to be the motive.  END SUMMARY.  --------------- We Will Join KA ---------------  2. (C) During a February 15 meeting, KIU head Baha al-Din informed Ambassador that the KIU decided to join the KA after weeks of pressure from the two main parties, the KDP and the PUK.  Baha al-Din said that the KIU originally had decided to run as an independent party to protest the corrupt and undemocratic practices of the Kurdistan Regional Government in Sulymaniyah.  The two main parties' revenge for this action, he added, was swift and deadly.  (NOTE: This was a reference to the attack on six KIU offices across the north, allegedly by Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG)-affiliated officers (reftels A and B).  A committee formed in the aftermath of the attacks was slow to investigate.  The KIU primarily is interested in justice for its slain officials, but Baha al-Din claimed that because Kurdish government officials are linked to the deaths the committee has made no progress (see reftel C).  END NOTE.)  3. (C) The KA was surprised that after all the violence, the KIU did well enough in the national elections to win 5 seats in the Council of Representatives (COR), continued Baha al-Din.  The KA, he explained, is trying to downplay the implications of that victory by co-opting the KIU into the ranks of the KA again.  The KIU, however, had some conditions:  --  The name of the Kurdistan Alliance should be changed to "Kurdistan Bloc" to placate the KIU's supporters.  (NOTE: The old term "alliance" in Arabic indicates a complete integration of all the members; "bloc," on the other hand, signals that all the components in the bloc retain their own separate identities.  This distinction allows the KIU to save face with its constituents as it can say publicly that it had retained some independence.  END NOTE.)  --  KIU will vote with the KA in the new parliament on issues of common interests to Kurds.  --  The KIU would continue to support the idea of an Islamic identity in accordance with the dictates of the Constitution.  --  Iraq should act a single nation; Kurds are not independent and seeking such independence harms the country as a whole.  --  Other countries need to understand Islam and KIU's peaceful interpretation of it, which wholly rejects terrorism in the name of Islam.  Separately, Baha al-Din reported that the KIU had some conditions for within Kurdistan as well:  --  The two key issues of human rights and corruption should be addressed (see septel);  --  KIU also is demanding a deputy leadership role in the new KA, 10 percent representation in everything else, a role in government formation negotiations, Secretary of the Kurdish National Assembly, increased funding, three KRG ministry positions, and one national ministry.  4. (C) While the KIU wishes to stay independent, the KA is threatening to withhold KRG ministerial positions and material support to the KIU if they do not join with the KA nationally.  Of all the demands, Baha al-Din stated, the most  BAGHDAD 00000517  002 OF 002   crucial was the name change from Kurdistan Alliance to Kurdistan Bloc, for which the KIU gave up its claim to ministries.  (COMMENT: Baha al-Din's stress on the name change suggests that the KIU is well aware that none of its other demands are likely to be met.  END COMMENT.)  -------------------- Government Formation --------------------  5. (C) Ambassador inquired whether the KIU is satisfied with the Shia Coalition's re-nomination of incumbent Prime Minister Ja'afari.  Baha al-Din replied that, although the KIU did not have a finger in this pie, it is clear that only half of the Shia Coalition selected Ja'afari.  Still, Baha al-Din asserted, this was a democratic mechanism and the KIU is satisfied with the result despite the objections over Ja'afari's past performance in the position.  It is the fate of the Iraqis, Baha al-Din lamented, to be constantly amid ongoing negotiations; but, he noted, at least there are no tanks on the street enforcing these decisions.  However, he concluded that because Ja'afari was not the overwhelming choice and he has clear debts to other groups, it is difficult to predict how the total ministerial package will look.  ------- Comment -------  6. (C) COMMENT: The KIU claims that it will withdraw if all its conditions are not met, but it is doubtful that they will have the capacity to demand anything.  One KIU member told PolOff on February 16 that the KIU has not yet been able even to reach the KA to inform it of KIU's decision to join.  As the KIU delegation was leaving, Baha al-Din said that the KIU does not wish to disappear within the Alliance.  When PolOff noted that it would be difficult in an unsettled Iraq for any third party to emerge in Kurdistan, Baha al-Din replied that the KIU is looking at the long term.  If the merger goes through, the addition of five KIU seats will boost the KA group to 58 seats.  This total could enable the Shia Islamist Coalition to cut a separate deal with the Kurds without the Sunni Arabs.  We have no indication that the Kurds or the Shia are planning that now.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000518  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: JAFARI DISDAINS "BACKROOM CONVERSATIONS" ON PM MACHINATIONS  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) In a February 18 meeting with Ambassador, Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari agreed that the pace of government formation is too slow and lamented the absence of a set negotiating mechanism.  When asked about his approach for securing his own premiership by a two-thirds vote in the Council of Representatives (CoR), Jafari answered that the democratic process had won him the PM nomination and that the Iraqi people will insist on democracy and the constitutional process.  2. (C) Jafari dismissed the machinations of other Shia coalition politicians (such as Fadhila's Nadim al-Jabiri and SCIRI) and outside coalitions to secure enough CoR votes to select a different PM.  He denounced these "backroom conversations" as disrespectful of democracy.  Jafari told Ambassador that "there is great fear in the hearts of Iraqis that some politicians are attempting to bypass democracy." Although Jafari acknowledged the need for a unity government and the role of the four negotiating groups, he rejected the proposed national security council, claiming that it would defy the constitution and usurp power from the CoR and PM. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000519  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2016 TAGS: ECON, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: COUNCIL OF MINISTERS SYG REQUESTS USG HELP TO HIRE TECHNOCRATS  REF: BAGHDAD 444  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (S) SUMMARY: On February 13, the day after the United Iraqi Coalition (UIC) nominated Ibrahim Jafari for Prime Minister, Council of Ministers Secretary-General (SYG) Emad Dhia al-Khirsan told PolOffs that Jafari knows there were weaknesses in his administration.  Dhia said that he is trying to find ways to strengthen the office of the PM by strengthening the capacity of the Council of Ministers Secretariat (CoMSec).  He asked the USG to fund a program by  SIPDIS which Iraqi-American technocrats would work in the CoMSec's office to assist the PM in working effectively with the Iraqi ministries.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (S) On February 13, Council of Ministers Secretary-General (SYG) Emad Dhia al-Khirsan told PolOffs  SIPDIS that Jafari recognizes weaknesses in his administration. Dhia, who was head of the CPA Iraqi Reconstruction and Development Council (IRDC), described how he had been recruited by PM Jafari as an economic adviser.  Dhia was one many Iraqi-Americans who served in PM Jafari's office, and he implied that he helped balance out Dawa loyalists like Jawad al-Malaki and 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Tamimi -- who Dhia said had served with Jafari since opposition days and whose loyalty Jafari valued, but who did not have sufficient experience in management.  Dhia said he also believes that Iraq needs a change in its governmental culture and that efficient and effective ministries are a key to success in Iraq both for Iraqi and for U.S. interests.  Such a change will take years, he said, and needs to start with an infusion of the right kind of expertise.  3.  (C) Dhia asked the USG to fund Iraqi-American professionals to come to work in the PM's office.  Dhia also referred to the Iraqi Reconstruction and Development Council (IRDC) as an example of how Iraqi-Americans could improve organizational culture and capacity in Iraqi ministries. Dhia said he regards it as essential that the people brought in be fluent in Arabic, that they have practical professional or business experience in their areas of specialty, and that their heritage be Iraqi (since other Arabic nationalities would raise political sensitivities for the GOI).  Initially, Dhia explained, about four or five Iraqi-Americans would be responsible for coordinating with three or four ministries each.  He said he would like to see the program expand, if resources are available, in order to have one Iraqi-American in the PM's office responsible for tracking the work of each ministry.  4.  (C) Dhia said he is requesting USG funding for the program because he does not believe the GOI could afford to hire Iraqi-Americans to work in Iraq.  Dhia revealed that he was offered a salary of 1500 USD per month to be one of PM Jafari's top advisers -- generous by Iraqi standards (Iraqi university professors earn 600 USD a month).  Dhia said that health insurance alone for his family in the United States is 1200 USD per month, and therefore works pro bono and is selling off his personal property in the United States to fund his service in Iraq.  From his IRDC and Future of Iraq experience, Dhia said he knows that the USG could pay Iraqi-Americans at a rate of around 120,000 USD to 130,000 USD per year, as was done by the IRDC.  Dhia offered to find housing in the International Zone for up to 40 people working under this program.  (NOTE: Dhia's position as Council of Ministers SYG is colloquially referred to by many as the Mayor of the Green Zone.  END NOTE.)  Dhia noted that he does not envision a large support base for this operation, hinting that he has specific people in mind whom he would like to hire.  Poloffs told Dhia that resources are an obvious concern and that this idea deserved further study.  6.  (S) COMMENT: Jafari may be the leading candidate for PM, but he does not have the job yet.  It is noteworthy that key aides such as Dhia are thinking of ways to improve the professionalism of the PM's office.  Dhia and other Western-oriented aides to Jafari are not the only ones competing for Jafari's ear.  If Jafari stays on as PM, he will need all the help the USG can give him -- in which case we would want to be in a position to support the effort to improve the quality of his staff.  Indeed, we should move immediately to have a program ready to implement irrespective of who emerges as PM, on the assumption that it will be somebody with whom we can work.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000534  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: SADRISTS EXTEND HAND AS PLOT AGAINST JAFARI DEVELOPS   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (S) SUMMARY: A Sadrist leader presented a flexible approach to government negotiations in a February 19 conversation with the Ambassador, but, in a subsequent meeting, Ayad Allawi and Kurdistan President Masud Barzani made clear that they want to continue to develop plans to upend Jafari's nomination.  The Sadrist official, Baha al-Araji, told the Ambassador that his group has no red line against Allawi, prefers technocrats in the cabinet, and would even accept a national security council provided it is consultative and has no executive authority.  At a subsequent meeting the same day with the Ambassador, Allawi and Barzani told the Ambassador that they find those offers unconvincing.  They said they plan to decide names of alternate candidates for the top government posts in consultation with SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim.  Hakim, Allawi said, promised him that he would cooperate in private to forge an alternative government.  In a separate later meeting with the Ambassador, Tawafuq leader Khalaf al-Ayan said he is ready for an alliance with SCIRI but concerned that ongoing disputes over de-Ba'athification, federalism, and the constitution might make that impossible. END SUMMARY.  ----------------------------- Softer Line from the Sadrists -----------------------------  2. (C) In a February 19 meeting with Ambassador, Sadrist negotiator Baha al-Araji dismissed the current hardline Shia coalition stance on government formation as merely a negotiating tactic.  Araji said he objects to Allawi because Allawi waged a war against the Mahdi Army and allegedly was personally responsible for the destruction of Araji's house and the arrest of his brother.  Araji further explained that the Sadrists are objecting to a national security council because it would appear to undermine Iraq's democratic institutions.  Araji said the Sadrists also are driven by a fear that growing Kurdish power in the central government and in Kurdistan could lead to secession.  The Sadrists see flaws in Jafari's management but are confident in his piety and morality, Araji said.  Adil Abd al-Mahdi, Araji contrasted, is a fine man crippled by a subservient relationship with SCIRI and a potentially treacherous partnership with the Kurds.  3. (S) Ambassador warned that a Sadrist hardline stance could alienate the groups outside the Shia coalition and drive them to nominate a prime ministerial candidate of their own.  That prospect seemed to moderate Araji's tone.  He subsequently said that the Sadrists support a Sunni Arab for the presidency but would understand if Talabani had to stay. Araji then said he could see working "hand-in-hand" with Allawi if Iraq needs it.  The Sadrists even would support a national security council if it were labeled "consultative" or "coordinating," Araji added.  The Sadrists want a technocratic cabinet, he continued, even if it means the rise of ministers from outside their ranks.  According to Araji, the Sadrists want an independent body to study hiring practices in the Ministries of Interior and Defense because SCIRI members had been promoted extensively while Sadrists had been left behind.  --------------------------- Building Bridges to Muqtada ---------------------------  4. (S) Ambassador asserted that a letter expressing those positions would build bridges and speed up the negotiations, and Araji pledged to draft one and supply a copy to the USG within the next few days.  Araji said the Sadrists would moderate their politics if other Iraqi parties work to bring them in rather than keep them out.  The 30 Sadrists in parliament, Araji suggested, ought to be used as guarantors for 10 detainees each, allowing the Coalition to free some 300 Sadrists now in MNF-I custody.  5. (C) Araji denied that the Sadrists have any link to advanced weapons being used in Iraq, describing the Mahdi Army as an employment project more than a militia.  He alleged that other groups put on the traditional all-black Mahdi Army garb and carry out attacks to divert the blame to the Sadrists.  "Give me 200,000 jobs and I'll end this thing you call the Mahdi Army," he said.  Araji denied allegations that the Sadrists are tied to Iran or are running sharia courts in Baghdad.  According to Araji, the late Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr was never linked to Hizballah or Khamenei. Sharia courts are a vestige of religious expression from a time of religious persecution during the Saddam era, and Muqtada has banned their use now, Araji claimed.  When word  BAGHDAD 00000534  002 OF 002   reached Muqtada of one such court, Araji said (apparently trying to be reassuring), Muqtada threatened to shut it down or kill the "court officials" if they resist.  --------------------------------------------- -------------- Allawi and Barzani Work to Draw SCIRI Out of Iran's Embrace --------------------------------------------- --------------  6. (C) At a separate February 19 meeting with the Ambassador, Allawi and Barzani continued discussions aimed at keeping the Sadrists out of positions of influence in Iraq's next government.  Both insisted that the Sadrists are a weapon in the hands of the Iranians.  Allawi said SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim had told him in a lengthy 3-hour conversation the previous day that Iran appears to be changing course in Iraq.  Allawi said Hakim now feels threatened by Iran and does not even trust his own staff on the subject, at one point dismissing his guards from the room during the conversation because of doubts about their loyalty.  According to Allawi, Hakim might be ready to shift his loyalties to the U.S. but doubts the U.S. commitment to his group and needs to find a way to build his position regionally.  Sadr's recent trip across the Middle East demonstrated an emerging effort to upstage and then crush SCIRI, Hakim reportedly assessed.  Allawi said that even with these fears, Hakim wondered whether the U.S. also might be behind such a conspiracy against his group, and he does not want to risk dropping Iranian backing and accepting U.S. support only to find himself abandoned "in the middle of the road."  Allawi said he told Hakim that he would work to strengthen SCIRI with the Saudis and the UAE.  7. (S) Barzani, who planned a separate meeting with Hakim, told the Ambassador that, once the Sadrists are in power, they are sure to turn on the Hakim family to settle the long-running competition between them for authority in Najaf.  Barzani said he would expect the Sadrists to pursue that goal ruthlessly, even by wiping out Hakim's children. Barzani said Hakim knows the magnitude of the threat and needs to be helped out of his rut.  The problem, Barzani said, is that the Badr Organization is more directly tied to Iran than SCIRI, and Hakim may not be able to trust that entire half of his parliamentary bloc.  Both men assessed that Hakim would not break the Shia coalition since after all he was its leader.  They decided instead to work with him in private in the coming days to settle on a menu of nominees for all top government jobs.  They planned to compare notes again at Talabani's residence on February 20.  8. (S) In a separate later meeting with the Ambassador, Tawafuq leader Khalaf al-Ayan said that he is ready for an alliance with SCIRI but is concerned that ongoing disputes over de-Ba'athification, federalism, and the constitution might make that impossible.  Ambassador told him that Hakim might prove more ready to work out compromises on these issues than expected and urged al-Ayan to seek out common ground.  Al-Ayan said he fully supports the idea of a National Salvation Front and does not seek a set number of ministries for the Tawafuq Front.  If all sides can agree on the right programs and principles, Al-Ayan said, he thinks a unity government will be achievable. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000537  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KJUS, KCRM, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: TRIAL OF SADDAM HUSSEIN - SESSIONS 11 AND 12   Classified By: DCM David M. Satterfield for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.  (S) SUMMARY: The eleventh and twelfth sessions of the Ad Dujayl trial continued with witness testimony and minimal difficulties related to the defendants' previous refusal to attend trial.  The Court now has received evidence from all but one witness.  In a surprise move, however, the Chief Judge recessed the court for two weeks until February 28. The next steps now require that additional testimony be taken and that the Court introduce documentary evidence prior to the judges drafting the final list of charges.  Saddam Hussein continues his hunger strike, but the on-site physician reports that his health is not in danger at this point.  MNF-I, which has responsibility for Saddam's medical care, has indicated that, if necessary, it will begin involuntary feeding.  If needed, the Regime Crimes Liaison Office (RCLO) will seek an order from the Iraqi High Tribunal (IHT) authorizing the forced use of an IV. END SUMMARY.  -------------------- THE ELEVENTH SESSION --------------------  2. (SBU) Just prior to opening the eleventh session of the Iraqi High Tribunal (IHT) on February 13, Judge Raouf Abdul Rahman ordered the detainees to be physically compelled to attend the trial if they refused to return voluntarily. Saddam Hussein was the first to be approached.  Unlike most previous sessions, Hussein refused to change into his signature suit and open collared shirt and opted to remain in the native attire he wears each day.  When the guards arrived at his cell, he put on his coat, picked up an ornate copy of the Koran, and sat back down in protest.  He subsequently was handcuffed and did not physically resist as he was led to the defense's attorney/client meeting room, adjacent to the court chambers.  3.  (SBU) After the movement of Saddam to the courtroom, the other defendants complied without resistance.  The defendants, with the exception of Barzan Al-Tikriti, also remained in native costume and quietly complied with instructions from Iraqi Police, U.S. Military Police, and U.S. Marshal's Service personnel.  Upon his entry into the courtroom, Barzan began to shout at the bench.  He subsequently sat on the floor with his back to the bench, removed his shoes and overtly ignored the proceedings, but the trial continued and he eventually took his seat.  4. (SBU) The presentation of evidence began with the reading into record of 23 previously sworn statements.  This was followed by testimony of the first two of six government witnesses currently held in custody.  Presidential Decree No. 778, which called for the execution in 1982 of 148 primarily Shia townspeople in Ad Dujayl, was entered into evidence. Former Presidential Diwan Director Abdul Tikriti Khudayir, who initially refused to testify, ultimately submitted to questioning regarding his role in channeling information to Saddam.  Khudayir authenticated the signature and handwriting of Saddam Hussein on the Presidential Decree when presented with regime documents by the Chief Prosecutor.  5.  (SBU) Despite attempts by Saddam Hussein, Barzan, and others to impede the trial's progress with disrespectful arguments, outbursts, and other distractions, the Presiding Judge maintained order and asserted Saddam's subordinate status as a defendant and supplicant before the Court.  The Court recessed for the day at 1445 hrs.  ------------------- THE TWELFTH SESSION -------------------  6.  (SBU)   During the twelfth session on February 14, the defendants again attempted to delay the trial.  Unlike the eleventh session, all defendants except Barzan Al-Tikriti dressed for the day and none of them resisted the guards as they were led to the court chambers.  Three additional government witnesses testified about their knowledge of the former regime's response to the assassination attempt on Saddam in Ad Dujayl; however, their testimony was marked by an unwillingness to confirm previous statements made during the investigative phase of the case.  (NOTE: Under Iraqi law, witness statements serve as direct evidence rather than impeachment evidence.  Therefore, when a witness recants or refuses to confirm a sworn statement, it is up to the panel of judges to determine whether the refusal to confirm the statement's contents casts doubt upon the testimony therein. In the current case, judges will consider the witnesses' fear of Saddam, his supporters, and any other intimidation in making this determination.  END NOTE.)   BAGHDAD 00000537  002 OF 003   7.  (SBU) Judge Raouf recessed the trial until February 28 without hearing testimony from the sixth and final government witness, contradicting his previous agreement to adjourn for no more than ten days.  (NOTE: Although present in the courthouse, the final witness -- former Minister of the Interior Sadoon Shakir -- told prosecutors that he would not testify. END NOTE.)  Had the court taken an additional day or two to hear the final witness' testimony and to introduce the documentary evidence, trial could have recessed naturally to draft the formal charges.  Now the Court will assemble for one or two days on February 28 and then adjourn for three to four additional weeks so that the judges can draft the formal charging document.  By then, the Court will have been in session only four out of 60 days.  (COMMENT: This delay may raise the frustrations of the Iraqi people as well as the international perception of ineffectual governance.  END COMMENT.)  --------------------------- SADDAM BEGINS HUNGER STRIKE ---------------------------  8. (U) On February 12, Saddam defense attorney Khalil al-Dulaimi, despite not having visited his client since January 29, stated to the media that Saddam would begin a hunger strike on February 13, the day trial resumed.  Within 45 minutes of this press statement, however, Dulaimi retracted this claim. Attending physicians noted that Saddam first refused food on the evening of February 12.  9. (S) On February 14, Saddam claimed in court that he and his fellow detainees were on a hunger strike.  In fact, only four of the defendants had not eaten that morning: Saddam, Barzan, Taha Ramadan, and Awad Bandar.  Although the other three defendants quickly ended their respective hunger strikes, Saddam has continued with his.  Saddam has stated to MNF-I that he will not end his hunger strike until he is permitted to see his retained attorney and he is returned to his "regular" cell.  (COMMENT: Saddam was visited by his retained attorney on February 20, though not in response to his demands since the visit had been agreed upon regardless of the hunger strike. Previously, Saddam had been held in the same area of the courthouse as his co-defendants while awaiting transfer to the courtroom.  Judge Raouf ordered that Saddam be held separately from his co-defendants while attending court sessions so that he could not communicate and with them.  MNF-I complied with the order, which comported with Iraqi law.  EN D COMMENT.)  10. (S) According to MNF-I, Saddam remains in good health. As of February 20, the on-site physician reported that Saddam is "doing quite well" despite having lost 15 pounds. MNF-I also conducted a modified mental evaluation and determined that he is competent to assess his own actions. Saddam appears intentionally to be drinking more water than he usually does.  Based on these tests, the on-site physician reported on February 17 that Saddam could go a week or more without food before an IV or forced feeding would be ordered.  Should intrusive methods be required, an IV to replace fluids and provide electrolytes would precede any actual forced feeding, which would involve the insertion of a feeding tube through the nose or surgically to the stomach.  A nose tube would be good for approximately one week, then a surgical tube would need to be inserted.  Saddam is examined twice daily by the physician, who will conduct lab tests every two days.  MNF-I re-assesses the situation each evening. To date, on-site physicians have not ordered an IV or forced feeding.  Saddam has stated that he does not object to an IV, but the feeding tube has not been discussed with him.  11. (S) Pursuant to the Memorandum of Agreement between MNF-I and the Ministry of Justice, the Iraqis have legal custody of Saddam and MNF-I has physical custody.  MNF-I is responsible for providing medical care and monitoring Saddam's physical and mental well-being.  MNF-I interprets the medical care to include potential forced feeding.  MNF-I also has determined that involuntary feeding to prevent the loss of life of a detainee is consistent with DOD policy and U.S. law. Moreover, regardless of necessity RCLO has obtained a broad order from the IHT requesting that MNF-I take all the required steps to preserve the detainees' lives and health.  --------------------------------- THE COURT UNDER CHIEF JUDGE RAOUF ---------------------------------  12.  (SBU) COMMENT: Judge Raouf has introduced more order, decorum, and discipline into the proceedings.  Having established order, he now is permitting the defendants some more leeway in addressing the court.  Although the  BAGHDAD 00000537  003 OF 003   defendants, particularly Saddam Hussein and Barzan Al-Tikriti, have continued to attack Judge Raouf and the methods he uses to control the courtroom, the level of rhetoric has been reduced.  One danger in Judge Raouf's approach, however, is that public opinion may conclude that he has a preformed opinion regarding Saddam's guilt.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000544  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: GROUPS OUTSIDE SHIA COALITION START WORK ON ALTERNATIVE PLATFORM   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (S) In an evening meeting on February 20 at President Talabani's residence, leaders of the Kurdistan Alliance, Tawafuq Front, and the Allawi list agreed to accelerate the government formation process and to calm the tense Iraqi public.  Ambassador attended the meeting, which included a readout by Kurdistan President Masud Barzani on that day's meeting with Hakim.  The meeting ended with agreement on a four-point agenda:  -- ONE: Talabani will issue a presidential statement urging restraint by the Iraqi security services and a halt to night-time raids without judicial orders.  -- TWO: Representatives of all three lists will meet at Ayad Allawi's house February 21 to draft a detailed version of the Salah al-Din Principles suitable for airing to the public as the platform of a National Salvation Front.  -- THREE: The Kurdistan Alliance will demand that all future negotiating sessions with the Shia coalition include representatives from the Tawafuq and Allawi lists.  Kurdish negotiator Mahmud Othman predicted that this demand could end the talks with the Jafari group.  -- FOUR:  The groups will work to determine a date for convening the Council of Representatives as soon as possible.  2. (S) As the meeting closed, all agreed that it is likely that the Kurdistan Alliance ultimately would offer the National Salvation Front as its own initiative and call other sides to join it.  The leaders also agreed to intensify discussions over candidates for the key positions in the next government.  Talabani explicitly ruled out Adil Abd al-Mehdi as a candidate for the premiership, saying that he believes Mehdi's re-emergence would cause the Da'wa Party and Sadrists to think the National Salvation Front is nothing more than a plot to reverse the Shia coalition vote. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000548  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2026 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, DA, IZ SUBJECT: DANISH DCM COMMENTS ON CARTOON CONTROVERSY  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Danish DCM Torkild Byg told Poloff February 20 that Denmark is getting mixed signals from the Iraqi Government on whether the Danes are welcome in Iraq in the aftermath of protests over publication of the cartoons depicting the Prophet Mohammed. Foreign Minister Zebari and Defense Minister Dulaymi have both publicly welcomed continued Danish troop and reconstruction presence in Iraq.  However, Sadrist Transportation Minister Selam al-Maliki, has twice called for a boycott of contacts and trade with both Denmark and Norway.  The governors of Basra and Karbala have made similar demands.  Byg told Poloff that the Danish parliamentary mandate for deployment in Iraq expires in June.  The Danish government (which according to Byg has been strengthened by the cartoon controversy) wants to continue the deployment but will not stay if their presence is unwelcome.  2. (C) Byg said that the "struggling" Danish government has closed its embassies and withdrawn all diplomats from Damascus, Beirut, Jakarta, Teheran and Istanbul.  He said that Beirut and Damascus may be closed for a long time.  The boycott of Danish goods by Muslim countries is having an impact though Danish exports to the region (about 2.5% of total Danish exports) are mostly cheese and butter.  He said that the boycott may shave a half percent from Denmark's projected 3% GDP growth for 2006.  He added that the Danes have closed a factory in Saudi Arabia affecting 300 jobs. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000549  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  LONDON FOR ARAB MEDIA UNIT  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, KPAO, KISL, OPRC, IZ SUBJECT:  MUQTADA SADR DEBUTS ON AL-JAZEERA WITH IRAQI NATIONALIST MESSAGE, REJECTING "SECTARIAN" OR "OCCUPATION" FEDERALISM  REF:  (A) OSC GMP20060218564004; (B) OSC GMP20060212522002  1.  (SBU) Summary.  Influential Iraqi politician Moqtada al- Sadr has emerged from relative media obscurity into the regional limelight with extensive travels and a remarkable interview on al-Jazeera on February 18.  During a regional procession that included Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iran, Syria and Jordan (and reportedly stops still planned for Egypt and Lebanon), he has repeatedly called for removal of "occupation" forces from Iraq and said the Sadr Trend has entered a phase of "political engagement" to effect this. He has called for national unity and rejected "sectarian federalism," and notes that the Mahdi Army has evolved from being a "military" to a "cultural" force, even while committing it to defend Iran or Syria if they are attacked. Sadr is praising Hamas and copying the rhetoric of some regional Islamists with promises of improved service to the people.  End Summary. 2.  (U)  Iraqi politician and son of the influential late Ayatollah Mohammed Sadiq al-Sadr made his debut on pan-Arab talk shows with a February 18 appearance on al-Jazeera's "Open Dialog" program with Ghassan bin Jiddu.  The program was rebroadcast on February 19. (Ref A provides further readout). 3.  (U)  Sadr in many ways elaborated on themes he has repeated during regional visits that began with a visit to the funeral of the Kuwaiti Emir in January.  Since then, he has visited Saudi Arabia, Iran, Syria and Jordan.  In both Iran and Syria, he created a stir with comments that the Mahdi Army would protect either of those states in the face of an external attack; he stressed the need for positive relations with both. (Ref B provides readout of the Syrian visit.) Politics and Religion ---------------------  4.  (U)  On Jazeera, Sadr said he does not accept secularism.  However he drew a distinction between religion and politics.  Religion, from God, must include all aspects of life, including politics.  Politics, however, need not include religion.  He reiterated his adherence to the guidance and rulings of Shia marja' Ayatollah Kadhim al- Ha'iri (who lives in Qum, Iran).  He said the Al-Sadr Trend is not a political party and has no political leaders, only religious leaders who aim to establish an Islamic society, to spread Islam among people, not governments.  Sadr Role in Iraq -----------------  5.  (U)  In Syria (on February 13), and again in the Jazeera interview, Sadr outlined three phases of the "Sadrist" evolution:  "peaceful resistance, to help Iraq get rid of the occupation and establish security; military resistance repelling U.S. attacks in the south and the center; and now political resistance."  He told Syrian TV that this resistance should lead to removal of the occupation or a timetable for withdrawal."  He added "the U.S. brought democracy to the Middle East but God turned the tables and made the democratic process a weapon against the U.S., as was the case in Palestine and in Iraq."  6.  (U)  On Jazeera, he was questioned extensively on the role of the Sadr Trend in Iraqi politics.  Sadr refused to be pinned down on whether he would be directing the (thirty- strong) Sadr Trend bloc in parliament.  He said only that Sadrists would represent the people, not a group or person, and their votes would be determined by the needs of the people.  He admitted that the Trend had joined the United Iraqi Coalition (Shia bloc, or UIC), but said Sadr trend parliamentarians "will serve all sides, including Turkmen, Kurds, Sunnis, and Shabak."  7.  (U)  Pressed again on the issue of the UIC's "clearly Shia trappings," Sadr said his bloc would represent anyone "who seeks an independent and stable Iraq."  Indeed, he noted the Sadr Trend would work with anyone but Saddamists and Takfiris.  Sadr confirmed he was talking to Iraqi Sunni political entities (in Jordan, as there was no place in Iraq where the two could safely meet) and advising them to press two key demands:  a just trial of Saddam, and withdrawal of foreign forces.  He lumped Saddamists and Takfiris in with the occupation forces and said the latter "wield a fictitious Zarqawi like a knife or a pistol" as a tool to blame others (Saddmists and takfiris) for crimes they commit themselves.   BAGHDAD 00000549  002 OF 004   Sadr vs. SCIRI --------------  8.  (U)  Sadr told bin Jiddu that his supporters in the UIC voted for [Islamic Da'wa Party] candidate al-Ja'aferi as Prime Minister because Ja'aferi had been responsive to popular demands to release Sadr Trend detainees.  "We are closer to Ja'aferi in addressing popular concerns than to SCIRI nominee Adel Abdul-Mahdi."  (NOTE:  Although Sadr never mentioned SCIRI leader Abdul-Aziz al-Hakim, one Iraqi Sunni contact, addressing the Sadr support for Ja'aferi, told PAS Media Advisor on February 18 that the "clerical rivalry between the Hakims and Sadrs is deep and historic, yet rarely addressed publicly."  Mehdi Army ----------  9.  (U)  Sadr calmly deflected the attempt to put him on the defensive over the Mahdi Army, or Jaish al-Mahdi.  He said that the Jaish al-Mahdi serves the Iraqi people; at one point, it was a military force, but now it is a cultural entity.  It had earned the respect of many Iraqis for resisting Saddam in the first intifada; Ayatollah Sistani had cautioned against its disarmament.  Sadr the Public Servant -----------------------  10.  (U)  Sadr repeated comments he made soon after government formation negotiations began in January, that he does not seek any "sovereign" ministries, but prefers to occupy the posts of "service" ministries.  On Jazeera he specifically mentioned his desire for Sadr Trend to fill the ministry of electricity.  Occupation ----------  11.  (U)  On Syrian TV, Sadr remarked that "the presence of occupiers exacerbates the situation and leads to bloodshed. At the beginning the occupiers were targeted but now the targets are the Iraqi people, their shrines, land, and resources."   He says one purpose of his regional tour is to seek support for the withdrawal of foreign forces from Iraq."  We Won't Accept any Foreign "Occupiers" ---------------------------------------  12.  (U)  When asked on Jazeera about a possible plan for Arab or Muslim countries to replace troops now in Iraq, Sadr says that is not acceptable, he'd be the first to oppose it. He adds that when Najaf was under siege (in April 2004), no Arabs or Muslims came to their rescue.  13.  (U)  He notes a double standard in U.S. statements, calling Syrians occupiers of Lebanon, while the U.S. occupies Iraq.  Even President Bush said he would resist occupation by foreigners.  Sadr told Syrian TV "the United States is targeting Islam, the Islamic and Arab states in the Middle East and beyond.  It wants to control the world. It started war in Iraq . . . then started problems with Syria, Lebanon, and Saudi Arabia.  It started a problem with the Islamic Republic of Iran.  These are pretexts to occupy them [politically] because it cannot occupy them militarily."  14.  (U)  He told Syrian TV that "occupiers say that the Iraqi Army and Police must be prepared to run the country. . . but they [don't] provide weapons, funds, or equipment." He repeated the gist of this critique on Jazeera.  Federalism and the Constitution -------------------------------  15.  Sadr told Jazeera that federalism per se is accepted in Islam, but not if it is carried out under occupation or if it promotes sectarianism.  Sectarian federalism he claims, will:   1) create fear of division; 2) be exploited as foreigners intervene; 3) lead to friction or conflict between regions; 4) cause divisions between Shia and Sunnis, Kurds and Arabs, not to mention other minorities.  This would be a mistake, he adds.  Kirkuk ------  BAGHDAD 00000549  003 OF 004    16.  (U)  Addressing the Kurds' demands for distinct regions, he said "the Kurds had a fear of dictatorship.  But if the occupiers leave, there will be real democracy and freedom, and then there is no need for regions."  Sadr says he opposes establishment of a southern province.  (NOTE: This is a keen interest of SCIRI leader Abdul Aziz al- Hakim.)  He dismissed Kurdish claims to Kirkuk, saying "if Kurds, Shia, and Sunni are all Iraqis, Kirkuk is also an Iraqi city."  He says that people are only focusing on it for its oil.  17.  (U)  Asked about the constitutional provision that allows Kirkuk to decide its own future by census, Sadr says this is not feasible.  "Then Kirkuk would also have to be 'federalized' with an area for Shia, one for Sunnis, one for Kurds, one for Turkmen.  Instead, Kirkuk or Kirkuk province should be part of a unified Iraq.  Its wealth, its benefits, must be shared by all.  We must fight sectarianism inside Kirkuk.  If the constitution calls for a sectarian solution to Kirkuk, I reject it. Kirkuk should promote peaceful existence among all Iraqis."  Praise for Hamas -----------------  18.  (U)  In the February 13 interview in Damascus, Sadr was asked about his meeting with the Palestinian groups there and replied "we want to help these forces stand against attacks aimed at Islamic and Arab states, whether in Syria, Iraq, or Iran."  He expressed hope that "political transformations in Palestine will be a prelude to ending occupation in Palestine and Iraq."  Saddam Trial ------------  19.  (U)  On February 19, Sadr told Jazeera that the new presiding judge in the Saddam trial is preferable to Judge Rizgar Amin.  He elaborated on the crimes and mass graves that are Saddam's legacy, and gave a "personal opinion" that Saddam deserved the death sentence.  Comment -------  20.  (U)  Sadr is a media anomaly in Iraq.  He is associated with at least one newspaper, al-Hawza al-Natiq.  (NOTE:  The paper is named the "Vocal Hawza" to distinguish it from the quietist Hawza clerical tradition of Ayatollah Ali al- Sistani).  Incitement in Hawza al-Natiq prompted the coalition to close down the latter in April 2004, sparking clashes between the Mahdi Army and the U.S. in Najaf. (NOTE:  The paper is randomly available in Baghdad now.) Sadr has rarely taken to the airwaves; his relative silence to date contrasted starkly with Iraq's political "stars" (Ja'aferi, Hakim, Barzani, Talabani), all of whom fund their own TV stations.  (Allawi has gotten airtime from the privately funded al-Sharqiya TV and terrestrial channel al- Rashid, owned by Sunni politician Sa'ad al-Janabi, and he finances "Baghdad" newspaper.  He often directed programming of the public broadcaster as Prime Minister.)  21.  (SBU)  Some contacts in the media speculate that Sadr was being manipulated by others and afraid of being caught short on camera.  They relate that Moqtada was only a child when his father and two older brothers -- both noted clerics -- were killed.  His credentials are shrouded in mystery. One contact told us he had studied at Hawza and earned the "intermediary" clerical title of Hojjat-al-Islam, others say he avoided Hawza and remained aloof, playing video games that earned him the nickname "Moqtada Atari."  Others say he disdains the media as un-Islamic, but this seems unlikely. Still others say he does not need TV when he controls influential mosques in the holy city of Najaf, Kut, Baghdad, Samawwa, Kerbala and Basra.  Indeed, a contact from Najaf who started an independent TV station in 2003 told us in February that Sadr controls the city through mosques and the Mahdi Army to a degree that astonishes apolitical residents.  22.  (SBU)  In any event, camera-shy Moqtada is now a thing of the past.  As evidenced in his extensive interviews in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iran, Syria, Jordan, and now regional kingpin al-Jazeera, Sadr has received coaching.  In past public appearances he glowered at the camera with head bent and seemed immature.  On Jazeera, seated in Grandma Moses profile, facing the anchor against a Zen-like backdrop of  BAGHDAD 00000549  004 OF 004   artistically arranged branches, he was at ease and quite confident.  23.  (SBU)  Iraqi contacts who resent Sadr's ability to mobilize the Mahdi Army against Iraq's "silent majority," commented on the transformation.  Sadr drew some jibes from our staff who noted an extensive use of "habibi" (a common term of endearment), which they said betrayed his non- clerical schooling.  And while he did not shake his youthful, pudgy and faux-cleric image, he struck at least three chords with this appearance among several Iraqis we polled:  a pledge to address the electricity shortage, a pledge to serve all Iraqis, even Kurds (a rarity among Arab politicians), and a pledge to keep Iraq united.  We suspect his resonance among the poorest Iraqis was even deeper.  24.  (SBU)  He has not, however, presented any detailed plans on how he would address these issues.  His cagey language on Islam and politics may have been a clever intent to draw in non-Islamist Shia.  His tour in itself projects solidarity with Sunni Arab nationalists who are barely grappling with the concept of a Shia Iraq (no other Iraqi politician has conducted such an expansive regional tour). Certainly, taking his case to the huge regional audience on Jazeera while Sistani remains enveloped in the quietist cocoon of Najaf has now put Sadr fully on the map as the "Hawza al-Natiq."  Judging by comments of most media contacts, many unhappy with this new TV image, Sadr also gained stature by engaging in "summits" with regional leaders while his cohorts back home remain mired in sordid bickering over cabinet slots. 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000550  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2026 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PNAT, IZ SUBJECT: DEPUTY TNA SPEAKER SPECULATES ON FUTURE PARLIAMENTARY LEADERSHIP AND REFORMS  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1.    (C) In a February 16 meeting with Poloff, Deputy TNA Speaker Arif Taifour discussed the transition from the Transitional National Assembly to the Council of Representatives (CoR).  He speculated that he or Fu'ad Ma'asum (leader of the Kurdish Alliance delegation in the TNA) would be a Deputy Speaker of the CoR.  He added that Ma'asum would likely not accept the position since he had been Speaker of the Iraqi Interim National Council (IINC). He also thought Hussein al-Shahristani would remain as the other Deputy Speaker.  As for the next speaker, he acknowledged that it would likely be a Sunni Arab and said he had heard Tariq al-Hashimi and Ayad al-Sammarai mentioned as possible candidates.  2. (C) Taifour agreed with the assessment that the Council of Representatives likely will have more responsibility  under the new constitution than the TNA had under the Transitional Administrative Law (TAL).  He expressed the hope that power within the CoR would be decentralized, with a formal division of labor so the Deputy Speakers could have more specific responsibilities and authorities than they had in the TNA. (Comment.  In the TNA, the Speaker had much more control over the budget, staffing and day-to-day activities of the assembly.  End Comment).  He also said there needed to be more financial transparency of the TNA's own budget, with less centralized control in the Speaker's Office.  He acknowledged the importance of having active committees and of having CoR members attend sessions regularly.  3. (C) Comment.  Taifour's comments were an indirect, but not very subtle, criticism of the management style of the TNA Speaker Hajim al-Hasani.  The TNA Speaker's office exercised control over the TNA's administration and budget, but the Speaker himself was frequently absent.  It is unclear whether the parties will fight for the aforementioned CoR reforms when new by-laws are adopted.  End Comment. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000551  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2016 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: MINISTRY OF HUMAN RIGHTS LOSING ITS DEPUTY MINISTER - NO LEADERSHIP IN SIGHT  REF: DAR 02/02/2006  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Summary: Deputy Minister of Human Rights Aida Ossairan told PolOff February 16 that she will leave the Ministry within the next two weeks to focus on her new role as a Council of Representatives member. In that capacity, she said, she will seek to head up the Human Rights Committee. Ossairan noted that there was no replacement in sight for her. In a separate meeting, Acting Human Rights Minister Narmeen Othman told PolOff February 18 that a new deputy - temporary or permanent -- would have to be approved by the Council of Ministers. Furthermore, she added, none of the seven directors general of the Ministry would be adequate replacements given their political ties as well as other issues. Ossairan's departure without an adequate replacement would further gut the Ministry of Human Right's capacity. Post is following up with Othman to encourage her to find a plan to "fill the gap". End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ------------ DEPUTY MINISTER: LEAVING BUT WANTS TO CHAIR HR COMMITTEE --------------------------------------------- ------------  2. (C) On February 16, Deputy Minister for Human Rights Aida Ossairan told PolOff that she would be leaving the Ministry shortly to prepare for her new position as a Council of Representatives member, a seat she obtained under Allawi's ticket. Ossairan told PolOff that, in her capacity as a CoR member, she would be pushing to serve as the chairwoman of the human rights committee.  If not designated as such, she asserted, she would not serve on the Human Rights Committee.  --------------------------------------------- -------- NO REPLACEMENT IN SIGHT - CURRENT STAFF NOT COMPETENT --------------------------------------------- --------  3. (C) When asked whether there were any strong candidates who would be competent replacements for either the minister or deputy minister position Ossairan replied that there were not. She did say, however, that former Human Rights Minister Bakhtiar Amin would be an excellent candidate for the ministerial position, were he willing to take the job.  During his time as minister, Ossairan said, Bakhtiar Amin was very proactive and had a strong leadership style. However, she said, he would not be willing to take the minister position again. When pressed, Ossairan did not explain further.  4. (C) Narmeen Othman, in a separate meeting February 18, was also hard pressed to provide a sense of who would serve as a replacement for the deputy. She told PolOff that, of the seven directors general, she only viewed one as reasonably competent -- the DG for Research. He was a Sunni, she said, and plagued by "De-Ba'athification" allegations -- thereby blocking him from moving up.  The others, she said, either have strong party ties that she believed would contaminate their work or were not especially experienced.  5. (C) Othman mentioned that even a temporary replacement deputy minister would have to be appointed by the Council of Ministers.  Othman informed PolOff that this requirement was set in law and would result in a delay for naming a replacement. Othman further stated that she had heard no word on ministerial candidates for Human Rights.  In a February 1 conversation with PolOff (ref), Othman indicated that she herself was unsure whether she would accept a ministerial nomination, given that her children in Sulaymaniyah were urging her to return home permanently.  ------- COMMENT -------  6. (C) Comment.  The lack of a full-time deputy minister will further weaken the Human Rights Ministry.  The current acting minister also heads the Ministry of Environment and only spends a few days per week in her Human Rights Minister capacity. Additionally, she admits to being more proficient with environmental issues than human rights. Zuhair Chalabi, the minister-designate, has never been officially appointed. At a time when even more human rights abuses are coming to light, the Human Rights  BAGHDAD 00000551  002 OF 002   Ministry is falling further by the wayside. Post will continue to follow up with the Ministry as it copes with this management gap, and will encourage a rapid and permanent replacement to MoHR leadership. Post intends to raise the Ministry's right, under Article 42 of the TAL, to identify and nominate a deputy minister for the Council of Ministers to approve and send to the Presidency Council for ratification.  This may accelerate filling the gap.  While it is true that under either the TAL, or the Constitution, the Council of Ministers must act on appointments of deputies/undersecretaries, Post will explore whether there is any means to appoint an "acting" deputy/undersecretary pending final action. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000552  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: BASRAH GOVERNOR SAYS UK REPRESENTATIVE BOYCOTT NOT HIS IDEA   Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: In a February 19 meeting with the Ambassador, Basrah Governor Mohammed Mossibh al-Wahili and Fadhila Party General Secretary Nadeem al-Jabiri said they do not favor the Basrah Provincial Council's (PC) boycott of UK representatives.  The Governor said that he was in Italy for ten days and that the PC decided on the boycott in his absence.  Al-Wahili added that he would like to work closely with the UK but fears the UK does not want to work for the best interests of Basrah.  The Governor denied responsibility for police brutality and corruption in Basrah, saying that he is working to clean things up.  It is important that the Basrah government succeed in these efforts, al-Jabiri said, because many forces are working to take control of the provincial government.  According to Al-Jabiri, this cannot be allowed to happen because other parties do not want what is best for the province.  Al-Jabiri added that he thinks a coalition of Kurds, the Allawi camp, and Tawafuk may come together to nominate a candidate to be Prime Minister.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- --- Governor Disavows Boycott, Wants to Work With UK --------------------------------------------- ---  2. (C) Basrah Governor Mohammed Mossibh al-Wahili and Fadhila Party General Secretary Nadeem al-Jabiri told the Ambassador that the Basrah PC's boycott of UK representatives does not have their support.  Governor al-Wahili said that the PC decided on the boycott while he was in Italy.  The Governor stressed that he would like to cooperate with the UK, and he agreed with the Ambassador that refusing to cooperate with the UK is not in the best interests of the people of Basrah. However, the Governor asserted that the UK does not take some issues seriously.  For example, the Governor said he has spoken to the UK several times about the manner in which UK forces arrest people, including "terrorizing" people with helicopters in the middle of the night.  3. (C) Nadeem al-Jabiri added that the UK could do a lot to help the Basrah PC.  He predicted that fear of Iran would lead London to seek a compromise with Tehran, leaving Basrah open to greater Iranian influence.  Governor al-Wahili agreed, saying that he gave the UK details about Iranian agents and high-ranking Iraqi security officials smuggling rockets into Basrah.  The UK, he alleged, has done nothing to stop it.  He then alleged that the UK is not telling the U.S. the whole truth regarding such matters.  -------------------------------- Governor Denies Police Brutality --------------------------------  4. (C) Governor al-Wahili denied reports that he condones illegal acts committed by the Division of Internal Affairs (DIA) of the Basrah Police.  The DIA was not created by him, al-Wahili said, adding that he has tried to disband the unit.  According to al-Wahili, when he took office the DIA had 400 members, which he since has cut down to 40.  The Governor added that he has ordered the Police Chief to dissolve the group so that its duties could be assumed by parts of the police department.  ------------------------------------ Governor Denies Corruption in Basrah ------------------------------------  5. (C) Governor al-Wahili told the Ambassador that he does not condone corruption in the Basrah Provincial Government, claiming that he has asked the Commission on Public Integrity to set up an office in the province.  Dozens of cases will be referred to it, he predicted, adding that corruption hurts the people as well as the credibility of the government.  -------------------- Fadhila Under Threat --------------------  6. (C) Nadeem al-Jabiri asserted to the Ambassador that it is in the best interests of Iraq and CF that Fadhila retain control of Basrah Province.  Al-Jabiri added that SCIRI is working with the Sadrists, Thar Allah, Hezbollah, and other groups to take control of the PC away from Fadhila.  If another party takes over the Basrah Provincial government, al-Jabiri warned, there will be many problems.  He elaborated that brutal measures, including assassinations, are being used in a concerted effort to knock Fadhila out of power.  ------------------------------  BAGHDAD 00000552  002 OF 002   Jabiri on Government Formation ------------------------------  7. (C) Al-Jabiri reported that a coalition of Kurds, the Allawi camp, and Tawafuk may join forces and nominate a candidate for PM.  SCIRI, he said, has begun reaching out to this coalition and may join with it.  However, he said the Fadhila Party has not joined it.  8. (C) Nadeem al-Jabiri told the Ambassador that he still considers himself to be a possible compromise candidate for PM.  He argued that the Fadhila Party has good relations with many groups.  In Basrah Province, Governor al-Wahili added, Fadhila enjoys good relations with the Allawi camp.  Sunni Arabs, al-Wahili continued, make up 10-15 percent of the population in Basrah Province, so it is conceivable that Sunni Arabs would back Nadeem al-Jabiri for PM.  The Ambassador argued, however, that the Sadrists would object to al-Jabiri becoming PM.  Al-Jabiri countered that the Sadrists would object to any candidate other than Jafari.  ------- Comment -------  9. (C) COMMENT: Governor al-Wahili denied responsibility for all the problems in Basrah Province that the Ambassador raised.  His explanation for the boycott of UK representatives -- that he was in Italy and the PC decided on a boycott without his knowledge -- is rather implausible. The Governor has, after all, called two boycotts of Coalition partners, in September and November 2005.  Nor does his explanation correspond to what PM Jafari told the Ambassador on February 15 (septel).  We suspect that this is the Governor's face-saving way of telling us he intends to end the boycott soon.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000554  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  LONDON FOR ARAB MEDIA UNIT  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: OPRC, PHUM, KMDR, ECON, EAID, ECPS, IZ SUBJECT:  Freedom of Speech in Iraq 2006, Part I: Media Gold Rush in a "Virtual" Marketplace  1.  (U)   This is the first in a series of cables that will address the media environment in Iraq in early 2006.  Embassy PAS will review positive developments since liberation in 2003 (outlined below); examine popular attitudes on the limits of free speech; assess the Iraqi public broadcaster; and outline challenges presented by coalition and Iraqi government activities.  The series will provide thumbnail sketches of the major outlets and players.  Finally, it will review some suggestions for the U.S. and other donors who are interested in supporting free press as a key pillar of civil society.  2.  (U)  It is very difficult to define the "media market" in Iraq.  There has never been anything quite like it in history:  in post-war Germany and Japan, Allied forces owned the airwaves and controlled programming for years.  There were already some elements of a market economy established in those countries, so once Allied broadcasters began permitting commercial channels and economic capacity resumed, media emerged according to market principles.  Demographic homogeneity in those countries also limited the number of voices seeking outlets.  3.  (U)  Eastern Europe transformed peacefully, and thus commercial media emerged without competition from "combat zone" actors that one finds in Iraq. In Afghanistan, NGOs had pre-war experience and thus could identify elements of independent civil society; furthermore, the security situation there permits greater scope of operation for capacity- building and investment.  The Balkans may offer the closest example, but Tito's Yugoslavia was more open than Saddam's Iraq and the change there came before journalism went totally electronic and digital, thus the skill gap was smaller. Furthermore, Iraq, with its importance to the global economy, global religion, and regional politics, is an automatic draw for anyone with a message.  Not surprisingly, with so much in flux, there are some interesting dynamics.  4.  (U)  CPA abolished Iraq's ministry of information, which usefully denied the government a monopoly on news (although this move left 50,000 employees jobless).  CPA also set up a legal framework for media (and telecommunications) regulation and public broadcasting modeled on BBC. CPA substantially funded technical training and new equipment for both these institutions and gave them guaranteed income (from the Treasury and telecom licenses) to protect their independence.  5.  (U)  This environment proved enticing.  As we highlighted in the embassy Human Rights Report for 2005, Iraq has advanced light years beyond Saddam- era prohibitions on free speech.  The country has over 200 newspapers, at least 20 TV stations, and countless radio outlets; they function at the national, regional, and local levels, and broadcast in Arabic, Kurdish, Turkmen, and Syriac.  6.  (U)  Liberation set off an information "gold rush" as political parties, entrepreneurs, opportunists, exiles, foreign governments, and conscientious citizens swarmed to stake claims in a sector with enormous potential to shape opinions regionally.  Indeed, the sector has surged faster than Iraq's media regulator can track them (the National Communications and Media Commission/ NCMC retains a CPA mandate to assign broadcast frequencies).  As of January 2006, NCMC had licensed 108 entities:  28 terrestrial TV; 25 satellite TV; 41 FM radio; and 14 AM radio stations.  7. (SBU)  In Iraq today, journalists frequently and openly criticize the government, ministers and senior officials with a freedom that is rare in the region.  Perhaps 25% of the new outlets can be classified as "independent;" they express a wide variety of views, including mainstream Shia- flavored stations that are a first for the Arab world (COMMENT:  a welcome change to Hizballah's al- Manar.)  BAGHDAD 00000554  002 OF 004    8.  (SBU)  Stations permit Iraqis to phone in questions to officials, and a few political satires have emerged to acclaim, such as al-Baghdadiya's "Dialog of the Deaf" and al-Sharqiya's show "Caricatures."  December 2005 election programs featured live debates with multiple candidates, a novelty for the region.  Although recently caught up in political crosscurrents, CPA legal structures and equipment are still in place to facilitate true public broadcasting by the Iraq Media Network.  9. (U)  According to numerous polls (polling capability itself an indicator of new freedoms), the most widely watched television stations were independent al-Sharqiya and public broadcaster al- Iraqiya, along with Arabic-language satellite channels broadcasting from outside Iraq, such as al- Arabiya and al-Jazeera.  Several other outlets are gaining popularity, such as entertainment channel al-Sumeria.  10.  (SBU)  There are other indications of new maturity in Iraq's media world:  Private funding, external printing, limited ads and text messaging services are providing some reliable income streams.  A September 2005 story by a reporter for the Institute of War and Peace Reporting (IWPR), which trains journalists in Iraq, confirms this, reporting a veritable boom in independent shops "printing books, pamphlets and newspapers prohibited under the old government."  Partly this is driven by newspapers themselves.  The piece noted that "in Baghdad alone, there are 80 titles with a combined daily circulation of 200,000."  A new independent news agency - National Iraqi News Agency (NINA), supported by USAID, has helped Iraqi journalists to support over 100,000 visits per month on its website and now has a link with BBC Arabic news.  11.  (U)  Elections last year further boosted the industry, allowing printers to buy presses and computer applications.  One employee at Ibn- Khaldoon print shop told IWPR he had paid 60,000 USD for a new press, suddenly affordable with "monthly incomes averaging 2040 USD."  12. (U)  There are also more and more local TV and broadcasting production companies who can be contracted by the stations to produce shows.  The Embassy Public Affairs section is aware of at least ten such companies, capabilities are fairly professional, and certainly more attuned culturally to the Iraqi scene than Egyptian, Lebanese and Gulf Arab competitors who are still technically far more savvy.  13.  (U)  A definitive piece on Iraq's media freedoms by freelance journalist Jill Carroll in mid-2004, just before CPA handed the reins to a sovereign Iraqi government, quoted Nada Shawkat, women's editor at Az Zaman newspaper, rejoicing that she could finally "practice her trade free of many restrictions imposed on the press after the war with Kuwait."  14.  (SBU) Unlike other entrepreneurs eyeing Iraq, media investors are able to locate much of their infrastructure (safely) offshore.  We see satellite TV stations now targeting the Iraqi market from Dubai (al-Fayha'), Kuwait (al-Anwar), Cairo and Lebanon (al-Baghadiya), and London (al-Sharqiya, al- Zaman).  Al-Furat newspaper began publishing from Paris, where its expatriate editor lived for over a decade.  These outlets are harbingers of other private investment in Iraq, sure to follow when security improves.  Trial by (Gun)fire -------------------  15.  (SBU)  Iraq's global strategic importance and the pace and volume of events here thrust local actors onto a global stage.  They have literally learned on the fly, observing seasoned Western journalists at joint press conferences and competing with them for top stories.  That has  BAGHDAD 00000554  003 OF 004   honed talent.  Locals have also reaped a bonus from the eviction by then-PM Allawi of al-Jazeera, which had it been here, would have probably crushed much of the local competition by dint of pure competence.  16.  (U)  Carroll's piece highlighted a bittersweet side of this media boon.  Security threats and impenetrable political and cultural environments have thrown up formidable barriers to foreign journalists, who rely substantially on intrepid local talent.  Most foreigners now rely on Iraqi legwork and add flavor with "stand ups" from (relatively safe) hotel balconies.  Carroll's 2004 piece quoted a Baghdad bureau chief of an American newspaper noting "after three decades of secret police, oppression and propaganda about the West, there's much distrust of outsiders."  Indeed, these phenomena persist in 2006; reliance on Iraqis is likely to rise with the tragic January abduction of Carroll and the near-fatal injury sustained by ABC anchor Bob Woodruff.  17.  (U)  In late 2005, we saw bylines from several Iraqis in major media outlets:  Mohammed Hayder reporting from Basra for Newsweek; Qassim Abdul- Zahra and Murtada Faraj from Baghdad, Yahya Barzanji from Kirkuk, Ali Ahmed from Ramadi, Haider Hani in Amara, Gahid Jabbar from Karbala and Zeki Hamad from Tikrit, Haider Hani in Amarahall for AP; Mahmud al-Rawi reported for Al-Jazeera; Hala Jaber for the London Sunday Times; and Ghaith Abdul Ahad reported on insurgents for the Guardian and Washington Post.  Even banned Al-Jazirah uses stringers, like Falih Abd-al-Qadir who reported from Al-Qa'im on December elections.  Iraq Gets a Media Pool ----------------------  18.  (U)  The Iraqi media has acquired important professional capacity.  Since April, 2005 over 1,000 Iraqi journalists and managers have received technical training from USAID on investigative journalism and strategic management.  Over two hundred journalists have received informal training by working with MNFI and Embassy press officers, and up to 100 have participated in PAS exchange programs in the U.S. and the region.  The U.S. has also invested heavily in infrastructure and training for both Iraq's independent media and telecommunications regulator and the Independent Media Network, both established by CPA.  19. (U)   While the media has not replaced Saddam- era unions, they did organize a national media pool, driven by constraints on access to sites (such as the Saddam trial courthouse).  With much coaching by MNFI public affairs officers, several outlets agreed in September 2005 to form the Iraqi National Media Pool (INMP).  The INMP is managed by the media for the media, with notable democratic flair.  20.  (U)  The pool management team was selected by Bureau Chiefs in September.  Members of the INMP share output from INMP print, radio and television representatives, and rotate these slots monthly. The pool has notably boosted Iraq media access and thus coverage.  This in turn prompts public buy-in for key events such as the Abu Ghraib detainee release, NATO HQ opening, Fallujah anniversary, Khor Az Zubayr power plant opening, and Mosul transition of authority.  21.  (U)  The INMP is open to all Arabic outlets. It has 52 members, including Asharq Al-Awsat and al- Arabiya TV (pan-Arab), and Addustour, Azzaman, Al- Mada and Al-Mashriq (Iraqi).  Nine radio stations include Radio Sawa, Radio BBC Arabic, Radio Monte Carlo, and Kurdistan Radio.  Three of the top five TV stations in Iraq - Al-Arabiya, Al-Sharqiya, al- Hurra -- also belong.  With pan-Arab members, the pool thus also provides a launchpad for regional dissemination and provides a forum for the transfer of know-how to nascent Iraqi outlets.  Comment  BAGHDAD 00000554  004 OF 004   -------  22.  (SBU)  There are many promising new "shoots" and many more seeds that have been planted in Iraq for free and independent media that can serve as a model to the region.  These shoots, as we will see from subsequent cables, still require care and feeding from interested outsiders.  More critical will be the continued support from an Iraqi government that may not feel at ease with the unfamiliar press "watchdog" that purports to track both its achievements and setbacks.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000558  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, TU, IZ, ASEC SUBJECT: TURKISH CONSULATE IN MOSUL MUST PROVIDE ITS OWN SECURITY  Classified By: DCM David Satterfield for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) The Turkish delegation led by Avni Botsali sent to evaluate sites for a new Turkish Consulate in Mosul (reftel) completed its visit and departed on February 18.  Botsali, the Consul-General-designate, had hoped to come to Mosul, check the lay of the land, rent some property, and make it ready for a new consulate within six weeks.  We believe he has realized that the process will be more complicated than that.  Having come with inadequate vehicles, the delegation traveled with Strykers to meetings with local officials and to view potential sites (NOTE: Thanks to the generosity of MNF-I GEN Rife and the team at Camp Courage.  END NOTE.)  2. (C) Embassy Baghdad suggests that the Department and Embassy Ankara (a) reiterate with Turkish authorities that Avni Botsali should keep Embassy Baghdad and the Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Mosul informed about his plans and (b) reinforce the need for the Turks to make a sober assessment of their security requirements.  Our PRT office in Mosul will work closely with them, but the Turks ultimately will have to depend on their own resources.  Our Mosul PRT cannot provide the level of security protection that Avni Botsali enjoyed during his visit.  The GOT will have to make some tough calculations about whether they can secure a consulate on their own. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000563  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2016 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: SECTARIAN NERVES ON EDGE AFTER SAMARRA  SHRINE EXPLOSION  Classified By: POL COUNS ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  There are many rumors of attacks on Sunni religious sites and anti-Sunni demonstrations in the wake of the February 22 bombing of the Shia holy mosque in Samarra, but there appears to be much less occurring on the ground.  Sunni Arab Iraqi Islamic Party Deputy Secretary-General Ala Makki told PolOff February 22 that there have been "retaliatory" attacks on 29 Sunni Arab mosques in Baghdad and other cities.  So far, we can confirm only three - one in Baghdad and two in Basrah. The party's headquarters in Basrah also was attacked. Evening television showed large Shia marches in several districts of Baghdad.  Both Sunni and Shia groups condemned the attack on Samarra mosque. Prime Minister Ibrahim Al-Ja'afari announced a 3-day period of mourning and released government employees early from work, the first such early shutdown of the government in the past two years.  National Security Advisor Al-Rubaie told Al-Arabiya television that Iraqi security forces have detained ten people linked to the Samara explosion.  Our sense is that while events here are not spiraling out of control, sectarian tensions have grown substantially in recent months and the reaction to the Samarra mosque attack is only the latest manifestation.  END SUMMARY  OUTCRY IN BAGHDAD -----------------  2. (C)  A member of the Baghdad Provincial Council claimed to PolOff during the early afternoon of February 22 that 26 Sunni mosques have been attacked, including the Al Mustapha mosque in Karkh, the Al Hamza mosque in Ghazaliya and the Firdos Square mosque.  Sheikh Hassam Kajem Abd Allah, the Chairman of the Al Adhamyah District Council reported at 1545 hrs that the Al Farouk mosque on Palestine Street is burning and is still under attack, with worshippers trapped inside.  Abd Allah also reported that a Sunni Sheikh was killed in the Istiqlal District, and that his body was dumped in front of the local police station.  Nasaif Jassim, of the Sadr City District Advisory Council (DAC) General Information Center told PolOff that the Al- Sha'ab district Jaysh al-Mahdi is occupying four Sunni Arab mosques.   The Iraqi Islamic Party issued a statement counting 29 Sunni Arab mosques it claimed had been assaulted.  Hussain Mohammed Ali Al Tahan, Governor of the Baghdad Provincial Council asked PolOff to request U.S. forces impose martial law in order to help restore order.  3.  (C)  The Iraqi government announced that government employees were being released at 14:00 local, a couple hours early.  (Comment:  This is the first such instance we can recall during the past several years of such a step and shows the seriousness with which the government views the situation.  End Comment.)  The Embassy let its local staff leave early too.  An Embassy FSN who lives near Sadr City reported to us on his way home that he was seeing armed Jaysh al-Mahdi convoys on the streets.  There were some demonstrations in Baghdad, and markets closed early.  Evening news broadcasts showed thousands demonstrating in the Baghdad districts of Kathimiya, Sadr City, Kerrada and Shuala.   BASRAH ------  4. (C) According to Ala Makki, Deputy Secretary General of the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP), the IIP branch office in Basrah was attacked by Jaysh al- Mahdi forces around 1300 hours.  British contacts confirm that the Sadrist Jaysh al-Mahdi had surrounded the building and were reportedly detaining IIP staff.  IIP leader Tariq al-Hashimi told Arab TV stations in the late afternoon that the Iraqi police had colluded in the attack on the Basrah headquarters and warned if its staff were harmed there would be retaliation.  PolOff told an aide to al-Hashimi late afternoon that the IIP should avoid inflammatory rhetoric in the media and work with authorities and us to address specific  BAGHDAD 00000563  002 OF 003   incidents.  Additionally, the Basrah Regional Reconstruction Operations Centre reported attacks on two Sunni mosques during the day - one attacked with RPGs and another vandalized by a mob.  DEMONSTRATIONS ELSEWHERE ------------------------  5. (C) REO Hillah is reporting small demonstrations of 500-1000 people.  Press reports indicate that afternoon demonstrations were scheduled for Karbala, Babil, and Diwaniya.  SUNNI AND SHIA JOINTLY CONDEMN ATTACK -------------------------------------  6. (U) Both Sunni Arab and Shia groups condemned the attack on Samarra mosque.  Prime Minister Jafari on the morning of February 22 told Iraqiya TV that the nation should avoid sectarian strife and hold to national unity.  Minister of Interior Bayan Jabr announced that the government is forming an investigative committee composed of different sects to look into the crime, and called the incident an attack on all Iraqis.  National Security Advisor Mowafaq Al-Rubaie told Al-Arabiya television that Iraqi security forces have detained ten people linked to the Samara explosion.  7.  (U)  According to media sources, the top Shia clerics in Najaf held a meeting this morning to discuss their community's response to the bombing. Pro-Shia al-Furat television reported that Grand Ayatollah Ali Al-Sistani later issued a fatwa forbidding attacks on Sunni mosques and religious "symbols".   Al-Furat also reported that Ayatollah Mohammed Said al-Hakim, often viewed as the second most influential cleric in Najaf, bluntly told the government that since it could not protect Shia holy sites, it should let the public do it.  Shia political party SCIRI went into a special huddle meeting midday.  Later, its leader, Abdulaziz Al- Hakim, issued a televised statement denouncing the attack.  He blamed Ambassador Khalilzad's public remarks February 20 about avoiding sectarianism in the security ministries as encouraging Sunni Arab extremists to attack Shia.  Muqtada Sadr was on Arabiya TV at 19:00 local blaming the Iraqi Government and Coalition Forces.  He urged demonstrations be peaceful and urged his followers not to attack Sunni mosques.  BBC Arabic quoted Sadr extremist Abd al-Hadi ad-Darraji saying that the Shia would not just condemn but respond vigorously to the attackers.  8.  (U)  The Iraqi Islamic Party denounced the attack, but it claimed that there appeared to be a hidden hand involved since the mosque had not been attacked before despite the security problems in Samarra.  The usually outspoken Sunni Arab hard- liner Salih Mutlak issued a TV statement condemning the attack as well.  All these speakers warned Iraqis against sliding into civil war.  Consistent with the conspiratorial nature of Iraqi politics, an Allawi list contact told Poloffs that the Samarra explosion was a ploy by Jafari and the Sadrists to "unite" the Shia and prevent the Alliance from splitting and potentially depriving him of the premiership.   COMMENT -------  9.  (C)  Despite the many rumors, the number of confirmed attacks against Sunni sites in the wake of the Samarra bombing so far appears significantly lower.  The number could easily rise in the days ahead; the Prime Minister worried about this with us midday February 22 (septel).  Sistani's statement was especially important in terms of containing Shia emotions.  Although retaliatory attacks so far appear relatively limited, sectarian tensions have grown substantially in recent months; the reaction to this mosque attack is only the latest manifestation.  Public remarks from Shia leaders like al-Hakim about the public taking security into its own hands are worrisome as well.  (Deputy President Abd al-Mahdi repeated this call with us privately - septel.)  We can expect the Sadrists to  BAGHDAD 00000563  003 OF 003   take special advantage of this anger and fear, as they apparently did in Basrah.  Most notably, in public and private our contacts are speaking with genuine concern about the possibility of civil war, something we did not hear much about two years ago.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000564  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: TNA SPEAKER URGES QUICK GOVERNMENT FORMATION   Classified By: AMBASSADOR KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) The Ambassador and MNF-I Commanding General (CG) Casey met February 20 with Transitional National Assembly (TNA) Speaker Dr. Hajim al-Hasani.  Dr. Hasani described Ibrahim Jafari's PM nomination as an "Iranian trick" and predicted that Jafari will be the PM "whether we like it or not."  The Shia Alliance, he added, will stay together, and it will not be possible to lure any members out.  He asserted that there are only three ways to mitigate a Jafari prime ministership:  -- Allow Jafari to become PM, create a crisis one or two months later, and then vote out the government;  -- Create the National Security Council;  -- Allow Jafari to become PM but with a formalized agreement on how the government will run, to include two strong Deputy Prime Ministers.  2. (C) Dr. Hasani said that government formation should accelerate now and that President Talabani should call the Council of Representatives to start the clock on government formation deadlines.  In order to get around the problem of having to know the CoR leadership as part of the package of ministers, he added, the Council should elect people who are almost assuredly going to be ministers (and therefore will resign as Deputy Speaker/Speaker).  3. (C) Dr. Hasani also urged a greater role for the UN, adding that it is not good for the U.S. to play the major role in the government formation negotiations.  He said that he had met with UN Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG) Qazi, who reportedly told Dr. Hasani  SIPDIS that he (Qazi) has to stay neutral and will not be more involved if not asked.  4. (C) When asked what position he hoped for in the new government, Dr. Hasani answered with Minister of Defense or Deputy Prime Minister.  He said he prefers Minister of Defense if there is a solid program, adding that "democracy will not survive without a military to protect it." KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000566  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2026 TAGS: PINS, PGOV, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: PM JAFARI AND DEPUTY PRESIDENT ABD AL-MAHDI  WARN OF INFLAMED SECTARIAN TENSIONS AFTER SAMARRA BOMBING  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad.  Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (U) This is an action message.  Please see paragraph 12.  2. (S)  Summary:  Prime Minister Jafari and Deputy President Abd al-Mahdi emphasized to the Ambassador and General Casey midday on February 22 that the bombing of the Askeri mosque in Samarra had inflamed sectarian tensions and raised the risk of major civil strife. Jafari recalled the planning behind the successful security operations before the Shia Ashura celebrations earlier this month and said it would be useful to plan quickly for the "worst-case scenario."   He thought the statement issued by Ayatollah Sistani would help reduce the likelihood of Shia street action against Sunni Arabs. Jafari asked that the U.S. urge Arab and Islamic states to send messages condemning the attack against the Samarra mosque; messages from Saudi Arabia and al-Azhar in Egypt would be especially useful in reassuring the angry Iraqi Shia about Sunnis.  The Ambassador and General Casey promised to provide whatever support possible.  Jafari welcomed Casey's offer of help with the forensic investigation in Samarra.  He said he would highlight that help, and the arrest of a group of Iraqi workers at the Samarra mosque believed possibly connected to the bombing, to minimize criticism of the Coalition. Deputy President Abd al-Mahdi called sectarian tensions "critical."  He urged that new security measures be taken to reassure a skeptical Shia public "fed up" with terror attacks.  The Ambassador and General Casey urged the Prime Minister and the Deputy President to use the bombing as a rallying point to bring all Iraqis together to condemn terrorism.  Embassy Baghdad requests assistance from Department and regional posts in eliciting strong statements condemning the Samarra attack from Arab capitals.   End Summary.  -------------------------------------- Jafari Ponders the Worst Case Scenario --------------------------------------  3.  (S)  A somber Prime Minister Jafari told the Ambassador and General Casey on the afternoon of February 22 that he is worried about the reaction among the Shia public in the wake of the bombing of the al-Askeri (Golden Dome) mosque in Samarra early in the day.  Those who attacked the mosque clearly aim to incite sectarian strife ("fitna") and civil war.  Jafari had dispatched Interior Minister Bayan Jabr Solagh and Sunni Endowment leader Shaykh Ahmed Abd al-Ghafur Samarrai'e to Samarra to see events on the ground first-hand.  He said the Iraqi cabinet would meet later on February 22 and he asked that the Coalition representatives to the Iraqi National Security Council also attend a meeting at 17:00 local.  Jafari said it would be prudent to plan for the "worst case."  He recalled the planning that went into the successful security for the Ashura celebrations earlier this month and said the same level of planning is necessary now.  4.  (S)  Jafari said further terror attacks to cause even greater agitation were possible.  He said that ISF should be deployed to protect sensitive religious sites to prevent further acts of violence.  The ISF would need Coalition Forces' assistance.  If there were clashes between Sunni and Shia groups on the street, the ISF would need to intervene with help from the Coalition. Jafari mused that a curfew may well be required beginning the evening of February 22.  ----------------------------- PM Welcomes Sistani Statement -----------------------------  5.  (C)  Jafari said the role of the Shia religious establishment in Najaf was vital to contain Shia retaliation.  Jafari noted that the four top clerics in Najaf were meeting urgently to discuss the situation. During the meeting, an aide informed Jafari that television reports stated that Ayatollah Sistani had just issued a statement calling for only peaceful demonstrations and forbidding attacks against Sunni "mosques and symbols."  Jafari said it was a good statement that would help.  (TV reports also say that Sistani called for seven days of mourning; Jafari said he had already ordered a three-day mourning period.)  ------------------------------------  BAGHDAD 00000566  002 OF 003   Getting Support from the Arab States ------------------------------------  6.  (C)  Jafari asked that the United States use its good offices to encourage Arab and Islamic states to send condolence messages to the Iraqi government and to the Shia religious establishment in Najaf for the loss of the Golden Dome mosque - an important religious and cultural site.  Jafari highlighted the importance of such a message from Saudi Arabia, given Shia public suspicions of Wahhabis.  He also underlined the utility of a message from Egypt and from al-Azhar as a symbol of the Sunni religious establishment.  Expressions of willingness from Arab states to help rebuild the Golden Dome would absorb some of the anger on the Shia street, he said.  It would also demonstrate to Iraq's Shia, who feel they are under constant attack from Sunni Arabs, that there is real Shia-Sunni solidarity.  ------------------------------------------ Limiting Damage to Coalition's Credibility ------------------------------------------  7.  (S)  Jafari added that those who responsible for the attack also hope to spur increased Iraqi antipathy towards the Coalition Forces.  He predicted Arab satellite stations would air interviews blaming the Coalition Forces for the attack to further stir up trouble.  He welcomed General Casey's offer of assistance with a forensic investigation as something that could be publicly highlighted to show the positive role of the Coalition Forces.  Casey informed the PM that Iraqi police that morning had arrested ten Golden Dome mosque security guards who had tested positive for traces of explosives.   Jafari told an aide to immediately publicize that Iraqis who had possibly been involved in the attack had been detained.  The PM stressed that it was important to calm public anxiety by showing that those responsible had been apprehended and punished.  ---------------------------------- Promoting Unity out of the Tragedy ----------------------------------  8.  (C) Ambassador Khalilzad promised the PM that the U.S. would respond positively to every request that it could, including seeking condolence messages from Arab and Islamic states and issuing strong American denunciations.  He also agreed to the PM's request that he meet with Iraqi Sunni Arab leaders to get them to respond positively to the Iraqi government's relative restraint and to convince them to work to calm their own community.  The Ambassador noted this was a shocking attack that could be turned to bring all Iraqis together to condemn terrorism as one unified nation.  Jafari agreed, and said he would try to stake a position like he did during the September 2005 bridge disaster when he highlighted a Sunni boy's efforts to save drowning Shia pilgrims.  ------------------------------------ Abd al-Mahdi:  "A Critical Situation" ------------------------------------  9.  (S)  In a subsequent meeting, Deputy President Abd al-Mahdi told the Ambassador and General Casey that that with this attack Iraq had entered "a very critical situation."  Abd al-Mahdi underlined the religious significance to the Shia of the al-Askeri mosque.  He predicted that "some" Sunni mosques would be attacked in retaliation.  Abd al-Mahdi pointed to the Sistani statement on TV and said it could help.  Abd al-Mahdi also stressed, however, that the Shia public feels enormous frustration that terror attacks continue.  He stated that Ayatollah Mohammed Said al-Hakim, the second- most important cleric in Najaf, had told his aides after the meeting of the four top clerics in Najaf that if the Iraqi government could not maintain security, then the Shia public should be allowed to protect itself with its own means.  --------------------------- Urges New Security Measures ---------------------------  10.  (C) Abd al-Mahdi also stressed that new, concrete measures on security are essential to reassuring the Shia public.  He lightly but directly castigated the Coalition Forces for not allowing SCIRI to help fix security problems with its own resources.  He claimed that SCIRI  BAGHDAD 00000566  003 OF 003   could have deployed its "forces" (i.e. the Badr Corps) to maintain security starting in 2003 but had not done so at Coalition request.  Instead, the Shia had accepted the need to build new Iraqi security units whose recruitment had unfortunately only introduced new problems into the security forces.  The Shia public's perception is that they had tried to work peacefully to build a new Iraq but their restraint was rewarded only with terror.  Now, they are "fed up."  He wondered whether it was not time to reconsider neighborhood watches and an enhanced Coalition Force presence in Samarra to protect Shia sites and visitors.  11.  (C)  The Ambassador said we deeply regretted the attack in Samarra and urged Abd al-Mahdi to think politically about how to use the attack as a rallying point to unify the Iraqi nation.  He urged Abd al-Mahdi to consider the utility of immediately assembling Iraq's political leaders to issue a statement - and visible demonstration - of unity against terror.  General Casey said that MNF-I would be open to considering new security measures; out of great tragedies perhaps useful new ideas can come forward, he observed.  Abd al-Mahdi appreciated the remarks but doubted that a meeting of leaders would be useful now.  Such meetings lead to positive verbal exchanges, but no action.  He emphasized that new security measures are essential.  The Shia political leadership can no longer only urge patience and hope on the Shia public.  12. (C) ACTION REQUEST: Assuming Department approves, Embassy would appreciate urgent assistance from posts in Arab capitols to elicit strong statements of condemnation of the attack on the Samarra mosque.  We would in particular welcome Cairo's help in ensuring a strong statement from Al-Azhar and Riyadh's with condemnations from the Saudi Government and religious authorities.  END ACTION REQUEST.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000567  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, PREL, IZ, JA SUBJECT: SRSG QAZI'S VIEWS ON PRTS, JAPANESE ASSISTANCE ON AIR TRANSPORT NEEDS   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: At a February 19 meeting with the Ambassador, UN Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG) Ashraf Qazi asked for the U.S. view on Iraqi constitutional revision and expressed a positive view of UN participation in Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs), hinting that a UN-PRT liaison could provide political cover for other countries to contribute.  The meeting concluded with an update from Deputy SRSG De Mistura on Japanese views on withdrawing from Iraqi and UN efforts to obtain Japanese airlift support for the UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).  De Mistura opined that a U.S. nudge to Japan would seal the deal.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------- CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM ---------------------  2. (C) At a February 19 meeting, also attended by DSRSG De Mistura, SRSG Qazi asked for Ambassador's views on constitutional review.  Ambassador replied that constitutional review would be a distraction and a divisive issue that is better left off the agenda for now.  Qazi asked if the UIC 555 would accept such a decision and pressed for U.S. views on when the review process should get started. Ambassador reiterated that it is best not to mix constitutional review with government formation and reiterated U.S. opposition to early engagement on the issue.  ---------------------------------- POSITIVE VIEW ON PRT PARTICIPATION ----------------------------------  3. (C) Qazi shared that he favors a UN liaison element in the PRTs.  As long as the UN is not seen as being too tightly wedded to the PRTs, he explained, the UN could bring a significant "dowry" to the table.  This "dowry" would take the form of possible support or engagement from nations officially opposed to U.S. involvement in Iraq but which might be willing to contribute to a UN effort through the PRTs.  Qazi specifically mentioned France and Germany as countries that the UN might be able to engage for PRT support.  --------------------------------------------- ----- JAPANESE WITHDRAWAL AND A REQUEST FOR A U.S. NUDGE --------------------------------------------- -----  4. (C) Noting that he was recently in Japan, DSRSG de Mistura said that the Japanese are planning to wind down operations in Iraq, but they are very concerned about the fate of projects they have started and the legacy and reputation they would leave behind.  In the event of a withdrawal, De Mistura asserted, the UN could quietly pick up the management of some of the projects Japan has started.  He elaborated by saying that if this were kept low-key, it could be done through the use of some 800 permanent Iraqi employees the UN has in country.  De Mistura added that the UN also is urging Japan to remain engaged and possibly widen its efforts across the country.  One specific example he said that he offered the Japanese for consideration is the development and printing of school textbooks to be distributed throughout the country.  5. (C) With regard to ongoing talks with the GOJ on providing UNAMI air transport support, de Mistura said that he feels the Japanese are leaning towards an agreement but need a little push from the U.S.  He said that Japanese concerns over their legacy and reputation in Iraq could move them toward agreement on the issue.  Providing air support to the UN, de Mistura continued, could be sold as a change of mission for Japan, allowing it to withdraw on the ground while still playing an important international role in Iraq. The Japanese Air Force is likely to accept this as they already are familiar with the operational environment in Iraq and could base their main operations in Kuwait.  ------- COMMENT -------  6. (C) COMMENT: From previous working level discussions with Emboffs, it has been clear that UNAMI sees constitutional reform as a high priority to be addressed sooner rather then later.  We may need to continue to curb UNAMI's enthusiasm to move forward on this process before the Iraqis are ready. Qazi's positive comments on PRT participation are a welcome signal of support; however, we are less sanguine about the introduction of other national groups at this time.  END COMMENT.  BAGHDAD 00000567  002 OF 002   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000568  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, PHUM, TU, IZ SUBJECT: RESPONSE RE: GOT INVITATIONS TO SADR, MUTLAK, AND JAFARI  REF: A. ANKARA 721      B. BAGHDAD 517      C. KIRKUK 251      D. KIRKUK 21      E. STATE 27111  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Reftel A requests Embassy Baghdad's views on invitations by the Government of Turkey to Iraqi political leaders.  As we have reported, it is not yet certain that current Prime Minister Jafari will retain his position; there are a flurry of discussions underway in Baghdad.  Although it seems unlikely that Jafari would leave Iraq to visit Turkey amid these talks, we do not object to the Turks hosting him in principle.  Indeed, his leaving the country might make it easier to bring the talks to a close with a compromise candidate.  Embassy Baghdad, however, strongly discourages the Turks from inviting Muqtada Sadr, who remains tied to acts of violence and intimidation and is not the political statesman he tries to portray.  Salih Mutlak is not tied directly to acts of violence, but his public statements frequently are unhelpful.  As he would likely use his meetings in Ankara to boost his credibility, we do not think the Turks receiving him now will be particularly useful.  The Kurdish Islamic Union (KIU) has joined the broader Kurdish Alliance and is playing by democratic rules.  We therefore see no problem with the Turks receiving the KIU.  Embassy recommends that the invitation for PM Jafari be delayed until there is certainty on who will form the next Iraqi government.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------ IBRAHIM JAFARI: Not Yet a Lock ------------------------------  2.  (C)  As we have reported, intense discussions are underway about the prime ministership.  Since it is not clear that the controversial Ibrahim Jafari will retain the position, we doubt that he would leave Baghdad in the middle of these talks.  However, his departure for Turkey might help those who are operating quietly to remove Jafari as PM and open the way for a final deal that achieves the unity government we seek.  Furthermore, a Jafari trip to Turkey could further strengthen the resolve of Kurdish leaders to back another Shia Coalition figure for the premiership.  It is also possible that the Turks could use the opportunity to convince Jafari to raise his standing with Sunni Arabs on issues vital to Sunnis -- such as the selection of the Interior Minister.  ------------------------------------- MUQTADA AL-SADR: A Divisive Influence -------------------------------------  3.  (C) Muqtada al-Sadr is a divisive influence in Iraqi politics and should not be invited by the GOT.  Sadr's militia, the Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM), has fought MNF-I twice, causing U.S. and Iraqi casualties.  Armed groups connected to the JAM continue to attack Coalition Force (CF) targets, especially in southern Iraq.  In addition, JAM groups have been implicated in extra-judicial killings of Sunni Arabs and other murders and intimidation in Baghdad and the Shia heartland of Iraq.  Sadr has never renounced what the JAM is doing.  Indeed, in his recent trips throughout the region he has said that, if the U.S. attacks Iran or Syria, JAM would fight U.S. forces once again to help defend these Islamic countries.  4.  (C)  Sadr likes to portray himself as a defender of Islam, and his regional travel thus far has given him a forum to proclaim his views to the Arab street.  Meanwhile, in his stronghold of Sadr City, we have confirmed the existence of extra-legal sharia courts, which Sadrist elements use to harass and threaten Iraqi citizens.  Sadr supported the same kind of sharia courts in Najaf prior to being forced out of the city by CF action in September 2004.  He has never denounced the killings committed by the Najaf sharia court (which CF and Iraqi authorities documented).  Instead, despite fellow Sadrist claims to the contrary (reftel), he accepts and promotes such courts and his militia as elements of an extremist state within Iraq.  5.  (C)  Post therefore shares Ref E's view that receiving Sadr sends a distorted message.  Sadr keeps one foot in the political process and one in the camp of armed resistance, and such straddling cannot be accepted as a pass to international legitimacy when Iraq has a democratically elected government.  The USG seeks to limit his exposure and  BAGHDAD 00000568  002 OF 002   influence and would not support providing Sadr with the increased stature that an official visit to Ankara would bring.  Any GOT contacts with Sadr should be avoided.  Any contacts that occur should be crafted so as not to increase his perceived legitimacy and should include a blunt message about his destabilizing role.  ----------------------------------- SALIH MUTLAK: Unworthy Interlocutor -----------------------------------  6. (C) Salih Mutlak, whose coalition won eleven seats in the December election, may retain control of a few seats as the next parliament assembles to vote on the Presidency Council (and the PM as part of the package).  As we encourage the formation of a unity government, Mutlak and his small group of supporters need to be inside the Sunni Arab-Allawi-Kurdish group negotiating with the Shia Islamist Coalition.  His defection separately to the Shia Islamists would make achieving a balanced unity government more difficult.  If the Turks can convince him to avoid cutting a separate deal, then his visit to Ankara might be useful.  7.  (C)  However, Mutlak repeatedly has made statements that encourage Sunni Arab hard-liners and foster sentiment against the presence of Coalition Forces in Iraq.  Last month he told a major Arabic daily that he supports the Iraqi resistance -- a remark that immediately drew the ire of the Shia.  Most recently, on February 17, Mutlaq publicly stated, "It is time for the occupier to leave our land immediately."  He said this even while privately telling us that he supports a continued Coalition presence in Iraq -- a two-faced approach that exceeds the boundaries of even Iraqi political behavior.  At his worst, Mutlak is a potentially dangerous demagogue who is only interested in securing a government position for himself.  At his more benign, he is increasingly discounted even by his own supporters.  If the Turks receive Mutlak, they must deliver a stern message about his public remarks and the importance of fostering reconciliation, not extremism.  ------------------------------------- KIU: Now Part of the Kurdish Alliance -------------------------------------  8. (C) Post has no objection to the GOT inviting KIU leaders to visit Ankara.  The KIU, which recently agreed to join the Kurdistan Alliance, has a record of being the third-party choice for many disaffected Kurds in the North.  Its relations with the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) in particular are strained, and the GOT can expect that an invitation to the KIU will raise more than passing interest among KDP leadership.  Although an Islamic party, the KIU repeatedly has stressed to U.S. interlocutors its commitment to separating religion from politics and its adherence to the principles of the constitution.  Moreover, the KIU appears to be a peaceful party, without a quasi-militia force such as the peshmerga.  The KIU, however, is seeking significant political spoils in return for merging with the Kurdistan Alliance (reftels C and D). KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000569  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2026 TAGS: IZ, PGOV SUBJECT: POLITICAL UPDATE: SHAWAYS DOUBTS NON-SHIA ALLIANCE PM POSSIBLE; SHIA ISLAMISTS CHAFE AT USG  CALLS FOR CROSS-SECTARIANISM  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, reason 1.4 (d)  1. (S) Summary.  The Kurds together with the Sunni Arab bloc and Ayad Allawi's group are writing up a program that they can present as a national salvation front program.  They aim to attract Shia Islamists who will split from Prime Minister Jafari.  Deputy Prime Minister Shaways told PolOffs February 22 that the Shia Coalition's refusal to include Ayad Allawi is the biggest obstacle to forming the new government. He doubted it would be possible for any candidate outside the Shia Coalition to become PM, noting Sistani's insistence on Shia Coalition unity. Shia independent Qassim Daoud asserted to PolOff on February 22 that any attempt to nominate a Prime Minister outside of the Shia Coalition would be the basis for a Shia uprising in Iraq.  He did not think loyalty to Jafari was deep, however.  Allawi ally Saad al-Janabi told us February 21 that Allawi and Sunni Arab leaders agreed on February 20 to open a dialogue with Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim and other Shia leaders. Adil Abd al-Mahdi told the Ambassador February 22 that the Shia Coalition had a good meeting with Sunni Arab Tawaffuq representatives.  The Ambassador's remarks at a February 20 press conference drew criticism from many Shia Coalition members while others praised his statements, saying that the Iraqi street agreed with him.  2. (C) Summary Continued.  President Talabani will host a midday meeting February 23 with senior political leaders to discuss how to contain the impact of the bombing of the Shrine of the 10th and 11th Imams in Samarra.  In response to a reporter's question about whether the Samarra bombing will affect the political dialogue, Abdulaziz Al-Hakim answered, "Dialogues are meant to continue," but later added that "we cannot continue our dialogue in a normal manner while we suffer from this calamity."  End Summary.  ------------------------------------ DRAWING UP A SALVATION FRONT PROGRAM ------------------------------------  3.  (S)  On February 21 and February 22 there were more rounds of meetings about government formation. The Kurdish/Allawi/Sunni Arab group met to begin developing the principles from the meeting a month in Kurdistan into a broader government program.  This program would be introduced be the Kurds as the basis of a "National Salvation Front" to which the Shia would be invited to join.  There was another, quieter meeting February 21 between Kurdish PUKer Barham Saleh and SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi aimed at developing a government program to which SCIRI could adhere with the Kurdish-Allawi-Sunni Arab group.  It also began discussing the choreography by which SCIRI would drop its support for the Shia Coalition's official prime minister nominee, Ibrahim Jafari.  They are reviewing names for Prime Minister such as Qassim Daoud and Finance Minister Ali Allawi.  They will develop a longer list of names in the coming days.  They have told the Ambassador that they will widen the discussions to include Ibrahim al-Janabi (Allawi aide), Azet Berwari from the KDP, and a representative of the Sunni Arab Islamic Party  --------------------------------------------- -------- DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER SHAWAYS: SHIA COALITION REFUSAL TO ACCEPT ALLAWI PRIMARY OBSTACLE TO FORMING GOVT. --------------------------------------------- --------  4. (C) On February 22, Kurdish Deputy Prime Minister Rowsh Shaways told PolOffs that the primary obstacle to forming a national unity government is the ongoing refusal of the entire Shia Coalition to accept former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi and his National Iraqi List as part of the new government.  Given Ayatollah Sistani's instructions to both SCIRI's Abd al-Aziz al- Hakim and Prime Minister-elect Ibrahim al-Jafari to maintain the unity of the Shia Coalition, Shaways doubted that it would be possible to field an alternate candidate - such as Allawi - for Prime Minister.  Should Jafari fail to assemble a government within the thirty-day period specified by the Constitution, however, the Shia would be allowed to select a new candidate.  Shaways stated that the candidate must come from within the Shia Coalition and  BAGHDAD 00000569  002 OF 003   ruled out SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi, noting that he would be considered too controversial.  Shaways added that the sectarian violence over the Al-Askaria Mosque bombing in Samarra on February 22 would only make government formation more difficult.  Iraq, he opined, had begun its slide toward civil war.  He confided that he was not sure Sistani could control the Shia street much longer.  --------------------------------------------- ------ SHIA INDEPENDENT QASSIM DAOUD: PM CANDIDATE OUTSIDE SHIA COALITION IMPOSSIBLE --------------------------------------------- ------  5. (C) Shia independent Qassim Daoud also informed PolOff on February 22 that any attempt to nominate a Prime Minister outside of the Shia Coalition would provide the basis for a Shia uprising in Iraq.  He had also heard rumors that an alternate candidate might be nominated if Prime Minister-elect Jafari failed to convene a government in time.  He expressed bitterness at the result of the internal Shia vote on February 12, stating that deciding a nomination by a margin of one vote "is not democracy."  Daoud sympathized with the difficulties of working in a Jafari government again after the experiences of this past year.  He firmly maintained, however, that only the Shia had the right to select the Prime Minister.  As long as the alternate candidate came from within the Shia Coalition, however, Daoud indicated that no one would fight to keep Jafari.  --------------------------------------------- -- SUNNI ARAB LEADERS TO REACH OUT TO SHIA PARTIES --------------------------------------------- --  6. (C) Allawi ally Saad al-Janabi told Poloff February 21 that Allawi hosted a lunch for Sunni Arab leaders on February 20 at which the group decided to open a dialogue with Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim and other Shia leaders.  Present were Saleh Mutlak from the Hewar National Dialogue, Khalaf al-Ayyan and Abd al-Nasser al-Janabi from the National Dialogue Council, and Ayad al-Samarrai from the Iraqi Islamic Party.  Following the luncheon, Mutlak, who has been elusive in declaring his allegiance to any political block, made a public statement that he (and his coalition) is a member of the Sunni Arab and Allawi negotiating group. Separately, SCIRI's Abd al-Mahdi told the Ambassador February 22 that the Shia Coalition had had a good meeting with the Tawaffuq Front on February 21.  --------------------------------------------- -------- RESPONSE TO AMBASSADOR'S FEBRUARY 20 PRESS CONFERENCE --------------------------------------------- --------  7. (C) SCIRI Chief of Staff Haitham al-Husseini complained to Poloff February 21 about the Ambassador's remarks to the press indicating that the USG might withhold assistance from a new sectarian government.  Husseini said that such comments make Iraq look like it has no sovereignty and is a US puppet.  According to February 21 press reports, Shia Islamist Abbas al-Bayyati said that the Ambassador's expression of opposition to sectarian Defense and Interior Ministers reflected an international role that is "important, effective and significant" but that should be dealt with based on Iraqi national interests.  When PolOff argued the importance of establishing a unity government, al-Husseini said he understood its importance and agreed with SCIRI leader Abdul Aziz al-Hakim's comments that everyone needs to be included.  But he explained that these press statements make al-Hakim's job harder to convince his Shia base that working closely with the Americans is a good thing.  8. (C) In a February 21 meeting with Poloffs, re- elected Council of Representatives (CoR) member Shia Coalition Independent Zakia Ismail Haqqi told PolOffs that she was "dismayed" to read the Ambassador's public statements in support of a national unity government.  She alleged that the USG effort ran contrary to a U.S.-Iraqi relationship based on trust and equality.  She said that, while Iraqis are grateful for liberating them from Saddam, the Ambassador's statement made her sad because it shows "he disrespects our democracy and is too much in our affairs".  She also strongly disagreed with efforts to  BAGHDAD 00000569  003 OF 003   include Dr. Ayad Allawi in the new government, claiming he is a corrupted Baathist.  In the Shia Coalition vote on the PM nomination, Haqqi proudly said that she voted for Ibrahim Jafari because of his efforts to fight corruption.  She said that during Jafari's tenure, the Commission for Public Integrity brought forward 450 corruption cases for prosecution that included cases against seven ministers.  9. (C) Upon hearing about the bombing of the Shrine of the 10th and 11th Imams in Samarra CoR members Jinan Jasim al-Ubaidi and Muna Noor Zalzala al-Ubaidi and Zalzala queried PolOffs as to why the Ambassador continues to push for Sunni inclusion when they are responsible for all the violence.  Poloffs responded by saying that inclusion of all groups is important, and that working towards a more stable government is a process that requires time.  10. (C) TNA Legal Committee Chairman Muhsin Saadoun (Kurdish Alliance) told PolOffs February 21 that he agreed with the Ambassador's statements, saying the Ambassador had the right to threaten cuts in support since the political parties are talking without caring for the national interests.  New Council of Representatives member Abd al-Lateed Abd al-Wahab al- Bedri (National Iraqi List) told PolOff February 22 that the Ambassador's press conference was "excellent," adding that the street (including the Shia) agrees with him.  ----------------------------------- SADRIST UPBEAT THAT DEAL ACHIEVABLE -----------------------------------  11. (C) Leading Sadrist Baha al-Araji told PolOff February 22 that "today was a good day for government formation" because the Sadrists and PM Jafari called for calm, and this was largely eventually achieved. Al-Araji will represent the Sadrists at the February 23 lunch with President Talabani.  He said he hopes to build on today's success at quelling the violence after the Samarra mosque bombing. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T BAGHDAD 000570  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2026 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT FORMATION UPDATE, FEBRUARY 22 - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  REF: BAGHDAD 569  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, reason 1.4 (b)  1.  (S)  The effort to oust Ibrahim Jafari from the Prime Ministry is on two tracks.  February 21 and February 22 the Kurdish/Allawi/Sunni Arab group began developing the principles from the meeting a month in Kurdistan into a broader government program.  This program would be introduced be the Kurds as the basis of a "National Salvation Front" to which the Shia would be invited to join.  There was another, quieter meeting February 21 between Kurdish PUKer Barham Salih and SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi aimed at developing a government program to which SCIRI could adhere with the Kurdish-Allawi-Sunni Arab group.  It also began discussing the choreography by which SCIRI would drop its support for the Shia Coalition's official prime minister nominee, Ibrahim Jafari.  SCIRI wants the biggest payoff they can obtain while paying themselves the smallest price possible in terms of their image as standard-bearer of the Shia Islamist Coalition.  Saleh and Abd al-Mahdi are reviewing names for Prime Minister such as Qassim Daoud and Finance Minister Ali Allawi.  They will develop a longer list of names in the coming days.  They have told the Ambassador that they will widen the discussions to include a top Allawi aide, and an aide to Kurdish President Barzani, along with a representative from the Sunni Arab Islamic Party.  2. (C)  On February 22, Kurdish Deputy Prime Minister Rowsh Shaways told PolOffs that the primary obstacle to forming a national unity government is the refusal of the entire Shia Coalition to accept former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi and his National Iraqi List as part of the new government.  Given Ayatollah Sistani's instructions to both SCIRI's Abd al-Aziz al- Hakim and Prime Minister-elect Ibrahim al-Jafari to maintain the unity of the Shia Coalition, Shaways doubted that it would be possible to field an alternate candidate - such as Allawi - for Prime Minister.  Shaways thought it would be possible to dump Jafari, however.  He ruled out SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi, noting that he would be considered too controversial.  3. (C)  Shia independent Qassim Daoud told PolOff February 22 that any attempt to nominate a Prime Minister outside of the Shia Coalition could provoke a Shia uprising in Iraq.  He had also heard rumors that an alternate candidate might be nominated if Prime Minister-elect Jafari failed to garner enough support.  He expressed bitterness at the result of the internal Shia vote on February 12, stating that deciding a nomination by a margin of one vote "is not democracy."  Daoud sympathized with the difficulties of working in a Jafari government again after the experiences of this past year.  As long as the alternate candidate came from within the Shia Coalition, however, Daoud indicated that no one would fight to keep Jafari.  He firmly maintained, however, that only the Shia had the right to select the Prime Minister.  4.  (C)  The Ambassador's press remarks on February 20 generated both criticism and praise from political observers.  Shia Islamists rejected his call for the security ministries to be non-sectarian as an obvious slam against the SCIRI Interior Minister and thus an indirect call for Sunni Arab extremists to increase their attacks.  Kurdish and Allawi List parliamentarians, by contrast, registered strong agreement with the Ambassador.  5.  (C)  President Talabani will host the top political leaders on February 23 to show national unity in the wake of the February 22 attack on the Shia holy mosque in Samarra.  A Sadrist told Poloff he was upbeat that the political process would not suffer, since Jafari allegedly had stopped widespread violence between Shia and Sunni Arabs. By contrast, Rowsch Shaways thought the sectarian violence over the bombing in Samarra would only make government formation more difficult.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000573  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2016 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: PATRIARCH DELLY PESSIMISTIC ABOUT PROSPECTS FOR CHALDEANS  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Summary: On February 16, Chaldean Patriarch Emmanuel III Delly told PolOff that conditions for his community were getting worse.  He expressed concern about human rights, religious freedom and political representation for Chaldean Catholics in Iraq.  He noted that Christians elected to the Council of Representatives were not representative of the Chaldean community.   Patriarch Delly stressed the need for a diverse cabinet, one that would include a member of the Chaldean Church.  When asked whether there were any Chaldean leaders hoping to serve in leadership positions in the new government, he responded in the negative but pointed to Election Commissioner Farid Ayar as a Chaldean whom he believed could adequately represent the community. Post will remain in touch with the Patriarch and other Chaldean leaders in order to monitor their concerns.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- SENSE THAT CONDITIONS ARE WORSE FOR CHALDEANS ---------------------------------------------  2. (C) Patriarch Delly told PolOff February 16 that conditions for the Chaldean community in Iraq had worsened. Without providing specifics, the Patriarch said he was very concerned with human rights and religious freedoms for his community.  A major worry, he underlined, is the livelihood of his parishioners, many of whom he says depend on stores that sell liquor.  The Patriarch noted that many of these stores have been targeted and closed despite his perception that the major consumers are Muslims (NOTE: The Patriarch said he did not know who was responsible for the closures but suspected Islamists.  END NOTE).  The Patriarch said that sectarian violence had become more prominent in Baghdad, and that his community was even more fearful for its safety than the previous year.  He cited the recent car bombings outside several Chaldean churches January 29.  --------------------------------------------- ---- CHALDEAN REPRESENTATION IN NEW GOV'T NON-EXISTENT --------------------------------------------- ----  3. (C) Patriarch Delly also outlined his complaint about the lack of Chaldean representation in the new government.  He expressed his support for a unity government, but told PolOff that a truly representative government should include a Chaldean in a prominent position.  When PolOff asked whether there were any Chaldean leaders who would be jockeying for government positions, Patriarch Delly said no.  He did, however, point to Election Commissioner Farid Ayar, whom he said he held in high regard. While he acknowledged the presence of Christian representatives in the new parliament, he said that these Christians largely belonged to the Assyrian Church and/or do not represent the Chaldean community interests.  (NOTE: While the Assyrian and Chaldean Churches are historically linked, only the latter is in communion with the Roman Catholic Church.)  4. (C) PolOff noted to the Patriarch the benefits of engaging with other religious leaders as a way to bring Chaldean concerns to the forefront.  PolOff suggested that the Patriarch's efforts, as well as the Chaldean community's efforts, to engage in dialogue with other leaders would contribute to the democratic process and would also benefit the Chaldean community.  The Patriarch responded by saying that he was not willing to engage in that capacity and that the problem was not with the leaders, but with the "common man."  He explained to PolOff that security was an issue, and advocacy could worsen that situation for himself and Chaldean Catholics.  ------- COMMENT -------  5.  (C) Patriarch Delly has become more distressed about conditions for the Chaldean community.  Although unable to statistically define the extent to which conditions have worsened for the community, his outlook was decidedly grimmer than during previous visits.  Post will continue to meet with Chaldean leaders and encourage them to provide details about security incidents and to engage in dialogue with other communities with whom they have common concerns. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000574  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (CLASSIFICATION TO SECRET)  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PNAT, PREL, IZ SUBJECT: (CORRECTED COPY) QUIET MORNING FOLLOWS SIGNIFICANT VIOLENCE; SECTARIAN TIMBER REMAINS DRY  REF: BAGHDAD 563  BAGHDAD 00000574  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Although it appears there were more incidents on Wednesday after the Samarra mosque bombing than we reported (ref), there appear so far to be fewer incidents of sectarian violence on Thursday.  Baghdad Deputy Mayor al-Bahrani told Poloff February 23 that approximately 30 Sunni mosques had been attacked on February 22; 105 people were killed and 220 injured in violence resulting from the Samarra mosque explosion.  Press reports indicate an even higher level of violence, which we cannot confirm.  The Ministers of Interior and Defense declared a state of alert, recalling all army and police forces from leave.  Local media is reporting a heavy security presence on the streets. President Talabani invited most of the country's political leadership to a luncheon discussion of the political situation.   However, several key Sunni leaders and SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim stayed away.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------------- Differing Reports on Baghdad Violence -------------------------------------  2. (C)  Reftel reported that we could confirm attacks on only three mosques (two in Basra).  Deputy Mayor of Baghdad Hussain Bahrani told Poloff February 23 that approximately 30 Sunni mosques in Baghdad were attacked during the period between the Samarra explosion and the morning of February 23.   The Deputy Mayor added that casualties included 105 killed (including three Sunni imams) and 220 injured.  He said that 75 to 80 percent of the casualties were Sunnis injured during the attacks on the mosque.  He said the attacks had occurred primarily in the Rusafa and Adhamiya districts.  However, the Deputy Mayor did not pass on reports of new violence the morning of February 23.  In contrast to February 22, our contacts among the Sunni Arab community are not calling with frantic new reports of attacks.  3.  (S)  U.S. military as of 1330 hrs local time had received reports that 25-30 Baghdad mosques had been attacked during the period between the Samarra bombing and the early morning hours of February 23.  The imams of mosques in Rashidi and Sabbar mosques were murdered.  There are also reports of two attacks on Basra-area Sunni mosques February 22.  4. (U) Some press accounts suggested a higher level of violence on February 22.  One news agency reported that 53 bodies were found blindfolded and bound, and quoted an Iraqi police captain who claims that the dead are Sunnis who were dragged from mosques and executed.  Media  reports noted between 50 and 80 overnight attacks on Sunni mosques.  5. (C) Also in contrast to the previous 24 hours, Embassy local staff and Iraqi contacts report that the streets of Baghdad remained relatively calm the morning of February 23. However, a U.S. NGO representative who was in touch with his local staff suggested that this was because of a high militia presence in many areas.  Consistent with this view, one FSN who lives in Baghdad's Karradah district reported that as of 1130 hours, Al-Sadr,s militia has begun to roam the streets and is warning people to stay inside.  6. (C) A close associate of Interior Minister Bayan Jabr told Emboff February 23 that he expected violent demonstrations and attacks targeting both Sunni and Shia sites to continue in Baghdad, Samarra and other cities.  He warned that attacks would undermine already fragile relations between Iraqi Sunnis and Shia and alleged that foreign Al-Qaida elements had played a role in the Samarra explosion.  However, he said that the MOI had no evidence proving such involvement. Personnel at the MOI's National Joint Operations Center also reported that Iraqi Security Forces had found the corpses of at least 47 people killed in Nahrawan over the past 24 hours.  ----------------- Elsewhere in Iraq -----------------  7. (C) According to REO Basrah, twelve prisoners (five Iraqis, two Egyptians, two Tunisian, one Saudi, one Libyan and one Turk) were removed from a prison by ten armed men claiming to be from MOI intelligence at 2000 hrs February 22.  Iraqi police confirmed that they later found the bodies of eleven of the men as well as the twelfth, who was injured. Al-Arabiya reported that three of its journalists were killed in Samarra after being abducted by an armed group.   BAGHDAD 00000574  002.2 OF 002   8. (C) As of mid-day, reportedly peaceful demonstrations were underway to denounce the Sammara  attack in Baghdad, Kirkuk, Tell Afar, Al Hilla, and Nasiriyah.  Reportedly, the initial size of the demonstrations numbered a few hundred each. (Comment:  If true, this would mean most demonstrations on February 23 were smaller than those of February 22.  End Comment.)  ------------------ Leadership Efforts ------------------  9. (C) Council of Ministers Secretary-General Emad Dhia told Political Counselor February 23 that Jafari had argued vehemently into the night February 22 with Ayatollah Yaqubi, the spiritual leader of the Fadillah Party, persuading him to rescind an earlier statement urging the faithful to go to Samarra to protect the mosque.  Iraqi security forces surrounded Samarra and have set up checkpoints to regulate traffic into the city, according to media reports.  10. (C) President Talabani invited most of the country's political leadership to a February 23 luncheon discussion of the political situation.  Initial reports are that several key Sunni Arab invitees declined to attend including Adnan al-Dulaymi, Saleh Mutlak, Tariq al-Hashimi and Khalaf al-Alayan.  Tawafuq members Ala Makki and Hassan al-Bazaz told Poloff that Adnan Dulaymi, usually a fiery speaker for the Sunni Arabs, wanted to attend the luncheon but al-Alayan and al-Hashimi declined to attend.  Our sources said the Sunni coalition's leadership planned to make a public announcement during the afternoon.  We also understand that SCIRI leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim was absent from the Talabani lunch as well.  ------- Comment -------  11.  (C)  There is violence nightly in Baghdad, but the report of 50 - 105 killed would be markedly higher than normal.  The demonstrations so far appear smaller on February 23, and we are getting far fewer reports so far of attacks on mosques.  The government reportedly will have a more restictive curfew in effect in Baghdad on the night of February 23.  We are not out of the woods.  Iraq's sectarian tinder remains dry, as most vividly demonstrated by the refusal of Sunni Arab leaders to attend a unity luncheon hosted by the Kurdish president of Iraq. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000581  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2026 TAGS: PREL, EG, IZ SUBJECT: ARAB LEAGUE VISIT TO BAGHDAD: WAIT UNTIL MARCH FOR CONFERENCE DETAILS  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Following three days of meetings with senior Iraqi officials, the Arab League (AL) delegation left with no set details for the AL-sponsored conference on Iraq. During a February 22 meeting at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Deputy Foreign Minister Labeed al-Abbawi told PolOff that AL meetings with President Talabani, PM Jafari, SRSG Qazi, FM Zebari, KDP's Masrur Barzani and SCIRI's Abdul Aziz al-Hakim produced nothing.  Al-Abbawi said that the conference is tentatively scheduled for some time in June but that all details will be finalized at the upcoming AL Summit in Khartoum in March.  2. (C) Control Officer for the visit, MFA Third Secretary Qusay al-Kubaysi told PolOff February 21, that for the most part, the purpose of the AL visit was to remind GOI officials of its determination to still hold a conference and to report back to SYG Amre Mousa about government formation progress. Al-Kubaysi said that PM Jafari insisted that the conference should not include outsiders and President Talabani reminded the delegation that the conference must be held after the formation of the new government. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000583  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI LEGAL ADVISERS AGREE THAT COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES MUST CONVENE WITHIN CONSTITUTIONAL DEADLINE, BUT DISAGREE OVER WHETHER DEADLINE CAN BE EXTENDED  REF: BAGHDAD 499  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Summary.  The requirements of Article 54 of the Constitution continue to elicit multiple legal opinions.  In separate meetings February 21 and 22, TNA Legal Committee Muhsin Saadoun and Presidency Council Legal Adviser Ameer Al-Shammari offered separate interpretations.  The former said Article 54 required the Council of Representatives (CoR) to convene by February 25, while the latter said it could convene as late as March 12.  Neither agreed with the interpretation that Article 54 allowed the Presidency Council to issue a decree within fifteen (or thirty) days for the CoR to convene at a date outside that timeline.  Both agreed that a first session could be extended so that the CoR leadership would not have to be elected at the first session in order not to violate Article 55.  End Summary  --------------------------------------------- ---------------- TNA LEGAL COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN: COR MUST CONVENE BY FEBRUARY 25 --------------------------------------------- ----------------  2. (C) In a February 21 meeting, Chairman of the TNA Legal Committee Muhsin Saadoun told PolOffs that TNA Speaker Hajim al-Hassani asked him to review the Constitution and give his opinion as to when the Council of Representatives (CoR) should convene.  Saadoun said he interpreted Article 54 to require that the CoR convene within 15 days of the certification of election results (i.e., February 25).  He also did not think that the provision would allow an extension of this deadline.  (Comment.  Official translators at Post and in Washington assure us that according to the constitution text, the Presidency Council only must issue a decree within 15 days and that this period may be extended for another 15 days.  However, Saadoun's opinion that the COR must be convened within the specified period of time is in concert with the Presidency Council Legal Adviser,s opinion (see para 5). End comment.)  3. (C) In order to obey the Constitution, Saadoun argued, the CoR should convene for a ceremonial first session (a day of speeches) that would be continued at a later date.  He stated that it is important to put pressure on the political parties to finish the government formation negotiations.  Such pressure could include electing the CoR leadership ) even if the political blocs have not finished their negotiations.  He said the Iraqi public perceives that the parties are not really negotiating for a unity government, but instead are looking more narrowly for specific positions within the government.  --------------------------------------------- --------------- PRESIDENCY LEGAL COUNSELOR: COUNCIL MUST CONVENE BY MARCH 12 --------------------------------------------- ---------------  4. (C) In a February 22 meeting, Presidency Council Legal Adviser Judge Ameer al-Shammari told Embassy Legal Advisers and PolOff that some political entities are misleading the Iraqi public by asserting that there will be legal/constitutional problems if the CoR does not convene by February 25; specifically, they have misled the Iraqi public by failing to explain the 15-day extension allowed under Article 54.  He agreed with the argument that, although the Transitional Administrative Law (TAL) remains in effect until the formation of the new government, the constitutional provisions and timelines related to the formation of the government should be followed.  (Comment.  Judge al-Shammari previously asserted in the media that the constitution and its timelines do not apply and that only the TAL is relevant to the government formation process.  Embassy Legal Advisers contested this interpretation of the relevant law and maintained that there must be some legally binding element to the constitution's government formation provisions ) despite the fact that the constitution as a whole is not in force -- because it is the constitution that also explains the institutions that must be formed, the entities that choose the relevant candidates, and the voting thresholds required for approval.  If all of these aspects of the new constitution apply, the government formation deadlines also presumably would apply.  Judge al-Shammari did not necessarily agree with this assessment but did appear to concede that the constitution deadlines should be followed as a practical matter.  End comment.)  5. (C) Judge al-Shammari disagreed with Post's translation of Article 54 as requiring only that the Presidency Council call  BAGHDAD 00000583  002 OF 002   for the CoR to convene within fifteen or, with an extension, thirty days of the certification of results; rather, he believes that the CoR must be called and must convene within thirty days of the certification (March 12), assuming the extension is invoked.  (Note.  This opinion is inconsistent with the opinion of Muhsin Saadoun, the TNA Legal Committee Chairman, as to whether a 15 day extension exists -- Saadoun does not believe an extension is possible -- but is consistent with Saadoun to the extent that the CoR actually must convene within a specified period of time.  Judge al-Shammari did appear to agree with the recommendation that the CoR convene for a ceremonial first session that could be continued at a later date when the elections for the CoR leadership would be held (as part of the larger government package).  6. (C) Al-Shammari said he had personally informed President Jalal Talabani of his legal opinion, but he was not aware if Talabani had shared this with the other political parties. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000584  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2026 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, IZ SUBJECT: SISTANI RELATIVE COMMENTS ON SAMARRA ATTACK   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (S) Summary:  Sayed Emad Kelanter (strictly protect), who is related by marriage to both Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani and Muqtada al-Sadr, told PolOff in a February 23 meeting that Grand Ayatollah Mohammed Said al-Hakim successfully pressured Grand Ayatollah Sistani into inserting tougher language into his February 22 fatwa.  This language called on Muslims to protect themselves if the GOI proves incapable of providing them with protection.  Ammar bin Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim, son of SCIRI head Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim, said in a February 22 speech in Najaf that the Sunni Arabs have condemned such attacks with words in the past, but words will not suffice this time.  Ayatollah Hussein al-Sadr told Fourth Infantry Division senior officers in a February 22 conversation that terrorists are not being punished harshly enough.  Our sense is that Sistani's fetwa on February 22 contained some movement in a way that opens the door a bit for Shia militias to operate - a serious change.  End Summary.  ----------------------- Sistani Under Pressure? -----------------------  2. (S) Sayed Emad Kelanter told PolOff in a February 23 meeting that Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani's February 22 fatwa, which calls on "believers" to defend religious places if the Iraqi Government cannot fulfill its responsibility to do so, was influenced by Grand Ayatollah Mohammed Said al-Hakim. Grand Ayatollah al-Hakim, Kelanter said, had put a great deal of pressure on Sistani, arguing that Sistani's strategy of telling Shia to remain calm after attacks had contributed to the attack on the Samarra mosque.  Grand Ayatollah Sistani relented somewhat to Grand Ayatollah al-Hakim, calling for seven days of peaceful demonstrations to allow the Shia to vent their anger and calling on "believers" to defend holy sites if necessary.  3. (S) When PolOff argued that such a statement leaves the door open for Shia militias to take security into their own hands, Kelanter countered that Grand Ayatollah Sistani has always been opposed to militias and even helped Coalition Forces (CF) broker a deal with the Sadrist-backed Jaysh al-Mahdi in August 2004.  The holy sites in Najaf, Kelanter said, are not currently guarded by any militias, but rather Shia "believers" who are private citizens.  PolOff suggested to Kelanter that Sistani's statement could nonetheless be interpreted as an endorsement of militias, and perhaps further clarification would be beneficial.  Kelanter said he would pass this message to Grand Ayatollah Sistani, and perhaps a clarification would be issued in a few days.  4. (S) Grand Ayatollah al-Hakim, Kelanter said, wants to use this opportunity to discredit the government of Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari because Jafari is seen as being too close to Muqtada al-Sadr.  Kelanter said that if the Badr Organization can successfully protect Shia areas, it would certainly help discredit Jafari.  ----------------------------- Ammar al-Hakim Demands Action -----------------------------  5. (U) Ammar bin Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim, son of SCIRI head Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim, in a February 22 speech in Najaf demanded that action be taken against terrorists.  He said the Sunni Arabs have condemned such attacks with words in the past, but words will not suffice this time.  In his speech Ammar al-Hakim said the attack on the Al-Askariya shrine "maligned the decency of the holy prophet's family." Hakim told the crowd to not attack Sunni mosques, but rather encouraged them to demonstrate peacefully.  He said he did not want to see a civil war break out because of the Samarra attack.  ----------------------------------------- Hussein al-Sadr Demands Harsh Punishments -----------------------------------------  6. (C) In a February 22 meeting with senior Fourth Infantry Division officers, Ayatollah Hussein al-Sadr said that leniently punishing terrorists only encourages more terror. He argued the Shia should take justice into their own hands, and pointed to the Ministry of Defense as a corrupt institution that cannot protect Shia.  He blamed the attack on the Samarra shrine on Baathists and asked CF to send 400 more security force members to defend the Khadimiyah shrine in Baghdad.  ------- Comment  BAGHDAD 00000584  002 OF 002   -------  7. (S) Sistani's fetwa on February 22 twice urged the Shia faithful specifically to avoid acts of sectarian violence; he noticeably highlighted that the Shia should not help the group that blew up the Samarra mosque achieve its goal of spreading civil strife.  The language in Sistani's fetwa on February 22 about the Shia faithful taking a more direct role in security was new, however, and mirrors language we sometimes hear from political leaders in SCIRI.  The Kelanter account, therefore, is interesting.  Kelanter's family relationship to Grand Ayatollah Sistani makes him one of our more credible sources on thinking at the senior levels of the Shia religious leadership.  The idea that Grand Ayatollah al-Hakim influenced Sistani seems plausible.  Certainly, news reports February 22 stated that Ayatollah al-Hakim himself was arguing for the Shia faithful to take a greater role in security of holy sites if the government can not provide the protection.  The Kelanter account seems to show the extent to which acts of sectarian violence can strengthen the influence of hardliners in all of Iraq's communities.  The harsh comments from the comparatively moderate Hussein al-Sadr seem to do so as well. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000591  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: SUNNI ARAB LEADERS' REACTION TO SAMARA BOMBING STRONG BUT MIXED  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Summary: On February 23, Sunni Arab Tawafuq leaders refused to join President Talabani at a gathering of top Iraqi government officials in response to sectarian violence that followed the February 22 bombing of the Golden Mosque in Samara.  At an afternoon press conference, Tawafuq leader Tariq al-Hashimi blamed the Shi'a-led United Iraqi Coalition (UIC) for attacks on Sunni mosques and demanded a halt to the violence before discussions can continue.  The private reaction from Sunni Arab politicians is mixed.  Iraqi Islamic Party's Ayad al Samarai said the situation could quickly return to "normal" if the violence ends soon.  However, fellow Tawafuq member Hassan al Bazzaz, referring to  the new Council of Representatives, told PolOff "Seats mean nothing now. Guns mean something."  End Summary.  2. (C) The three leaders of the Sunni Arab Tawafuq Coalition, Adnan Dulaymi, Khalif Alayan and Tariq al-Hashimi, refused to join President Talabani February 23 in a gathering of top Iraqi government officials to discuss solutions to the sectarian violence resulting from the February 22 mosque bombing in Samarra.  Instead, they delivered a letter to Talabani demanding Prime Minister Jafari take responsibility for bringing calm to Iraq.  Their demands included (a) a clear denunciation by the government of all attacks of any kind and using even a three-day curfew if needed to restore law and order; (b) returning mosques occupied by gangs to their rightful owners; (c) pledging to repair damaged mosques; (d) compensating the IIP for damage to its offices and compensating victims and their families; (e) political parties to halt their incitement and especially the programming on al-Furat and al-Fayha satellite TV channels; (f) freeing persons kidnapped by armed gangs during the violence; (g) an urgent government investigation to determine those responsible for the Samarra bombing.  In a public statement, Secretary General of the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) Tariq al Hashimi accused the Shia Islamist Coalition and Sadrists of attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq.  3. (C) IIP,s Ayad al Samarai told PolOff privately that Tawafuq would likely return to government discussions as soon as they get a positive response to their demands.  Samarai said the political leaders must condemn violence against Sunni mosques and protect Sunni areas.  If the violence decreases, he continued, &then the next step will be easy." He added the Tawafuq leaders would likely meet Talabani February 24.  Samarai told PolOff that Sunni leaders had tried to protect Shia mosques and had hoped the Iraqi Police and Army would do the same. Samarai accused Iraqi Security Forces of having threatened Sunni mosques and not aiding those who requested help.  As an example, Samarai said that in the Jamiyah area of Baghdad, National Guard troops went to the Mullah Waysh mosque and wrote on the walls that the mosque was closed. He said this caused the Sunni Arab leaders to send their own armed personnel to the mosque.  Samarai lamented that the Sunni leaders did not have enough people to provide this protection at every mosque.  4. (C) Tawafuq member and University of Baghdad Professor of International Relations Hassan al Bazzaz asked for USG efforts to influence PM Jafari and Grand Ayatollah Sistani. Bazzaz said he wanted the USG to pressure Minister of Defense Sa'adoun Dulaimi to recruit more former Iraqi Army officers. When PolOff countered that there has been an ongoing recruiting effort with just that goal, Bazzaz replied Dulaimi's leadership has been too slow and that the MoD has not recruited effectively.  5. (C) Bazzaz explained that the Tawafuq leaders refused to attend Talabani's event because the Tawafuq are working from a position of weakness.  "They (Shi'a leaders) have all the guns and power."  When PolOff countered that the Tawafuq now has power through their Council of Representative seats and broader alliances, Bazazz replied, "Seats mean nothing now. Guns mean something."  6. (C) Sunni Arab leaders expressed divergent opinions regarding possible action by Coalition Forces (CF).  Abdul Nasir al-Janabi - Iraqi National Dialogue Council (ICND) member and newly elected to the Council of Representatives - pleaded with PolCouns for Coalition Forces to patrol Baghdad.  The political process was under direct threat because of the violence, he warned.  PolCouns replied the USG wants the political process in Iraq to succeed, but deploying troops under these circumstances would likely lead to Sunni extremists battling CF.  Janabi conceded the problem and said he would ask the Sunni Arab religious leadership to issue a statement renouncing retaliations by Sunni extremists.  BAGHDAD 00000591  002 OF 002   (Comment:  Al-Janabi in the past was at the forefront of those calling for the withdrawal of CF from cities.  End Comment.) 7. (C) Mithal al-Alusi, Council of Representatives member and liberal/independent Sunni, told PolOff that IIP's Tariq al-Hashimi's public comments Feb 22 incited violence.  He opined that Coalition Force presence on the Baghdad streets would cause further bloodshed and send the wrong message.  He felt the Iraqi security forces must be competent and accountable - starting immediately. 8. (C) In Baghdad, Allawi ally Saad al-Janabi told PolOff that MOI Police Commandos had taken over at least one mosque in Adamiyah.  (MNF-I has not yet confirmed other reports of alleged mosque raids locally.)  IIP's Ala Mekki told PolOff he received several calls February 23 alleging Jaysh al-Mahdi soldiers in Sha'ab and Hiour areas of western Baghdad were taking young Sunni men from their homes "because they're Sunni."  He also claimed Sunni mosques were burning in the same areas. 9. (C) Regionally, Diyala Provincial Council member Sheik Dhari Thuban traveled to south Buhriz in Diyala province.  He confirmed to Diyala SETOff that 47 Sunni and Shia brick factory workers were pulled from their cars and killed February 23.  However, in contrast, State Department officers in Anbar, Ninewa, and Salah ad Din provinces reported little violence. 10. (C) Comment: Publicly, Tawafuq is putting forward a message of "no discussions" to maintain credibility with their angry and frightened Sunni Arab constituency.  Their rhetoric mirrors that of Shia leaders who have made equally inflammatory statements in the aftermath of the attack on the Samara mosque.  The ITG and the Coalition are seized with dealing with the violence -- a series of measures has been ordered during several back-to-back MCNS meetings, including one on February 24 (reported septels).  The immediate challenge is to get both sides to desist from provocative pronouncements that carry the risk of increasing sectarian violence past the point of no return.  Ultimately, we must ensure both sides rejoin the effort to establish a cross-sectarian government.  End Comment. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000593  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: OLDEST MEMBER OF COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES CONTEMPLATES CHAIRING FIRST SESSION  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) Summary. PolOff and PolFSN met February 22 with new Council of Representative (CoR) member Dr. Abd al-Lateef Abd al-Wahab Hassan al-Bedri.  Dr. al-Bedri was the first candidate on the National Iraqi List (Allawi) slate in Salahadin.  When PolOff informed him that he appeared to be the oldest member in the new CoR, Dr. al-Bedri expressed surprise adding that he thought Dr. Adnan Pachachi was older.  Al-Bedri joked that he would call Pachachi to let him know (NOTE: Adnan Pachachi was reportedly born in 1923, while al-Bedri was born in 1922.  END NOTE).  When told that, as oldest member, he would preside over the first session of the CoR until the elections of the Speaker and Deputy Speakers, al-Bedri asked, "What do you want me to say?"  He added that he did not want to say anything wrong.  PolOff responded that the TNA Speaker's Office, Dr. Allawi, and other political leaders would likely be in touch with him before the first session.  2. (C) Dr. al-Bedri told PolOff that he was never a Ba'athist and was not sure why he was initially removed from the candidate list by the National de-Ba'athification Commission. (NOTE: Reportedly, the Commission concluded ultimately that al-Bedri might have been the victim of a case of mistaken identity and withdrew its objection to his serving in the legislature.)  When asked what CoR committees he would try to join, al-Bedri said he hoped to be involved with health and higher education issues.  3. (C) Al-Bedri said he was one of Allawi's professors in the 1960's, and their relationship has continued uninterrupted since then.  He told PolOff that he had believed "with all of his heart" that Allawi would do well in the December elections.  When asked why Allawi only won 25 seats, he said the election was not honest, mentioning multiple voting, polling station fraud, and shortcomings of the IECI.  PolOff said that the International Mission for Iraqi Elections had reviewed the election results, but did not find evidence of massive fraud.  4. (C) When asked about the security situation, Dr. al-Bedri said that the situation will get better if extrajudicial killings stop.  He added that the Minister of Interior should be replaced, preferably by a Kurd.  He said if a Shia is Minister of Interior, that person would be under the "influence of the masses".  5. (C) BIONOTE: Dr. Abd al-Lateef Abd al-Wahab Hassan al-Bedri was born in 1922 in Samarra, Iraq.  He went to college in Baghdad, and completed his post-graduate studies in the UK and U.S. (Chicago).  He returned to Iraq in 1949 and joined the medical college at the University of Baghdad as a professor of surgery.  He was briefly imprisoned in 1958 on political charges.  He later served as a Minister of Health in the government of Prime Minister Abdurrahman al-Bazzaz (1965-66) and as President of the medical college from 1971-1972.  He was expelled from his position at the medical college by the Ba'athists in 1975.  He moved to the UAE where he served as a medical advisor until 1980, and then he went to Jordan, where he served as the dean of the medical school at the University of Jordan.  In 1985, he suffered a major heart attack.  According to Dr. al-Bedri, King Hussein contacted Saddam Hussein directly and asked for Saddam to let Dr. al-Bedri return to Iraq to be with his family.  He was allowed to return, but reportedly not permitted to work.  In 2003, he returned to the medical college at the University of Baghdad as a professor of surgery ) many of his former students are now on the faculty.  He will leave his faculty position once the CoR convenes, but he said he hopes to give guest lectures from time to time. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000594  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2016 TAGS: PINS, PTER, PHUM, IZ SUBJECT: QUIET CONTINUES; ASSOCIATION OF MOSLEM  SCHOLARS CALLS FOR "UNITY" IN THE SPIRIT OF FALLUJAH  AND NAJAF  REF: A. BAGHDAD 584      B. BAGHDAD 574  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY Iraq was relatively calm on February 24.  There was a curfew in effect most of the day in Baghdad and three surrounding provinces.  There were no or reduced prayers at many Baghdad mosques.  The Mahdi militia was out in force in some cities. Political and religious leaders, both Sunni and Shia, appealed for calm. Although Friday seems calmer thus far, sectarian tensions remain high. END SUMMARY  ------- Baghdad -------  2. (C) City streets leading to public buildings were reportedly being patrolled by the Iraqi Army, police and neighborhood citizens, who are controlling traffic into these areas.  In Sadr City, Jaysh al- Mahdi (JAM) forces have blocked off streets and effectively shut down traffic, reportedly out of fear of VBIEDs, according to an Embassy FSN who lives in Sadr City.  Sadrist mosques in this area held Friday prayers and demonstrations, despite the ban in effect in Baghdad.  JAM is also conducting round-the-clock patrols in Sadr City.  3. (C) On the morning of February 24, the National Joint Operations Center, combining MOI and MOD data, reported that the Baghdad body count was highest on Wednesday, February 22 and that the level of confirmed killed decreased on February 23.   The body count as of mid-afternoon February 24 also pointed to a continued decreasing level of body counts.  In a conflicting report, Deputy Mayor Hussein Bahrani told PolOff that the body count in Baghdad resulting from violence after the attack on the Samarra mosque could be as high as 500, citing police and hospital numbers from across the city. MOI's IG office reported that as of the afternoon of February 23, 29 mosques had been attacked (septel) and 57 people killed since the Samarra explosion.  4. (C) Tawafuq member Professor Hassan al-Bazzaz asked for USG assistance to control militia and the Iraqi Police, whom he accused of taking advantage of the curfew to raid homes and kill Sunnis in seven Baghdad neighborhoods.  In addition, Allawi ally Saad al Janabi told PolOff that MOI Police Commandos had arrested 70 Sunni men late February 23 with CF asssistance.  (COMMENT: MNF-I has no information to confirm this report. END COMMENT.)  He suggested that Sadr militia and Badr Corps are coordinating efforts to cause 'civil war'.  Janabi accused the Iraqi Police of colluding with JAM militia in Salman Pak to arrest Sunni men from their homes.  Another Sunni Arab contact on February 24 told us that the Mahdi Army was operating openly in Salman Pak.  An Embassy contact in Lutifiya, south of Baghdad, reported that Jaysh al-Mahdi elements were driving through the city and ignoring checkpoints.  ------ Basrah ------  5. (C) As Friday prayers ended around 13:30, Basrah remained relatively calm, according to REO Basrah. 2000-3000 people gathered at the Al Ubala mosque for a unity prayer, and small but peaceful demonstrations continue around the city.  Local REO staff report that Jaysh al-Mahdi is out in the streets in force and is "protecting" Sunni mosques. (NOTE: In a February 23 press conference, the Association of Moslem Scholars AMS called for Moqtada al-Sadr to remember the unity between the Sunnis and his supporters shown during the attacks on Fallujah and Najaf in 2004 and called for JAM to take back all the Sunni mosques and protect them.)  6. (C) Sadr's office in Basrah is reportedly saying that the Coalition and the central government are to blame for the attack on the Samarra mosque, and is vowing to protect Shia shrines themselves.  Local REO staff is reporting that individual Sunnis  BAGHDAD 00000594  002 OF 002   throughout Basrah province have been harassed or threatened on the streets or in their homes.  ------------------- Political Responses -------------------  7. (C) Ayad al-Samarai told PolOff February 24 that he and Tariq al-Hashimi would meet Sadrist (and Transportation Minister) Salam al-Maliki later in the day at TNA Speaker Hachim al Hashimi's home to discuss how to decrease the violence.  The three leaders of the Sunni Arab Tawafuq Coalition, Adnan Dulaymi, Khalif al-Alayan and Tariq al-Hashimi, will also meet President Talabani on February 25, according to Tawafuq member Hassan al Bazzaz.  8. (C) On February 24, Arab media broadcast a pre- recorded speech by Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim calling for calm and for his followers not to attack Sunnis. Al-Furat TV on February 24 highlighted in its news crawlers throughout the day the condemnations by Sunni figures, including the Iraqi Sunni Endowment head, the Jordanian King and the Kuwait Government.  9. (C) Many mosques did not have Friday sermons because of the curfew.  SCIRI Chief of Staff Haitham Husseini told PolOff that SCIRI called on associated mosques to obey al-Hakim's demands, telling the people to calm down, avoid confrontation and maintain stability.  IIP's Ayad al-Samarai told PolOff February 24 that his party had issued a similar message to Sunni mosques.  Sammari said he believed Friday sermons called for calm, and for Iraqis to put down their weapons and stop attacks on all mosques, Sunni and Shia.  (By contrast, the Prime Minister's office was furious at coverage on February 24 the Islamic Party's Baghdad TV station that they said was encouraging Sunnis to arm themselves.)  In Baquba, the local head of the Sunni Waqf received a phone call from Sunni Waqf leader Ahmed Abdul Ghafur al-Samarai and was asked to give peaceful messages during Friday sermons.  In the Istiqlal District of Baghdad, Sunni and Shia leaders agreed to have a joint worship service in district mosques.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000595  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: GATHERING OF IRAQI LEADERS PRODUCES FRAIL CONSENSUS AND MUTUAL RECRIMINATIONS  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Iraqi leaders arrived at a frail consensus for calm after a day of meetings and mutual recriminations on February 23.  President Talabani issued a statement (after reading it aloud to unanimous approval at a meeting he hosted for Iraq's leadership) calling for peaceful demonstrations, reconstruction of all damaged religious sites (Sunni and Shia), and a halt to violence.  The Talabani meeting was marred, however, by an ongoing and still unsettled clash between Sunni Arab Tawafuq front leaders and the Sadrist Mehdi Army.  Tawafuq leaders boycotted the Talabani meeting and instead sent a letter accusing the Sadrists of direct complicity in a wide range of attacks on Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) headquarters and religious sites.  Sadrist leader Salam al-Maliki denounced this letter as "Saddamist" in tone, denied any Mehdi Army involvement in the violence, and promised to punish any group found responsible.  Tawafuq leadership emerged by the evening and met with SCIRI leader Adel Abd al-Mehdi, Ayad Allawi, and Masoud Barzani -- agreeing that all sides needed to stand down and push for quick progress on government formation.  By the end of the day, however, leaders from across the spectrum warned that they have never felt so close to civil war and that they see an urgent need for accelerating government formation talks. END SUMMARY.  ------------------------ Frank Fears of Civil War ------------------------  2. (C) President Talabani gave Iraqi leaders a forum to air their grievances but had trouble pulling them toward a consensus at a large meeting he hosted on February 23.  Every major leader at some point in the proceedings acknowledged that the specter of civil war has never been more real to them than after the events of the previous day.  All called for a denunciation of the sectarian violence and backed a statement by President Talabani to that effect.  PM Jafari praised the stance of the marja'iya in calling for calm, also warning, "If this ignites, then all Iraq will be ablaze, the political process will end, and the people really will miss Saddam because at least he used an iron fist to prevent a civil war."  Talabani told the group that, on Wednesday for the first time, he had felt that a civil war is possible. Leading SCIRI figure Adel Abd al-Mehdi and Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Masud Barzani both echoed this fear in their own remarks.  ----------------------------------------- Simmering Dispute Over Role of Mehdi Army -----------------------------------------  3. (C) The role of the Mehdi Army in the violence was a controversial topic throughout the day.  Leading Sadrist figure and Transportation Minister Salam al-Maliki denied (in front of the group at Talabani's meeting) that the Mehdi Army had played any role in the ongoing violence.  Maliki said that Muqtada al-Sadr had called for calm and that any Mehdi Army elements found responsible for the violence would be harshly punished.  Da'wa leader Jawad al-Maliki seconded Salam al-Maliki's defense and warned that denunciations of the Mehdi Army are "irresponsible."  On the sidelines of the meeting, however, Sadrist leader Baha al-Araji openly acknowledged to Poloff that Mehdi militia elements are surrounding Sunni Arab mosques "for their protection."  Araji seemed buoyant and said to Poloff with a half-smirk that the only way to calm the crisis would be for the U.S. to "support us as we liquidate all of them (the Sunnis)."  He then denounced the Ambassador as a Sunni and therefore not a trustworthy envoy.  4. (C) The controversy over Sadrist actions surfaced when President Talabani read aloud a letter he had just received from the Sunni Arab Tawafuq Front leadership, who boycotted the meeting.  The letter directly accused the Mehdi Army of fomenting violence and leading attacks on Sunni Arab mosques and IIP headquarters.  Upon hearing the accusations, Salam al-Maliki denounced the letter as "Saddamist" and warned that such baseless attacks play into the hands of terrorists.  ------------------------------ Wavering Stance By Sunni Arabs ------------------------------  5. (C) The conspicuous boycott by the Sunni Arab Tawafuq Front leadership set the meeting on edge from the start.  IIP leader Tariq al-Hashimi told Poloff before the Talabani meeting that he would refuse to attend as long as the GOI tacitly cooperates with groups attacking their mosques and  BAGHDAD 00000595  002 OF 002   offices.  According to Hashimi, the government has yet to defend against such actions or to provide security, and the Tawafuq Front is suspending participation in government formation talks.  When Poloff urged Hashimi to attend the meeting and make such arguments in person, Hashimi said his hands are "in the fire" and he would be accused of "selling our interests for a cheap price" by showing up for a lunch with his opponents at a time of civil strife.  Leading Tawafuq Front figure Adnan al-Duleimi told Poloff separately by phone that he had been attempting desperately to convince his colleagues to attend and that he had been forced to stay away when Hashimi and Khalaf Alayan chose to boycott the meeting.  In their absence, Transitional National Assembly (TNA) Speaker Hachem al-Hasani, Sunni Waqf Director Ahmad Abd al-Ghafour al-Samarai, Adnan Pachachi, and Mithal Alusi were the only well-known Sunni Arab figures at the gathering.  6. (C) All three Tawafuq Front leaders emerged from their foxhole by the evening and met with SCIRI leader Adil Abd al-Mehdi at Ayad Allawi's house, but they remained out of touch and at odds with the Sadrists.  At the evening meeting at Allawi's house, the Ambassador questioned Tawafuq's decision to boycott that day's meeting and warned that they are hurting no one but themselves with their threat to withdraw from government talks.  Hashimi acknowledged that the letter and boycott had been poorly thought-out decisions, and Duleimi promised that the group would continue government negotiations.  Hashimi, however, pushed for a much stronger Iraqi government stance in providing security, arguing that the Sunni Arabs are powerless victims and that the government is failing in its responsibility.  ----------- Steps Ahead -----------  7. (C) Talabani labored at the end of his meeting (earlier in the day) to focus attention on government formation as a way out of the crisis.  He pitched the formation of a National Salvation Front and asked all sides to consider joining it and using it to influence the shape of the next parliament. In addition to calling for calm in his final statement before the press, Talabani echoed a call made by Sunni Waqf Director Ahmad Abd al-Ghafour al-Samarai for compensation and reconstruction for all damaged holy sites.  8. (C) The evening meeting between Ayad Allawi, Masoud Barzani, Adel Abd al-Mehdi, and the Tawafuq Front leadership produced a suggested series of several steps that the Ambassador took with him to a subsequent Ministerial Committee for National Security (MCNS) meeting (septel).  The steps, largely recommended by Allawi, included:  -- A call for all forces occupying Sunni mosques to leave immediately or be removed by force;  -- A curfew to be imposed on key areas of friction for Friday or beyond;  -- Steps to keep militias, particularly the Mehdi Army, off the streets;  -- A government call for calm and respect for the rule of law;  -- The formation of committees to investigate the crimes committed, handle compensation for damaged sites, and coordinate further political steps. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000596  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2016 TAGS: PHUM, PTER, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: LIST OF SUNNI MOSQUES ATTACKED IN BAGHDAD  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) An Embassy contact working at the MOI's IG office reported that the office has a list of 29 Sunni mosques in Baghdad attacked February 22, in the aftermath of the explosion at the Al-Askariya Mosque in Samarra. The names of mosques, corresponding neighborhoods, and incident description according to our source are listed below.  Post does not know to what extent MoI has followed up on these reports and cannot currently confirm the accuracy of this list.  --Al-Tayba Mosque - Zaiyuna - bomb --Al-Rahman Mosque - kidnapping --Al-Hamza Mosque - Al-Risala - burned --Mustafa Mosque - Al-Aamel - bomb --Al-Mustani Mosque - Al-Firas - bomb outside mosque --Al-Quds Mosque - Al-Shaab - gunfire attack --Al-Rishadeen Mosque - Al-Husseiniya - killing --Al-Yemani Mosque - Al-Zafaraniya - killing --Al-Asharah al-Mubashara - Al-Aamel - gunfire attack --Al-Haq Mosque - Al Shu'la - hand grenade --Al-Ali Mosque - Al-Risala - burned --Al-Sheikh Ghazi Mosque - Al-Husseiniya - unknown --Al-Aksa Mosque - Al-Zafaraniya - hand grenade --Al-Samaraii Mosque - Baghdad Al-Jadeed - gunfire --Al-Sheikh Al-Jiwa Mosque - Al-Saadoun - unknown --Al-Yaseen Mosque - Doura - bomb --Al-Rahman Mosque - Doura - bomb --Al-Sharkee Mosque - Al-Chadour - gunfire --Al-Mehdi Mosque - Al-Shu'la - unknown --Al-Quds Mosque - Al Mishta - gunfire --Al-Khadimiya Shrine - Al-Khadimiya --Al-Haja Fatima Mosque - Palestine District - bomb --Al-Yakeem Mosque - Al Zaiyuna - unknown --Al-Taha Al-Samaraii Mosque - Al-Baya'a - bomb --Al-Kubeisi Mosque - Al-Aamel - bomb nearby --Al-Zaghail Mosque - Al Chilam - burned --Al-Ali al-Atheem Mosque - Al-Zafaraniya - gunfire --Al-Adil Mosque - Al Adil - unknown KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000597  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2016 TAGS: IZ, KCRM, MOPS, NATO, PARM, PGOV, PINR, PREL, UK SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 23 MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY ACS ON GOLDEN MOSQUE BOMBING  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad For Reasons 1.4 (C) and (D).  (S/REL MCFI) SUMMARY: PM Jafari called a Minister,s Committee on National Security (MCNS) meeting with the Ambassador, UK Ambassador Patey, MNF-I Commanding General and Deputy Commanding General, and Iraqi Security Ministers to continue addressing the February 22 bombing of the Shia Golden Mosque in Samarra.  The GOI enacted a daytime curfew, in addition to the nighttime one, in select provinces and began preliminary work on a comprehensive security plan to include broad-based public outreach to overcome sectarian differences.  Despite isolated incidents of violence, with the imposition of the extended curfew the situation is relatively calm in Baghdad.  END SUMMARY.  2. (S/REL MCFI) Jafari called a MCNS meeting on February 23 with the Ambassador, UK Ambassador Patey, and MNF-I CG Casey to continue developing a response to the bombing of the Shia Golden Mosque in Samarra.  Also in attendance were Minister of Defense Dulime, Minister of Interior Jabr, Minister of National Security al-Anzi, National Security Advisor Rubaie, and MNF-I DCG Houghton.  A smaller follow-up meeting was held on February 24 with Jafari, the Ambassador, Duleime, Rubaie, and Houghton.  3. (S/REL MCFI) Jafari characterized the situation as having the potential to lead to civil war.  Although some groups and imams are urging calm, he asserted, others are being inflammatory and are playing into the hands of the terrorists inciting violent unrest.  Therefore, according to Jafari, the GOI must maintain order, demonstrate that it is in control, and begin actions to unify the nation.  4. (S/REL MCFI) After discussions with Ayad Allawi, Tawaffuq leaders and Masoud Barzani, Ambassador pushed Jafari to consider four main proposals: establish an investigative committee on the Askariya Shrine incident; establish a political committee to foster national unity in the wake of the attack; enact a security plan to include bans on public displays of weapons; and issue specific instructions for Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) to guard mosques and shrines.  5. (S/REL MCFI) After much discussion, it was decided to enact a daytime curfew from 0600 to 1600 on Friday, February 24, and Saturday, February 25, in the provinces of Baghdad, Diyala, Salah al-Din, and Babil.  This daytime curfew would be in conjunction with the extended nighttime curfew of 2000 to 0600 that was enacted previously.  The governors of the other provinces could decide for themselves if they should apply these curfews to their areas.  The main purpose of the curfew is to prevent the conduct of Friday prayers that could lead to further violence and to prevent large groups from gathering for demonstrations.  6. (S/REL MCFI) The MCNS later adopted Ambassador,s plan to announce the selection of broad-based committees to investigate the Askariya Shrine bombing and to devise outreach methods to unify the populace.  Preliminary work is underway to form these committees under the GOI's security plan.  Additional highly-publicized statements and appearances -- to include many different sectarian blocs and political and religious leaders -- will follow.  Jafari and his staff are planning to enlist leaders from a broad spectrum to form a unified front in a call for calm.  6. (S/REL MCFI) The Ambassador urged Jafari to make these announcements within a day in order to reassure the Iraqi people as quickly as possible.  Ambassador also asked to be provided with the specifics of the security plan so that he can use them in outreach efforts with religious and political leaders.  7. (S/REL MCFI) A smaller group met the afternoon of February 24 with General Casey to review the planned public announcement.  After the meeting ended, Jafari gave a press conference to announce the new security measures.  The press conference was carried live on al-Iraqiyya television and repeated on several other stations later in the evening. After a short preamble Jafari read the following points.  (U) Begin Embassy Translation of speech:  Orders were given to all Iraqi security forces to play a vital and important role in this critical historic stage by maintaining security and order. We urge the Iraqi people to  BAGHDAD 00000597  002 OF 003   cooperate with our armed forces in eradicating the terrorists and to be vigilantly aware of the internal and external conspiracies that surround Iraq. The presence of our armed forces is for the safeguarding of the citizens and the protection of their interests.  We have decided to deploy the Iraqi armed forces and increase their presence in the areas of friction in a manner that would achieve security and stability in those areas. We have decided to prohibit entry and exit, into and from Baghdad except for police vehicles, ambulances and convoys that belong to the ministries.  We know that the imposition of curfew in some areas and at specific times limits the freedom and movement of the citizens; however the government sees that the curfew is crucial to stop the terrorists from achieving their objectives and limit their movement. We do this so we can provide our security forces the opportunity to go after the terrorists and to facilitate the mission of our armed forces in protecting the citizens. Our armed forces have confidence in the citizens and are completely aware of the reasons on which basis we took this decision.  We also decided to form an advisory political team that is comprised of a group of influential individuals, political leaders, and heads of parliamentary blocs to listen to their views concerning this crisis and to obtain their contribution in strengthening the national unity which is subjected to attempts aimed at weakening it by the terrorists and the enemies of Iraq.  We have taken all the necessary security measures to protect the holy shrines and the places of worship throughout Iraq, especially in the areas that are made up of diverse components, in addition to examining the possibility of establishing a special force for their protection.  We have also taken suitable security measures to protect the roads leading to the holy shrines and to secure them for visitors.  For the security of the citizens and the protection of their interests, all public show of weapons is prohibited on the streets and carrying of weapons without permit shall be prohibited outside of homes and shops.  In order to increase the assurance and protection of citizens in the hot spots the Government has decided to amplify the efforts and the security presence in guarding the areas in a way that reinforces the citizens, trust and strengthens security, and to reinforce all means for maintaining good order.  The Government calls on all media and cultural agencies to shoulder their national responsibilities at this critical moment of our nation,s history and to play their role in pulling together national cohesion and strengthening unity among the one people and to stay clear from all that aims and leads to disunity and incites terrorism and violence, and to contribute in uncovering the plans of Iraq,s enemies in their attempts to sow sectarian strife. To start of a new phase, the Government calls on all venerable religious scholars and Imams, in harmony with the responsible message given by the leading Marja,iya and the highest national interest, to shoulder their legal and national responsibilities in disseminating the spirit of brotherhood, tolerance, rejection of violence and terrorism and all that offends the lofty values of our true religion.  The Government has communicated to the concerned judicial authorities to move forward with the important judicial dossiers and quickly bring the terrorists and the criminals to justice. At the same time, the Government stressed the need to activate the Anti-terrorism Law and to enforce it on all.  The Government has decided to rebuild all that has been damaged by the Samara tragedy and all the destruction that ensued.  The Government has decided to contribute in forming an investigative committee to uncover the reasons and the motives of the Samara tragedy and what ensued thereafter, and to identify the people who neglected their duties and bring  BAGHDAD 00000597  003 OF 003   them to justice, and to focus the furthermost intelligence effort to uncover the perpetrators. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000600  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQI OFFICIAL REPORTS TALABANI WILL NOT CONVENE THE COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES SOON  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for   Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Presidency Council Chief of Staff and President Talabani's aide Kamran Karadaghi told PolOffs on February 24 that Talabani does not plan on convening the Council of Representatives (COR) on February 25.  Karadaghi claimed that since the Iraqi Government was still operating under the Transitional Administrative Law (TAL), vice the Constitution, it is Talabani's prerogative to delay calling the COR into session.  2. (C) Having said this, Karadaghi privately admitted that he had remonstrated both Talabani and Deputy President Adil Abd al-Mahdi for not releasing a press statement to explain this decision to the Iraqi public.  He noted that most of the people believe that the Constitution is in effect and calls for the convention of the COR no later than February 25 (the 15-day point after the verification of the elections results).  Neither Talabani nor Abd al- Mahdi were willing to be bound publicly to a specific date for convening the COR, however, and refused to address the public directly on this issue.  According to Karadaghi, both Talabani and Abd al-Madhi believe that issuing a public statement about an extension would draw unwanted attention to the fact that they have not set a date. Karadaghi felt this to be a grave mistake, and would present precedence issues for successive Iraqi governments.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000601  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINS, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: SITUATION UPDATE SATURDAY: VIOLENCE  DIMINISHING AS BAGHDAD CURFEW REMAINS IN EFFECT  REF: A. BAGHAD 594      B. BAGHDAD 591  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR Robert S. Ford, for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: By most accounts, Baghdad saw fewer acts of sectarian violence on 25 February than it had over the previous several days, largely due to the extended curfew still in effect.  A variety of contacts told us that anti-Sunni violence had occurred overnight February 24-25, especially around Baghdad's Adhamiya district.  We should expect some more reports of gun battles and skirmishes in the Baghdad area on Saturday night, but overall the violence appears to be diminishing.  The Sunni Arab leadership is talking with Shia leaders, including those connected to the Shia militia thought most involved in security problems.  Early Saturday evening Sunni and Shia clerics and political leaders from the Sadrist movement appeared on national TV calling for an end to sectarian violence.  END SUMMARY  ------------------------ ON THE STREET OF BAGHDAD ------------------------  2. (C) MoI and MoD sources reported to MNF-I that the number of deaths dropped for the second day in a row.  Indications are that the body count will be lower at the end of February 25 than in previous days.  -------------- Curfew Helping --------------  3.  (C)  A variety of Iraqi contacts credit the curfew with helping.  For example, Aida Ossairan, Deputy Minister for Human Rights and Harith Hassan, Deputy Chief Electoral Officer, told PolOff on February 25 that due to the continued declaration of emergency procedures and curfew which is in place, the city remains calm and the general population no longer expects violence during the day.  According to Ossairan, traffic throughout the province and city is generally light, with only official vehicles allowed on the roads.   However, these two contacts, and others, fear that violence could spark after dark.  During the late afternoon of February 25 the government announced the curfew would continue, applied to vehicular traffic, through Sunday.  -------------------------------------- Small Fighting Friday Night in Baghdad --------------------------------------  4. (C) Allawi ally Saad al-Janabi told PolOff the evening of February 24 black-clad fighters had attacked the famous Sunni Abu Hanifa mosque in Adhamiya, and shot into Adhamiya's al- Numan Hospital. Al-Adhamiyah District Council Chairman, Hassam Kajem Abd Allah, told PolOff February 25 There was considerable activity in the Al-Adhamiyah district overnight with reports from local political figures and residents stating sniper fire and attacks started at dusk on February 24 and continued until U.S. Forces started patrolling the city later in the evening.  The chairman also told PolOff that residents of Al-Adhamiyah were continuing to protect the community and mosques from terrorists.   MNF-I confirms some instances of small-arms fire and sniping during the night of 24 February in Adhamiya. (Comment:  It is not clear that any group actually attacked the mosque; there was simply shooting near it.  The reports of attacks on the mosque itself suggest how nervous the Sunni community in Adhamiya is.  End Comment.)   -------------------------------------------- Ulema Council Head Also Makes News - Wrongly --------------------------------------------  5. (C) District Council Chairman of Abu Ghreib, Hamed Al-Amery, told PolOff February 25 that units from MOI continue to enter the district and that the residents are afraid they will attack the citizens  BAGHDAD 00000601  002 OF 003   and occupy the mosques.  On February 25, several Sunni contacts called urgently warning that a Ministry of Interior brigade had attacked the Baghdad home of Muslim Ulema Council leader Harith al-Dhari.  Subsequent checking through MNF-I confirmed that there was no truth to the allegations.  Instead, it appears that an accidental firefight broke out between two ISF units, one of which was protecting a funeral procession near Dhari's house.  (Comment:  This is another indication of how nervous the Sunni Arabs are now. End Comment.)  6. (C) Saifaldin Abd al-Rahman, Chief of Staff to the TNA Speaker, told PolOff February 25 that the situation is the worst he had seen since return to Iraq in 2003.  He said Sunni mosques in the Salhiya neighborhood of Baghdad had been attacked the night of February 24 and were using loudspeakers to call for help.  He described the violence as a concerted effort by the Shia Coalition to target Sunni Arab areas bordering Shia areas in Baghdad.  He claimed that the curfew is not helping, as Iraq Security Forces are involved in the attacks.  Despite the curfew, he was able to meet representatives from the Iraqi Islamic Party February 24 to discuss the next Parliament - he said he drove past three police cars and three police stations without being stopped.  ---------------------------- Political Figures Weighing In ----------------------------  7. (C) Shaykh Jalal ad-Din as-Saghir told PolCouns midday February 25 that he had received no reports of attacks against Shia so far during the day. (This was in sharp contrast to Thursday and Friday, he stated.)  He said the curfew appeared better enforced and thus more effective; it had been too lax on Thursday and Friday, he commented.  He urged that CF take a more visible role, including using helicopters and aircraft to remind people their presence.  PolCouns noted that CF have stepped up their patrols, but that Iraqi Security Forces must play their part too as must political leaders like Saghir.  Saghir dismissed the ISF as too weak still and insisted the CF must help them.  He pledged he would work to calm the Shia street, and that his Friday sermon had aimed at doing that.  However, the latest attacks had made public opinion very volatile within the Shia community, he warned.  He also highlighted that greater CF visibility in locales where Shia and Sunni populations are mixed, such as Mahmudiya and Lutifiya south of Baghdad, would be especially helpful.  He concluded that so far the news on Saturday was better and suggested there is now an opportunity fro the government to calm a nervous public.  ------------------------ Political Talks Underway ------------------------  8.  (C)  Sunni Arab Iraqi Islamic Party official Ala'a Mekki confirmed that the leaders of the Tawafuq Coalition, Adnan Dulaymi, Khalif Alayan and Tariq al-Hashimi, met with President Talabani and others the evening of February 24.  Mekki said Talabani agreed to Tawafuq's ten demands.  They plan to meet again February 25.  The Islamic Party issued a communiqu7 on February 25 saying that it welcomed the Prime Minister's announcement promising mosques of all communities would be protected and pledging an investigation into the Samarra bombing.  The Islamic Party's communiqu7 said it hoped the Government would make good on its pledges.  It said that if there was movement on the February 23 Tawafuq Front demands (ref b), then it would rejoin the political talks about forming a new government.  9. (C) IIP's Ala'a Mekki told us February 24 that Tariq al-Hashimi and Ayad Samarai had met that day with Sadrists Salam al Maliki and Baha al Araji, who stated they are not responsible for the violence. According to Mekki, the atmosphere in the meeting between the Sadrists and the Iraqi Islamic Party was generally good.  He anticipated that Hashimi and al- Maliki plan to issue a joint press statement today calling for peace.  The Sadrists reportedly claimed many fighters are attacking in the name of Moqtada  BAGHDAD 00000601  003 OF 003   al-Sadr and Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM), but were not JAM members.  Mekki added that there were multiple reports of JAM attacks throughout Baghdad.  In Mada'in, for example, he said that the JAM overtook a mosque and announced from the loudspeaker for Sunnis to stay in their homes or they would be killed that night.  10.  (U)  As this cable was being sent, Iraqiya TV began broadcasting a two-part press conference.  The first part included joint press statements by Sunni Arab Muslim Ulema Council cleric Abdel Selam al- Kubaysi and Sadrist cleric Fadhil ash-Shara that called for national unity.  They condemned attacks on mosques and said that the Ulema Council, the Office of the Martyr Sadr and the Khalisi Foundation (close to the Ulema Council) would establish a committee to investigate what had caused the violence.  It then showed the Shia and Sunni clerics praying together.  Iraqiya TV then showed a live press conference with Iraqi Party leaders Ayham Samarrai'e and Ala'a Mekki with Sadrist Baha ad-Din al-Araji calling also for national unity.  Mekki in his statement said the Sadrists would support the February 23 demands presented by the Tawafuq Front.   ------- Comment -------  11.  (C)  The situation is still tense, and we should expect more reports of skirmishes and small gun battles on Saturday night in parts of Baghdad. That said, our sense is that barring some spectacular new terror attack, the worst of this latest spasm of sectarian violence is past.  The Sadrist move to reach out publicly to the Muslim Ulema Council and the Iraqi Islamic Party will carry especially strong symbolism for many.  Extending the curfew - for vehicle traffic - will also help improve the security situation.  The underlying causes of the sectarian violence, of course, so far have not been addressed.  KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000602  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR RALLIES KEY PLAYERS AROUND PM'S CRISIS PLAN   Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY: After a day of prodding, Sunni Arab leaders agreed over February 24-25 to join a government advisory committee that will unite key leaders and convene the evening of February 25 to plan the next steps following the Samarra tragedy.  Prime Minister Jafari issued a plan February 24 calling for, among other steps, a continued curfew, increased security deployments, and a ban on public weapon possession. The Sunni Arab Tawafuq leadership learned of the plan in an evening meeting with Ambassador and subsequently issued a statement February 25 welcoming it, calling for its implementation and expressing interest in returning to the negotiating table for government formation talks.  They stopped short of withdrawing their announced suspension of government formation engagement, however, and they complain that some Sunni mosques remain occupied by Mehdi Army elements -- a charge that we and the GOI are working to verify and address.  2. (C) SUMMARY CONTINUED: The Sunni Arab leadership promised the Ambassador that they will rein in media incitement and said they are holding "positive" meetings with Mehdi Army leaders to de-escalate the situation.  Allawi recommended that the government summon governors from key Iraqi provinces for a meeting in Baghdad to coordinate a unified approach to quelling unrest.  In a separate meeting the evening of February 24, a still-shaken Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim told the Ambassador that he backs the Prime Minister's plan but warned that the Shia community would put its faith in the Mehdi Army if the government does not deliver results soon.  Leaders outside the Shia alliance have acknowledged that a national unity government remains the only escape from this crisis, and they say that they are going to work closely with SCIRI to agree on an end-game before taking the first deliberate steps to push Jafari aside.  END SUMMARY.  ----------------------------- Rallying Around the PM's Plan -----------------------------  3. (C) PM Jafari announced a security plan on February 24 after multiple Ministerial Committee on National Security (MCNS) meetings (see septel).  The Ambassador worked to rally Sunni Arab, Kurdish, and Shia leaders around the plan, which called for, among other things, increased security force deployment, an extended curfew, and the creation of a political advisory team to bring together key leaders to consult on the crisis and build national unity.  --------------------------------------------- Sunni Arabs Reluctantly Agree to Come Forward ---------------------------------------------  4. (C) The Ambassador worked with Ayad Allawi to host a meeting the evening of February 24 for Sunni Arab leaders and Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Masoud Barzani in an effort to convince them to rally around the PM's plan.  Adnan al-Duleimi, Tariq al-Hashimi, Khalaf Alayan, Salah Mutlak, and Hassan Zeidan al-Luheibi all attended.  All present praised the decision to put a daytime curfew in place and approved its extension.  They backed the PM plan and, with some cajoling from the Ambassador, agreed to attend the first meeting of the new advisory council on the evening of February 25.  The Ambassador urged the group to announce its return to political negotiations regarding both the crisis and the government formation process.  Hashimi resisted initially, claiming that his boycott is one of his only "cards," but he soon backed down after the Ambassador, Allawi, and Barzani warned him that he is playing into the hands of forces that want the Sunni Arabs kept out of the government.  5. (C) Ultimately, the Tawafuq Front issued a statement the morning of February 25 welcoming the Prime Minister's plan and calling for its implementation on the ground.  The statement parses words on its final point, emphasizing that the Tawafuq Front "is moving forward with participation in the political process and will not hesitate to reconsider its decision and come back to the negotiating table regarding the formation of the government in the event that its legitimate demands are met."  6. (C) The Ambassador criticized the Iraqi Islamic Party's (IIP's) "Baghdad" TV station for airing a provocative sermon supporting vigilantism.  Hashimi contacted the station and pledged to keep programming focused on a call for calm.  The leaders present made clear, however, that the crisis is far from over in their view.  They asserted that several mosques remain occupied by militia elements; raids and clashes  BAGHDAD 00000602  002 OF 002   continue; and they want any investigation into the Samarra violence and its aftermath to be conducted by an independent committee, not one tied to government ministries that they believe are responsible for or complicit in some of the violence.  The Ambassador urged the leaders to raise these points in the new committee's meeting and promised to ensure that any still-occupied mosques will be evacuated immediately.  Allawi recommended that the PM also convene governors from throughout Iraq's sensitive areas, possibly accompanied by their police directors, in order to ensure a unified government stand against further sectarian violence.  ----------------------------------------- SCIRI Warns the Public, Remains Skeptical -----------------------------------------  7. (C) The Ambassador made a similar effort to bring SCIRI on board with the PM's plan in a subsequent meeting with Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim and Vice President Adel Abd al-Mehdi.  Hakim said that he would back the plan but is still stunned by the Samarra attack, which he sees as an Iraqi 9/11.  Many voices still are calling for a broader response, he warned.  The attack brought to mind a host of failures on the security front, Hakim said, particularly inaction on the counter-terrorism law, the "meandering" Saddam trial, and a passive military posture.  Hakim confidante Humam al-Hamudi warned the Ambassador that the PM's plan is necessary but insufficient.  It amounts, he said, to a list of prohibitions but no list of initiatives.  8. (C) Hamudi suggested two initiatives: First, the GOI, working with the USG, should lead the effort to send a major delegation to Samarra before Sadrist elements beat them to the city.  Second, the GOI and MNF-I should find a way to bring Shia families who have fled Baghdad in fear a chance to return to their homes.  He said that Dura and Sayidiyya have seen a Shia exodus.  Hamudi warned that the Mehdi Army represents a major threat that can be defeated only if the GOI is seen as a competent provider of security. If the GOI fails to project that image, he predicted, more and more Shia will think the Mehdi Army is their only hope.  Adel Abd al-Mehdi echoed those concerns to Poloff and warned that a major confrontation with the Mehdi Army might be needed, but such a decision has to be studied more carefully.  ------- Comment -------  9. (C) COMMENT: As we head into the convening of an advisory committee, the climate of mutual suspicion remains thick. The Sunni Arabs claimed to the Ambassador on February 24 that the Mehdi Army campaign against them remains in effect. Khalaf Alayan has recommended a week-long curfew and claims that more than 1,050 bodies have turned up in Baghdad so far, a number far above our estimates (of under 250).  SCIRI leader Hakim, for his part, claimed separately to the Ambassador that some 80,000 have died since the U.S. arrival in Iraq and that the vast majority have been Shia.  The various sides will aim to sit down together at the advisory committee, but every side in this ongoing crisis clearly feels aggrieved.  Even as we move forward with steps to address the security crisis, Allawi and the Kurds tell us that the formation of a national unity government remains the larger solution.  They plan to accelerate their efforts in talks with SCIRI and the Sunni Arabs in order to reach consensus on an alternative ticket to Jafari in the coming days. END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000609  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: JAFARI DRAWS SUNNI LEADERSHIP INTO CRISIS MANAGEMENT AT ADVISORY GROUP MEETING  REF: BAGHDAD 595  Classified By: Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY AND COMMENT: Prime Minister Jafari drew leaders from across the political spectrum into his crisis management process by convening a new advisory group late on February 25.  For the first time since the Samarra tragedy, the Sunni Arab leadership directly engaged the top tier of the GOI on a joint plan to decrease tensions in Iraq. Whereas President Talabani's meeting earlier in the week saw a Tawafuq Front boycott and only broad statements of good will (reftel), this session had full attendance and a long list of specific initiatives.  Jafari said that he will increase troop deployments at hotspots around the country and deploy Ministry of Interior (MOI) forces away from Sunni Arab areas.  The Sunni Arab Tawafuq Front matched that concession with an agreement to submit a list of damaged mosques to a joint government-chaired committee that will investigate conflicting reports on the scope of damage to mosques.  2. (C) SUMMARY AND COMMENT CONTINUED: Jafari pledged to convene this new advisory group regularly, and he closed the evening with a joint press appearance alongside the Sadrists, Sunni Arab leaders, and key Shia personalities.  Nobody wants a civil war, Jafari announced, and all are united against terrorists who wish to incite one.  Jafari also proclaimed that the meeting had produced a wide range of proposals for the way forward, which will be considered on the agenda of its next Ministerial Committee for National Security (MCNS) meeting.  The Ambassador had pushed Jafari to convene the advisory group in the first place and will encourage it to meet again to translate its proposals into actions.  The advisory group also saw an unusually blunt push by the Kurdish leadership, Allawi, and Adil Abd al-Mehdi for redoubling efforts to form a national unity government without red lines on any group's involvement.  The Samarra crisis cannot be detached from the government deadlock, they pointed out.  END SUMMARY AND COMMENT.  --------------------------------------------- - After Initial Reluctance, A Wide Call for Calm --------------------------------------------- -  3. (C) The PM drew leaders from across the political spectrum into his crisis management process by convening an advisory committee late on February 25.  The meeting brought the Tawafuq Front into the decision-making process after Sunni Arab leadership in the past week had appeared to suspend participation in such meetings.  The Ambassador had requested that Jafari convene this group, and, after considerable reluctance, the PM did so.  Jafari nevertheless failed to invite Transitional National Assembly (TNA) Speaker Hachim al-Hasani, a sign of continuing Shia coalition grudges against Sunni leaders and of a sectarian desire to ensure that the majority in attendance were from their own coalition.  Once convened, all attendees repeatedly denounced sectarian violence and emphasized their determination to avoid civil war.  Most notably, Sadrist leader Salam al-Maliki said that it is un-Islamic to attack mosques and denounced as an infidel anyone who undertakes such an act. For his part, Tawafuq leader Adnan al-Duleimi told the group that he believes only terrorists are benefiting from Iraq's strife and only terrorists could have been behind the Samarra attack.  Da'wa leader Jawad al-Maliki told the group that they need a broad solution to a crisis that was brought on by years of "accumulated attacks and a waterfall of blood," not just the one attack in Samarra.  ------------------------------------ Jafari Government Harshly Criticized ------------------------------------  4. (C) The meeting began with mutual recriminations when Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) leader Tariq al-Hashemi delivered a scathing criticism of the government's handling of the crisis.  He said that he had told Jafari to impose a curfew immediately after the tragedy but that the government demurred from a decision and then failed to protect Sunni religious sites when attacks on them were predictable.  He looked at Interior Minister Bayan Jabr, who was sitting directly across the table from him, and said, "Our people have no confidence in your forces."  Hashemi accused the MOI of assassinations and raids against the Sunni Arab community and then called for all MOI forces to be kept away from Sunni areas.  Hashemi gestured down the table to Defense Minister Sa'adun Duleimi and denounced him for failing in an earlier press conference to present to the media a full and accurate picture of the damage to Sunni holy sites.  Lastly, he denounced Shia media outlets that he said have broadcast  BAGHDAD 00000609  002 OF 003   incitement since the attack.  Assyrian leader Yunadam Kanna added to the complaints against the government by questioning why the Samarra Chief of Police has not yet resigned after this catastrophe.  Even SCIRI leader Muhammad Taqi al-Mawla criticized the government for failing to implement recently passed laws for counter-terrorism and the protection of holy shrines.  --------------------------------------------- ------- Sunni Arabs and Shia Coalition Leaders Trade Insults --------------------------------------------- -------  5. (C) Hashemi's remarks provoked the strongest reaction, and by the end of his harangue the leadership around the table was visibly uncomfortable.  Bayan Jabr,  openly rolling his eyes and throwing his hands up in frustration during Hashemi's remarks, forcefully defended the MOI and denounced the Sunni Arab community for failing to acknowledge terrorists in their midst.  "Mosques are being used to hold weapons and explosive belts and when they are raided all we hear are condemnations that we are raiding religious sites," Jabr said.  Jabr then referred to a recent MOI raid on IIP headquarters that had netted illegal weapons.  Jafari defended his decision not to impose a curfew immediately after the Samarra explosion, stating that the vast majority of the cabinet opposed a curfew, believing that holding back the public would lead them to turn on the government.  6. (C) Da'wa Tanzim al-Iraq leader Khudeir al-Khuzai denounced incitement in the media and referred to Hashemi in his criticism of leaders who "work in a brotherly fashion in some meetings and then transform into ranting generals on the satellite networks."  By that point, Hashemi had denounced Khuzai for media incitement of his own.  Jafari cut Hashemi off and asked him to wait his turn to speak.  When that turn came, Hashemi rejected the implication that anyone in his office had attacked a U.S. soldier and defended his possession of heavy weaponry.  ---------------------------------------- A Heated Debate Over Raids and Detainees ----------------------------------------  7. (C) Hashimi and Adnan al-Duleimi sparked a lengthy argument when they called for the government to halt nighttime raids and to release detainees in order to defuse the crisis.  Hashemi denounced conditions in the prisons and said that the Ambassador and others had failed to follow through on repeated promises that detainees would be released.  Mithal al-Alusi denounced the call for a complete prisoner release as totally unreasonable given the number of criminals and terrorists in detention.  Jabr admitted that an overburdened judiciary is failing to try cases and acquit the accused with enough speed.  Talabani said he is mystified by the complaints over nighttime raids because he personally had ordered a halt to such operations weeks ago.  The only raids taking place should be based on a judicial order, he said. Jabr did not explain the nighttime raids but claimed that judicial orders sometimes need to be obtained ex post facto for actions against an imminent threat.  --------------------------------------------- - A Renewed Push for a National Unity Government --------------------------------------------- -  8. (C) Several leaders used the meeting to renew the push for a national unity government.  Leading SCIRI figure Adel Abd al-Mehdi told the group that Iraq is in the midst of a crisis of confidence that can be solved only by a national unity government.  He urged the quick formation of one so that all groups can be in positions of responsibility.  "No red lines" should be allowed to hamper that process, Mehdi added. Fadhila Leader Nadim al-Jabiri told the group that he thinks they can turn the Samarra tragedy into a push toward unity -- a remark seconded and praised by  Hashemi, Ayad Allawi, and Masud Barzani.  Barzani spoke emotionally in his pitch for a unity government, warning the group that civil war would be a disaster, to which he and Talabani could attest.  ----------------------------- A List of Key Recommendations -----------------------------  9. (C) Jafari closed the gathering by reading the list of suggestions that he had heard and noted.  He promised to use the ideas as a basis for discussion in his next MCNS meeting and pledged to reconvene the advisory group within days.  He listed the following ideas from the meeting, each followed by its proponent:   BAGHDAD 00000609  003 OF 003   -- Declare all those killed in the violence since the Samarra tragedy martyrs.  They would be eligible for all related benefits. (Adnan Dulaimi)  -- Immediately set aside money and bring together engineers to rebuild damaged shrines and offices.  The Sunni and Shia Waqf offices could potentially lead this effort. (Yunadam Kanna and others)  -- Create a broad National Security Council, potentially drawn from the group gathered, to meet continually to fill the leadership void until a new government is formed. (Mithal al-Alusi)  -- Release prisoners who have been found innocent or have no evidence against them, focusing on those arrested or kidnapped illegally during the recent violence.  Increase the number of judges to process the cases of those who remain incarcerated. (Tareq al-Hashemi, Jalal Talabani, Bayan Jabr, and others)  -- Deploy Iraqi Army and MNF-I to hot spots around the country to preserve calm and protect other shrines.  Use MNF-I and MOD forces in areas where there is sensitivity about the presence of MOI forces. (Jafari, Hashemi, and others)  -- Contact neighboring states and inform them that Iraq is in a critical situation and that they all need to play a role in securing the borders. (Ayad Allawi)  -- Draft an honor code forbidding attacks on religious sites or sectarian groups. (Salam al-Maliki)  -- Appear regularly and jointly in the media to emphasize national unity. (Khudeir al-Khuzai and others)  -- Form a committee to review all detainee files and recommend appropriate releases. (Bayan Jabr and Tariq al-Hashemi)  -- Form a committee to review the work of the MOI and MOD through a comprehensive review of actions and documents. (Bayan Jabr)  -- Enforce the counter-terrorism law and the law for the protection of holy shrines. (Muhammad Taqi al-Mawla)  -- Convene the Council of Representatives to demonstrate unity and progress. (Adnan al-Duleimi)  -- Extend the curfew to prevent further deterioration. (multiple proponents)  -- Form an investigative committee to determine who was behind both the Samarra explosion and the attacks that followed.  This committee also will determine the extent of the property damage that has resulted from the violence. (multiple proponents)  ------- COMMENT -------  10. (C) COMMENT: This nearly three-hour session, for all its tense moments, expanded Jafari's crisis management team at a crucial moment and may have produced the frankest discussion among between Shia and Sunni Arab leaders that we have seen. It is indicative of the moment that leaders like Hashemi are condemning the Iraqi security services even as they call for them to play a greater role around the country.  The PM needs national unity and a clear program of action to lead Iraq away from the brink; both began to crystallize at this meeting.  Jafari's agreement to keep MOI forces out of sensitive areas could be the basis for a broad modus vivendi between the Sunni Arab leadership and the Iraqi Security Forces, particularly the National Guard.  The Sunni Arab leadership still may boycott meetings in their rhetoric, but now they have joined openly the search for a way forward. The Ambassador's pressure was needed to get this meeting convened, and he will keep applying it to make sure the ideas put forward find their way onto the agenda at the next MCNS session.  This group needs to keep convening, and we will ensure that it does.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000610  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: RELATIVE CALM IN BAGHDAD; JAFARI MEETS WITH SISTANI  REF: BAGHDAD 594  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (C) SUMMARY:  Incidents of sectarian violence dropped further February 26.  There were reports of mortar fire on a mosque in Sadr City and of an IED outside a mosque in Basra.  Jafari's Chief of Staff reported that the PM had traveled to Najaf where Grand Ayatollah Sistani "approved" of the process leading to the Shia Islamist Coalition (List 555) PM nomination decision.  Sistani also reportedly stressed that the Shia Coalition must remain united.  In a meeting with the Political Counselor, IIP leader Tariq al-Hashimi called for the abolition of all militia groups and the cleaning up of the Iraqi police.  President Talabani's Chief of Staff told PolOff that many Kurds are losing patience with the slow pace of government formation negotiations and want Kurdish leaders Talabani and Barzani to focus on internal Kurdistan issues rather than national Iraqi politics.  END SUMMARY  2. (C) MNF-I noted two reports of Mosques attacked on February 26.  According to Al-Furat television, mortars were fired at the Al Ansar mosque in Sadr City with no casualties.  According to REO Basrah, an IED was detonated outside the Al Amir Mosque, located in the center of the city.  REO reported that the only reported injuries were of construction workers and (according to a REO media contact) possibly individuals responsible for the explosion.  There also was a bomb in al-Hillah, but it drew little street reaction.  Separately, more than 56 Shia families have left their homes in the Abu Ghraib district after receiving threats from Sunni extremists, according to al-Alem TV.  Shaykh Jalal ad-Din as-Saghir told PolCouns late February 25 that Sunni Arab militants had forced some Shia families out of their homes in Tarmiya.  (Comment:  We cannot verify reports of displacements so far.  End Comment.)  -------------------- JAFARI TRIP TO NAJAF --------------------  3. (C) During a February 26 late afternoon telephone call, PM Chief of Staff Abdul Aziz al-Tamimi told PolOff that Jafari had traveled to Najaf earlier in the day to visit Ayatollah Sistani.  Al-Temimi said that the purpose of Jafari's two-hour visit was to inform Sistani of the joint steps to reduce sectarian tensions.  (Comment:  This visit comes after Sistani twice gave stinging rebukes to the Iraqi government for security lapses.  End Comment.)  According to al- Tamimi, Jafari also discussed the government formation progress and gave an update on the status of the Shia Coalition.  Tamimi, who did not travel to Najaf, claimed that Jafari had told him that Sistani approved of the democratic process whereby the Shia Coalition had selected him as its PM candidate. Al-Temimi said that Sistani made clear to Jafari that the Shia Coalition must remain intact.  --------------------------------- SUNNI ARAB PARTY SAYS IT'S BETTER ---------------------------------  4.  (C)  PolCouns February 26 informed Tariq al- Hashimi of the Iraqi Islamic Party that MNF-I forces will increase patrols in Baghdad to quell possible violence in the coming days.  Hashimi welcomed the move and said he perceived that violence was diminishing.  He had only one report to share on February 26 involving a mosque in the al-Dora district.  (Comment:  MNF-I gave a different report from al-Hashimi which indicated no actual gunfire; again we found the IIP's information suspicious.  End Comment.)  Hashimi and Emboffs reviewed Baghdad maps as al-Hashimi and IIP spokesman Zafir al-Ani pointed out the districts they thought were most threatened with violence.  (They opined that the most suffering Baghdad neighborhoods are ash-Shu'ala in northwest Baghdad -- the most difficult -- along with nearby Huriya and Ghazaliya.)  They pleaded for increased American patrols in these areas and removal of ING from them.  5. (C) Hashimi explained he must respond to Sunni Arab pleas for action in the wake of last week's violence following the Samarra mosque bombing.  PolCouns  BAGHDAD 00000610  002 OF 002   replied the Islamic Party must counsel restraint. Ultimately, he noted, the best action would be for Hashimi and other elected officials to participate in the new Iraqi government.  ------------------------------ URGING IIP TO STAY IN THE GAME ------------------------------  6. (C) Hashimi told PolCouns that he might rejoin talks on the government but he had a list of demands that Jafari had to move on.  (He observed that Jafari had promised to call him February 26 but so far had not done so.)  PolCouns urged al-Hashimi to rejoin talks promptly.  When al-Hashimi complained that he lacked cards, PolCouns shot back that if the Sunni Arabs boycott the talks they should not be sure the Shia and Kurds would not cut a deal without them.  7. (C) Hashimi called for a thorough restructuring of the Iraqi Police.  He said many IP officers are past criminals.  PolCouns countered that this is exactly why Hashimi needs to help negotiate who the next security ministers would be as well as the contents the government program.  Hashimi said that the Iraqi government must quickly disband militia.  He agreed with Pol Couns that this would occur only when the militias evolve an affiliation with the Iraqi Police.   ------------------------ Kurds Gathering Inwards? ------------------------  8. (C) On February 26, Presidency Council Chief of Staff Kamran Karadaghi told Pol and Legal Offs that the Kurdish public was losing patience with the slow pace of government formation negotiations.  He reported that both Kurdistan Democratic Party leader Masoud Barzani and President Jalal Talabani were under pressure from their constituencies to return permanently to Kurdistan and take care of matters at home, namely the long-awaited merger of the two Kurdistan Regional Governments (KRGs).  Karadaghi explained that the Kurdish people, having observed the political and social upheaval in the rest of Iraq, are more determined than ever to withdraw into their cocoon in the North.  PolOff argued that that attitude came too close to independence, and that both Talabani and Barzani needed to explain to their people how to be "Iraqis," vice "Kurds."  Karadaghi agreed, but noted that it would be difficult to get Kurds to take a broader perspective on Iraq. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000611  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ENRG, EPET, MOPS, MARR, PGOV, PREL, TU, IZ SUBJECT: IRAQ ENERGY UPDATE -- THE INADEQUACY OF MUDDLING THROUGH  REF: A. (A) ANKARA 0775      B. (B) KIMMEL-YOUNG-GOLDBERGER-REID EMAILS 2/06      C. (C) YOUNG-DELARE E-MAIL 2/21/06      D. (D) BAGHDAD 495  Classified By: Economic Minister Counselor Tom Delare for reasons 1.4 ( b) and (d).   1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Fuel supplies are very low across the country and are critically so in Baghdad.  Imports of refined products and domestically produced fuels both dropped during the first two months of 2006.  Turkey and Iraq have come to agreement on arrears payments and, in time, the resumption of imports.  Some key oil pipelines remain cut and natural gas lines supplying power plants have been interdicted intermittently, reducing electricity production.  Oil exports have been varying wildly in recent days, with ship loadings at Umm Qasr reaching 1.8  mbpd during February 12-15, but dropping to zero on other days in February.  While the policy by default for the GOI appears to be "muddling through," if the government holds to the budget ceilings it has for fuel purchases, more drastic steps will be necessary, particularly market liberalization and/or rationing to distribute fuel and electricity equitably among consumers.  END SUMMARY.  ----------------- FUEL AVAILABILITY -----------------  2.  (C) Iraq is falling behind "just in time" deliveries for fuels.  As of 26 February, Baghdad had only 0.6 days of supply for gasoline and 0.4 days of LPG (gas for cooking). Diesel supply was marginally better at 1.0 days of supply. Only kerosene (used for heating) is at more comfortable level, with 10.9 days of supply.  Nine days earlier (February 17), Baghdad fuel stocks in days of supply were: gasoline - 0.9, LPG - 0.7, diesel - 1,3, and kerosene - 13.6. Nationally, the days of supply for gasoline as of 26 February were at 1.4, diesel at 3.1, kerosene at 5.9, and LPG at 14.4.  Fuel shortages would be worse were it not for the current curfew and curtailment of inter-provincial travel imposed following sectarian disturbances following the bombing of the Golden Mosque in Samara.  ----------------- STATUS OF IMPORTS -----------------  3.  (C)  Fuel imports have slowed considerably since early January from Turkey as a result of unpaid arrears to Turkish suppliers.  Turkey and Iraq agreed February 15 to settle some $653 million in arrears by monthly installments beginning in March with 3% interest on any unpaid balances (Refs A and B).  The monthly payments will be charged against the 2005 budget, in view that the arrears were from purchases made during the 2005 fiscal year.  To prevent new arrears from accumulating, the Turks agreed to sell only against Iraqi letters of credit (Ref A).  It will likely be several weeks before Iraq sees substantial increases in tanker trucks crossing the border.  Only then (Ref C) will the loading and shipping system gear up again.  4.  (C)  DPM Chalabi informed the Embassy (Ref D) that the GOI intends to shift a considerable portion of its fuel imports to seaborne fuel cargos imported through the South. In fact, imports by ship through Khor al-Zubayr from the UAE have made the key difference in fuel supplies during the past month.  The bulk quantities of fuel are fed into the product distribution lines for delivery in southern Iraq and can be pumped north as far as Baghdad.  ----------- FUEL PRICES -----------  5.  (C) In his first press conference after being nominated by his party for a second term as Prime Minister, Ibrahim al-Ja'fari said the government has no intentions to raise fuel prices further.  This announcement was widely reported on radio, TV and newspapers.  (NOTE:  The next price increase according to Iraq's agreement with the IMF is scheduled for March 31.  However, a number of stations -- at least six in Baghdad -- are already selling gasoline for $.63/gallon at the instigation of the MOO Director General for Distribution.  This is $.25/gallon above the price set in December under Iraq's agreement with the IMF.  END NOTE).  6.  (C) Black market prices vary widely, with the highest  BAGHDAD 00000611  002 OF 003   prices in the Kurdish north, where there is the greatest shortage of fuel.  In Kirkuk, the street price for gasoline is $1.26-$1.52 per gallon, while in Tikrit the price is only $.56 per gallon.  Black market prices in Baghdad are reportedly about $.76 per gallon. LPG has skyrocketed in price on the black market and is reportedly being sold at $10.00 per 12 kilogram (kg) container in Kirkuk and $12.00 in Baghdad, where only 32,000 12 kg containers of 120,000 container daily demand can be filled from available supplies due to a series of pipeline interdictions.  LPG is reaching Baghdad by truck.  Fuel is most readily available in southern Iraq, as the Basrah refinery is still operating, albeit at a reduced level, with supplies supplemented by imports coming in from Kuwait, Iran, and the UAE.  ---------- REFINERIES ----------  7.  (C) Refining at Bayji restarted on February 13 with the delivery of crude via the repaired 26-inch pipeline from Kirkuk. Bayji is currently processing 142,000 bpd of crude oil per day (49% of capacity).  The Daura Refinery is processing 62,000 bpd of crude oil and operating at 57% of capacity.  Production at Daura may increase at the end of February with the repair of the Unit #1 reformer, adding another 25,000 bpd of capacity.  Basrah Refinery remains at 81,000 bpd, as half of the plant is down for long term maintenance.  The refinery will also be at 50% capacity later this year, as remaining processing units are taken down in succession and the entire plant is eventually retrofitted, improving production and output.  ------------------------------- PIPELINES AND FUEL DISTRIBUTION -------------------------------  8.  (C) The key oil link between Kirkuk and Bayji, the 26-inch pipeline, was reported operational February 16.  The 40-inch pipeline in the same corridor is scheduled for repair completion in early March.  The 22-inch product line from Bayji to Baghdad remains interdicted, requiring repairs at multiple sites along the corridor.  The 22-inch pipeline will again become critical for providing fuels to Baghdad with the restarting of the Bayji Refinery, particularly with full production expected in late February.  The main LPG line to Baghdad was interdicted on February 17, cutting off Baghdad from LPG deliveries by pipeline until repairs completed.  9.  (C) The interdiction of two gas pipelines, the 16-inch dry gas line to the Taji and Daura power plants and the 30-inch sour gas line from Ageel to the Bayji and Mulla Abdullah power plants, resulted in a reduction of natural gas deliveries to these gas fired power plants and the loss of 280 MW of power on the national electrical grid.  ----------- OIL EXPORTS -----------  10.  (C) Crude oil export volumes remain below forecast.  The early-February attack on the new oil stabilization plant at Kirkuk reduced processing capacity there from 1,000,000 bpd to 500,000 bpd -- and that only when the old stabilization plant becomes fully operational in about 30 days.  The current limit to production from Kirkuk remains the 26-inch pipeline, which can only carry 270,000 bpd across the Tigris, an amount less than the daily demand of the Bayji refinery (290,000 bpd).  Export capacity would increase when the 40-inch pipeline is in service, but still will be limited to exports of roughly 200,000 bpd by the capacity of the old stabilization plant to process only 500,000 bpd. Thus, crude oil exports from the North are not expected to reach substantial levels in the immediate future.  In the South, exports have dropped appreciably from the average of 1.1 million bpd in January to 0.69 million bpd during the period 18-25 February. Inclement weather and a lack of tug boat support have caused Iraq to miss multiple days of loading crude oil tankers.  --------------------------- MUDDLING THROUGH AT AN END? ---------------------------  11.  (C) COMMENT: Despite interdictions and the clearly mounting pressure on the GOI (particularly the acute shortage of LPG and gasoline in Baghdad), the GOI remains indecisive, resulting by default in a "muddle through" policy in hope that the quantities of imports and domestic production will  BAGHDAD 00000611  003 OF 003   increase.  Iraqis have long been used to shortages as they wait in lines for LPG and gasoline and temperate springtime weather in February has helped to lower needs for heating. However, the 2006 budget for fuel appears to permit no more than approximately $213 million per month for fuel imports, considerably below the $450 million per month the GOI was spending at the end of 2005.  Given that fuel imports met approximately 40% of Iraqi domestic needs in 2005 (including power generation), the fall off in import purchases may force the Iraqis to look at radical coping measures quite quickly -- import liberalization, rationing or the breaking of budget targets seem the only likely candidates. END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000620  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: (U) IRAQI OFFICIAL ON GOVERNMENT FORMATION, CONVENING THE COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES  REF: A. BAGHDAD 600      B. BAGHDAD 569  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for   Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Presidency Council Chief of Staff Kamran Karadaghi told PolOff and Embassy Legal Advisors on February 26 that the government formation process appeared to have been temporarily derailed by the attack on the Samarra mosque and its aftermath.  While sounding pessimistic overall, Karadaghi dismissed concerns that Iraq was about to slide into civil war.  He reported, however, that both President Talabani and Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Masud Barzani were being pressured by the Kurdish public to withdraw permanently into Kurdistan and leave Iraq's messy political and social problems to the Shia and Sunni Arabs.  PolOff warned Karadaghi that such attitudes fanned fears that the Kurds were planning to seek independence and that Talabani and Barzani should educate their people on being "Iraqis" vice "Kurds." As for calling the Council of Representatives (COR), Karadaghi reported that the Presidency Council had unanimously decided to postpone calling for the first session.  END SUMMARY.  -------------------------------- (U) Government Formation Stalled --------------------------------  2. (C) Presidency Council Chief of Staff Kamran Karadaghi told PolOff and Embassy Legal Advisers on February 26 that the government formation process appeared to have been sidelined by the attack on the Samarra mosque and its aftermath.  While he denied rumors that both President Talabani and Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Masud Barzani were about to reject the candidacy of Prime Minister- elect Ibrahim Ja'afari, he did emphasize that the Kurds were very frustrated with Ja'afari's lack of leadership.  Barzani, in particular, is frustrated said Karadaghi, and is clearly anxious to go back North.  Since Tawafuq withdrew from government formation talks, the Kurds were just in a holding pattern, grumbled Karadaghi.  3. (C) Ja'afari, Karadaghi continued, should never have been renominated.  According to Karadaghi, Moqtada al-Sadr threatened all his people, warning them that he himself would kill any Sadrists who did not vote for Ja'afari.  He was assisted in this by the marja'iyah's statement demanding that the Shia Coalition remain unified.  Sadr is vehemently against SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi, and threatened to leave the Shia Coalition if Abd al-Mahdi was chosen. This gave the rest of the Shia Coalition no choice but to select Ja'afari, given the marja'iyah's statement.  The irony was that despite Sadr's threats, it was Ja'afari's own Dawa Party leaders who refused to vote for him - both Jawad al-Maliki and Ali al-Adeeb handed in blank forms, Karadaghi claimed.  (COMMENT: Previously, SCIRI politicians told PolOffs that it was two Shia Coalition Independents who handed in blank forms.  END COMMENT.)  ------------------- (U) Kurds Want Out? -------------------  4. (C) Karadaghi reported that the Kurdish public is losing patience with the slow pace of government formation negotiations.  Both Barzani and Talabani are being pressured by their constituency to return permanently to Kurdistan and take care of matters at home, namely the long-awaited merger of the two Kurdistan Regional Governments (KRGs).  Karadaghi explained that the Kurdish people, having observed the political and social upheaval in the rest of Iraq, are more determined than ever to withdraw into their cocoon in the North.  PolOff argued that that attitude came too close to independence, and that both Talabani and Barzani needed to explain to their people how to be "Iraqis," vice "Kurds."  Karadaghi agreed, but noted that it would be difficult to get the people to take a broader perspective on Iraq issues.   BAGHDAD 00000620  002 OF 003   -------------------- (U) Calling the COR? --------------------  5. (C) Embassy Legal Advisors then approached Karadaghi about calling the Council of Representatives (COR) into session.  Karadaghi repeated Talabani's and Abd al-Mahdi's position on this (see reftel A).  He stated that Talabani had spoken with Sunni Deputy President Sheikh Ghazi al- Yawr, who was still abroad for health reasons. According to Karadaghi, Talabani had asked al-Yawr to return to Baghdad, but al-Yawr declined and gave Talabani the right to vote for him in all Presidency Council decisions.  This proxy vote essentially allows Talabani to say that the Presidency Council has voted unanimously to postpone calling the COR into session.  6. (C) Karadaghi expressed the opinion that the TAL is the law in effect, and that none of the Constitution's provisions, including the deadlines for the COR were binding.  He took the position, which he said Chief Judge Medhat shared and had expressed verbally (though not in his written opinion), that there was only a "moral" and not a legal obligation to convene the COR within the constitutional timeline.  Embassy Legal Advisers contested this and maintained that the better interpretation of the relevant law is that there is some element of legal requirement in the constitution's government formation provisions, even though the constitution as a whole is not in force. It is the constitution that explains the institutions that must be formed, the entities that choose the relevant candidates, and the voting thresholds required for approval.  If all of these aspects of the new constitution apply, the government formation deadlines also presumably apply.  Karadaghi did not engage on the legal merits of this assessment, but pointed out that he had advised the Presidency Council to make some statement on convening the COR, or to consider a symbolic convening of the COR, only to have his advice rejected as calling dangerous attention to the COR at a time when the "package" on government formation had not been agreed by the parties.  His assessment appeared to be that the date on which the COR would be convened would be decided as a political, and not a legal matter, and might be well after the deadlines in the Constitution.  ------------------------ (U) A Civil War? Not Yet ------------------------  7. (C) Karadaghi dismissed fears that Iraq was in a low grade civil war (unlike Kurdish Deputy Prime Minister Shaways, who is more pessimistic - see reftel B).  Should the country turn to civil war, however, Karadaghi opined that the Sunni Arabs would reclaim Iraq in two weeks.  The Shia, according to Karadaghi, were still behaving like victims despite being the numerical majority, and in times of crisis - like the Samarra bombing - still tended to turn inwards rather than defend themselves.  The Sunni Arabs, especially the Ba'athists, were better organized, more used to commanding, and more motivated than the Shia.  When asked what role the Kurds would play, Karadaghi shrugged and stated that Kurdistan would be safe - and detached.  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  8. (C) Karadaghi is hardly a military expert, and we report his comments about Sunni Arab fighting strength compared to that of the Shia only as an example of comments we hear from other Iraqi contacts as well (most Sunnis).  His indifference to Sunni/Shia fighting - which is shared by most of the Kurds - will only confirm the fears of non-Kurds, who believe that the Kurds are only waiting to resolve the Kirkuk issue before seeking independence from Iraq.  Despite Karadaghi's easy dismissal of civil conflict, he did sound pessimistic during the meeting.  When asked about Talabani's conversation with President Bush, Karadaghi noted that it went well, but added, "You know things are not going well  BAGHDAD 00000620  003 OF 003   when the leader of the world's only superpower is calling six Iraqi officials!"  He showed some of his old spark when he criticized Barzani (a longtime rival of Talabani) for presuming to interfere in government formation negotiations - an activity best left to Talabani as the highest Kurdish representative - rather than tending to his business in Erbil.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000621  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PTER, IZ, KISL SUBJECT: SADRIST PARLIAMENTARIAN:  JAYSH AL-MAHDI BEYOND MUQTADA AL-SADR'S CONTROL   Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  In a February 26 telephone conversation, Sadrist Council of Representatives member Kusai al-Suhail told PolOff that the Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) is not fully under the control of Muqtada al-Sadr.  JAM is not an organized army, al-Suhail said, and "anyone with a gun" can dress in black and take to the streets, claiming to be a member.  Local commanders, therefore, do not always heed Muqtada al-Sadr's orders, he said.  Muqtada al-Sadr, al-Suhail said, told JAM on February 24 that it should stay off the streets.  That some JAM members are still out in force on February 26 shows the disconnect between Muqtada al-Sadr and some local commanders, al-Suhail said.  2. (C) SUMMARY CONTINUED:  Commenting on the agreement signed by the Office of the Martyr Sadr (OMS) and Tawafuq on February 25, al-Suhail said that it is even more important than the agreement reached the same day with the Muslim Ulema Council.  The article of the agreement with Tawafuq that calls on Coalition Forces (CF) to better train and better equip the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) to deal with the insurgency is especially important, al-Suhail said.  Despite the dangers facing Iraq, al-Suhail was hopeful that Iraqis will heed the Marjaiya and Iraq's political leadership and avert civil war.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------------- Not Even Muqtada al-Sadr Controls JAM -------------------------------------  3. (C) Kusai al-Suhail told PolOff in a February 26 phone conversation that JAM is not completely controlled by Muqtada al-Sadr.  It is not an organized army, al-Suhail said, and does not have a set number of fighters.  JAM consists largely of young men who are "loyal to the principles of Mohammed Sadiq al-Sadr," al-Suhail said. The number of JAM fighters can increase or decrease rapidly, depending on how many young men wish to dress in black and join other JAM members in the streets.  Local commanders do not always respond to Muqtada al-Sadr's orders, al-Suhail said.  For example, al-Suhail said that the JAM elements that burned the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) headquarters in Basrah on February 22 were acting independently of Muqtada al-Sadr.  He noted that on February 24, Muqtada al-Sadr ordered JAM to cease operations, yet as of February 26, JAM patrols still continue in some parts of Iraq such as Sadr City.  ------------------------------------- ISF Needs Better Training and Weapons -------------------------------------  4. (C) Al-Suhail told PolOff the agreement reached by OMS and Tawafuq is a great accomplishment, and one that is even more important than the agreement signed by OMS and Sunni Arab Muslim Ulema Council.  Of all the articles in the agreement signed by OMS and Tawafuq, the most important is the fifth article, which states that ISF has not done a good job of maintaining public order.  CF should therefore better train and equip the ISF.  When PolOff asked if this meant OMS wanted CF to prolong its presence in Iraq to train ISF, al-Suhail said, "No."  CF must withdraw from Iraq, but as it does, it should improve the "quality and quantity" of training provided to ISF.  "The United States," al-Suhail said, "handles security in Iraq poorly and is part of the problem."  The ISF, therefore, should be given the tools it needs to take the lead on security in Iraq, he said.  5. (C) In particular, al-Suhail argued, ISF needs better weapons to fight the insurgents.  He said ISF should be given tanks and armored Humvees because the insurgents have weapons more advanced than ISF, including missiles, mortars, and IEDs.  The ISF needs armor to confront these weapons, he said.  Giving the ISF AK-47s in not enough, al-Kusai argued.  ------- Comment -------  6. (C) The question that al-Suhail raised is weighing on the thinking of the Sunni Arab leadership.  A top Iraqi Islamic Party official told PolCouns February 27 that they are not sure if the Jaysh al-Mahdi will honor the pact they signed with the Sadrist political leadership.  BAGHDAD 00000621  002 OF 002   Dating back to at least his April 2004 uprising against the Coalition Provisional Authority, we have heard mixed accounts about how much Moqtada controls the JAM.  We will undoubtedly continue to do so as long as the Sadrist leader and the JAM are factors in Iraq.  While some of our contacts have told us that the JAM is a franchise operation with little central control, they tend, like al-Suhail, to be individuals who seek to project a softer image of the Sadrist leader.  Claims from such sources that Moqtada is not in full control of the JAM must be viewed judiciously.  Arguably, Moqtada's political success (indeed his survival) to date suggests he has great influence over the militia, even if he does not have total operational control.    Extra-Governmental armed groups lend themselves to ambiguity over who is in fact in charge.  However, the fundamental issue remains the danger groups like the Jaysh al-Mahdi pose to Iraq's stability, especially now.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000624  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: RAMADI CONUNDRUM: COMMERCE AMID TERROR  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford, for reasons 1.4 (b), (d).  1. (C) Summary.  From State Embedded Team Ramadi.  Iraqi Police employees working for the Governor painted for PolOff earlier this month a bleak picture of intimidation and paralysis on the streets of Ramadi.  Terrorists use criminal enterprise to fund their jihad.  While the people hope for a greater Iraqi Security Force presence, there are new threats against the Iraqi Police.  A senior officer noted many of the Ramadi elite are maintaining a low profile.  He predicted tribal allegiance will play the strongest role in the upcoming provincial elections. Talk of doom and gloom inside the Governorate Center belies a thriving souk and heavy traffic - both commercial and private.  End Summary.  2. (C) SETOff queried a group of the Governor's Personal Security Detail about the state of the insurgency in the ravaged capital of Anbar province.  On February 19, several of the Emergency Battalion of the Iraqi Police, which is made up largely of the governor's relatives and serve as his PSD, said Al Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) or takfiri extremists were widespread.  They suggested AQI operatives are engaged in criminal activity to fund their jihad.  This includes extorting bribes at border crossings and black marketing benzene at Ramadi's gas stations.  They also post spies at hospitals and clinics.  3. (C) The young men asserted that the terrorists had murdered the brother (and bodyguard) of the governor's assistant for legal matters, lawyer Arif al Alwani, the week of February 12.  (Note: Shortly after the assassination of his close associate, the Deputy Governor, in October 2005, Arif went underground.  Arif had visited the Governorate Center only once shortly before his death.  End Note.)  The group described Ramadi as 'disgusted' with the terrorists for destroying the city's telephone network, but noted that few were fighting back.  They posited that the people were waiting for an Iraqi Army and Iraqi Police presence on the streets.  The Governor's detail also claimed a handbill found in the souk advised "killing one IP is worth the murder of seven Americans".  (Other contacts could not confirm the existence of such takfiri propaganda.)  4. (C) Another Governorate Center employee, Colonel Fahdel Makhilif Dayaa al Assafi al Dulaimi, Director of Internal Affairs, spoke of armed gangs of takfiri extremists in close proximity to the seat of government. He noted several of the Anbar Security Committee, including former General Sa'ab al Rawi and Sunni Waqf Director Sheikh Dhaher al Ubaidi, are restricting their movements.  He suggested the people were dissatisfied with Sa'ab, Dhaher and others who led last years' intense engagement with the Coalition Forces because they produced no tangible benefits.  Fahdel observed that AQI's intimidation campaign targeted all figures associated with the Iraqi Islamic Party. He added that the party had 'lost face' by failing to deliver improvements since their election to the Provincial Council January 30, 2005.  Fahdel predicted that tribal leaders would play a greater role in the upcoming provincial elections.  5. (C) Comment.  A local unit commander noted on February 19 that the Ramadi souk was thriving.  PolOff must rely on military colleagues' observations because it is deemed too dangerous for SETOff to travel far beyond the confines of the Governate Center.  One officer estimated the population of Ramadi's market district at over 50,000 and observed that his Humvees could hardly pass through the streets narrowed by crowds, including children. SETOff observed heavy traffic in commercial and private vehicles on the main arteries into the capital and west, suggesting private enterprise continues to flourish against an unstable and tense political backdrop.  End Comment.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000626  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PNAT, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: RELATIVE CALM PREVAILS  REF: BAGHDAD 609  Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR ROBERT S. FORD, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  The overall security situation in Baghdad is relatively calm and reports of sectarian violence once again decreased overnight.  The ban on vehicular movement in Baghdad was lifted at 0600 hrs on February 27, and our contacts appeared to be largely consumed with personal errands for much of the day.  The Deputy Mayor of Baghdad reported a February 27 missile attack on a girls' school resulting in casualties.  Although the violence has tapered, sectarian and ethnic tensions are still high.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) MNF-I noted two reports of attacks on Shia mosques overnight.  According to the Basrah police, shortly before midnight on February 26, an improvised explosive device (IED) exploded inside the Imam Ali Mosque in Basrah.  The National Police reported that a Shia shrine in the Madean District of Baghdad was hit by three mortar rounds an hour later.  Two of the rounds hit the dome of the Selman Al Muhemdi shrine; the third struck the outside of the shrine.  3. (C) Deputy Mayor of Baghdad Hussein Al-Bahraini told PolOff that on February 27 a missile was fired into a girls' school in the Al-Salaam district of Al-Monsour, reportedly killing seven teachers and several students.  Hussein and officials in the district are attempting to confirm casualties and damage to the school.  No group has taken responsibility for the attack. 4. (C) Fadhila parliamentarian Mohammed Ismail al-Kusai told PolFSN in a February 27 phone conversation that the challenge Iraq is currently facing is sectarian, not political.  He added that the Fadhila Party will work to preserve the unity of the Shia coalition in order to present a united front and to keep the "Ba'athists" at bay.  5.  (C)  Ala'a Mekki of the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) told us February 27 that Sunni Arabs were watching the Shia militia carefully, especially Jaysh al-Mahdi.  He was unsure whether the militia would stand down, although he had only one report of an attack on a Sunni area (which we later learned was an approved MoI operation).  Mekki expressed some discomfort with the Sadrists.  The talks on February 23 and 24 had been difficult, he observed, as Sadrist negotiators Abdel Hadi ad-Darraji and Hazem al-Araji had been "almost violent."  6. (C) In a telephone conversation on February 27, Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) senior member Masrur Barzani expressed the Kurds' frustration with the slow pace of government formation negotiations and blamed both Shia and Sunni Arabs for the delay.  "It seems as though only the US Government and the Kurds are interested in helping Iraq progress toward democracy and self-sufficiency," complained Barzani.  Barzani then reported that the KDP is avoiding large gatherings in the Green Zone after a mortar landed in its compound yesterday.  While no one was hurt, the Barzanis are uncomfortably aware that their late-night conferences are attracting attention.  7.  (C)  Iraqi National Security Advisor Muwaffaq Rubai'e told PolCouns February 27 that he would brief Sistani's office on February 28 about events.  He perceived that Sistani's mention in his February 22 fetwa about the faithful protecting holy sites themselves was "not helpful."  Rubai'e opined that Shia patience with terror attacks is still very thin; one major terror attack could alter the scene immediately, he thought. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000627  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/26/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, KDEM, KWMN, IZ SUBJECT: WOMEN PARLIAMENTARIANS LOG  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY. On January 22, Poloffs met SCIRI parliamentarians Jinan Jasim Ali Al Ubaidi and Muna Noor Zalzala, two of this year's Iraqi delegates to the Commission on the Status of Women.  Al-Ubaidi lamented that the role of women in society had been greatly diminished during Saddam's reign, and was still inferior to the role of men.  She said that women are excluded from first-tier politicking and allowed to work only on traditional "women's" issues, where they still face meddling from male colleagues.  End Summary.  ---------------------------- ROLE OF WOMEN: PAST & FUTURE ----------------------------  2. (C) During the January 22 meeting, al-Ubaidi told Poloffs that the status of women had diminished during Saddam's reign.  She said that oppressive Ba'athist policies severely limited educational opportunities for women, and that fears of being kidnapped and raped by Uday's gangs prevented women from leaving their homes.  Al-Ubaidi continued by saying that even when women were willing to go through with university training, they were often relegated to traditionally female fields such as education.  3. (C) Al-Ubaidi lamented the high rates of unemployment, underemployment and illiteracy that resulted from these policies and continue to plague women in Iraq.  She said that underemployment had caused women to lose important skills sets, and that family responsibilities, especially in families that had lost members in the Iran-Iraq war, left no time for social participation.  4. (C) Al-Ubaidi then discussed progress made since the fall of Saddam's regime.  She highlighted the extent to which women are now participating in the political process, noting that women serve as parliamentarians and participate in the constitution-making process.  However, she noted that politics was still considered the "least accepted field for women," and that there were still "two levels of chess":  the men's level and the women's level.  Women are still not allowed to participate at the men's level, and occasionally face male interference at their own level.  5. (C) Al-Ubaidi outlined priorities for the new parliament, including elimination of "tribal systems of law", greater equity in the distribution of resources, protection of human rights and elevation of women's status.  She specifically noted a law that would make "honor" killings illegal, and a law that would eliminate the tradition of exchanging female family members as a means of conflict resolution between tribes or families.  -------------------------------- THOUGHTS ON GOVERNMENT FORMATION --------------------------------  6. (C) Saying that it would be up to UIC 555 to select the future Minister of Interior, both women expressed support for the incumbent Bayan Jabr.  They highlighted to Poloffs that Jabr has been doing a good job of cleaning out the "Ba'athists" and the insurgents. Howver, both CoR members said that there was still no lead on who would be nominated for this position, nor any sense of when the council would convene. The next Minister of Interior, they said, would be a Minister with cross-sectarian appeal, and someone who would be required to attend UIA meetings.  -------- BIO NOTE --------  7. (C) Jinan Jasim Ali Al Ubaidi is a doctor who recently gave birth to her fifth child.  She is a member of SCIRI and a previous TNA member.  She is a graduate of Baghdad University and practiced medicine in Najaf hospital prior to 2003.  She is very well-spoken, has a good command of English and appears very interested in women's issues.  BAGHDAD 00000627  002 OF 002    8. (C) Muna Noor Zalzala, who lived several years in Denmark, was also a TNA member.  Zalzala was reserved during this meeting and not as quick to engage in a conversation on women's issues.  However, she seems to be a somewhat outspoken and challenging personality, more willing to engage on conversations relating to what she perceives as mistakes by MNF-I forces. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000628  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/26/2016 TAGS: IZ, KCRM, MOPS, KJUS, PINR, PREL, PGOV, UK SUBJECT: NATIONAL SECURITY COMMITTEE DISCUSSES 24-POINT PLAN FOR STABILITY  REF: BAGHDAD 609  Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (C) and (D).  1. (S//REL MNFI) SUMMARY: Prime Minister Ibrahim Jafari called a Ministerial Committee on National Security (MCNS) meeting on February 26 with the Ambassador, UK Ambassador Patey, senior MNF-I officers, and top Iraqi national security staff to continue addressing the February 22 bombing of the Golden Mosque in Samarra.  Discussion focused on the specifics and implementation of a GOI-compiled 24-point agenda (see para 12) as a political blueprint to ease tensions and restore stability.  The agenda was based on the previous night's political advisory group meeting (reftel). Among the key deliverables are: a committee to review the status of those detained since February 22; an agreement to inspect and repair damaged mosques and to return those occupied since February 22 to their original administrators; a government offer to protect the holiest shrines as required; a determination of which victims of the sectarian strife are eligible for benefits as martyrs; and deployment of armored vehicles around cities to maintain stability. Embassy also pressed for enforcement of the GOI-prescribed weapons ban, but Jafari asked for more time to publicize the ban nation-wide.  END SUMMARY.  2. (S//REL MNFI) Jafari convened the MCNS on February 26 to review the 24-point agenda proposed during the previous night's meeting of a broad-based political advisory group that had comprised political party and other leaders. Present at the MCNS meeting were the Ambassador, UK Ambassador Patey, MNF-I CG Casey, MNF-I DCG Houghton, Pol-Mil Counselor Litt, Minister of Defense Dulaime, Minister of Interior Jabr, Minister of National Security al-Anzi, and National Security Advisor Rubaie.  See para 12 for a complete list of the 24 points; a review of the highlights appears below.  (COMMENT: As with all MCNS meetings, the Sunni Arab political perspective was mostly absent given the heavily Shia political configuration of the national security apparatus.  END COMMENT.)  ------------------------ ADVISORY GROUP'S SUCCESS ------------------------  3. (S//REL MNFI) Ambassador praised the political advisory group meeting.  Jafari said its success is attributable to the breadth of participation and points of view expressed; to its results and recommendations; and to the positive impact the image of the meeting had on the populace.  He thanked Ambassadors Khalilzad and Patey for generating the idea to hold such a meeting.  Nevertheless, Jafari said, success will only come with implementing its recommendations.  ------------------------------ POINT 2: REASSURING THE IRAQIS ------------------------------  4. (S//REL MNFI) The MCNS members concurred that the political parties, especially the two principal Sunni groups, have launched an important effort in their positive public statements and that these must continue.  ---------------------------- POINT 3: RELEASING DETAINEES ----------------------------  5. (S//REL MNFI) Much debate occurred about releasing detainees.  After discussing the formation of a committee to determine releasability of detainees (e.g., whom the committee should comprise, whether there should be an amnesty/unconditional release, which group of detainees are to be considered), the MCNS reached consensus to augment the current Combined Review and Release Board (CRRB) (composed of nine members, the majority of whom are Iraqis) by two new members: representatives of the Sunni Tawaffuq group and Mithal al Alussi's party.  Jafari imposed three conditions on this board's members, especially the political party members: information revealed during the board's deliberations must not be made public; the inevitable internal disagreements and disputes of the board must not be discussed with the media; and each party is obliged to contribute information relevant to a given detainee not already available in the files to which they might be privy.  This expanded CRRB would only review the files of the approximately 100 people detained  BAGHDAD 00000628  002 OF 003   since February 22.  The board would identify the detainees as falling into two categories: those to be released (either having been detained unlawfully or detained legally but without prosecutable evidence or posing a security threat) and those to be maintained under detention (those who are prosecutable and those who pose a security threat but are not necessarily prosecutable).  The Ambassador suggested the government might consider extending the mandate of this board if the model proves successful.  In that case, another category would apply -- those whom Iraq might agree to release under one set of circumstances, but not under others.  These people could be part of an amnesty program.  All agreed that unconditional amnesty is premature.  (COMMENT: The modalities of the new board's deliberations will have to be worked out to ensure compliance with Iraqi law and UNSCR 1647.  END COMMENT)  ------------------------------------- POINT 4: DAMAGED AND OCCUPIED MOSQUES -------------------------------------  6. (S//REL MNFI) Jafari announced the formation of a committee comprising representatives of the Sunni and Shia foundations (waqf) and the Council of  Ministers that will inspect mosques that were damaged or destroyed during the recent violence.  Mosques that were damaged during the current violence would be repaired or rebuilt.  Those seized unlawfully as a result of the crisis would be returned, but those mosques whose ownership has been under dispute since before the crisis would be dealt with separately.  Dulaime reported the case of one mosque (Masjid an-Nida') seized by the government and in which the Iraqi Security Force (ISF) found  Saddamist propaganda, evidence of a military operations room, and a medical clinic used to treat insurgents.  -------------- SHIA EVICTIONS --------------  7. (S//REL MNFI) A discussion ensued about the imminent problem of dozens of Shia families evicted from their homes in predominantly Sunni neighborhoods (especially Abu Ghraib, Daura, and Shu'la) who are seeking to enter the International Zone for refuge.  Jafari and Dulaime stressed the importance of returning these people to their homes and halting these evictions immediately, lest Shia neighborhoods begin to retaliate against Sunni families.  MOI explained that many of these families were not driven away at gunpoint but rather received credibly threatening letters demanding that they leave.  Since other families ignoring such threats had been killed, he added, these victims needed no additional warning.  ----------------------------- POINT 5: DEPLOYMENT OF FORCES -----------------------------  8. (S//REL MNFI) Jafari reiterated the importance of deploying forces into "hot" or sensitive areas without delay and announcing such deployments publicly.  Casey, Dulaime, and Jabr stated that beginning February 27 mechanized/armored vehicles would be deployed visibly around the cities, especially in mixed Shia/Sunni areas.  Casey also asked for, and received, confirmation that the vehicle ban in Baghdad would be lifted February 27.  Finally, Casey emphasized the importance of enforcing the government's weapons ban immediately, although some violence should be expected as a result, especially from the Jaysh al Mahdi.  Jafari urged that first the ban first be publicized broadly over the course of a few days.  MOI Jabr added that he has begun a campaign to ask political party leaders to inform their organizations about the ban.  Jafari tried to argue for an interim weapons buy-back program before enforcement of the ban, but Casey persuaded him that a buy-back program is premature.  (COMMENT: The weapons ban was not part of the 24-point plan but was prescribed earlier by the GOI.  END COMMENT.)  --------------------------------- POINT 20: PROTECTING HOLY SHRINES ---------------------------------  9. (S//REL MNFI) Jafari warned that destruction of another major religious site could plunge Iraq into civil war.  As a result, Jabr said he will meet with the religious leadership  BAGHDAD 00000628  003 OF 003   of all sides regarding the requirements to protect their holiest shrines, especially if they have evidence of threats.  In the longer term, Jafari suggested creating a security force with a mandate to protect holy sites.  UK Ambassador Patey observed that such a government offer of security would shift some responsibility to the shoulders of the religious foundations to determine for themselves what assistance they require.  -------------------------- POINT 21: HONORING MARTYRS --------------------------  10. (S//REL MNFI) The issue of determining "martyrdom" as a result of the violence is important for the government to provide benefits to families of victims.  Jafari said the same committee working the mosque inspections also could decide whether the deceased is a terrorist/foreign fighter and thus ineligible, or is an innocent party and thus a martyr eligible for assistance.  The PM acknowledged that there would be many difficult cases to decide.  ---------------------------------- POINT 22: RECONSTRUCTION DONATIONS ----------------------------------  11. (S//REL MNFI) Jafari observed that sharia law actually complicates the procedures for collecting donations for reconstruction of damage or other loss.  Donations offered for a particular fund, he explained, may be spent only on that project and may not be diverted to another cause or project for any reason.  Jafari expressed Iraq's profound appreciation for President Bush's and HMG's offers to contribute to rebuilding the Samarra mosque.  The Shia religious leadership prefers to reconstruct the mosque themselves, he said, but the US/UK offers (and those of other nations and organizations) might be used for reconstruction around the mosque.  ------------- 24-Point Plan -------------  12. (U) The following is Embassy's unofficial translation of the 24 points raised during the political advisory group meeting on February 25, collated by the PM and distributed at the February 26 MCNS meeting:  1.  Political initiative is the solution 2.  Public announcement reassuring all Iraqis 3.  Releasing detainees 4.  Return of occupied mosques 5.  Consideration of proper deployment of Iraqi Army and Iraqi Police in Shia and Sunni areas 6.  Application of martial law 7.  Condemning terrorism 8.  Detentions under law and approved by a judge 9.  Addressing extremist imams in mosques 10. Form investigative committee 11. Avoiding exaggeration of facts 12. National Honor Charter 13. Joint review of detainee folders by MOI and MOD 14. Consult with neighboring nations 15. Regularly conduct outreach meetings 16. Follow the rule of law 17. Increase number of judges 18. Apply anti-terrorist laws 19. Use of curfews 20. Protect holy shrines 21. Consider the dead as martyrs 22. Donation-collection committee 23. Conclusion statement 24. Execute the Cabinet plan KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000629  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/26/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: SHIA INDEPENDENT SAYS DO NOT BLAME US FOR JAFARI SELECTION AND CRITICIZES U.S. POLICIES IN IRAQ   Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Council of Representatives (CoR) member and Shia Independent Mahmoud Muhammad al-Sheikh Radhi told PolOff that Shia Independents were being blamed unfairly for the Jafari victory in the PM race.  He downplayed the effect of Sadrist "threats" before the election.  Al-Sheikh Radhi also said Shia independents were beginning to organize on a national level, and within the CoR.  He expressed bewilderment at the USG for "pushing" an unconstitutional national security council concept; reaching out to groups (i.e., Sunnis) who do not believe in the democratic government, thereby damaging the entire political process; and pushing for the inclusion of Ayad Allawi in the government of national unity thereby "tampering" with the election results. END SUMMARY  --------------------------------------------- ------------ WE ARE NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR JAFARI'S ELECTION, BUT SADRIST PRE-ELECTION "THREATS" DID NOT AFFECT THE OUTCOME --------------------------------------------- ------------  2. (C) In a February 20 meeting, CoR member and Shia Independent Mahmoud Muhammad al-Sheikh al-Radhi told PolOff and PolFSN that the Shia Independents were being blamed unfairly for the Jafari victory in the PM race.  He believes that no less than 22 independents voted for Adil Abd al-Mehdi for PM (NOTE: This number is too high.  END NOTE).  He said the independents acted like everyone else and would not rule out that 2 to 3 members of Fadhila voted for Jafari.  As for the reports of Sadrists threats prior to the election, he did not characterize them as personal, adding that they did not affect the outcome of the election.  He said the Sadrists said before the Coalition  vote that if Abd al-Mehdi was nominated, there would be certain disturbances that would lead to bloodshed in the streets and asking their fellow Shia Coalition members if they wanted to be responsible for that.   In his case, he explained that he was sitting with 6 to 7 people, including a Sadrist (whom he did not identify), when the Sadrist member made the aforementioned statement.  Al-Sheikh Radhi stated that Shia Coalition unity is at stake and that it should keep unity by standing as one and supporting the election results  --------------------------------------------- ----------- INDEPENDENT BLOC: GETTING ORGANIZED, BUT UNCLEAR WHAT IT MEANS --------------------------------------------- -----------  3. (C) Al-Sheikh Radhi described the Shia Independent bloc as a semi-organization.  He said the independents are in the process of establishing a central caucus and leadership.  Local caucuses in each governorate will nominate people (the number nominated depends on the size of the governorate).  Those selected will join the Shia Independent members from the TNA and the CoR to form an organization of about 100 members.  A central caucus will meet to elect new leadership.  When asked if TNA Deputy Speaker Hussein al-Shahristani is considered the leader of the Shia Independents, al-Sheikh Radhi would only describe Shahristani as a "central symbol."  Al-Sheikh Radhi did not describe what powers this organization would have over the Shia Independents in the CoR (would its decisions and recommendations being binding or would it just set guidance).  4. (C) Al-Sheikh Radhi also told PolOff that the Shia Independents in the CoR will elect five people to serve as their leadership in the CoR for a three-month period before a new election.  (COMMENT.  The relationship between this leadership and the national Independent leadership is unclear.  END COMMENT.)  --------------------------------------- SHARP CRITICISM OF USG POLICIES IN IRAQ ---------------------------------------  5. (C) In a series of questions for PolOff, Al-Sheikh Radhi then sharply criticized the USG for, among other things: supporting an unconstitutional national security council over the government; reaching out to groups (i.e., Sunnis) who do not believe in the democratic government, thereby damaging the entire political  BAGHDAD 00000629  002 OF 002   process; and pushing for the inclusion of Ayad Allawi, thereby tampering with the election results.  He added that a national unity government should only represent people and not political opinions, and therefore should logically only include the three main lists (Shia, Sunni, and Kurds).  PolOff responded that the USG supports an effective national unity government that includes the major political blocs so that the national government represents all Iraqis, with no group excluded.  Al-Sheikh Radhu also said that the Minister of Interior "is doing a great job" and should stay to finish cleaning up the Ministry.  He dismissed the claims against the Minister as being untrue.  PolOff responded that there is evidence that some MoI forces are engaged in extra-judicial killings and that it is important for the Minister to be non-sectarian, not connected to any militia, and acceptable to all parties in Iraq.  (COMMENT : We have heard similar criticisms from several other less well known Shia independents who express distrust for U.S. motives, criticize Sunni outreach efforts and oppose inclusion of Allawi in a national unity government and the establishment of a national security council -- all on the grounds of preserving the Shia electoral victory.  END COMMENT.)  ------------------------------- SISTANI: "FATHER TO ALL IRAQIS" -------------------------------  6. (C) Al-Sheikh Radhi told PolOff and PolFSN that he is a follower of the marja'iya and a believer in their leadership, saying they are wise and are concerned with the interests of all Iraqis (not just of the Shia).  He described Ayatollah Sistani as a "small, simple man," who enjoys a very modern mentality (more than most of most politicians) and has the ability to influence and control the country.  He stated that Sistani does not enter politics and will never join the political business.  He said Sistani forces his own people to adopt interests of other groups (as long as practical and logical).  He speculated that those who follow Sistani will likely act the same (as a guide but not a participant in the political process).  7. BIONOTE.  Mahmoud Muhammad al-Sheikh Radhi was born in Najaf in 1944.  He graduated from the University of Baghdad in 1965-66 with a degree in mechanical engineering.  He worked mainly in Baghdad and Samarra in the health/pharmaceuticals sector.  He retired in 1994, and worked in private businesses until 2003, with no participation in any clear political activities.  He participated with Dr. Hussein al-Shahristani in the early stages of the establishment of the Shia Alliance in 2004. He was elected to the Transitional National Assembly (TNA) and was the 56th candidate on the Shia Coalition list in Baghdad.  He was not directly elected, but was awarded one of the Shia Coalition's compensatory seats. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000630  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: SCUL, PHUM, PREL, PINS, IZ SUBJECT: BORDER SECURITY OFFICERS PRAISE U.S. VISIT   Classified By: Rule of Law Coordinator James Yellin for reason 1.4 (d).  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: At a recent gathering at the Embassy, eight Iraqis who visited the U.S. under the International Visitors Program from November 7 to 26, 2005, had overwhelmingly positive comments about their trip.  END SUMMARY.  --------- ITINERARY ---------  2. (SBU) The itinerary for the Iraqis included visits to the U.S. Departments of State, Homeland Security, Defense, and Justice, as well as to law enforcement training facilities in Texas and New Mexico.  They celebrated Thanksgiving with host families in Connecticut.  ---------------------------- RECEPTION AT EMBASSY BAGHDAD ----------------------------  3. (C) On January 28, the following eight Iraqis who visited the U.S. under the International Visitors Program attended a reception at Embassy Baghdad:  -- Major General Adnan Abdul-Hassan Manhal (Shia), Deputy Assistant Minister of Interior for Support Forces (duties include command of the Border Police);  -- CQain Ahmed Kareem (Sunni), deputy of Major General Manhal;  -- Lieutenant Colonel Abbas Al-Gebory (Sunni), Deputy Chief Police of Babil Province;  -- Colonel Saad Alwan (Sunni), Border Police officer;  -- Major General Hadi Taha Hassoon (Sunni), Border Police officer;  -- Major Ratha Ainad (Shia), Border Police officer;  -- Captain Amjad Saker Taeiah (Shia), Border Police officer;  -- Lieutenant Colonel Hassan Hushia Adnan (Shia), Border Police officer.  4. (C) At the reception, MG Manhal remarked, "The trip helped us understand the United States and the American people; it touched us deeply.  We feel terrible when we hear about U.S. soldiers dying in Iraq.  We owe the Coalition forces a great debt for liberating us."  He also said that Americans often honor the values espoused by Islam more than do Iraqis.  5. (C) Manhal added that the biggest problem that Iraqis face is corruption.  COL Alwan said that human rights training is necessary for security officials in Iraq.  Alwan also praised the practice in the United States of "putting qualified people in power, rather than one's relatives."  6. (C) With regard to media coverage of Iraq, CPT Kareen remarked,  "Al-Jazeera has such a large negative effect on the region; can't  the U.S. just tell them to shut up?"  The Americans at the reception explained that although we sometimes disagree with Al-Jazeera, we believe in freedom of speech and do not believe censorship is appropriate.  ------- COMMENT -------  7. (SBU) COMMENT: We should continue recruiting members of the Iraqi Security Forces for the International Visitors Program.  We recommend that members of the Iraqi Police Service (the regular police) be among the next group of visitors and that Shia and Sunni, and at least two women, be included.  END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000637  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/28/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT:  IRAQI OFFICIAL ON GOVT FORMATION-CONVENING THE COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES.TXT  BAGHDAD 00000637  001.3 OF 003   Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  ///////////////////////////////////////////// /////////// ///////////////////////////////////////////// /////////// ///////////////////////////////////////////// /////////// PLEASE CANCEL THIS TELEGRAM.  WILL RESEND UNDER NEW MRN. ///////////////////////////////////////////// /////////// ///////////////////////////////////////////// /////////// ///////////////////////////////////////////// ///////////   BAGHDAD 00000637  002.2 OF 003   of northern Iraq.  5. (C) Othman retreated to London and became a senior Kurdish politician, respected more within the Kurdish community for his past association with Mullah Mustafa than his current political importance.  Othman has remained close to Mullah Mustafa's son and heir to the KDP leadership, Masud Barzani, and to Talabani.  He still identifies as an independent, however, and told PolOffs that his utter disregard for political office allowed him to speak frankly on any issue.  He won a seat in the TNA and the new Council of Representatives (COR) under his Kurdistan National Struggle Organization party, which is nominally a part of the main Kurdistan Alliance.  6. (C) Even as an independent, Othman is still trusted to some extent by both Barzani and Talabani, and they named him as the nominal lead on the current Kurdish negotiating team, working on national government formation talks for the first permanent Iraqi Government since the fall of Saddam Hussein.  The other six members are equally divided between the KDP and the PUK:  KDP leaders Rowsh Shaways, Hoshyar Zebari, and Azad Berwari; PUK leaders Barham Saleh, Fuad Masum, and Latif Rashid. (COMMENT: Both Berwari and Rashid are also additions from last year's negotiating team on forming the Iraqi Transitional Government (ITG).  END COMMENT.)  --------------------------------- (U) Views on the KDP-PUK Conflict ---------------------------------  7. (C) Othman expressed his disappointment with how disagreements between Barzani and Talabani led to the death of so many Kurds in the 1990s.  "If you remove the KDP and the PUK banner from their manifests," said Othman, "both programs look exactly the same!"  According to Othman, the PUK and the KDP nearly split again during the intra-Kurd negotiations on the merger between the KDP-dominated Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) in Erbil and the PUK-led KRG in Sulymaniyah.  After several days of negotiations, Barzani on January 6 2006 threatened Talabani that if no agreement were made, Barzani would tell the Kurdistan Regional Assembly and the Americans that the Kurdish split was Talabani's fault.  Talabani then conceded because he assessed that splitting the Kurdish Alliance would weaken Kurdish influence in Baghdad and undermine the progress the Kurds have made on key issues such as federalism and Kirkuk.  Despite this tension, Othman vehemently denied that Barzani and the KDP would ever maneuver against Talabani.  (COMMENT:  This last statement was in response to PolOff's query on rumors that Barzani would refuse to support Talabani for President if the Shia Coalition had nominated SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi for Prime Minister. According to some Kurdish insiders, Barzani fears that he gave Talabani and the PUK too much national prominence, and was concerned that the closeness between Abd al-Mahdi and Talabani would give the latter too much power if the former had become Prime Minister.  END COMMENT.)  8. (C) While the superficial delay of waiting for the PUK to nominate a Deputy Prime Minister for the combined KRG has been resolved by the nomination of former KRG-Sulymaniyah Prime Minister Omar Fattah, Othman claimed deeper splits remained between the two parties.  It was not yet clear that the PUK nominee for Deputy President (Kosrat Rasul Ali) would accept this post, and the Barzanis were uncomfortable with the choice anyway.  (COMMENT: Unlike the Barzanis, Talabani does not have as tight a control over his PUK; in some ways, Talabani's party is run more like a democracy than the KDP. The fact remains, however, that Talabani narrowly avoided a coup d'etat by his PUK Politburo senior members, and still maintains only a tenuous control over them.  END COMMENT.)  Othman claimed that Barzani preferred Nowshirwan Mustafa, the PUK's second in command to Talabani, to be Deputy President.  Barzani fears Mustafa more, stated Othman, and wanted him closer at hand in Erbil. Mustafa, on the other hand, has always been against the KRG merger and has made it clear he would never  BAGHDAD 00000637  003.2 OF 003   agree to move to Erbil as Barzani's deputy.  -------------- (U) Next Steps --------------  9. (C) Othman stated his determination to pressure the Iraqi Government to enforce the mandates of TAL Article 58 and its constitutional equivalents.  As for the prospects of the various Kurdish leaders in the next government, Othman speculated that Fuad Masum would remain a parliamentary member or perhaps even lead the COR.  When pressed, Othman stated that he declined to lead the TNA or the COR because he knew he would not implement KDP or PUK policy.  As for Shaways and Barham Saleh, Othman said with confidence that either could fill the Deputy Prime Minister slot, but while Shaways would be adequate, Saleh is the preferred choice because he would be more "active."  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  10. (C) Othman has always been unafraid to stake out his own positions on various issues.  During the past month, Othman has been blunt about his own preferences (openly supporting Fadhila Party's Nadim al-Jabiri, for example, despite's the Talabani preference for SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi or Barzani's wish for former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi).  In doing so he has never jeopardized his position within the Kurdish Alliance.  While we suspect that his ability to speak freely is at the sufferance of Barzani and Talabani, it nevertheless speaks to the level of respect according to him by both Barzani and Talabani for his proven credentials as a Kurdish nationalist.  Othman bears watching since - as a man who theoretically has nothing to lose in the high-stakes political game in Iraq - he would feel less pressured by either the Americans or the Kurdish leadership to refrain from staking out extremist positions on delicate issues such as the status of Kirkuk and the question of Kurdish independence.  KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000643  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: IZ, KCRM, MOPS, NATO, PARM, PGOV, PINR, PREL, UK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH TURKISH IRAQ COORDINATOR   Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD, REASONS 1.4 (C) (D).  1. (S//REL MNFI) SUMMARY. Turkey's Iraq Coordinator, Amb. Oguz Celikkol, visited Baghdad February 24-25 where he met separately with Pres. Talabani, PM Jaafari and the Ambassador.  Topics discussed were the Golden Mosque bombing, Sadrists, Iranian influence, formation of the Iraqi government, Kurdish issues and PRTs.  END SUMMARY  2. (S//REL MNFI) Turkey's Iraq Coordinator, Amb. Oguz Celikkol, visited Baghdad February 24-25 where he met individually with Talabani, Jaafari and the Ambassador.  In his Feb. 25 meeting with Celikkol, the Ambassador began by reviewing the current political/security situation following the Golden Mosque attack.  He told Celikkol we are not out of danger yet, but listed a number of positive steps the ITG has taken (curfew, formation of an investigative committee, weapons ban, etc.).  The Ambassador added Jaysh al Mahdi (JAM) is still an issue. The Sadrists sometimes say the right things publicly, but not privately.  He noted our continuing concern about JAM, and the outstanding warrant against Muqtada al-Sadr.  3. (S//REL MNFI) This led to discussion of Sadr's proposed visit to Turkey.  Ambassador weighed in against such a visit, and hoped the GOT will take that into account.  The Ambassador asked Celikkol to reflect in light of developments with Sadr in the past month, especially the indications of Iranian arrangements with Sadr, which we view negatively.  He added that Abd-al-Aziz al-Hakim feels "jilted" by Iran over the process by which Jaafari was voted as the UIC's PM candidate. Some see Iran as trying to build a "Lebanon-like" Shi'a arrangement, with Hakim as Nabih Berri (Amal Movement) and Sadr as Nasrallah (Lebanese Hizballah).  We are considering the position we should take vis--vis Sadr, but Jaafari must contain the Sadrists' irresponsible behavior, since they are his political allies now.  We are also weighing in with Saudis, who seem to see Sadr as a "moderate," and we are advising Riyadh against giving him assistance.  Celikkol stated that GOT has approved the Sadr visit in principle, but with no date. This decision was taken within the context of GOT policy to meet all sides of the political spectrum in Iraq; they will hear from him directly - but will not receive him beyond the Foreign Minister level, according to Celikkol.  GOT will give him the right message, and will be in touch with AmEmbassy Ankara.  Celikkol also noted the Jaafari visit has been arranged for Feb. 28.  Celikkol reiterated the GOT's offer to host further Iraqi political meetings in Turkey if that would be useful.  4. (S//REL MNFI) Turning to Iraqi government formation, the Ambassador talked about the need for national unity, and efforts to overcome mistrust among ethnic and sectarian groups.  One vehicle is setting up baskets of ministries each headed by a DPM, so that several diverse groups participate in the sector (e.g., security, finance/oil, public services) rendering government operations more transparent to all.  He noted misunderstandings about the USG position on who leads MOI and other ministries -- our view is that leaders must not have militia ties or sectarian loyalties (as opposed to not being of a particular faith or sect).  We are investing a lot of money in MOI and MOD, and expect a positive return.  Celikkol asked about a proposal to create a national security advisory council.  The Ambassador replied that the Shi'a at first opposed this suggestion, but now agree that it could have a coordinating or advisory role.  Celikkol also expressed the GOT's readiness to provide training for ISF, especially police training.  5. (S//REL MNFI) Celikkol then provided readouts of his meetings with Talabani and Kurdish leader Barzani.  He had told Barzani he would visit Irbil to continue discussions. Celikkol said Talabani gave him some hope for the future, saying that there was too much push now for a Kirkuk referendum.  Rather it should be delayed and needs a broader consensus on issues.  Celikkol asserted that this matched Turkey's position.  The Ambassador noted our position that there is time before resolving Kirkuk, but that he told Talabani of our displeasure with certain maps and unilateral steps we had seen.  Celikkol said he intended to raise Kirkuk with Barzani in these terms, especially to give time for consensus to build.  6. (S//REL MNFI) The Ambassador asked about PKK  BAGHDAD 00000643  002 OF 002   developments.  Celikkol said he will continue discussions with Barzani on the PKK, but that the Kirkuk issue is more important and more difficult.  He noted that Kirkuk could be a trigger for violence as Samarra was.  PKK is a bilateral issue that could be settled more easily.  The Ambassador referred to possible steps such as negotiating a cease-fire, and said Talabani was favorable. The Ambassador added that, together with Talabani, he hoped to talk with Barzani in coming days.  7. (S//REL MNFI) Celikkol noted the GOT was working to assist in supplying additional electricity to northern Iraq.  Once the GOT irons out some domestic legal issues regarding privatization (NFI), the intention is for a Turkish company to provide around 1200 MW of electricity to Iraq and to invest in Iraq's power grid.  8. (S//REL MNFI) The Ambassador raised the Consulate General Mosul visit in January, and offered that he thought it went well.  Celikkol readily agreed.  The Ambassador noted it is a good thing to set up a CG there, but advised that Turkey must ensure it is resourced properly.  9. (S//REL MNFI) Turning to Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRT), the Ambassador asked about Turkish interest in contributing to a PRT.  Celikkol assured us the GOT is strongly interested in going wherever the USG wants them. The Ambassador expressed his thanks for their support and flexibility, noting Turkey would bring a lot to the table and offered to put our experts in touch. KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000644  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/28/2016 TAGS: PGOV, IZ SUBJECT: (U) KURDISH POLITICIAN MAHMUD OTHMAN: THE  INSIDER INDEPENDENT  Classified By: Political Counselor Robert S. Ford for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Summary:  In the first of a series of in- depth studies of the various Kurdish parties that will operate in the new Council of Representatives (COR), this cable examines the history and the evolution of one of the most powerful Kurdish independents in Iraqi politics.  Dr. Mahmud Othman's long association with both the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) allows for better insight into the motivations of both parties.  Othman also bears watching since - as a man who theoretically has nothing to lose in the high-stakes political game in Iraq - he would feel less pressured by either the U.S. or the Kurdish leadership to refrain from staking out hardline - but potentially influential - positions on delicate issues such as the status of Kirkuk and the question of Kurdish independence.  End Summary.  -------------------------------- (U) The Barzani Family Physician --------------------------------  2. (U) Over the course of five meetings during February 2006, Kurdish independent and government negotiation working group member Dr. Mahmud Othman told PolOffs that his connection with the Barzani clan and the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) began in 1953 when he was in the fourth grade, in as- Sulymaniyah.  He rose through the ranks and eventually was appointed a member of the KDP Politburo in 1964.  (COMMENT:  Othman's Transitional National Assembly (TNA) badge form lists his year of birth as 1943, which would have made him 21 years old when he became a Politburo member.  END COMMENT.)  At some point after this, Othman traveled to Baghdad to begin six years of training in medical college, then an additional two years working first as a civilian medical doctor for a year and then as a military medic.  His impressions of his time in Baghdad during those years appears idealized: he recalls never bothering about sectarian differences, and claimed that while he had kept up sporadic contact with his colleagues in medical school, he had never cared until three years ago (2003) whether they were Sunni Arab or Shia or Kurdish.  3. (U) As a Politburo member and newly minted medical doctor, Othman became close with KDP founder Mullah Mustafa Barzani and acted as the KDP President's personal physician, translator, and consultant.  It was then that he came to know Mullah Mustafa's sons Idris and Masud Barzani.  (COMMENT: Idris and Masud were half-brothers; Idris was the elder by two years.  Masud's mother was Mullah Mustafa's third wife, and a member of the Zebari clan, the Barzanis' traditional rivals.  END COMMENT.)  Mullah Mustafa trusted Othman enough to include him in the Kurdish bloc that settled the 1970 ceasefire between Kurdistan and Baghdad; Othman personally negotiated some details with Saddam Hussein. At this point, Othman was considered by many to be second only to Mullah Mustafa in the KDP.  ------------------------------- (U) The Split From the Barzanis -------------------------------  4. (C) The ceasefire ended with another conflict between Kurdistan and Baghdad from 1974-1975.  With the Kurds' defeat, the KDP leadership fled Iraq in 1975.  While in exile, Othman and other KDP members split from Mullah Mustafa.  Othman claimed the split occurred because he refused to go to Iran with the others and disagreed with other decisions by the KDP leadership.  After Mullah Mustafa's death, the KDP leadership that remained wanted Masud Barzani to lead, said Othman.  Idris Barzani opted to step aside in favor of his younger half-brother, but remained very close to Masud until his death in 1987.  In 1976, Othman founded an independent socialist party that was more closely aligned with Jalal Talabani's Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) than the KDP.  Othman's independent party never really challenged either the KDP or the PUK, and mostly dissolved as a result of the 1992 election in Kurdistan where the KDP and PUK assumed the vast majority of seats in the Kurdish autonomous region  BAGHDAD 00000644  002 OF 003   of northern Iraq.  5. (C) Othman retreated to London and became a senior Kurdish politician, respected more within the Kurdish community for his past association with Mullah Mustafa than his current political importance.  Othman has remained close to Mullah Mustafa's son and heir to the KDP leadership, Masud Barzani, and to Talabani.  He still identifies as an independent, however, and told PolOffs that his utter disregard for political office allowed him to speak frankly on any issue.  He won a seat in the TNA and the new Council of Representatives (COR) under his Kurdistan National Struggle Organization party, which is nominally a part of the main Kurdistan Alliance.  6. (C) Even as an independent, Othman is still trusted to some extent by both Barzani and Talabani, and they named him as the nominal lead on the current Kurdish negotiating team, working on national government formation talks for the first permanent Iraqi Government since the fall of Saddam Hussein.  The other six members are equally divided between the KDP and the PUK:  KDP leaders Rowsh Shaways, Hoshyar Zebari, and Azad Berwari; PUK leaders Barham Saleh, Fuad Masum, and Latif Rashid. (COMMENT: Both Berwari and Rashid are also additions from last year's negotiating team on forming the Iraqi Transitional Government (ITG).  END COMMENT.)  --------------------------------- (U) Views on the KDP-PUK Conflict ---------------------------------  7. (C) Othman expressed his disappointment with how disagreements between Barzani and Talabani led to the death of so many Kurds in the 1990s.  "If you remove the KDP and the PUK banner from their manifests," said Othman, "both programs look exactly the same!"  According to Othman, the PUK and the KDP nearly split again during the intra-Kurd negotiations on the merger between the KDP-dominated Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) in Erbil and the PUK-led KRG in Sulymaniyah.  After several days of negotiations, Barzani on January 6 2006 threatened Talabani that if no agreement were made, Barzani would tell the Kurdistan Regional Assembly and the Americans that the Kurdish split was Talabani's fault.  Talabani then conceded because he assessed that splitting the Kurdish Alliance would weaken Kurdish influence in Baghdad and undermine the progress the Kurds have made on key issues such as federalism and Kirkuk.  Despite this tension, Othman vehemently denied that Barzani and the KDP would ever maneuver against Talabani.  (COMMENT:  This last statement was in response to PolOff's query on rumors that Barzani would refuse to support Talabani for President if the Shia Coalition had nominated SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi for Prime Minister. According to some Kurdish insiders, Barzani fears that he gave Talabani and the PUK too much national prominence, and was concerned that the closeness between Abd al-Mahdi and Talabani would give the latter too much power if the former had become Prime Minister.  END COMMENT.)  8. (C) While the superficial delay of waiting for the PUK to nominate a Deputy Prime Minister for the combined KRG has been resolved by the nomination of former KRG-Sulymaniyah Prime Minister Omar Fattah, Othman claimed deeper splits remained between the two parties.  It was not yet clear that the PUK nominee for Deputy President (Kosrat Rasul Ali) would accept this post, and the Barzanis were uncomfortable with the choice anyway.  (COMMENT: Unlike the Barzanis, Talabani does not have as tight a control over his PUK; in some ways, Talabani's party is run more like a democracy than the KDP. The fact remains, however, that Talabani narrowly avoided a coup d'etat by his PUK Politburo senior members, and still maintains only a tenuous control over them.  END COMMENT.)  Othman claimed that Barzani preferred Nowshirwan Mustafa, the PUK's second in command to Talabani, to be Deputy President.  Barzani fears Mustafa more, stated Othman, and wanted him closer at hand in Erbil. Mustafa, on the other hand, has always been against the KRG merger and has made it clear he would never  BAGHDAD 00000644  003 OF 003   agree to move to Erbil as Barzani's deputy.  -------------- (U) Next Steps --------------  9. (C) Othman stated his determination to pressure the Iraqi Government to enforce the mandates of TAL Article 58 and its constitutional equivalents.  As for the prospects of the various Kurdish leaders in the next government, Othman speculated that Fuad Masum would remain a parliamentary member or perhaps even lead the COR.  When pressed, Othman stated that he declined to lead the TNA or the COR because he knew he would not implement KDP or PUK policy.  As for Shaways and Barham Saleh, Othman said with confidence that either could fill the Deputy Prime Minister slot, but while Shaways would be adequate, Saleh is the preferred choice because he would be more "active."  ----------- (U) Comment -----------  10. (C) Othman has always been unafraid to stake out his own positions on various issues.  During the past month, Othman has been blunt about his own preferences (openly supporting Fadhila Party's Nadim al-Jabiri, for example, despite's the Talabani preference for SCIRI's Adil Abd al-Mahdi or Barzani's wish for former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi).  In doing so he has never jeopardized his position within the Kurdish Alliance.  While we suspect that his ability to speak freely is at the sufferance of Barzani and Talabani, it nevertheless speaks to the level of respect according to him by both Barzani and Talabani for his proven credentials as a Kurdish nationalist.  Othman bears watching since - as a man who theoretically has nothing to lose in the high-stakes political game in Iraq - he would feel less pressured by either the Americans or the Kurdish leadership to refrain from staking out extremist positions on delicate issues such as the status of Kirkuk and the question of Kurdish independence.   KHALILZAD 
C O N F I D E N T I A L BAGHDAD 000645  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, IZ SUBJECT: SHIA CLERIC TELLS AMBASSADOR IRAQ NEEDS COMPETENT GOVERNMENT   Classified By: AMBASSADOR ZALMAY KHALILZAD FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Shia cleric and former Iraqi Governing Council member Mohammed Bahar al-Uloom told the Ambassador at a February 21 meeting that he agreed with the Ambassador that Iraq needs a strong governing center. Sectarianism threatens to destroy Iraq, he warned.  Bahar al-Uloom also opined that the process to choose a Prime Minister (PM) and President needs to accelerate.  He opined that former PM Ayad Allawi would make a good PM but that the UIC 555 would not accept it.  Iraq also needs a council of wise men, Bahar al-Uloom concluded, to help all Iraqis work together.  END SUMMARY.  ------------------------------ Bahar al-Uloom On Sectarianism ------------------------------  2. (C) In a February 21 meeting with the Ambassador, Shia cleric Mohammed Bahar al-Uloom said that his views on government formation are not far from the Ambassador's.  He agreed with the Ambassador's views about "governing from the center", adding that competence, rather than partisan loyalty and the sectarianism that accompany it, should determine the composition of the PM's cabinet.  Bahar al-Uloom worried that, if the seven Shia Islamist parties plan to divide up the bulk of the ministries among themselves, there will be no room for competent technocrats.  Bahar al-Uloom said that former PM Ayad Allawi had faced the same sectarian issues, which had left Iraq very polarized.  He added that he had told Allawi that Iraqis would not tolerate Ba'athists in government.  3. (C) Bahar al-Uloom told the Ambassador that sectarianism has risen since the fall of Saddam Hussein, although he does not know why.  Although it is fine for each sect to demand its rights and keep its identity, all Iraqis must work together, Bahar al-Uloom asserted.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Bahar al-Uloom on the Pace of Government Formation --------------------------------------------- -----  4. (C) Bahar al-Uloom lamented that more than two months have passed since the December 15 elections, and Iraq still does not have a government.  He emphasized that Iraq needs to choose a PM and President so that difficult issues such as corruption, unemployment, and security can be addressed.  He called on the Ambassador to help, but he cautioned that the Ambassador's role must remain discreet.  5. (C) In an apparent reference to PM Ibrahim Ja'fari, Bahar al-Uloom claimed that the Marjaiya is "tired of some people."  A government is needed to fight terrorism, he argued.  Bahar al-Uloom added that Allawi would make a good PM but that UIC 555 would not accept it.  6. (C) The sovereign ministries should be run by specialists, Bahar al-Uloom asserted.  The Ministry of Interior, he opined, should be run by a Shia, while the Ministry of Defense should be run by a Sunni Arab.  He added that, when choosing ministers, sects and personalities must be considered.  Governmental institutions must be made to work properly before they fall apart, he said.  ------------------------------------ The Council of Binding and Loosening ------------------------------------  7. (C) Bahar al-Uloom told the Ambassador that he had suggested to Masoud Barzani that Iraq needs a council of wise men -- a group Bahar al-Uloom called the "Council of Binding and Loosening" -- to help guide Iraq.  Iraq needs a government to serve all Iraqis, Bahar al-Uloom asserted, and a Council of Binding and Loosening could help resolve sectarian issues.  The Council, he said, should be given real power and be the most important governing body in Iraq.  8. (C) Bahar al-Uloom then discussed the political reality of Muqtada al-Sadr.  Iraq does not need a group without principles in government, he said, adding that Iraq needs order, not chaos.  Bahar al-Uloom then pointed out that SCIRI was largely responsible for bringing the Sadrists into the UIC 555 coalition.  Neither the long-standing rivalry between the Hakim and Sadr families nor the rivalry between SCIRI and Dawa serves the greater good, he added. KHALILZAD 
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000646  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2016 TAGS: IZ, KCRM, MOPS, NATO, PARM, PGOV, PINR, PREL, UK SUBJECT: IRAQ,S EFFECTIVE SECURITY RESPONSE TO THE GOLDEN MOSQUE BOMBING  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David M. Satterfield for reasons 1.4 ( C) and (D).  1. (S//REL MNFI) SUMMARY: The GOI's national security apparatus and the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF), supported by the U.S. and UK embassies and MNF-I, performed well in most areas of Iraq that experienced sectarian violence following the February 22 bombing in Samarra.  The GOI's tactics were mostly successful in maintaining order, but some, such as the ban on public display of weapons, have yet to be enforced. Sunni Arabs are still highly skeptical of Ministry of Interior (MOI) police forces and have urged a stronger Coalition Force (CF) or Iraqi Army (IA) presence in some neighborhoods.  Militias took advantage of the situation to flaunt their presence in the streets, without significant challenge from legitimate security forces.  Reports from Basrah in particular indicated that the ISF were conspicuously absent, relative to Muqtada al-Sadr's Jaish al Mahdi (JAM) militia, for the first two days after the Samarra attack.  A confrontation with JAM could develop if ISF and CF enforce the weapons ban.  END SUMMARY.  -------------- GOI LEADERSHIP --------------  2. (U) After the February 22 bombing of the Golden Mosque in Samarra, widespread violence did not break out in large part due to effective actions by the GOI, calls for calm from leaders across Iraq, and the performance of the ISF.  PM Jafari's initial calls for unity and for Iraqis to block those aiming to spark sectarian violence, which were supported and at times overshadowed by similar public announcements by senior religious leaders, reassured the country and limited sectarian violence.  3. (S//REL MNFI) The GOI's security measures included curfews and a security plan led by the ISF.  In some instances, ISF heeded Sunni Arab sensitivity to a heavy MOI presence and substituted IA or CF for the police.  Judicious use of extended nighttime curfews (February 23-27), no-notice daytime curfews (February 24-26), and control of vehicle access to Baghdad facilitated the maintenance of order. According to some reports, ISF was slow to enforce the curfew on the first two days but by February 25 had imposed stricter enforcement.  We also received accounts of militias flouting the curfew in some areas, without challenge.  Jafari proposed a ban on public display of weapons by non-security forces, but this measure has yet to be enforced.  --------------- ISF PERFORMANCE ---------------  4. (U) IA and IP performance contributed substantially to keeping demonstrations peaceful and contained.  Overall, ISF adhered to their mission rather than a sectarian agenda. According to MNF-I, ISF-implemented crowd controls proved largely effective and demonstrated real improvements in ISF planning, coordinating, and executing security missions.  IP and IA coordinated in a timely and effective manner, moving to key locations to control demonstrations without themselves inciting violence.  IP handled a number of real and fake IEDs around demonstrations and religious sites.  5. (S//REL MNFI) Despite capable performance in independent and joint operations, ISF performance required CF support to be fully effective.  In general, ISF first responders established an inner cordon around an area to control violence, and CF set up an outer cordon to contain the situation.  6. (S//REL MNFI) Although the IA performed well, the IP had mixed results, according to MNF-I division commanders.  This is due partly to the army having more training and experience than the police and because some IP units are populated by militia members.  Overall, major subordinate command (MSC) division commanders evaluated IP performance outside of Baghdad as much better than units inside Baghdad.  In addition, according to Sunni interlocutors, Baghdad's Sunni Arab residents tend to distrust the IP and do not feel protected unless U.S. soldiers, or at least the IA, are in the area.  Thus, Multi-National Division-Baghdad (MND-B) surged more U.S. troops into the Sunni parts of the city to maintain order.  Outside of Baghdad, public support for  BAGHDAD 00000646  002 OF 002   police remains largely positive.  7. (S//REL MNFI) Reports from Basrah were conflicting. MND-SE commanders evaluated ISF performance as largely positive and reported that the population saw the ISF clearly in the lead, demonstrating capabilities to maintain order in a sensitive situation.  REO Basrah, however, noted a conspicuous absence of IP or IA in the first few days of the crisis; they apparently had abandoned the streets to Sadr militias who were out in force.  ------- COMMENT -------  8. (S//REL MNFI) COMMENT: The ISF acquitted themselves admirably during this crisis.  Following their successful, albeit passive, performances in securing the referendum and elections, this was their first encounter with widespread public disorder and violence.  The ISF rose to the occasion and -- without over-reacting or using heavy-handed tactics -- eased tensions, promoted general stability, and supported the politicians' efforts to show unity.  The daytime curfew on Friday (February 24) was risky but effective, and the political leadership is now fully aware of the importance of accurate reporting of events and of squelching rumors and exaggeration.  9. (S//REL MNFI) COMMENT CONT'D: Nonetheless, the ISF still needed a huge push and material assistance from the U.S. and UK missions and from MNF-I.  The ban of public display of weapons has yet to be implemented.  To the upside, they also did not unnecessarily instigate further instability through confrontation with the militias.  Such a confrontation with JAM or other militias may yet occur, however, if ISF and CF begin to enforce the ban on the public display of weapons. END COMMENT. KHALILZAD 
