 c  o  n  f  i  d  e  n  t  i  l  section  01  02  islamabad  08251  e.o.  12356  :  decl  :  oadr  tags  :  prel  ir  pk  su  subject  :  pakistan  sees  signs  upturn  iran-soviet  -  ties  1.  confidential  -  entire  text.  -  2.  summary  :  foreign  secretary  naik  summarized  ambassador  's  appraisal  upturn  iran-soviet  ties.  ambassador  asserts  iranian  rationale  basically  pragmatic  asserts  trend  continue.  summary.  3.  responding  earlier  request  gop  thinking  meaning  april  5  visit  moscow  iranian  deputy  foreign  minister  hossein  ardebili  foreign  secretary  april  19  summarized  polcounselor  cable  received.  protect  source  completely.  signs  upturn  4.  1984  goi  indicated  its  intention  tudeh  party  leaders  sent  level  officials  soviet  revolutionary  celebrations  limited  soviet  diplomats  '  contacts.  left  soviet  ambassador  tehran  voicing  gloomy  negative  prognosis  relations.  -  5.  soviet  patience  seems  bearing  fruit  :  iranians  postponed  tudeh  trials  (  november  ;  rafsanjani  attended  spoke  profusely  10-day  dawn  (  sic  celebration  ;  iranian  press  started  cast  soviets  favorable  light.  recently  prominent  columnist  questioned  government  's  rationale  not  having  consulted  soviets  during  recent  diplomatic  demarches  war  intensified  (  not  include  superpower  strong  neighbor  ?  .  -  iran  wants  -  6.  context  increasingly  costly  war  ambassador  concludes  iran  seeks  :  ease  its  economic  problems  e.g.  possibility  gas  sales  soviets  ;  secure  lines  communication  appears  uncertainty  turkish  loc  ;  establish  alternative  routes  iraqi  threat  cut  iran  's  westward  service  soviets  offered  new  route  frankfurt  via  moscow.  7.  pakistani  ambassador  sees  tangible  indicators  already  reflecting  benefits  increased  economic  cooperation  :  soviets  helping  build  power  generators  seeking  expand  area  cooperation.  two-way  trade  1985  exceed  2  billion.  joint  ministerial  meeting  held  may-june  experts  meet  moscow  steps  enhancing  economic  relations.  -  ardebili  visit  8.  pakistani  ambassador  surmises  soviets  reiterated  opposition  war  's  continuation.  believes  iranian  side  likely  listened.  iranians  raised  questions  soviet  arms  supplies  iraq  whether  soviets  note  probably  depend  soviet  perceptions  iran  's  post-war  intentions.  soviets  reluctant  iran  strong.  9.  pakistani  ambassador  sees  current  moves  marriage  convenience.  iran  feels  increasingly  isolated.  its  remaining  arab  supporters  e.g.  syria  libya  soviet  friends.  ambassador  asserts  iranians  prefer  better  relations  u.s.  islamic  revolutionary  tide  flowing  strong  u.s.  not  ready  moves  case  distant.  russia  hand  powerful  neighbor  immediate  good  evil.  -  10.  naik  extending  u.s.  noted  iranian  delegation  recent  economic  cooperation  organization  (  eco  committee  meetings  expanded  consensus  technical  cooperation  (  necessary  ``  western  industrialized  countries.  ''  pakistan  turkey  initially  promoted  idea  ``  rest  world  ''  concern  iran  balk  grouping  included  u.s.  instead  iranians  explicitly  expressed  preference  western  countries  formulation.  11.  comment  :  doubt  gop  watching  developments  considerable  concern.  understand  concerns  iranian  state  terrorism  welcome  u.s.  moves  ease  iran  's  isolation.  short  hope  show  understanding  patience  work  help  iran  falling  substantial  soviet  sway  mean  pakistan  afghanistan.  certainly  long-term  risks  interests  demand  attitude.  hinton 
 c  o  n  f  i  d  e  n  t  i  l  section  01  02  islamabad  01587  e.o.  12356  :  decl  :  oadr  tags  :  pins  pgov  pk  subject  :  khamenei  's  visit  :  resurgence  shia  extremism  ?  1.  confidential  -  entire  text.  2.  summary  :  successful  (  perspective  visit  khamenei  pakistan  boosted  morale  radical  shia  groups  here.  apparently  flush  new  funds  shias  begun  making  common  cause  anti-gop  anti-us  opposition  particularly  libya.  causes  evoke  little  public  sympathy  attitudes  sunni  majority  whom  begun  upon  signs  shia  assertiveness  suspicion  distaste  continue  limit  ability  radical  shias  pursue  specifically  sectarian  goals.  however  shia  extremists  doubtless  seek  exploit  opportunities  fanning  anti-americanism  among  public  large.  heating  al  quds  episode  groups  us.  summary.  khamenei  visit  2.  worrisome  aspect  recent  visit  iranian  president  khamenei  pakistan  apparent  new  lease  life  given  radical  shia  organizations  here.  pakistani  shias  clearly  viewed  visit  primarily  sectarian  community  whole  ensure  khamenei  's  welcome  warm  one.  huge  throngs  shias  bused  airports  lahore  islamabad  greet  khamenei  welcoming  posters  sprung  major  cities  country.  3.  money  major  effort  apparently  sources  :  wealthy  pakistani  shias  iranian  government.  funds  funneled  primarily  radical  shia  organizations  tehrik-e-nifaz-e-  fiqh-e-jaffria  imamia  students  organization  (  iso  .  organizations  forefront  sectarian  agitation  last  year.  however  variety  reasons  perhaps  including  fear  sunni  backlash  relatively  quiet  past  months.  4.  utilizing  new  funds  available  extremist  shias  ensured  khamenei  's  welcome  radical  anti-gop  anti-us  tinge.  crowds  chanted  anti-american  slogans  banners  anti-american  theme  shias  departure  ceremony  openly  showed  disrespect  president  zia  surrounding  car  making  obscene  gestures.  renewed  self-confidence  5.  aftermath  khamenei  visit  radical  shias  appear  self-confident  months.  since  khamenei  's  departure  iso  particularly  active  supporting  flurry  anti-american  pro-libyan  rallies  opposition  political  parties  organized  throughout  country.  rallies  not  struck  popular  chord  attendance  almost  uniformly  amount  organizational  effort  gone  into  fact  popped  country  makes  phenomenon  noteworthy.  limits  6.  activities  radical  shia  organizations  however  continue  limited  factors  :  availability  funds  fear  sunni  backlash.  recent  activism  radical  shias  appears  manifestation  not  euphoria  following  khamenei  visit  greater  availability  funds.  money  being  spent  presumably  left-over  visit  replenished  shias  maintain  current  level  activity.  attitude  iranian  government  likely  paymaster  become  crucial  iranians  risk  antagonizing  gop  play  own  sectarian  games  pakistan  ?  7.  given  demographic  imbalance  growing  intolerance  shia  ``  demands  ''  vast  sunni  majority  shias  not  pursue  successfully  specifically  shia  agenda.  indeed  level  grumbling  amongst  sunnis  shias  noticeably  risen  result  perception  shias  ``  hijacked  ''  khamenei  's  visit  own  purposes  growing  uppity.  president  zia  himself  reportedly  enraged  treatment  hands  khamenei  's  well-wishers  security  forces  check  closely  into  operations  funding  radical  shias.  8.  presumably  recognition  not  afford  alone  least  partially  explains  radical  shias  increasingly  making  common  cause  extra-parliamentary  opposition  particular  lashed  libyan  cause  tool  american-bashing.  9.  opposition  alliance  movement  restorartion  democracy  (  mrd  willing  common  cause  government  shias.  ways  natural  alliance  groups  outs  present  system.  mrd  however  shias  represent  two-edged  sword  :  shia  extremists  hijack  anti-government  movement  own  radical  purposes  thereby  alienating  mrd  's  constituency  (  whom  fairly  conservative  sunnis  .  comment  10.  moment  tactis  radical  shias  appear  unlikely  succeed  :  government  appears  fairly  firmly  saddle  least  short  term  ;  colonel  qaddhafi  's  cause  evokes  little  public  sympathy  pakistanis  consider  terrorist.  however  anti-american  cause  arises  around  larger  section  pakistani  populace  unite  events  recently  happened  al-aqsa  mosque  prove  catalyst  radical  shias  doubt  advantage  situation.  hinton 
 s  e  c  r  e  t  islamabad  15762  e.  o.  12356  :  decl  :  oadr  tags  :  ir  iz  pk  subject  :  iran/iraq  war  ;  situation  tehran  ref  :  (  state  227611  (  b  islamabad  15582  1.  secret  -  entire  text.  2.  further  discussion  july  22  additional  secretary  international  organizations  shaharyar  khan  willing  expand  initial  briefing  provide  answers  questions  raised  ref  a.  shaharyar  comments  based  almost  entirely  conversations  pakistani  embassy  officials  businessmen  media  representatives  living  tehran.  himself  five  days  moved  around  city  little  general  seen  seemed  bear  told.  added  private  pakistani  community  tehran  pretty  good  access  place  time.  3.  shaharyar  stated  initial  comments  growing  disenchantment  population  meant  encompass  lower  classes.  nothing  new  disaffection  among  bourgeois  element  ;  new  lower  classes  tehran  countryside  involved.  i  asked  occurring  pointed  conscription  12-13  year  olds  major  factor  parents  not  being  willing  accept  necessity  move.  4.  himself  not  outside  tehran  trip.  however  pakistan  embassy  officials  private  citizens  countryside  fewer  restrictions  almost  foreigners.  (  evidence  recounted  anecdote  pakistani  ambassador  allowed  continue  skiing  destination  scandinavian  colleagues  turned  loca  checkpoint.  pakistani  sources  agreement  ordinary  people  increasingly  dis-  enchanted  war.  5.  according  shaharyar  ``  moderate  ''  clerical  group  led  rafsanjani  president  khamenei  foreign  minister  velayati.  doubted  conveyed  thei  views  war  directly  pakistani  officials  relatively  common  iranian  third  parties  characterize  views  pakistan  embassy.  not  believe  leaders  yet  openly  debated  differences  view  war  ayatollah  khomenei  nor  khomenei  likely  persuaded  debate.  ``  middle  ground  ''  shaharyar  's  view  iran  including  khomenei  seriously  elimination  baath  party  precondition  endin  war  though  public  iranian  demand.  restated  moderates  looking  solution  not  necessarily  require  departure  saddam  hussein  power.  6.  shaharyar  reluctant  estimate  whether  group  another  among  clergy  moving  into  ascendant  possible  time  beyond  present  situation  not  endure.  official  non-official  pakistani  contacts  generally  year  present  situation  continue  without  government  doing  something  relieve  general  discontent  quickly  added  heard  predictions  iran  past  credence.  7.  shaharyar  foreign  minister  velayati  anxious  visit  islamabad  prior  nam  meeting  harare  dates  second  third  week  august  discussed  (  not  yet  nailed  .  according  goi  concerned  iraq  having  success  nam  circles  resolution  iran  find  onesided  anxious  consult  gop  issue.  shaharyar  expressed  willingness  pass  additional  observations  iran  future.  mccarthy 
 unclas  islamabad  27305  s/ct  wharton  e.o.  12536  :  n/a  tags  :  pter  pk  subject  :  pakistan  :  1989  annual  terrorism  report  ref  :  state  363024  1.  reftel  requests  input  department  's  preparation  annual  report.  following  comments  keyed  reftel  's  questions.  2.  support  terrorism  :  gop  politically  opposed  terrorism.  not/not  support  sponsor  tolerate  terrorist  groups  tactics  methods.  not/not  given  support  publicly  privately  terrorist-supporting  country  terrorism  issue.  india  periodically  charged  pakistan  supporting  local  terrorists  indian  punjab  kashmir  sanctuaries  training  camps  side  border.  gop  denies  accusations.  hard  evidence  india  's  charges  lacking.  3.  1989  court  prosecutions  :  not  significant  court  prosecutions  terrorist  cases  year.  ano  terrorists  convicted  1986  pan  am  hijacking  karachi  remain  prison.  appeals  pending  courts.  4.  major  counterterrorist  efforts  1989  :  gop  not  undertaken  new  major  policy  efforts  counterterrorism  1989.  (  gop  created  paramilitary  ``  sindh  force  ''  help  deal  law-and-order  difficulties  sindh  problem  ethnic  communal  violence  rather  terrorist  activity.  gop  attempted  continuing  basis  enhance  its  antiterrorist  law  enforcement  capabilities.  pakistan  participates  state  department  's  anti-terrorism  assistance  program.  three  training  courses  thirty  pakistani  participants  held  year  crisis  management  aiport  security  dealing  explosives  incidents.  5.  government  responses  terrorism  affecting  american  citizens  facilities  :  terrorist  incidents  affecting  american  citizens  facilities  1989.  attack  american  cultural  center  islamabad  february  12  properly  classified  mob  violence  rather  terrorist  incident.  local  police  successfully  defended  center  although  six  people  crowd  (  americans  died  police  bullets  building  suffered  considerable  damage.  oakley 
 unclas  section  01  02  islamabad  22570  s/ct  breeland  ;  e.o.  12536  :  n/a  tags  :  pter  prel  pk  subject  :  pakistan  :  1990  annual  terrorism  report  ref  :  state  355397  1.  reftel  requested  input  department  's  preparation  annual  terrorism  report.  following  comments  keyed  questions  para  five  reftel.  2.  host  government  prosecutions  :  significant  court  prosecutions  terrorist  cases  year.  ten  eleven  soviets  arrested  result  august  19  1990  hijacking  aeroflot  passenger  airliner  incarcerated  karachi  awaiting  trial.  (  eleventh  recently  committed  suicide  prison.  three  ano  terrorists  convicted  1986  pan  am  hijacking  karachi  remain  prison.  during  recent  election  campaign  government  claimed  uncovered  ``  plot  destabilize  ''  country  centered  southern  province  sindh  encouraged  indian  external  intelligence  service  implemented  individuals  associated  pakistan  's  al  zulfikar  organization  (  terrorist  group  active  1980s  .  pakistani  suspects  jail  ;  authorities  claim  obtained  information  confessions  intended  terrorist  activity.  3.  extraditions  :  none  ;  government  pakistan  neither  extradited  nor  requested  extradition  suspected  terrorists.  4.  significant  impediments  prosecution  extradition  suspected  terrorists  :  not  aware  significant  systemic  (  i.e.  legal  political  procedural  impediments  government  pakistan  efforts  regard.  5.  host  government  responses  prosecution  :  government  pakistan  politically  opposed  terrorism  publicly  privately  consistently  condemned  terrorist  violence.  pakistan  scene  numerous  terrorist  incidents  during  1990  primarily  bombings  attributed  afghan  government  's  intelligence  service  afghan  resistance  groups.  government  pakistan  appears  effort  invqgate  incident  fully  results  hampered  police  's  relatively  level  sophistication  forensic  science  investigative  techniques.  6.  major  counter-terrorism  efforts  undertaken  host  government  :  pakistan  not  undertaken  major  steps  diplomatic  initiatives  1990.  pakistan  participates  state  department  's  anti-terrorism  assistance  program  training  course  crisis  management  provided  year  eighteen  participants.  government  pakistan  attempted  continuing  basis  enhance  its  anti-terrorist  law  enforcement  capabilities.  however  absence  effective  centralized  national  police  agencies  highly  politicized  nature  senior  levels  law  enforcement  bureaucracy  international  cooperation  difficult.  since  1986  pan  am  hijacking  authorities  implemented  maintained  good  airport  security  procedures.  7.  describe  significant  host  government  support  international  terrorism  :  government  pakistan  not  support  terrorist  groups.  india  periodically  charged  pakistan  supporting  local  insurgents  indian  punjab  kashmir  including  providing  tolerating  sanctuaries  training  camps  side  border.  government  pakistan  says  gives  moral  support  kashmiri  insurgents  denies  indian  accusations  tangible  aid.  8.  host  government  public  statements  support  terrorist-supporting  country  terrorism  issue  ?  government  pakistan  not  given  public  support  terrorism-supporting  country  terrorism  issue.  far  aware  not  offered  support  privately  either.  9.  describe  significant  since  1989  :  not  significant  inq  attitude  government  pakistan  toward  international  domestic  terrorism.  oakley 
 unclas  section  01  02  islamabad  08792  limited  official  dept  pass  aid/apre  manila  amb.  platt  usia  nea  -  rugh  e.o.  12536  :  decl  :  n.a.  tags  :  pgov  prel  phum  pk  subject  :  sharia  ?  1.  lou-  entire  text  2.  month  ago  leading  topic  political  discussion  pakistan  prime  minister  's  sharia  bill  ostensibly  meant  ``  islamize  ''  pakistani  laws  government  society.  debate  raged  press  critics  religious  argued  bill  weak  liberals  predicted  minimum  infringe  rights  women  minorities.  daily  editorials  columns  interviews  highlighted  positions  competing  political  parties  leaders.  bill  's  introduction  into  national  assembly  12  threatened  create  new  political  line-up  secular  pda  anp  mqm  allied  islamist  parties  bill.  3.  contrast  popular  expectations  however  general  preoccupation  sharia  disappeared  almost  overnight  its  16  passage  national  assembly.  sharia  's  passage  senate  28  drew  little  notice  senate  changes  essentially  rubber-stamping  national  assembly  's  decision.  time  press  members  nawaz  's  iji  coalition  predicted  president  ghulam  ishaq  khan  sign  bill  into  law  within  three  days.  three  weeks  later  however  sharia  largely  disappeared  public  discussion.  survey  pakistan  's  leading  dailies  mention  either  president  ghulam  ishaq  khan  's  unexplained  delay  signing  finally  signing  sharia  into  law  june  14.  true  non-event.  4.  believe  sudden  decline  interest  due  nawaz  's  success  creating  rhetoric  brings  immediate  pakistanis  '  daily  lives.  potential  language  better  worse  affect  pakistani  's  living  conditions  intense  interest.  liberals  women  minority  representatives  remain  leary  sharia  legislation  citing  example  abuses  hadood  (  islamic  punishment  ordinances  general  zia  example  religiously-motivated  legislation  twisted  fit  political  objectives.  however  admitted  text  itself  less  issue  departures  future  regime  letter  law.  (  punative  articles  hadood  ordinance  example  generally  enforced  accompanying  protections  given  women  fallen  wayside.  critics  pda  's  aitzaz  ahsan  fact  critical  bill  's  vagueness  allowing  new  interpretations  ``  ''  mandate  actually  included  act.  5.  amendments  inserted  into  during  national  assembly  debate  helped  defuse  issue  pakistanis.  assembly  unanimously  approved  amendment  jointly  proposed  five  minority  representatives  stating  ``  nothing  contained  hereunder  shall  affect  rights  non-muslims  guaranteed  constitution.  ''  similarly  nawaz  readily  agreed  amendment  stating  ``  rights  women  guaranteed  constitution  shall  not  affected  (  sharia  .  ''  third  amendment  proposed  secular  anp  price  support  states  ``  nothing  contained  shall  affect  pakistan  's  existing  parliamentary  system.  ''  initial  three-year  deadline  abolition  interest  replacing  vague  ``  shortest  possible  time.  ''  another  amendment  defining  quran  sunnah  source  pakistani  law  rather  sum  total  law  itself  essentially  blocks  attempts  challenge  constitution  legislating  citations  directly  quran.  6.  comment  :  issues  raised  during  weeks  nawaz  's  proposal  sharia  its  passage  parliament  remain  pakistan  's  social  political  agenda  years  come.  fact  bill  advertised  being  broad  committment  islamic  agenda  later  fleshed  specific  legislation  drafted  conform  provisions  basic  law.  wide  differences  remain  within  pakistani  society  proper  role  religion  government  politics  society  vocal  religious  determined  dictate  its  views  society  large.  similarly  coalition  women  's  minority  human  rights  groups  remain  highly  critical  act.  recognize  sharia  fait  acompli  mobilizing  future  sharia-related  legislation.  therefore  sharia  passed  pakistani  parliament  1991  not  represent  type  attack  civil  liberties  pakistan  elsewhere  feared  concern  impact  future  legislation  remain.  jones 
