{ "_id" : "03STATE301352", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/1/2003 13:13", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS  ISLAMABAD 008950   S/CT FOR REAP  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PTER, PK SUBJECT: 2003 TERRORISM REPORT FOR PAKISTAN  REF: STATE 301352  A)  Pakistan continues to be one of the United States\' most important partners in the Global Coalition against terrorism. Pakistan\'s military, intelligence and law enforcement agencies are cooperating closely with the U.S. and other nations to identify, interdict and eliminate terrorism at home in Pakistan and abroad.  This includes ongoing efforts to capture and destroy the remnants of al-Qaida and the Taliban that remain in the region.  To date, over 500 suspected operatives of these groups have been successfully apprehended with the cooperation of Pakistani authorities. Among those captured in 2003 were Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a key figure in the events of September 11, and Waleed bin Attash, a prime suspect in the October 2000 attack on the U.S.S. Cole. The GOP has also demonstrated its resolve by cracking down on previously banned militant organizations that had regrouped under new names, freezing their assets and detaining their leaders.  Along its historically porous border with Afghanistan, Pakistan\'s military is undertaking operations to capture or kill trans-border terrorists.  In October 2003, security forces achieved notable success in an operation that killed 8 and captured 18 al-Qaida and Taliban in the remote tribal area of South Waziristan Agency.  Pursuant to its obligations under U.N. resolutions 1267, 1390 and 1455 Pakistan continues to work with the U.N. Sanctions Committee to freeze the assets of individuals and groups identified as terrorist entities.  At the same time, Pakistan faces difficult challenges as it does its part in prosecuting the war on terrorism.  The GOP has drafted but has yet to submit to Parliament for approval anti-money laundering legislation, a critical weapon in the terror-fighting arsenal.  Pakistan\'s beleaguered public education system is a source of concern both from a security standpoint and in terms of the country\'s future.  Religious schools, offering a limited curriculum and sometimes promoting violent ideologies have stepped in to fill the vacuum.  Reform and investment are urgently needed to broaden curriculum content and revitalize the public education system.  B)  Pakistan\'s judicial system continues to respond to both international and domestic cases of terrorism.  In 2003, Pakistan continued to use its Anti-Terrorism Courts (created in 1997 to expedite the handling of terrorist cases). Following in the wake of the Daniel Pearl kidnap/murder convictions in 2002, government prosecutors in April 2003 obtained convictions for defendants charged with organizing the bombing of the US Consulate in Karachi the previous year.  Mohammad Imran and Mohammad Hanif both received the death penalty while two accomplices were given life sentences for their roles in the vehicle bomb attack on the Consulate which killed 12 Pakistanis.  In November 2003, the same court handed death sentences to three members of the banned extremist group, Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, for planning and committing sectarian murders.  Pakistani investigators, as demonstrated in the aftermath of the 2002 church attack in Islamabad that killed two Embassy family members, have shown greater willingness to grant their U.S. counterparts access to evidence.  C)  No Pakistani nationals were formally extradited to the U.S. under the 1931 Extradition Treaty in 2003.  However, the GOP continues to facilitate and has stepped-up the transfer of captured terrorists to U.S. custody.  D)  Impediments to the investigation and prosecution of suspected terrorists include the lack of centralized databases to collect, process and disseminate timely information leading to criminal convictions.  Pakistan lacks a National Crime Information Center, Department of Motor Vehicles, Social Security System or other database systems commonly used in developed countries.  Sophisticated law enforcement and investigative techniques need greater development as well.  Pakistan\'s efforts to combat terrorism have also been hampered by its delay in passing key anti-money laundering legislation.  In 2002, key anti-money laundering legislation - drafted with U.S. assistance - failed to be enacted.  A revised version has, however, been approved by the Cabinet and is expected to be sent to Parliament.  This legislation is an essential tool in broadening the capacity of Pakistani authorities to monitor suspicious financial transactions. Such legislation will enable law enforcement and financial regulatory agencies to develop the necessary resources and technical infrastructure to pursue sources of terrorist financing.  Despite these hindrances, Pakistan has made a significant step forward with the recent implementation of a central fingerprint repository system which now includes some 70,000 10-print cards. Pakistan\'s progress with respect to developing the legal and technical infrastructure required to track terrorist financing has been incremental and the USG is encouraging it to do more in this area.  The GOP has taken many important steps to bolster its terror-fighting capabilities.  However, many of its resources are new, untested and will require time to prove their effectiveness.  E)  President Musharraf, Prime Minister Jamali and other senior Pakistani officials have repeatedly condemned terrorism and reaffirmed the government\'s commitment to putting a stop to it both inside Pakistan and abroad.  There is an understanding at all levels of the government that it is in Pakistan\'s interest to be a proactive member of the global fight against terrorism.  This commitment has been manifested in the high-level of cooperation the U.S. has received from the GOP in ongoing terrorist investigations in the United States and abroad.  With regard to threats on U.S. soil, such efforts include providing timely intelligence and support to U.S. agencies in identifying and neutralizing terrorist cells.  These efforts play an important role in helping prevent attacks on American citizens, installations and interests.  Pakistan also provides significant assistance in the investigation of international terrorism, acting on leads provided to its counterterrorism and law enforcement agencies by the U.S. and other nations.  In September 2003, Pakistani intelligence and law enforcement agents raided two religious seminaries in Karachi, uncovering a major student terrorist cell.  Those arrested included foreign nationals from Malaysia, Indonesia and Burma.  Following the November 2003 bombing in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia in which 21 people died, Pakistan\'s National Assembly unanimously passed a resolution condemning the attack and praising President Musharraf\'s \"courageous and consistent support to the war on terrorism.\"  After the September 11 attacks, Pakistani authorities arrested hundreds of suspected extremists and banned five militant groups.  However, many of the detainees were later quietly released and a number of the organizations resurfaced under new names and became active in 2003. Jaish-e-Muhammmad, for example, reemerged under the name Jamat-ul-Furqan while Lashkar-e-Taiba was reconstituted as Jamaat-ul-Dawa.  Both jihadi groups have been associated with terrorist activity in Kashmir while others are known to promote sectarian violence.  In November 2003, responding to increasing alarm over the active reemergence of these and other extremist groups, the Musharraf government ordered a major crackdown, banning 5 groups:  Jamat-ul-Ansar (formerly Harakat ul-Mujahedin) Jamat-ul-Furqan (formerly Jaish-e-Muhammad) Hizbu-ul-Tahreer (UK-based) Millat-e-Islamia (formerly Sippah-e-Sihaba) Tahreek-e-Pakistan (formerly Tehnik-e-Jafria Pakistan)  A sixth group, Jamaat-ul-Dawa was placed on a \"watch list.\" As part of its actions, the government closed offices, froze assets and detained over 60 individuals.  Although it is too early to determine the duration or effectiveness of these actions, the USG is encouraged by the GOP\'s willingness to forcefully address the problem.  (F)  In 2003, there has been significant progress in several areas of Pakistan\'s ongoing efforts to enhance its terrorist-fighting capabilities both within and beyond its borders.  Perhaps the most important development is the implementation of the first federal civilian counterterrorism force, established within the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA).  Special Investigation Group (SIG) --------------------------------- Established in late 2002 with U.S. financial and technical assistance, the Special Investigation Group (SIG) is tasked with facilitating a unified investigative response at both the national and provincial levels.  The SIG is comprised of 4 components: intelligence collection, investigations, agency liaison and cyber-terrorism.  On October 7, the SIG graduated 50 officers trained in special counterterrorism techniques. Provincial Criminal Investigation Divisions (PCIDs) in all 4 provinces will create sections to mirror the SIG structure and expand its reach to the regional level.  The SIG and its constituent parts are expected to be fully operational by mid-2004.  The USG and other governments are working closely with the GOP to explore more ways to augment Pakistan\'s terror-fighting capabilities, particularly in the areas of DNA collection/analysis, post-blast forensics and cyber-terrorism.  Crisis Response Team -------------------- To provide a tactical dimension to Pakistan\'s counterterrorism program, the USG is now training and equipping Crisis Response Teams (CRT).  Modeled after SWAT teams in the United States, the CRTs are being trained to deal with \"high risk\" encounters with violent criminals and terrorists.  Central Fingerprint Repository ------------------------------- Pakistan\'s first central fingerprint repository is being established following Pakistan\'s conversion to the international standard 10-print card.  A key step forward in aiding authorities to identify terrorists and other criminals, the 10-print card file now holds 70,000 cards. Another 10,000 cards will be added by the end of 2003.  The next step now underway is to procure and install an Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS), a highly sophisticated data management system that will assist law enforcement agencies to rapidly identify suspects.  Funded by the USG, the system should be operational in 2004.  PISCES ------ The Personal Identification Secure Comparison and Evaluation System (PISCES) is now operating at all major international airports in Pakistan and an expansion program is underway to install the system at all official sea and land entry points by the end of 2004.  PISCES technology is helping Pakistan identify wanted criminals and terrorists attempting to transit its borders at official crossing points.  Pakistani authorities report that the system is already yielding results.  Border Security Assistance Program ---------------------------------- The USG remains committed to assisting Pakistan in securing its borders against trafficking in weapons, drugs, and infiltration by terrorists.  Created in 2002, the $73 million dollar Border Security Assistance Program provides aircraft, surveillance technology, communications equipment, transport and training to assist Pakistan in securing its western borders with Afghanistan and Iran.  Related assistance efforts also provide funding for outpost construction and upgrade, training and other commodities.  To date, 183 border personnel have been trained in port-of-entry operations and small unit tactics.  In the previously inaccessible Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), $24 million is being invested in the construction of 400k of roads.  These roads provide critical access to security forces and have the added benefit of assisting in the economic advancement of historically underdeveloped areas.  G)  While the GOP does not overtly support any international terrorist groups, it does provide diplomatic and moral support for Kashmiri militant groups, some of whom are linked to terrorist acts.  There are indications that infiltration across the Line of Control between Pakistani and Indian-held Kashmir continue.  H)  Host government\'s public statements have been uniformly supportive of our joint efforts in the war against terror.  I)  President Musharraf said recently that Pakistan is at a \"critical crossroads,\" faced with both immense opportunities in the world economy yet burdened by continuing threats from terrorism, religious extremism and sectarianism.  Measured in terms of its public pronouncements and deployment of resources to counter these threats, Pakistan\'s commitment-level to the war on the terrorism can best be described as steadfast in 2003   POWELL " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15130", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/9/2005 15:38", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 015208  SIPDIS  DEPT. PASS TO USAID  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/09/2015 TAGS: AEMR, CASC, EAID, MASS, PK, PREL, SENV, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: WHAT THEY NEED  REF: ISLAMABAD 15130  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, B   1.  (c) Summary and Comment:  The scale of devastation from yesterday\'s earthquake is becoming increasingly clear as information comes in from remote, outlying provinces.  The Government now estimates that the number of fatalities could range between 32,000 and 40,000 -- and possibly more. Villages have been wiped out by the quake itself or by resulting landslides and large areas of the north have been rendered inaccessible by damage to roads.  It is now clear that a sizable, coordinated effort will be needed to provide relief and to support reconstruction.  Having returned from a tour of the north, Musharraf\'s top priorities are helicopter lift, tents, blankets and medicine. Other donors have joined us in assembling relief packages, but Pakistani officials have made clear that they will need significant helicopter capacity to deliver assistance -- something they will likely need for the foreseeable future and that the United States is uniquely positioned to provide.  Given U.S. interests in Pakistan and the region, it is imperative that we come forward with a substantial and flexible relief package.  We have an opportunity to win considerable goodwill -- particularly within affected populations in the Northern Areas, Pakistani Kashmir and the NWFP -- and to demonstrate that we are a strategic partner they can count on.  In line with our other commitments to Pakistan, we recommend we seize the high ground and be prepared to announce an assistance package of at least $20 million, and be the first off the block to say that we are interested not only in relief, but also rebuilding.  (By way of comparison, we would note that the appropriation for Tsunami relief totaled $901 million.) End Summary and Comment.  The Toll --------  2.  (u) While the GOP is literally digging out from the wreckage of Saturday morning\'s earthquake -- the worst in Pakistan\'s recorded history -- it is clear that the scope of Saturday morning\'s earthquake will be a major humanitarian disaster, far exceeding initial estimates.  On Sunday morning, GOP officials went public with a figure of roughly 18,000 fatalities, but they are telling the international donor community their own estimates are 32,000 fatalities, and they realistically assume that figure could rise to 40,000.  Four million people will be affected by quake damage, split roughly between the North West Frontier Province and Azad Jammu-Kashmir/Northern Areas. International media coverage has focused on discrete incidents of damage and building collapse in the major urban areas of Islamabad, Rawalpindi and Lahore, but it is already clear from phone reports that the scale of devastation is considerably greater in the inaccessible mountainous area near the epicenter, where there are reports of entire villages being leveled by landslides.  Landslides have closed many of the mountain roadways that form the principal means of access to the hill communities near the epicenter; while the GOP optimistically estimates they will reopen most within several days, some of the worst hit could take weeks to repair.  Here in Islamabad, donor coordination has been hampered by an inability to move back into the high rises where many UN bodies and ngo\'s have their offices, until their structural soundness has been confirmed.  3.  (u) The Embassy and American Citizen community in Pakistan has largely been spared.  Our Consular Section\'s warden system, as well as a quick check of the hospitals here in Islamabad, has uncovered no American Citizen casualties. We have confirmed that the entire American staff of the Embassy, as well as TDY staff, is unhurt.  We have confirmed that no FSN employees were killed or seriously injured; as best we know, only one FSN family member (the son of the DCM\'s driver) was killed, in the Azad area near the epicenter.  It appears the Embassy\'s physical plant -- chancery, residence, housing compound and leased and owned residential properties -- did not sustain significant damage.  Identified Needs ----------------  4.  (u) U.N. agencies are working together to put together a flash appeal for donor contributions that they plan to release on Monday evening.  Our understanding is the flash appeal will focus on relief needs but also contain a preliminary assessment of the reconstruction needs.  The GOP has outlined its near term priorities to the donor community as the following: -- shelter for up to four million affected.  (Embassy Note: the majority of quake damage occurred in a mountainous region where temperatures will drop significantly within about a month.  There will be significant need for winter-weight tents, building supplies, and possibly prefab housing); -- health support -- hospitals (both civil and military), mobile hospitals, surgical supplies, and disease control supplies; -- water (containers, purification equipment and water itself) -- search and rescue support.  5.  (u) In the near term, there is also a need for earth moving equipment to help clear roads to the affected areas. It is possible that the damage will prompt a flow of displaced persons out of the mountains south to the plains around Islamabad and Rawalpindi, in which case supplies to support camps will be needed.  The U.N. country team, led by UNDAC (UN Disaster Assessment and Coordination) has organized itself around the following clusters of priorities, with the indicated body in the lead:  health (WHO) nutrition (UNICEF); water and sanitation (UNICEF), shelter (International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent societies); logistics (WFP); emergency telecommunications (WFP); protection (UNHCR) and camp management (UNHCR).  U.S. Response to Date ---------------------  6.  (u) On Sunday, the Embassy released a press statement outlining our initial contribution to help Pakistan address this disaster: -- an immediate contribution of $500,000 for emergency relief supplier, to be provided through NGOs -- eight U.S. military helicopters to assist in bringing in emergency relief to communities and villages affected by the earthquake. -- A seven-person Disaster Assistant Response Team (DART), scheduled to arrive on October 10 and 11, which will assess humanitarian needs, assist with targeting and coordination of USG assistance, and provide technical assistance as needed; -- Relief commodities being airlifted to Pakistan from USG stockpiles in the region, including:  250 rolls of plastic sheeting (sufficient for approximately 2,500 families), 5,000 blankets, and 5,000 water containers. -- An ongoing military airlift of other relief supplies. -- U.S.-funded Ministry of Interior Airwing is providing helicopters for aerial relief support. -- Two C-130 aircraft in-bound to Islamabad tonight (October 9) with humanitarian relief supplies.  Other Donors ------------  7.  (u) Most major donors have also made contributions, and have indicated they anticipate providing significantly more as more detailed information becomes available.  Nine countries are sending search and rescue teams (China, Korea, Russia, Turkey, Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Japan and the United Arab Emirates).  NGOs working in country, including Save the Children, Mercy Corps and Oxfam, have established an NGO secretariat in Islamabad to coordinate delivery.  Next Steps ----------  8.  (u) Musharraf toured the north today.  His Military Secretary and ISI Director General Kiyani both contacted me  SIPDIS subsequently to convey Musharraf\'s urgent request for helicopter lift, tents, blankets and medicine. Both were very grateful for CFC-A\'s quick action to make available eight aircraft.  It is clear, however, that the magnitude of the task will require more assets, and for a prolonged period of time.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15130|05ISLAMABAD15208", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/11/2005 2:25", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015254  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AADP, AEMR, CASC, EAID, MASS, PK, PREL, SENV, ASEC, PA, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE - WHERE WE ARE AND WHAT\'S NEXT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 15208      B. ISLAMABAD 15130  1.  Summary and introduction:  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) says that it has confirmed 19,136 deaths and 42,397 injuries from the October 8 earthquake; both figures will climb as rescue/recovery efforts continue.  The GOP has centralized disaster relief coordination in the Prime Minister\'s office, under the leadership of a military officer.  The UN estimates that a population of four million has been directly affected by the earthquake, with one million in the most severly affected zones.  USG assistance -- humanitarian and logistical assistance and eight helicopters to provide airlift -- has begun arriving in Islamabad, and DART disaster assessments are underway.  Post has facilitated press coverage of incoming U.S. assistance and the Ambassador has conducted a series of interviews with major U.S. and international media outlets.  As the GOP has now begun to organize itself to confront the full implications of this disaster, post will focus on determining the specific material and services required for the relief effort.  2.  The U.S. announcement of an initial USD 50 million in relief and reconstruction assistance struck just the right chord.  The Vice Chief of Army Staff Gen. Hayat telephoned the Ambassador to express the GOP\'s gratitude for the contribution and the arrival of U.S. helicopters for air lift support.  Having just returned from a tour of affected areas, LTG Hayat indicated that Pakistan will require as many helicopters as possible for an indefinite period, as areas north of Mansehra and Muzzafarabad are inaccessible by road. In Gen. Hayat\'s words, \"the U.S. offer of assistance has given both the Pakistani military and public a huge psychological boost,\" so much so that it is now possible to imagine that the country will pull through this crisis.  End summary and introduction.  GOP and NGO Relief Efforts --------------------------  3.  Disaster Relief Structure:  Coordination for relief efforts is now centered in the Prime Minister\'s office, under the leadership of MG Faruk.  Thus far, the military has been the most visible agency on relief efforts, with other government agencies scrambling to get in the game.  The MFA and other agencies have established task force-style coordination centers.  Activity has shifted out to the airport, where the Interior Ministry has relocated its National Crisis Management Cell and other agencies are sending out liaison officers.  Various political parties have established relief funds; prominent politicians are following President Musharraf\'s lead in making large public donations to earthquake relief.   4.  Donor Coordination:  Post will report on GOP outreach to the donor community septel.   USG Assistance - October 10, 2005 ---------------------------------  5.  USAID Response:  A IL-76 carrying Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) relief supplies arrived in Islamabad midday October 10.  Save the Children was positioned with trucks to transport the cargo (Blankets, plastic sheeting, water cans).  Disaster Assistance Reaction Team (DART) team leader arrived at post on October 9 and has been assessing damage; the remainder of the team will arrive October 11 and 12.  6.  Military Assets:  The Office of the Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) has coordinated the arrival of the following U.S. military assets:  -- One (1) C-17 arrived early morning October 10, carrying relief supplies (Halal MREs, blankets, water), as well as a 10-ton fork lift and two (2) enlisted cargo handlers who have remained to off-load relief planes at Islamabad/Chaklala Airport.  -- Eight (8) helicopters from CFC-A arrived midday, but did not fly any relief missions today.  Helo crews will receive relief missions assignments on October 11, per coordination with the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) air operations center.  -- Two (2) C-17s from McGuire AFB will arrive on October 10 carrying a 23-person Contingency Response Team and airfield management equipment.  -- One (1) C-17 out of Kuwait will arrive late October 10 carrying blankets, medical supplies and water.  -- One (1) C-130 out of Bahrain will arrive late October 10 carrying RDML Lefevere and a humanitarian coordination team.  7.  CFC-A Coordination:  CFC-A Commander LTG Eikenberry arrived in Islamabad midday for consultations with Embassy and GOP officials.  The GOP has accepted an offer of four helicopters by the Government of Afghanistan (GOA); CFC-A will provide support for the Afghan helos and ODRP will provide ground support to the crews while in Pakistan.  8.  NAS Assistance:  Early on October 10, post\'s Narcotics Affairs Section (NAS) dispatched seven (7) vehicles and drivers to Manshera to assist with transportation needs at the request of the District Coordinating Officer.  The Ministry of Interior Air Wing, a joint NAS-GOP program, remains engaged in aerial relief support.  NAS helos have transported British search-and-rescue teams to remote areas and flown DART/Bill Berger on an aerial surveillance mission of the Muzzafarabad area.  Public Diplomacy ----------------  9.  Ambassador Crocker has given telephone interviews for the Monday morning shows on ABC, Fox, CNN and BBC Radio (UK and World Service).  The GOP has facilitated access by international media access to both the civilian and military sides of the Islamabad airport, allowing video and camera coverage of incoming international assistance, including the arrival of USG relief flights.  Post has distributed copies of the October 9 Statement by the White House Press Secretary to local media and to GOP officials.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15130|05ISLAMABAD15208|05ISLAMABAD15254", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/12/2005 2:20", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 015278  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/11/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PAS, Earthquake SUBJECT: TFPK01:  PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE -- DISASTER RESPONSE TAKING SHAPE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 15130      B. ISLAMABAD 15208      C. ISLAMABAD 15254      D. 11 OCT 2005 GRENCIK/HUNT-TASK FORCE 1 EMAIL  Classified By: DCM Patricia Butenis, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1.  (SBU) Summary and Introduction:  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) now has a firmer grasp on managing relief efforts, but still faces coordination problems between its civilian and military leaders.  The Prime Minister\'s coordination center is considering a USG proposal to have embassy liaison officers assigned to its working groups; If the GOP agrees, the liaison team will assist the GOP as it determines its assistance requirements and reconstruction needs.  U.S. military and civilian helicopters are flying dozens of sorties, transporting relief workers and supplies to the affected areas.   U.S. military planes are arriving with humanitarian assistance cargo, but the number of incoming flights has been limited by the capacity of the Chaklala air field to manage a flood of international relief flights.  The GOP is still grappling with how it will manage and distribute donor contributions, but is open to U.S. offers of technical assistance.  Despite a generally positive assessment of the GOP\'s management of the crisis thus far by NGOs and international relief coordinators, a frustrated Pakistani public is beginning to criticize the GOP for a slow and inadequate response to the millions traumatized by the earthquake.  End summary and introduction.  GOP Relief Coordination -----------------------  2. (SBU)  In a morning meeting with the Prime Minister\'s Disaster Relief Coordination Group, Embassy officials briefed the PM\'s Additional Secretary Zamir Akram on USG assistance on the ground and in the pipeline.  Post representatives also outlined the other assistance that the U.S. could offer Pakistan.  Akram said that the GOP has a good idea of the extent of the devastation in urban areas, but does not have a clear grasp of the situation in outlying areas. Akram broke assistance requirements into two categories:  immediate needs through late October (shelter; pre-cooked food, dry rations; bottled water and water purification tablets; medical supplies), followed by medium-term materiel (pre-fab housing; winterized tents; warm clothing).  Akram responded favorably to the Embassy\'s offer of disaster relief planning teams, logistic planning and tracking capability; and coordinating offers of assistance with assessed needs.  The GOP is considering an Embassy offer to assign liaison officers to work directly with the Disaster Coordination Group (and sub-groups); post has identified a four-person interagency liaison team that would be available to support the Coordination Group on site. The embassy liaisons have already passed a complete menu of available USG assistance for the GOP to consider at its federal-level interagency coordination meeting Wednesday morning, post expects that the Coordination Group will pass back the GOP\'s preferences by midday October 12.  3. (SBU)  Illustrating the close cooperation that is developing between USG agencies and GOP relief coordinators, the Pakistan Army today sent the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) detailed reports on Pak relief sorties, incoming assistance, loads shifted, etc., along with maps of supply lines and photos.  Post has forwarded these reports to Task Force-1 via email.  USG Relief Flights - Military -----------------------------  4. (S) ODRP reports that two (2) C-130s and three (3) C-17s carrying relief supplies and personnel will have arrived in Pakistan on October 11.  The military airport at Chaklala is operating at full capacity, leading the Pakistani Air Force (PAF) to restrict, for a time, fixed wing aircraft to nighttime take-offs/landings, reserving day-light hours for rotary wing craft.  PAF difficulties in managing incoming traffic have led to delays in the arrival of other U.S. aircraft originally scheduled to arrive today. 5. (S) The eight (8) U.S. Army helicopters that arrived October 10 began flying sorties at first light on October 11, completing 14 sorties (7 sorties returned to Chaklala due to adverse weather conditions).  The helos transported 223 passengers, more than 32,000 lbs. of supplies, and returned 102 evacuated casualties to Islamabad.  Four (4) MI-17s from the Afghan National Army, which arrived in the afternoon, will be ready to join the U.S. helos on missions tomorrow. Two German helicopters have also arrived and will be folded into the U.S. operation.  6. (S) ODRP reported that there are requests pending for ten (10) CH-53s, ten (10) UN-60s, and 4-6 medevac helos.  If approved, the estimated time of arrival in Pakistan would be at least a week.  USG Relief Flights - NAS ------------------------  7. (SBU)  Post\'s Narcotics Affairs Section (NAS) Air Wing (a joint project with the Ministry of Interior) helicopters flew five (5) HU-60s for 15 sorties, including airlifting a Japanese medical team and their supplies to Battagaram, Following a request from the Swiss Embassy, NAS will work on providing airlift to the four-person Swiss relief team and their supplies from Mansehra to a location further north. NAS helo teams are working flat out; with indications that the GOP may begin allowing night missions, NAS\' problem will be managing crew rest and a pilot shortage.  Donor Coordination ------------------ 8. (U)  Given persistent communication gaps between GOP military and civilian relief coordinators, USG agencies may have a better grasp of the nexus between donor contributions, incoming assistance and its distribution.  USAID/OFDA are in close contact with NGOs on the ground, and the UN is continuing daily coordination meetings with donors and NGOs.   In a meeting with USAID and DART representatives today, the MOF previewed a GOP\'s proposal to task the Prime Minister\'s Coordination Group with immediate relief efforts, then transferring long-term reconstruction oversight to the MOF. The U.S. officials suggested the inherent disconnects that could follow if relief efforts are not closely knitted to eventual reconstruction, and offered other models for the GOP to consider.  USAID and DART will meet again with the MOF and other bilateral donors tomorrow.   9. (SBU)  Both the UAE and Kuwait have announced donations of USD 100 million to assist Pakistan, with Kuwait\'s offer split evenly between concessionary loans and cash.  Post will carefully monitor how the GOP elects to use these funds and stands ready to offer assistance.  (Note:  We would welcome updates from Embassy Abu Dhabi and Embassy Kuwait on the donors\' disbursement plans.  End note.)  Private donors have also stepped up:  The U.S.-Pakistani Business Council has already donated USD 100,000; Boeing has advised that they will announce a USD 1 million donation on October 12; and the Coca-Cola Company/Coca-Cola Foundation have pledged USD 1 million to Pakistani relief efforts and USD 1 million to the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent.   Shifting Public Mood -------------------- 10. (SBU)  In an echo of U.S. public reaction in the days following Hurricane Katrina, Pakistani public opinion starting to turn against President Musharraf and the government for not reacting swiftly enough to the crisis, particularly as bad weather (severe thunderstorms accompanied by hail), equipment shortages and blocked roads hamper the government\'s relief efforts  Survivors\' expectations for immediate response have not been matched by actual delivery. Sporadic episodes of looting and raids on relief centers only add to survivors\' feelings of vulnerability.  The Pakistani and international press are increasingly airing reports critical of the President and the government\'s efforts.  For example, Survivors in Muzzafarabad and NWFP asked why rescue teams did not arrive in their regions until Monday, complaining that the GOP bureaucracy had been paralyzed in day-long coordination meetings.  Keenly sensitive to criticism, the government has defended its efforts, pointing to the numerous obstacles to transporting relief to remote mountainous regions. The President, Prime Minister and Army spokesperson have all appeared on national television, assuring Pakistani that the government is deploying all its assets to assist those in need.  Ironically, the consensus in the NGO community is that the GOP response to the earthquake has been relatively good -- a perspective shared by this Embassy.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15278", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/12/2005 9:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015286  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/11/2015 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, EAID, MOPS, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: TFPK01: POLITICAL PARTIES AND MILITANT ORGANIZATIONS PARTICIPATE IN RELIEF EFFORTS  REF: A. (A) ISLAMABAD 15278       B. (B) ISLAMABAD 15254      C. (C) ISLAMABAD 15208      D. (D) ISLAMABAD 15130  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (U)  Summary:  Pakistan\'s political parties are mobilizing their own relief/recovery operations for victims of the South Asian earthquake.  All have promised to send funds, supplies, and teams to the affected areas and several are setting-up independent relief camps.  In addition, Kashmiri militant/terrorist organizations and Pakistani sectarian extremist groups have initiated their own fundraising drives and relief operations ostensibly to benefit earthquake survivors.  End Summary.  2. (U) While public criticism of the GOP response to the October 8 earthquake has increased, political parties have taken a largely constructive line.  In parliament, leaders of all parties pledged not to try and score political points off the national tragedy and promised to cooperate in an effort to help victims.  Members of the National Assembly voted unanimously to donate the equivalent of a month\'s salary each to a National Assembly fund to help earthquake victims.  The Senate is expected to follow suit.  The opposition cancelled its long-planned anti-government demonstrations for October 12.  However, provincial leaders of the Pakistan People\'s Party (PPP) and Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) have not uniformly followed the cooperative national line with several publicly criticizing the slow pace of GOP relief.  3. (U) Cooperation between parties in administering aid, however, is noticeably lacking.  The Pakistan Muslim League (PML), PPP, and PML-N have all established separate relief funds to assist earthquake victims.  All intend to establish relief camps in the hardest hit areas, and PML has already set-up a national camp at its headquarters in Islamabad.  The Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) has dispatched a team of doctors to the earthquake zone and has promised to send additional relief teams.  4. (U) The Islamist Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) and Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F) are providing support to NWFP and Azad Kashmir victims of the earthquake through their respective charitable arms, the al-Khidmat Foundation and the al-Khair Trust.  JI leader Qazi Hussain Ahmed has been critical of the size of initial pledges from western donors and has demanded that the Pakistan military not participate in relief operations as it \"has lost the trust of the Pakistani people.\"  5. (SBU) Jamaat-ud-Dawa (parent organization of the designated FTO Lashkar-e-Tayyaba), which has an already-established social development program in Azad Kashmir and NWFP, has promised to provide relief assistance to victims, including supplies and medical relief.  Similarly Jamaat-ul-Ansar (an alias of designated FTO Harakat ul-Mujahidin) and Hizbul Mujahidin (a Kashmiri militant group) have pledged supplies, funds, and personnel for relief operations in Azad Kashmir.  Sectarian extremist organizations Sunni Tehrike and Sipah-i-Sahaba have both established funds to support earthquake victims.  It is unclear how these will be used to provide relief.  6. (C) Comment:  With public opinion increasingly critical of the perceived slow-pace of the GOP response, opposition leaders have decided there is little to be gained by involving themselves directly in a political confrontation. Qazi\'s statements aside, their decision to \"cooperate\" in the national interest has been uniformly praised.  While the parties\' relief operations are likely to remain small and uncoordinated, such humanitarian activism is seen as a routine and necessary extension of \"constituent services,\" which are critical to votes. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15278", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/12/2005 16:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 015316  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/12/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: TFPK01 - PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: RELIEF OPERATIONS UNDERWAY  REF: A. (A) HUNT/TASKFORCE E-MAIL 10/12/05      B. (B) ISLAMABAD 15278 AND PREVIOUS NOTAL  1. (SBU) Summary and introduction: Relief supplies and assistance teams are beginning to reach affected areas even as transportation remains a serious on-going problem.  There is great concern that deteriorating weather conditions -- snow has already begun falling in parts of Kashmir -- may exacerbate the humanitarian crisis.  Emergency shelter remains a top, largely unmet priority.  Raids of relief convoys and distribution centers by locals in the earthquake zone demonstrate growing frustration with delays in provision of supplies.  The GOP coordination effort remains hampered by a hierarchical structure and failure to adopt an open engagement policy with donors.  Public sentiment nationwide continues to shift against the Government of Pakistan (GOP), as images of human suffering bombard the media.  Criticism of international relief efforts is growing with public figures chastising the lack of airlift support and the lack of response from Muslim countries.  President Musharraf took advantage of Secretary Rice\'s October 12 visit to Pakistan to publicly thank the U.S. for its generosity and steadfastness as Pakistan faces this major crisis.  The Secretary assured the President and the people of Pakistan that the U.S. would provide both immediate relief assistance and long-term reconstruction support.  End summary and introduction.  GOP Efforts -----------  2. (U) The Pakistan military remains the focal point for relief operations and continues to transport relief supplies and humanitarian teams to the worst-affected areas.  Limited airlift capability (essential to reach many remote areas), crowded roads, and attacks on relief convoys by frustrated victims continue to hamper this process.  Military and civilian officials remain concerned about inadequate stocks of tents and plastic sheeting for temporary shelter in impacted areas.  With winter approaching, there is a real concern that deteriorating weather conditions could further imperil earthquake survivors.  Police and civilian medical personnel have been detailed from unaffected areas of the country to support military relief operations, although shortages in certain areas such as surgeons and paramedics reportedly remain.  Collection of domestic funds and relief supplies continues with reasonable success.  Relief supplies collected by district government in unaffected areas are making their way to Islamabad for onward distribution.  Many organizations are channeling contributions to the President\'s Relief Fund.  The exception to this rule has been political parties, many of which have established their own collection drives.  3. (C) A 29-member Federal Earthquake Relief Cell, located in the Prime Minister\'s Secretariat and chaired by MG Farooq Ahmed Khan, comprises of all relevant sectors of the civilian and military bureaucracies.  The cell is intended to be the nucleus of the central civil-military operations center for which post and other donors have been pressing.  The GOP has declined, however, to convene this cell in a central location to allow donors periodic access to the members.  Donors must instead liaise individually with the designated sectoral points of contact.  Decision-making on assistance proposals remains hierarchical, with proposals reviewed during a daily 0900 meeting of the cell.  Those given preliminary approval will be referred to more senior decision-making levels. Despite the Embassy\'s urging, the GOP has not adopted  a collaborative, on-the-spot decision-making model.  The Prime Minister\'s Office, however, has welcomed regular engagement with the USG on relief efforts, establishing a daily 1100 meeting with Embassy liaisons to discuss and coordinate relief operations.  (Comment:  This level of engagement will not get the job done. Post\'s designated interlocutor at these 1100 meetings,  Additional Secretary Imtiaz, has so far failed to respond to any of the proposals or questions put forward by our liaisons.  DCM and Embassy liaisons met with MG Farooq after COB October 12th to raise our concerns about the need for better communication from the GOP on matching USG resources to the GOP\'s needs.  MG Farooq offered the Embassy direct access to his deputy -- also a Gen. Farooq -- who offered to join the edaily 1100 meetings.  End comment.)  USG Relief Efforts ------------------  4. (C) DOD continues to deliver regular supplies of tents, medical supplies, water, and meals ready-to-eat through Chaklala airbase in Islamabad.  The schedule of twice daily C-17 and C-130 flights will need to continue for the foreseeable future, although the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) is working with Pakistani military to improve airfield efficiency so that more flights can get in each day.  Post has e-mailed ODRP reports of daily operations directly to Department\'s Task Force-1.  5. (SBU) The Ministry of Health has agreed to accept three (3) U.S. military field hospitals for the duration of the crisis, including staffing assistance from U.S. military personnel.  While the GOP has yet to identify specific personnel needs, the Ministry of Health believes that surgeons and paramedics top the list of those specialties required.  The Prime Minister\'s Office has promised to provide a list of priority deployment sites likely on October 13.  The GOP recognizes that there is a 4-5 day ship-deliver-operation lag time on these items.  6. (U) The USAID/DART team is now in-country following flight delays and is up-and-running.  All assistance items provided in the initial USAID airlift have been distributed through Save the Children.  Post believes that it is essential for USAID to identify and provide additional assistance on a priority basis in order to increase the civilian side of USG earthquake relief.  DART anticipates arrival in coming days of a second cargo flight of relief supplies, including 1500 tents, 5000 blankets, plastic sheeting, WHO health kits designed to serve 100,000 patients, two water treatment units and 5000 water containers; USAID has also transferred USD 9.3 million in response to the UN Flash Appeal and has increased the grant to the IFRC to USD 2 million.  Corporate Donations -------------------  7. (SBU)  Each of the sixty members of the American Busines Council in Karachi will contribute Rupees 100,000 (a total of approximately USD 100,000).  Many members are making additional contributions through their U.S. headquarters or foundations, including Citibank (USD 4 million), Coca-Cola (USD 2 million), Boeing (USD 1 million), Pfizer (USD 1 million), Caltex (USD 300,000), IBM (USD 50,000) and El Paso Energy (USD 50,000).  Other firms are making in-kind contributions:  medical supplies (Abbott Labs, Johnson and Johnson, Becton Dickinson, Pfizer), tents (Gillette), food (Sheraton) and software support (IBM).   Proctor and Gamble (which manufactures PuR water purification sachets in Pakistan for worldwide distribution) has given 500,000 sachets to NGOs for distribution in affected areas.  (Note: Please protect information on these donations, as several of these companies have not yet made public announcements.  End note.)  USG Distribution Support ------------------------  8. (U) Distribution of relief supplies by air is critical in isolated parts of Kashmir and NWFP.  USG military air assets in-country consist of 5 CH-57s and 3 UH-60s (as of 1200 October 12).  Four (4) MI-17s from the Afghan National Army, which flew ten sorties on October 12.  These air assets are supplemented by the Joint Narcotics Affairs Section (NAS) - Ministry of Interior Air Wing consisting of 5 UH-60s.  All air assets have been fully committed ferrying relief supplies and teams during daylight hours on October 11 and 12. Mission priorities are determined by the Pakistan military. Fixed wing air traffic control and aircraft support are being provided by a self-contained team deployed from McGuire AFB now operational at Chaklala Air Base.  Pakistan military is considering nighttime operation of rotary-wing aircraft. There is also discussion of establishing a second operations base for U.S. rotary wing aircraft at PAF Minhas.  9. (C) GOP continues to seek additional helicopter support from the USG.  Twenty (20) CH-47 helicopters are scheduled to arrive at Baghram in approximately two days for deployment in Pakistan within a week.  ODRP, in coordination with CENTCOM and CFC-A, is considering other sources of helo support to propose to the PAF, including four (4) State Department/INL MI-17s in Afghanistan and Tajikistan national MI-17s.  10. (C) During his October 12 meeting with CFC-A LTG Eikenberry, VCOAS Hayat agreed to ODRP\'s proposal to air drop rations into remote areas not presently accessible by road. High population density in some areas will complicate planning and force protection; drops will be possible only in areas where the Pakistan military has sufficient personnel on the ground to clear a drop site.  Planning for these missions is underway; missions could begin as early as October 13.  Public Perception -----------------  11. (U) Public anger over the GOP\'s perceived inability to meet humanitarian needs in the affected areas continues to grow.  There appears to be a widespread belief that the GOP is not doing enough to ensure expeditious delivery of relief supplies.  This sentiment is fueled by media reporting, interviews, and photographs displaying clearly-suffering individuals in the assistance zones.  In affected areas, frustrated individuals have attacked and looted relief convoys and distribution centers and have attempted to forcibly board relief aircraft with the objective of evacuation.  Public figures have also initiated criticism of international relief efforts, calling for additional helicopters to support air lift operations.  Some commentators also took Muslim countries, in particular, to task for failing to respond rapidly and sufficiently.  12. (U)  Mindful of public frustrations, President Musharraf took advantage of the press presence at the top of his October 12 meeting with Secretary Rice to praise the strong U.S. response to Pakistan\'s appeal for international assistance.  (Note:  Full reporting of the Secretary\'s meetings in Pakistan will be forwarded septel.  End note.) He thanked the United States for its pledge of an initial USD 50 million in relief and reconstruction assistance, noting that he highlights U.S. air lift and material support when travels to affected areas of Kashmir and NWFP.  The Secretary assured the President that the U.S. would support the Pakistani people through this crisis, starting with emergency relief and continuing through long-term reconstruction of the devastated regions. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15316", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/14/2005 9:54", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015463  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/13/2015 TAGS: PGOV, EAID, MASS, PK SUBJECT: POLITICAL FALLOUT FROM DISASTER RESPONSE  REF: ISLAMABAD 15316  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (C) Summary: The GOP and the Pakistan military have faced substantial media and public criticism, much of it unjustified, for their perceived ineffectiveness in earthquake response.  Musharraf\'s public address on October 12, a damage control exercise, was overshadowed by continued media images, interviews, and commentary on victims who are still without meaningful assistance.  The opposition parties, sensing a vulnerability, have joined the attacks and sought to portray themselves as constructive players in national relief efforts.  With damage concentrated in Azad Kashmir and North West Frontier Province (NWFP), there is a near term possibility that resentment at the central government may fuel the Kashmiri independence movement and Pashtun nationalist calls for increased provincial autonomy.  Over the medium-term, however, if reconstruction efforts are adequately funded and executed in these areas, government authority and credibility may be enhanced.  End Summary.  2. (C) International aid agencies and NGOs believe that the GOP and the Pakistan military have conducted a largely credible relief operation despite significant logistical challenges and infrastructure limitations.  This assessment is not widely shared in the Pakistani public or media. Images and stories of victims in dire need continue to flood the pages and television screens of an increasingly skeptical public.  Reported verbal abuse of Pakistani military and government personnel arriving in affected villages, coupled with stories and images of desparate survivors looting relief convoys and distribution points, adds to the perception of government paralysis.  The media has been demonstrating that it is completely free, but less than fully responsible.  For example, local journalists stationed at Chaklala Airbase in Islamabad report a chaotic scene, with the Pakistani military unable to prioritize assistance missions for timely delivery of aid and no visible decisionmaking chain-of-command.  In fact, the whole operation at Chaklala is running well, as the international media seems to be portraying today.  The absence of an effective media/public relations strategy within the GOP, coupled with the military\'s long-standing reluctance to provide operational information to journalists, plays into the hands of critics.  The Ambassador joined the Pakistan Army\'s air chief at Chaklala this morning for a Pakistan TV interview to set the record straight.  3. (C) To blunt criticism of GOP relief operations, President Musharraf addressed the nation on October 13.  While the speech contained some detail on military relief operations and praised international donor assistance, most commentators remained unmoved.  Media analysts charged that Musharraf came across as defensive when he articulated logistical challenges in aid delivery and appeared to open the military to additional criticism when he stated that 72-hours had been necessary to arrange for full mobilization.  4. (C) Nevertheless, Musharraf himself has been generally viewed in a favorable light during the crisis.  He continues to project an aura of leadership in meetings with foreign officials and relief workers and during well-publicized tours of the earthquake zone.  His astute political decision to create, in relatively short order, military and civilian relief cells that answer to others in the GOP, may allow him to shift future blame to other institutions, particularly the Prime Minister\'s Office and the military command.  5. (C) Prime Minister Aziz\'s image has suffered, despite tours of the earthquake zone and significant personal monetary donations.  Aziz lacks the leadership persona of Musharraf and has frequently seemed overwhelmed.  The Prime Minister is not helped by a bureaucracy that has done little other than designing numerous organigrams for relief operations and establishing multiple cabinet-level relief committees, few of which have delivered results.  The public perception has been of a Prime Minister (and government) involved in endless meetings while victims suffer.  Aziz, who has faced opposition within his party and government almost from the day he assumed office, may well end up as the government\'s scapegoat.  6. (C) The public welcomed the decision to appoint the military as lead agency for disaster response, but had unrealistic expectations of its capabilities.  (Note:  The military has always enjoyed a much higher level of trust than the civilian bureaucracy.)  The slow pace of relief delivery, an inevitable result of the scope of the disaster and the inaccessability of the terrain, undermined confidence. Military personnel in the disaster zone have been verbally abused, and commanders are under constant media scrutiny. General Farooq, the military\'s Disaster Relief Coordinator has explained publicly and privately that the area of devestation coincided with the area of the army\'s deployment in Kashmir leading to significant military casualties that hindered its rapid response capability.  7. (C) The media has carried positive stories of the opposition (both secular and Islamist) dispatching relief supplies and assistance teams to the affected areas.  The decision to conduct relief efforts independently through the parties\' existing charitable foundations arguably sacrifices efficiency in an effort to gain political advantage.  In contrast, the ruling Pakistan Muslim League\'s decision to focus its efforts on the President\'s Relief Fund has inextricably linked its efforts with the GOP.  The opposition\'s decision to refrain from vocal criticism of GOP efforts has allowed its leadership to appear constructive players.  NWFP Chief Minister Durrani\'s decision to attend, for the first time, the National Security Council meeting on October 12 to discuss earthquake relief allowed parties to seem above partisan squabbling.  8. (C) Comment:  The most severely earthquake-impacted areas, Kashmir and the NWFP, viewed themselves as isolated from the central government prior to this tragedy.  The GOP has steadfastly maintained the fiction of an autonomous Azad Kashmir government and in the NWFP calls for increased political autonomy are a well-established tradition.  In the near-term, public unhappiness over the relief effort could fuel both Pashtun and Kashmiri nationalist movements and give additional platforms to their principal advocates the Awami National Party (ANP), the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam Fazlur Rehman, and the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front.  However, over the medium term, if reconstruction efforts are adequately funded and executed, the GOP is likely to weather the storm and may come out ahead.  Indeed, a massive, GOP-led reconstruction effort could ultimately help bind both regions more tightly to Pakistan.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15316", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/14/2005 14:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 015513  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A DEPARTMENT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/11/2015 TAGS: PREL, PK, MASS, PARM, AEMR, ASEC, PGOV, AADP, CASC, AID, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  RELIEF MOVING FORWARD  REF: A. HUNT/SWAMY/GRENCIK - TASK FORCE EMAIL 10/13/2005      B. GRENCIK - FAGIN EMAIL 10/14/05      C. ISLAMABAD 15316 AND PREVIOUS NOTAL  Classified By: DCM Patricia Butenis, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary and introduction:  Relief efforts in Pakistan are pushing forward, as the government begins to implement a coherent Concept of Operations for managing its response to the crisis.  The U.S. has received diplomatic clearance to double its milair relief flights into Islamabad, and additional U.S. helicopters arrive each day to join the mission.  Even with the ramp up in relief operations, many areas hit by the October 8 earthquake remain inaccessible to relief workers.  U.S. C-130s began air-drops of rations to survivors in these remote areas.  Military coordinators are now considering whether some U.S. air assets should redeploy to alternative air fields, as operations at the Qasim and Chaklala sites are reaching saturation.  The UN and NGO relief continues to move forward, but coordination with the government remains a challenge.   The press continues to berate the government for an inadequate response to the crisis, with some actually suggesting that the failure to reach victims in remote areas as \"politically-motivated neglect.\"  (Note:  In a meeting in which the Ambassador urged the government to proactively engage the media, he repeated this baseless characterization to National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz.  After a moment of stunned silence, Aziz replied, with perfect comedic timing,\"That\'s nonsense -- the region voted PML\" (i.e. , for President Musharraf\'s party).  End note.)  No AMCIT Casualties -------------------  2.  (SBU)  The Embassy has not had any reports of American citizens killed or injured.  Consular officers have cleared eleven (11) welfare-and-whereabouts inquiries as of October 13; they are following up on two additional inquiries received October 14.  U.S. Relief Flights and Helicopter Operations ---------------------------------------------  3.  (C)  The Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) scored a major victory today, obtaining blanket diplomatic clearance for eight (8) U.S. milair flights daily, doubling the number the USG had earlier in the week.  Five flights came in on October 13, carrying tents, cots, rations, maintenance parts.  The  Contingency Response Group (CRG) at Chaklala airfield is doing well and is lashed up with the Pakistan Air Force.  The CRG was able to dramatically improve the efficiency of the airfield\'s cargo operations by connecting two NGO workers who have worked for DHL to Pakistani logistics officers:  the NGO/DHL workers showed the Pakistanis the advantages of getting cargo onto pallets and quickly converted a haphazard operation into an organized, efficient warehouse.  In another stroke of serendipity, CRG cargo handlers came to the rescue when an IL-76 bearing Iranian relief supplies could not find a Pakistani team to off-load its cargo; a photo of the U.S. ground crew unloading the Iranian supplies made the morning papers.  4.  (C)  Task Force Griffen conducted seventy-six helicopter sorties, conveying 208,680 pounds of relief supplies and 675 injured passengers. Two Navy CH-53s arrived at Qasim AFB on October 13.  Twenty CH-47s are still on schedule to arrive in staggered flows in Baghram over the next fourteen (14) days. On the State side, two (2)INL-sponsored MI-8s from Kabul due in Pakistan on October 14 have been delayed at least one day, as the Bulgarian and Tajikistani firms from whom the helos are leased must seek national government approval to transfer the assets to Pakistan.  Pieces Falling Together:  GOP Concept of Operations --------------------------------------------- ------  5.  (SBU)  In post\'s morning meeting with Deputy Commissioner of the Federal Relief Commission (FRC) BG Farooq, USG liaisons received a presentation outlining the GOP\'s Concept of Operations for the relief effort.  (Note:  Post has emailed the full presentation to Task Force-1.  End note.) The liaison team will reciprocate on October 14 by giving the FRC an outline of how the U.S. military can support the GOP Concept of Operations.  Once approved by the GOP, the U.S. military response will be knitted together with the Pakistani concept.  Post liaisons will then weave support from U.S. civilian agencies (DART, USAID, etc.), the UN and NGOs into the fold.  6.  (C)  The GOP has identified three sites (Rawalkot, Muzzafarabad and Mansehra) as potential forward operating bases, from which relief supplies would be transported.  An U.S. military engineering assessment team arrived in Islamabad October 13 and will assess the roads to these three sites on October 14 to determine where they are clear and capable of supporting a steady flow of supply conveys.  Air Drops ---------  7.  (C)  The U.S. military currently has 51 pallets of food, water and blankets ready at Baghram air field to supply air drops from C-130s to earthquake survivors in areas relief teams cannot access by road.  Military assessment teams in Blackhawks conducted surveys of possible drop zones on October 12, but the situation of these isolated survivors is so desperate that Pakistani military officials have requested that the U.S.conduct blind drops.  Ambassador supports this position.  U.S. C-130s air drop operations should begin on October 14.  Alternate Air Bases -------------------  8.  (C)  After some confusion as to the genesis of the concept of establishing a separate base of operations for Task Force Griffen (Note:  As a result of a communication garble, the USG thought that the GOP came up with the idea of moving U.S. milair flights to a designated air field, while the GOP believed that the USG had formally requested a separate air field.  End note.)  U.S. military planners are now examining whether it makes sense to move some U.S. air assets to alternate bases, as operations at Qasim and Chaklala are reaching capacity.  Coordinating with Other Donors -------------------------------  9.  (C)   The UN Disaster Assistance Center (UNDAC) has now organized sector cluster groups, which are establishing websites to improve coordination.  A UN Humanitarian Information Center team should be set up by October 14.  Post representatives at the daily UNDAC coordination meeting came away concerned that there is no comprehensive picture of the distribution of relief supplies.  ODRP will try to link the UN and NGOs into Pakistani military channels in order to improve tracking of the movement of humanitarian relief materials.  Another emboff officer attending the October 13 UNDAC meeting reported a dramatic change in atmosphere from the previous day, with NGO representatives increasingly frustrated by a lack of coordination with the GOP.  Relief agencies cannot get slots for flights to bring in relief cargoes.  The GOP sent an unprepared MFA officer to the October 13 session, rather than the officials who had participated the day before.  The MFA officer had no answers to the NGOs\' questions, saying only that he would try to have responses by the following day.  UN U/SYG Jan Egeland arrived October 13; in public statements calling for the international community to increase its assistance, he indirectly suggested that the Pakistani relief effort was failing.  Return to Muzzafarabad ----------------------  10.  (SBU) An emboff who had been in the devastated city of Muzzafarabad October 11 returned two days later to find a city reborn:  people on the streets, tractors and other earth-moving equipment moving about, volunteer relief workers from Pakistan proper distributing food supplies from Sindh from the back of jingle trucks.  Much of the credit for this transformation goes to the Punjabi police, who arrived late October 12 and immediately began to restore order amongst chaos.   11.  (U)  Kabul minimize considered. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15513", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/15/2005 8:59", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015518  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: SURVEY TRIP TO MUZZAFARABAD  REF: ISLAMABAD 15513  1. Summary:  A USG survey team consisting of personnel from State, USAID, and DOD visited Muzzafarabad and surrounding areas of Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) from October 11-13.  During the visit, the team met with officials from the local and AJK government, the Pakistani military, and relief workers to assess needs and relief efforts in the aftermath of the October 8 earthquake. All interlocuters believed that the immediate need was shelter for the ensuing 3 to 4 months followed by a permanent water supply.  By the fourth day following the earthquake, most of those with life-threatening injuries had been evacuated. Medical personnel felt that re-establishing electricity and running water was critical to preventing and treating disease.  Relief efforts by the Pakistani military, local government, Pakistani population and the international community were enormous, but coordination could be drastically improved.  Relief officials believed that the major focus of disaster response efforts should now shift to communities surrounding Muzzaffarabad. End summary.  A Long Way to Normalcy ======================  2. The one thing that all interlocutors -- from senior military generals to laborers who lost family -- agreed upon was the need for tents to be used as semi-permanent shelter for about 3 to 4 months.  While most stressed winterized units, a minority argued that securing any shelter was more important than waiting for winterized tents.  The latter group added that affected populations were resilient and needed only basic protection from the elements.  The Pakistani military, which was spearheading and directing most relief operations, had yet to establish a long-term reconstruction plan and was primarily focused on getting to and stabilizing the injured.  Logistics Will Win the War ==========================  3.  Much of the civilian leadership of AJK and Muzzafarabad were killed or severely injured.  The military was leading relief efforts but found coordination with the central command in Islamabad and with non-military relief efforts in the city complicated.  In many cases, private citizens were simply hiring trucks to ship goods to Muzzafarabad and then throwing the goods off the trucks while driving through the city.  Survivors heard of ad hoc collection and distribution centers by word-of-mouth; these sites lacked security elements to ensure orderly disbursement.   Many main roads to the city were passable, although cluttered with rocks and debris.  Several points along the road from Murree to Muzzaffarabad were limited to a single lane of traffic. These choke points were barely wide enough for a local \"jingle\" truck to pass, causing traffic jams and delaying needed relief supplies.  Getting out of the Big City ===========================  4.  Most relief personnel considered the situation in Muzzaffarabad to be stable and were encouraging relief efforts to shift to smaller communities in AJK.  Pakistani military officers considered Chokoti, Jure, Sawan, Dhani and Patika to be priority areas.  Almost a week after the disaster, these areas had yet to receive any assistance.  Comment =======  5. Our team believed that the military, civilian officials, and relief personnel in Muzzafarabad were doing a credible job in attempting to deliver assistance in the face of this overwhelming disaster.  There was a strong recognition and desire to do more both in Muzzafarabad and surrounding areas, limited only by the logistical challenges in transporting relief supplies and personnel.  While coordination could certainly be improved among those providing relief on the ground and with central authorities in Islamabad, we believe that such challenges will diminsh as the military and civilian authorities regain firm control and communications infrastructure recovers. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05USNATO707", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/16/2005 5:35", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 015522  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/15/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  ONE WEEK LATER  Classified By: DCM Patricia A. Butenis, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1. (C)  Summary and introduction:  One week after the October 8 South Asian earthquake, public and private relief operations on the ground are pushing forward.  The Government of Pakistan\'s (GOP) strategic concept of operations for the relief campaign, however, continues to evolve, with the Army\'s GHQ now offering its own vision for the relief campaign to supplant the plan unveiled by the Prime Minister\'s Federal Relief Commission only three days ago. U.S. military and civilian assistance continue to bring relief supplies into Pakistan and then out to affected areas, while members of post\'s earthquake working group serve as discreet liaisons between the civilian and military sides of the GOP and between the GOP and the UN and NGO relief organizations.  As the crisis moves into its second week, critical issues must be addressed to protect survivors in the affected areas and to ensure that the relief operation has the necessary logistical resources to increase movement of supplies to the far reaches of the quake zone.  Pakistani interlocutors have been effusive in their praise and gratitude for the  U.S. response to this natural disaster; if managed correctly, the USG relief effort will broaden and deepen our relationship with this often-mistrustful ally. End summary and introduction.   AMB Visit to Bagh:  Relief Underway, Next Step is Shelter --------------------------------------------- ------------  2. (SBU)  On October 14, Ambassador Crocker traveled by helicopter to the Azad Kashmir town of Bagh, where he saw relief efforts proceeding in good order.  Under the direction of a Pakistan Army brigadier, military troops had laid out and secured landing zones for relief helos, organized quick off-load of incoming supplies and on-load of wounded evacuees and erected a medical tent staffed by a Korean physician and Spanish rescue team.   The brigadier had only one message for the Ambassador to take back to relief coordinators in Islamabad:  \"Send winterized shelter.\"  The change of seasons is well along in this Himalayan region.  The USAID/DART team and U.S. military are investigating global inventories and manufacturers of winterized tents, as significant numbers of such tents and other pre-fabricated, quick-erect shelters must be imported to Pakistan soonest.   GOP Coordination:  Firm Grip or Still Grasping? --------------------------------------------- --  3. (C)  Post received information late October 14 indicating that the GOP\'s initial earthquake relief model -- with immediate disaster relief under MG Farooq at the Federal Relief Commission (FRC) and long-term recovery under a new Reconstruction Authority headed by MG Zubair -- has already been recalled.  Brigadier Nasser Janjua, Director General - Military Operations (DGMO) told an ODRP liaison that it was unrealistic to expect an hoc organization like the FRC to conceive, communicate and implement a vision for a crisis of this magnitude.  While Mg Farroq and his staff have been sorting out office space and learning their phone numbers, BG Nasser said, the Pakistani military has imposed order on chaos.  On the morning of October 15, DGMO briefed Vice Chief of Army Staff Hayat on a military concept of operations to supersede that devised by the FRC.  The DGMO plan would base U.S. forces near Islamabad, in support positions for Pakistani assets deployed to forward operating bases (FOBs). The DGMO concept reflects GHQ sensitivities to force protection issues raised by the prospect of U.S. military operations in remote areas known to harbor extremist elements.  BG Nasser urged ODRP to consider GHQ the \"central planning cell\" for relief operations and requested a copy of the list of available USG assistance that had earlier been passed to the FRC.  (Note:  As of this writing, ODRP and post liaisons are at GHQ for a briefing on the DGMO concept.  If Gen. Hayat (4-star) approves the proposal, FRC Coordinator MG Farooq (2-star) will quickly abandon the FRC concept presented three days ago in favor of the DGMO model.  End note.)  Relief Flights Operations -------------------------  4. (C)  Seven U.S. milair cargo flights arrived in Pakistan on October 14:  four (4) C-130s and one (1) C-17, carrying tents, medical supplies and food (Halal).  A KC-10 carrying relief personnel and a NATO 707 with medical teams and supplies also arrived at Chaklala air field.  Ten U.S. military helicopters completed 65 sorties, transporting 216,000 lbs. of relief supplies and evacuating 557 injured passengers.  The U.S. Contingency Response Group (CRG) supported four (4) Afghan National Army helos on 14 sorties on October 14, transporting 12,000 lbs of supplies and 65 injured passengers.  The State Department-funded NAS Air Wing Helos flew 19 sorties on October 14, carrying 8400 kg of relief supplies and evacuating 88 passengers.  Two U.S. C-130s conducted air drops operations in the Muzzafarabad area on October 15; given the dangers of low-altitude flying in the mountain terrain surrounding many villages, additional planning will be required before operations can begin to drop rations to survivors isolated in these areas.  Incoming Air Assets -------------------  5. (C)  Additional helicopter support is in the pipeline, giving the U.S. military Disaster Assistance Center (DAC) a window to identify alternate air fields for operations.  The first three of an expected twenty-four (24) CH-47s are scheduled to arrive in Pakistan on October 21.  One NAS-funded MI-17 arrived in Pakistan the morning of October 15; a second is expected later the same day.  With the arrival of these helos, the DAC will reach full capacity for the space allotted at the Qasim and Chaklala air fields. ODRP and DAC representatives are working to bring Pakistan Air Force (PAF) and Army coordinators together to expedite the process of selecting alternative venues for helo basing and operations.  Other U.S. Military Assets -------------------------- 6. (C)  Additional U.S. military relief supplies will begin arriving at the port of Karachi on October 17, with the morning arrival of the commercial vessel Northern Lights, followed by the U.S.S, Pearl Harbor later the same afternoon.   The ARCENT 831st Transportation Battalion will receive, off-load and transfer the cargo (relief supplies and heavy earth-moving and engineering equipment) to trains for transport north to the quake zone.  Media Coverage --------------  7. (SBU)  With a live feed from Chaklala air field, CNN broadcasts throughout October 14 were filled with images of U.S. helicopters moving relief supplies north and returning with injured survivors, who were then carried to a PAF field hospital for treatment on the side of the taxi-ways.  During CNN\'s live interviews with the Ambassador and RDML Lefever, U.S. ground crews could be seen off-loading fixed wing cargo planes from around the world.  State and military public affairs officers have been directing Pakistani and international journalists onto U.S. helos to ensure coverage of the relief campaign and its results.  Before departing Chaklala air field, the Ambassador pressed a senior Pakistani military official to put Pakistani media onto Pakistani military helos, particularly those pushing deep into isolated areas from forward operating bases in Kashmir.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15522", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/16/2005 12:23", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015531  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AEMR, EAID, MASS, PARM, PGOV, PK, PREL, AID, Earthquake, UN SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  UNHCR PLANS FOR CAMPS AND SHELTER  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 15522 AND NOTAL      B. HUNT/SWAMY/GRENCIK EMAIL TO SA/PB 14-16 OCTOBER         2005  1.   The October 8, 2005 magnitude 7.6 earthquake in Pakistan left an estimated 3.3 million people without shelter (UN Office of Humanitarian Coordinator, October 15).  Providing temporary shelter from them remains a top priority of the international assistance effort and the government of Pakistan.  The United Nations Disaster Management Team (UNDMT) and the UN Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) group is focused on establishing small temporary camps only where necessary, putting primary emphasis on providing shelter close to the destroyed homes of survivors.  CAMPS FOR EARTHQUAKE SURVIVORS -----------------------------  2.  The UNDAC Camp Management Cluster, led by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), received a written request on October 13, 2005 from Pakistan\'s Federal Relief Coordinator, Major General Farooq Ahmed Kahn, to establish camps for those left homeless by the earthquake. The UN Flash Appeal for the South Asia Earthquake contains a request for $22 million for the UNDAC Camp Management Cluster to provide everything needed to operate camps for up to 500,000 people except food (which is included in the Food Cluster Request).  UNHCR and the fourteen non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the Camp Management Cluster, recognizing that camps can be magnets for those looking for assistance and become unnecessarily large, have agreed to minimize the number of camps and to aim to keep them open only for six months.  The Camp Management Cluster will work with the Shelter and other UNDAC clusters to achieve this goal.  To keep camp sizes small, it plans to:  -- Prevent interim displacement by delivering tents and blankets to the most remote areas possible to enable people to remain near their destroyed homes;  -- Provide tents, blankets, non-food items, and organizational assistance to spontaneous settlements;  -- Keep those camps it is necessary to establish as small as possible;  -- Work to establish and maintain in the camps Sphere standards (which set minimum levels of assistance for disaster assistance).  UN HAS NO PLANS TO ESTABLISH LARGE CAMPS ----------------------------------------  3.  UNHCR and NGO members of the Camp Management Cluster are currently completing site surveys for the small camps in Muzaffarabad, Balakot and Batagram and in other locations. Although October 14 newspaper reports referred to a Government of Pakistan (GOP) plan to create \"tent cities\" to house earthquake victims, the UN has received no formal request from the GOP for such camps.  If asked, UNHCR will provide technical advice to GOP on establishing and operating large camps, but it will not itself take a role in management of camps in urban areas or camps located great distances from the homes of survivors.  PROVIDING SHELTER TO THOSE OUTSIDE CAMPS ----------------------------------------  4.  UNHCR is encouraged by assurances from the GOP that those in the earthquake-affected area will want to stay as close to their destroyed dwellings as possible.  It has already provided 2,400 winterized tents to its NGO partners for distribution, and an additional 15,415 winterized tents and 220,000 blankets from UHCR stockpiles in Afghanistan, Turkey and Dubai are scheduled to be delivered by October 20, The Shelter Cluster is also working to provide tents to the displaced who want to remain near their homes.  UNDAC and the Shelter Cluster are in the process of determining how many tents have already been delivered, how many are being shipped, and how many of them are winterized.  The Shelter Cluster reports that estimates of the need for tents varies; initial estimates were that between 100,000 and 200,000 tents would be needed, but the Shelter Cluster now estimates the number required could be as high as 600,000.  As of October 15, 2005, the Shelter Cluster estimated that 15,000 tents had already been delivered and that 66,000 were in the pipeline, but stressed that these are preliminary figures and that it lacks complete information from all donors.  5.  Comment:  The need to shelter survivors of the earthquake is growing more acute each day, as the shift in weather conditions has left thousands exposed to the elements. Post\'s contacts in the Kashmiri community agree with the GOP assessment that strong cultural imperatives will make survivors extremely reluctant to abandon their land and homes.  The sizable Kashmiri community in Islamabad/Rawalpindi is already housing extended family members affected by the earthquake, but will not be able to absorb the thousands of displaced survivors.  Post will continue to monitor UNHCR and GOP resettlement plans as Pakistan shifts from emergency relief toward sustainable mid-term housing for the homeless. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/17/2005 2:02", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015550  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT - PLS PASS TO USAID KABUL -- PLS PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, ECON, ETRD, MASS, PK, PREL, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  MFA EMPHASIZES URGENT NEED FOR WINTERIZED TENTS  1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  On October 15, Foreign Secretary Muhammed Riaz Khan, in a meeting with Ambassador Crocker, explained the GOP,s highest near term priority was obtaining winterized tents and blankets for the three million people needing shelter in the affected areas, and he requested U.S. assistance in locating throughout the world supplies of suitable tents.  The Ambassador assured him the Embassy was acutely aware of the need for tents and blankets, which we had heard at all levels from detachment commanders to President Musharraf, and had already sent back requests for Washington agencies to determine global availability.  Action requested:  Both the U.S. military via CENTCOM and USAID/DART are working this issue.  Washington agencies are requested as an urgent priority to identify from sources around the world supplies of winterized tents that can be provided as part of earthquake assistance to Pakistan.  End summary.  2.  (U)  This is an action request -- see para 7.  3.  (U)  Foreign Secretary On October 15, Ambassador was asked to meet with Foreign Secretary Muhammed Riaz Khan. Khan was accompanied by Tariq Osman Hyder, Additional Secretary for UN Affairs, who is the Foreign Office\'s  SIPDIS earthquake coordinator.  Khan expressed Pakistan,s gratitude for the support of the United States since the earthquake, specifically referencing the early and substantial pledge of $50 million in assistance, the provision of airwing and helicopter support, the visit by Secretary Rice, and President Bush,s visit to the Pakistani Embassy to sign the condolence book (Khan noted President Bush was the only foreign leader to do so).  All these gestures were deeply appreciated by the GOP and Pakistani people.  4.  (SBU)  Khan said that he wished to convey the GOP,s urgent request for winterized tents and blankets.  The earthquake happened to coincide with the onset of fall weather, and it would soon be getting much colder in the affected areas.  The GOP had located about 100,000 tents, and was asking local manufacturers to make more, but this would accommodate but a small fraction of the 3 million people who would need lodging.  The GOP would be grateful if the U.S. had any tents in storage (particularly in the region like Turkey or Jordan) it could provide.  Ambassador noted the Embassy had put the word out through both DOD and AID channels to obtain a reliable inventory of winterized tents. At present we had provided roughly 3000 winterized tents.  If the GOP was already working with local manufacturers, the U.S. would refrain from tapping that resource but would look to international suppliers.  Khan noted U.N. officials had told him UNHCR had 20,000 tents available in Turkey (which he understood it would take 37 sorties of C-130s to transport to Pakistan).  (Embassy note:  we have subsequently been contacted by NAVEUR about a supply of tents in Turkey, and provided those tents are confirmed to be suitable, we would strongly support the use of NATO strategic lift to bring them to Pakistan.)  5.  (SBU)  Turning to longer term reconstruction, Khan noted the GOJ would soon announce its reconstruction organization. For now, Finance Advisor Salman Shah (along with the Economic Affairs Division, which handles foreign assistance) was working to develop an overall financial estimate of reconstruction costs, while the Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority under LTG Zubair was preparing to begin (within a couple of days) an on-the-ground assessment of reconstruction needs.  In time these two organizations would come together, with LTG Zubair having more of the lead on implementation but not playing as big a role on working with international donors.  Coordinating with donors would be key, since the GOP had limited expertise in some of the reconstruction goals (e.g., quake-proof construction codes).  6.  (SBU)  Hyder noted that while Pakistan would be seeking the greatest possible amount of donor assistance, the people of Pakistan \"also want to earn our way.\"  The only way to do that would be through greater trade access to the U.S. and EU, Pakistan,s two largest markets.  Pakistan was urgently requesting the U.S. to consider emergency legislation to lower dutires on textiles, which account for 80 percent of Pakistan,s exports to the United States (Hyder noted virtually all other Pakistani exports enter the U.S. duty free under the GSP program).  Pakistan would also like the U.S. to fast track Pakistan,s request to launch FTA negotiations.  President Musharraf would be writing a letter on these topics soon (and sending a similar letter to the European Union).  Khan remarked that Pakistan understood the U.S. had extended trade benefits to countries affected by the December 2004 tsunami, and asked that in a similar vein the U.S. empower Pakistan to earn the money to pay for its reconstruction.  Hyder said that while most textile production in the affected areas was small-scale handicraft textiles, the migration of working-age Kashmiris out of the affected areas to major manufacturing centers like Karachi and Lahore meant that the health of Pakistan,s industrial sector (of which textiles represents roughly 60 percent of exports) would have a great impact on the flow of reconstruction funds to the affected areas.  7.  (SBU)  Action requested:  following up on Khan,s request for U.S. assistance in locating winterized tents -- a priority which has been emphasized at every level from division commanders to President Musharraf -- Washington agencies are requested as an urgent priority to identify worldwide supplies/sources of winterized tents that can be provided to those left homeless by the earthquake.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/17/2005 8:16", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 015555  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, MASS, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PK, PREL, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT #2    ------- SUMMARY -------  1.  From October 13 to 15, the USAID/Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) conducted an assessment in Muzaffarabad.  The USAID/DART,s assessments confirmed that winterized tents are the priority in earthquake affected areas.  The health cluster estimates that 67,000 persons are in need of immediate medical attention, and 13,000 people have been evacuated as of October 15.  Participants at the October 15, U.N. Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) meeting reported that there is a need for additional field hospitals in more remote areas of Pakistani Kashmir, as well as women health care providers.  Operational hospitals lack adequate water supply, and some water treatment units are needed for these facilities and communities.  End summary.  ------------------------------------------- USAID/DART Assessment Trip to Muzaffarabad -------------------------------------------  2.  From October 13 to 15, three members of the USAID/DART and a U.S. Embassy representative traveled to Muzaffarabad to conduct assessments.  The USAID/DART met with the UNDAC team leader, and stated that as of October 13, the local government had called off all search and rescue operations in Muzaffarabad, and all search and rescue teams were being sent home.  The UNDAC leader noted that cooperation between the U.N. and the military has been excellent in Muzaffarabad. UNDAC is in the process of starting coordination meetings, and is currently trying to determine which non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are operating in Muzaffarabad.  The UNDAC leader noted that there is a lack of coordination with local NGOs.  3.  According to the USAID/DART, the German government has two helicopters in Muzaffarabad and on October 14, one helicopter traveled north to Neelum, and the other helicopter traveled south to Jhelum.  On October 14, the German helicopters evacuated 171 Level One trauma victims.  4.  The USAID/DART reported that in Muzaffarabad, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) will take the lead in shelter, the U.N. World Health Organization (WHO) in health, and the U.N. World Food Program (WFP) in food.  5.  On October 14, the USAID/DART was told by an Indian Kashimiri who left Indian Kashmir after the earthquake that a 600-person camp was set up on the road to the airport in Muzaffarabad.  The USAID/DART was told that of the 600 camp residents, 50 to 60 people are in tents and the rest are sleeping on the ground.  Throughout the team,s assessment trip in Muzaffarabad, members were repeatedly told by local residents and government officials that tents were the number one priority.  On October 16, three USAID airlifts of relief commodities carrying a total of 1,570 tents are scheduled to arrive in Pakistan. (Note: The USAID/DART is working on a comprehensive shelter strategy.  End Note.)  6.  The team reported that the airport at Muzaffarabad receives four to five C-130 airdrops of food, medical supplies, blankets, and water per day.  However, no tents are being delivered.  The airdropped items are then airlifted to affected villages by helicopters or provided to villages on the road to the airport.  7.  The Federal Minister for Communications for Pakistani Kashmir visited the USAID/DART and stated that local officials are having problems accessing affected villages. The USAID/DART reported that the Minister,s priorities are tents (assuming 5 persons per family), blankets, and bulldozers or earth moving equipment to dispose of the debris from collapsed houses.  8.  The USAID/DART Health Officer (HO) reported that a 100-bed hospital run by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and located in the new stadium will be operational on October 18.  The hospital will have a heavy surgical capacity, as well as primary care, OB/GYN, and pediatric services.  The hospital will have 2 surgeons, 2 anesthesiologists, and 40 professional personnel, including doctors and nurses.  9.  The USAID/DART HO visited the Pakistani Air Force Hospital at the airport in Muzaffarabad.  The hospital opened on October 11 and staff saw 174 patients on that day.  Since October 11, hospital staff members have seen between 300 and 350 patients per day.  Most of the patients do not stay in the hospital and return to their homes or camps.  There are very few inpatients.  The hospital has x-ray capability, OB/GYN and labor and delivery services, surgeons, anesthesiologists, and medical doctors.  The USAID/DART HO spoke with a doctor at the hospital who told him that tents are the priority.  10.  Medecins sans Frontieres-Belgium (MSF-Belgium) conducted an assessment by road during the week of October 10 and observed that tents are a priority.  Jackets and winter coats are also needed since residents will use them to protect themselves from the cold weather and also as minimal shelter.  11.  The USAID/DART HO helicoptered up to the Jhelum Valley to deliver emergencyrelief supplies.  The road along Jhelum is blocked in multiple places, and only one bridge across the Jhelum River is intact.  The USAID/DART HO visited a village where 20 houses were all heavily damaged or completely flattened.  The unloading of relief supplies at this village was orderly; however, residents rushed the helicopter with injured people, and the situation became violent as residents fought each other to ensure that their injured relatives could be evacuated.  ---------------------------- USAID/DART Trip to Mansehra ---------------------------  12.  On October 14, the USAID/DART Structural Specialist traveled to Mansehra on an assessment trip with the U.S. military and U.S. Embassy representatives.  The team scouted forward operation bases and conducted infrastructure assessments.  The USAID/DART Structural Specialist reported that Mansehra sustained minimal damage from the earthquake and primarily mud houses on the hills were damaged.  Roads in Mansehra are in good condition and are not blocked by debris.  The USAID/DART Structural Specialist noted that the bridges in Mansehra were all passable.  --------------- Security ---------------  13.  The U.N. reported on October 15 that the roads from Balakot to Hajipur are now open.  A field hospital that was being transported from Muzaffarabad to Chakoti became stuck at Gahri Dupatta due to landslides blocking the road in both directions.  As of October 14, the Pakistani military is deployed on all major roads, and there were no further reports of looting.  --------- Shelter ---------  14.  Participants at the UNDAC team meetings determined that providing shelter for residents affected by the earthquake before winter arrives is the top priority.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) requested that U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) take the lead in the camp management cluster.  As of October 14, UNHCR distributed 2,400 winterized tents, and in the next week several flights will arrive with plastic sheeting and other emergency relief supplies.  On October 13, Pakistan,s Federal Relief Coordinator requested that the U.N. Resident Coordinator (UN RC) establish camps for residents displaced by the earthquake.  The GOP will be responsible for assisting UNHCR identify locations for the camps, logistics, and security. UNHCR will provide all other camp functions, except food which will be provided by the U.N. food cluster.  On October 16, UNHCR, accompanied by NGO representatives and 150 tents, will fly to Muzaffarabad for a site survey.  UNHCR is also assessing Balakot and Batagram. UNHCR plans small cluster arrangements versus large tent cities.  15.  The U.N. remains concerned that the internally displaced person (IDP) camps do not become a quote pull end quote factor attracting large numbers of victims who may be better housed in smaller, spontaneous settlements or elsewhere.  The U.N. will make a decision soon on sites for other camps as well as sites for five warehouses for general use.  Relief organizations will be able to temporarily store relief supplies in these warehouses before shipping them to beneficiaries.  As of October 14, 15,000 tents are available in-country, and 67,000 tents are in the pipeline.  Joint shelter assessments will take place starting on October 17. The current gaps in the shelter cluster are mainly procurement shortages; however, solutions, such as supporting local providers to increase the production of tents, are being suggested.  16.  The Red Cross has 22,000 tents in their pipeline and is setting up production lines.  Donors are urged to bring in more tents.  UNHCR stated that it is urgent to provide assistance to remote areas in order to avoid mass displacement of people.  Helicopter assets are expected to at least double in the next week.  ---------- Food -----------  17.  At the October 14 food cluster meeting, participants stated that the distribution of high energy biscuits (HEB) to earthquake affected persons is continuing in the areas of Mansehra and Muzaffarabad.  As of October 14, 30 tons of HEBs have been distributed in Muzaffarabad and 20 tons in Mansehra.  NGOs reported that food and relief supplies are being distributed by individuals and communities, and the local procurement of food commodities is progressing.  NGOs are concerned that relief supplies are focused in areas such as Muzaffarabad, and many remote villages are not being reached.  At present, there is insufficient information available on the nutritional situation of earthquake victims.   --------------------- Water and Sanitation ---------------------  18.  According to the U.N., there is an urgent need for latrines, and sanitary conditions are reportedly poor in all IDP sites.  Operational hospitals lack adequate water supply, and some water treatment units need to be provided to these facilities as well as communities.  --------------- Health ---------------  19.  The health cluster estimates that 67,000 persons are in need of immediate medical attention, and 13,000 persons have been evacuated as of October 15.  The hospitals in Islamabad are filled to capacity.  Punjab Province has cleared 3,000 to 5,000 beds for patients to be transferred from Islamabad. WHO reported 8 cases of bloody diarrhea on October 14 and 80 cases on October 15.  Participants at the October 15 UNDAC meeting reported that there is a need for additional field hospitals in more remote areas of Pakistani Kashmir as well women health care providers.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/19/2005 7:44", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015677  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL -- PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PK, MASS, AEMR, PREF, ASEC, PGOV EAID, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: ONLY MINOR MISSTEPS IN MILITARY RESPONSE  REF: ISLAMABAD 15559 AND NOTAL  1.  (U)  In the days since a violent 7.6 earthquake rocked northern Pakistan at 0853 October 8th, the Pakistan military has responded to the national crisis with valor and dedication.  Army helicopters were in the air less than two hours after the quake struck, flying reconnaissance missions over the North West Frontier Province and the Pakistan side of Kashmir. Before noon that same morning, Pak helicopter crews were flying the casualties back to Islamabad, bringing with them first accounts of the widespread devastation suffered in this mountainous area.  Since that day, the Pakistani military has personified patriotism and professionalism, demonstrating precisely why the military is the most highly-respected national institution in this country.  2.  (U)  Despite their own casualties and losses, military units -- from GHQ commanders to the lowest jawan -- have worked unceasingly over the past ten days executing rescue and relief missions in the most challenging conditions, organizing a massive air lift of humanitarian relief supplies into Pakistan and pushing those supplies north by helicopter sorties and truck convoys.  There has been no indication that any military unit has shirked its duty during this national crisis.  Indeed, post has heard Pakistanis proudly cite the dedication of those who have soldiered on, regardless of their personal losses, such as the brigadier organizing rescue and relief operations in near Balakot even as his own family lay buried beneath the rubble.  3.  (SBU)  Although the military quickly shifted into response mode after the earthquake, it took the Government of Pakistan (GOP) a full 24 hours to begin to comprehend the scope of this natural disaster, and another 48 hours to establish the relief infrastructure necessary to coordinate relief operations.  (Note:  Looking back at the recent U.S. experience with Hurricane Katrina, it is not surprising that the GOP lost precious days struggling to grasp the parameters of this unprecedented calamity.  One high-ranking politician confided to emboff, \"We didn\'t have a FEMA, so we had to start from scratch.\"  End note.)  While the newly-created Federal Relief Commission (FRC) set up an office in the Prime Minister\'s Secretariat and began hammering out a concept of operations, the Army and Pakistani Air Force (PAF) conducted organized, coordinated and professional relief missions 24/7.  Army helos carried supplies to hastily-established forward-operating bases in Muzzafarabad and Mansehra, flying into narrow valleys to survey areas inaccessible by road. the danger was underscored by the loss of an MI-17 and its crew on October 13th when a change in weather trapped it in a valley. PAF C-130s began air drops of relief supplies within the first few days of operations.  The military has deployed every resource at its disposal -- from sophisticated air assets to mule trains -- to get help to those who need it. In many leveled towns, civil administration vanished as the physical infrastructure collapsed, with thousands of public officials and service providers among the quake victims. The army worked to fill that void, imposing order on chaos.  4.  (SBU)  Troops (11th Corps) garrisoned in the region immediately began relief operations in the NWFP, even though their units lost suffered close to 1300 casualties, with more than 450 killed.  (Note:  Many troops would have not only lost comrades, but also family members living near the garrisons.  End note.)  Despite the new mission that nature involuntarily thrust upon it, the Army has capably responded to these new demands without compromising on-going security operations in the Federally-Administered Tribal Areas to the west of the quake zone.  Instead, the 10th Corps has reinforced its brother unit with troops and supply lines from the Punjab.  In effect, since the earthquake, the entire Pakistani military (the 11th Corps in particular) has been waging the equivalent of a two-front war -- and, in post\'s view, doing so with distinction.  5.  (SBU)  Of course, there have been missteps and the occasional institutional friction along the way, as the nascent FRC has bumped against the near omnipotent GHQ.  Even with these growing pains, the military has effectively (if not always seamlessly) managed a relief system that has moved more than a half milllion pounds of humanitarian assistance, along with rescue teams, medical personnel and crisis managers, into some of the most unforgiving terrain imaginable.  Ten days into the crisis, the trends continue to be encouraging. GHQ acknowledges the FRC\'s leadership role, telling emboffs that the FRC \"speaks for the GOP.\" Coordination between military and civilian agencies improves daily.  6.  (SBU)  The best evidence of Pakistani military professionalism has been the grace with which U.S. military assistance has been accepted and welcomed.  Confident that our assurances that U.S. forces are to support the Pakistani relief mission are sincere, both the Army and PAF have shown an increasing level of transparency and openness in coordinating with U.S. military interlocutors.  Simply put, our uniforms speak the same language as their uniforms; together, they have made things happen.  Two weeks ago, post\'s military liaisons were haggling to secure access for Embassy motorcades at the Chaklala air field; today, at that same air field, NAVCENT\'s 209-person Disaster Assistance Center is running independent flight operations for 400 fixed-wing and helo sorties and managing a logistical operation pushing tons of relief supplies to the disaster area.  7. (SBU)  It cannot have been easy for the proud Pakistani military to admit that it needed help to respond to the needs of its citizens; that it has done so demonstrates that its commitment to duty trumps institutional vanity.  By according the Pakistan military the respect it deserves for its competent and comprehensive emergency response, the U.S. makes it easier for military leaders to be receptive to our guidance and suggestions for improving coordination and efficiency.  In the end, we must always remember that this is Pakistan\'s crisis; as a FRC contact told emboffs on October 18, \"As much as we appreciate the U.S. effort, it is up to our internal organizational abilities to bring relief to our nation.\" CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/19/2005 12:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 015728  SIPDIS  FROM THE AMBASSADOR KABUL PLEASE PASS CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2015 TAGS: EAID, PK, PREL, SENV, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  NEXT STEPS   Classified By: AMBASSADOR RYAN C. CROCKER.  REASONS: 1.4(B)(D).   1.  (C) Eleven days into Pakistan\'s earthquake disaster, substantial U.S. assistance continue to encourage the Pakistani public and give confidence to the government that it has strong international backing as it confronts the worst catastrophe in its history.  Over the next several days, a U.S. military engineering company and field hospital will deploy into the affected area, strengthening the sense of an ongoing, reliable relief effort.  The Pakistani government, led by the military, has responded well to this crisis, demonstrating an impressive organizational ability, both in Islamabad and in the quake area.  2.  (C) That is the good news.  The reality is that the magnitude of the damage and the inhospitable terrain in which the quake occurred will mean that Pakistan and the international community must stay focused on the relief effort for the weeks and even months ahead.  The human losses are almost unbelievable with the government now estimating more than 60,000 dead and many more than that injured.  The remote, isolated locations of many of the villages compound the difficulty of delivering effective relief, and we are only a few weeks away from the onset of winter in a mountainous area where several hundred thousand are without shelter.  Some in the international community--and in Pakistan--are already talking about a shift from relief to reconstruction.  If we start backing away from relief operations, a lot more people are going to die.  3.  (C) As I judge it from here, the overall international response has been less than impressive.  The United Nations was slow to engage on this crisis, and its response remains lackluster.  As of today, for example, only four U.N. helicopters are operating in country.  The UNSYG is basically missing in action.  He has not visited Pakistan, nor has he done much to signal that earthquake relief is a top U.N. priority.  From our contacts here, I sense that other donors are looking at what the U.N. is doing and deciding on that basis that there is no need to be overly generous.  4.  (C) Against this backdrop, I am concerned that the Geneva Donors Conference on October 26 will not be a success.  The Europeans in particular are lagging, and the press here is speculating that grants from the European Union collectively or its members bilaterally may reflect simply a reprogramming of existing aid commitments.  5.  (C) To sustain the momentum that we and the Pakistani government are developing, and to prevent this devastated region from sliding into a fresh disaster, I recommend three steps:  -- a call to Kofi Annan to spark a more energetic U.N. effort.  In particular, Annan should visit Pakistan immediately and/or personally chair the Geneva Conference.  -- a call to Jack Straw, both as our leading European ally and because of the UK\'s EU presidency to assess the extent of European commitments and to urge more robust pledges.  -- a decision now by Washington to commit $150 million in new funds to the relief and reconstruction effort.  6.  (C) It is hard to overstate the magnitude of this disaster and its potential impact.  We have gotten off to a very good start, but it is only a start.  What we do and what we are able to get others to do in the coming days will be critical to determining what happens to hundreds of thousands of people, the way in which the government of Pakistan and its supporters are perceived by the people of this country and for the image of the U.S. and the West in the Muslim world. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/20/2005 1:55", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 015730  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT 4   ------- Summary -------  1.  The U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) estimates that there are 100,000 to 250,000 people who are not receiving relief in remote areas.  UNICEF will be assessing these un-accessed areas.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) requested that the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) establish camps at sites in Balakot, Batagram, Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, Shangla, and Gari Habibullah.  The shelter cluster group reported that 2 million people need shelter.  The Pakistani military plans to establish camps in Balakot, Gari Habibullah, and Batagram within the next 24 hours.  End summary.  -------------------- Logistics --------------------  2.  On October 18, a U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative attended the Logistics cluster group meeting and reported that the lack of information regarding needs of earthquake affected residents as well as the specific areas affected is still the major problem.  The group reported that it is difficult to determine what relief supplies are in the pipeline.  3.  One group participant estimated that on the civilian side of the airport, there are 300 metric tons or 120 pallets still on the ground.  In response to increasing traffic, the GOP has just announced that non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have six hours to clear cargo after it arrives.  Cargo that is not moved during that time will be picked up by the Pakistani military, presumably for distribution.  --------------------- Water and Sanitation ---------------------  4.  On October 18, a USAID/Pakistan representative attended a water and sanitation cluster group meeting and reported that UNICEF has set up a team to assess un-accessed areas. UNICEF estimates that there are 100,000 to 250,000 people who are not receiving relief in remote areas.  The UNICEF team will conduct a rapid assessment of these villages. Meeting participants reported that there is no additional need for mobile treatment units in Muzaffarabad.  5.  UNICEF and the Ministry of Environment (MOE) are collaborating to provide safe and clean drinking water in affected areas.  The MOE has constituted a survey team that has already surveyed Muzaffarabad and is currently surveying Balakot in order to assess the feasibility of installing water purification plants.  The survey team will identify the water source, quality, and the capacity of the treatment plant in terms of the treated water output.  The MOE has ordered four plants, one of which will be installed in Muzaffarabad on October 19.  ---------------------- Camp Management ----------------------  6.  On October 18, UNHCR briefed the diplomatic community on its efforts as leader of the camp management cluster for the relief effort.  UNHCR reported that it needs funding for the camp management category of the U.N.\'s 2005 South Asia Earthquake appeal in the amount of $22 million.  The food cluster appeal contains funding for food for those in the camps, but the camp management appeal includes funding for all other elements needed to establish camps logistics, water and sanitation, health, shelter, and emergency relief supplies such as kitchen sets and blankets.  UNHCR has already spent USD 7,584,000 from its operational reserve, which must be replenished.  7.  UNHCR reported the following main points:  --UNHCR\'s main goal is to discourage additional displacement by providing technical and organizational assistance to informal settlements and tents and emergency relief supplies to individual families who want to remain near their homes;  --The GOP requested that UNHCR establish camps at sites in Balakot, Batagram, Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, Shangla, and Gari Habibullah;  --UNHCR will plan camps of 5,000 persons except in Muzaffarabad where there is limited space.  UNHCR will not erect tents until people request to stay in the camp.  UNHCR will not object if those in the camp decide to leave and take their tents nearer to their homes;  --UNHCR has already distributed 3,000 winterized tents and 2,000 kerosene stoves.  UNHCR has an additional 10,000 tents, 20,000 blankets, and other emergency relief items on the way;  --UNHCR plans for the camps to remain open only six months; after this period, UNHCR anticipates that the International Organization for Migration (IOM) or another agency will assume management of any camps that may still be necessary;  --Camp size will be limited to 5,000 persons because of the difficult terrain, and UNHCR will rely on the GOP to identify appropriate locations for camps;  --UNHCR has no plans to establish camps in Islamabad, Rawalpindi, or other urban areas; however, UNHCR will provide technical assistance to the GOP if it decides to construct urban camps.  ------------------ Shelter ------------------  8.  On October 18, the USAID/DART Structural Specialist and the U.S. Military Officer Liaison to the USAID/DART attended the shelter cluster meeting and reported that 300,000 tents are necessary.  The cluster group reported that some residents who live in higher altitude areas are trying to relocate to camp cities in lower areas as they fear landslides and snowfall.  Blankets and tents are the most critically needed items.  The shelter cluster reported that 2 million residents need shelter, and 500,000 people may need to move to camps.  The Pakistani military plans to establish camps in Balakot, Gari Habibullah, and Batagram within the next 24 hours.  UNHCR reported that they will be operating here on a temporary basis for six to seven months.  --------------------------- USAID/DART Assessment Trips ---------------------------  9.  On October 19, the two USAID/DART team members and U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representatives deployed to Muzaffarabad to conduct follow-up assessments and coordinate relief activities with the U.N.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/20/2005 1:56", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015731  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, IN, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: AN OPEN DOOR TO KASHMIR?   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, B    1. (C) Summary:  During an October 18 press conference, President Musharraf sent out a trial balloon on Kashmir, announcing that Pakistan would allow Kashmiri civilians--including Kashmiri politicians--from across the LOC to come to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) to meet relatives and assist in reconstruction work. Musharraf also proposed opening mobile and landline communication links between Kashmiris on either side of the border, a move that was matched by Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh a few hours later. Musharraf\'s announcement supporting the free movement of Kashmiris across the border apparently had not been coordinated with the GOP Ministry of Foreign Affairs or Indian counterparts. Musharraf told the press that the idea was a \"suggestion\" from Pakistan, and that the modalities would have to be worked out. Reaction on both sides of the border appeared positive, leaving open now only the question of when and how. End Summary.  A NEW MUSHARRAF PROPOSAL ON KASHMIR ----------------------------------- 2. (U) During a press conference in Muzaffarabad, President Musharraf unveiled a new plan to allow Kashmiris from across the Indian side of the Line of Control (LOC) to enter AJK to \"help their brothers in reconstruction work on this side.\" While categorical that the proposal was only for civilians, Musharraf said he was open to the idea of allowing political leaders from the two sides to meet and interact on reconstruction issues. He also suggested the opening of landline and mobile phone links between Kashmiris on either side of the border, something which has been unavailable for several years.  3. (C) Musharraf described his announcement as a \"suggestion\" and said that the modalities would have to be worked out formally by both sides. A call to Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Director for Kashmir Affairs Miriam Aftab today confirmed that it was an idea developed by Musharraf (or his close aides) and not by the MFA. (Comment:  If left to the MFA, there would be no creative thinking on this or any other aspect of the Kashmir issue.  End note.)  Aftab candidly admitted that she had been cut out of the loop and was unable to answer questions on how or when Musharraf\'s proposals would be implemented, whether dialogue with the Indian side had begun, or who the key players in the process were.  PAKISTANI AND INDIAN REACTION ----------------------------- 4. (C) Musharraf\'s announcement received front-page coverage in this morning\'s Urdu and English language dailies, which continue to be otherwise consumed by earthquake-related news. Newspaper articles covering Musharraf\'s proposal were upbeat and positive in most Pakistani newspapers; editorial comment will take another day to emerge. Thus far, opposition parties--including the MMA--have remained quiet on the proposal. Militant groups, including the Islamabad-based United Jihad Council, welcomed the move, saying it would strengthen the cause of Kashmiris.  5. (C) Press reports indicate that the Indian Government reacted warmly to Musharraf\'s proposals, portraying them as well in line with what India has long advocated--greater movement across the LOC. India\'s External Ministry Spokesman Natvej Sarna and former Indian Ambassador to Islamabad G. Parthasarthy were quoted in the Indian Express and Reuters saying that India welcomed the remarks, and that they \"vindicated India\'s advocacy of the need for a soft border.\" Sarna said he is waiting for word from Pakistan to work out the \"practical details\" of implementing Musharraf\'s proposal. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh immediately acted on Musharraf\'s call for better communication links, ordering the Department of telecommunications to set up four Telecom Facilitation Centers (one each in Srinagar, Jamu, Uri, and Tangdhar). The Indian telecommunications centers are supposed to be operational for two weeks, starting today. Kashmiri groups--including the main separatist alliance in Indian Kashmir--the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) said they welcomed the offer. COMMENT ------- 6. (C) Musharraf\'s proposal is a well-timed attempt to turn public opinion in Kashmir to his side. Given the beating the GOP has taken for reacting too slowly to the crisis and several media accounts of militant groups being first on the ground, Musharraf\'s suggestion to reunite divided families and allow freer movement of relief personnel across the LOC is a welcome step. Consistent with Musharraf\'s usual style, he announced first and has left it to the bureaucrats to work out later. What happens to the proposal sticks remains to be seen; the Pakistani bureaucracy will only move on the proposal if consistent pressure is applied from the top. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15463", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/20/2005 5:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 015736  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/18/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: PUBLIC REACTION TOUR D\'HORIZON  REF: ISLAMABAD 15463  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (SBU) Summary:  Public criticism of the Government of Pakistan\'s (GOP) relief operations continues.  Media images of angry survivors still waiting for adequate relief, coupled with often-inaccurate and inflamatory editorials are fueling this resentment. Opposition parties have seized on this criticism to demand a full debate in the National Assembly in an effort to discredit the GOP.  Private individuals, companies, political parties and non-governmental organizations have initiated charitable drives, establishing collection points nationwide.  Some of these efforts are being channeled into GOP relief operations, while in other cases direct delivery to victims is being undertaken. Efforts by radical clerics to argue against acceptance of relief supplies from non-Muslim countries has failed, and public opinion seems very much in favor of taking aid from any donor, including Israel and India.  End Summary.  Islamabad/Rawalpindi --------------------  2. (SBU)  With numerous Kashmiri families living and working in Islamabad, nearly everyone knows someone affected by this natural disaster.  Collection and donation points have been established by government entities, private businesses, political parties, and NGOs.  Banners and advertisements exhort residents to contribute generously, and many are doing so.  Prominent politicians and businessmen have used the opportunity to publicize their generosity.  Many of the donations collected are funneled to GOP-relief efforts, although in some cases private individuals, charities, and political parties are attempting to transport donations by road to Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) with decidedly mixed results.  Public criticism of the government-relief efforts remain vocal and widespread.  Anger remains over the collapse of the Margalla Tower apartments, the substandard construction of which appears to be the result of local government corruption.  Media continues to criticize the speed and coordination of the GOP\'s response; there are daily stories from areas that have yet to recieve sufficient help. Opposition parties are attacking the GOP relief effort.  A National Assembly open debate on October 14 degenerated into a shouting match with opposition politicians denouncing the GOP as incompetent.  The opposition has requested a full parliamentary debate on relief efforts.  Foreign donor aid has been uniformly welcomed and the magnitude of the response (which is visibly apparent at the international airport) has won praise from even normally critical audiences.  Indeed, initial Islamist objections to aid from non-Muslim countries, particularly Israel and India, were quickly silenced as public opinion seemed firmly in the other direction.  Kashmir and NWFP ----------------  4. (SBU) Post has reports from Pakistan-controlled Azad Kashmir (AJK) that the GOP response has not been well-received.  Unrealistically high expectations of the army\'s ability to deliver relief supplies coupled with severe logistical challenges and deteriorating weather conditions have created a well-spring of resentment.  Reports of attacks on aid convoys and distribution centers by villagers continue to filter back from the area, indicating a continuing sense of desperation.  While the GOP\'s growing focus on reconstruction may overcome this initial anger, for the moment AJK appears to feel largely neglected by the center. This perception endures despite international relief worker assessments that relief efforts (both GOP and private) are being distributed equitably among the affected areas based on need and accessibility.  5. (SBU) In the North West Frontier Province (NWFP), business remains entirely focused on earthquake relief.  Charity drives are on the upswing, as people grasp the enormity of the damage to northeastern districts that now face a very difficult winter.  The relief effort continues to be hampered by a lack of overarching authority.  The Islamist Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal (MMA) government has been on the move throughout the hardest hit areas to coordinate the relief efforts with federal and Army units.  Within the MMA, officials are sniping at each other over the first-time attendance of Chief Minister Durrani at the October 12 National Security Council meeting.  JI officials are saying \"once, but never again,\" while JUI-F leaders argue such attendance is necessary to mount a more effective relief response.  In the Provincial Assembly, parties passed a unanimous resolution on October 17, calling for a specific earmark of international relief funds for NWFP.  This reflects a deeply-rooted distrust in national decision-making that the assembly feels will short change the province.  The English-language provincial press remains critical of the Army for an insufficient initial response, its refusal of Indian helicopter support, and its failure to divert more defense resources to the crisis.  The Urdu-language provincial press has, in contrast, been uniformly complimentary of army efforts in the province. Punjab ------  6. (SBU) In Punjab, provincial and local efforts to collect and funnel relief efforts north are prominent and ongoing. While opposition parties remained relatively quiet during the first week following the earthquake, they have now begun to break their silence.  Opposition members explained that they had refrained from criticizing the government relief efforts in order to present a unified front, as well as to avoid the appearance of taking political advantage of the crisis.  The initial grace period has now come to an end and they will raise their complaints at the October 20 provincial assembly session.  Both opposition politicians and PML members have begun to criticize the lack of information and transparency in the collection and distribution of relief goods and donations.  They additionally criticized a perceived lack of concern from both federal and provincial leaders.  The continued absence of the Chief Minister is cited as the prime example.  Instead of being in the affected areas with the people, the leadership remains in Islamabad or, in the case of the Chief Minister, hosting fundraisers in Washington, DC.  One PML member noted that although Nawaz Sharif had major faults, during the flood in Punjab he was seen distributing goods to to the victims. She stated \"This is not a people\'s government and it comes across at a time like this.\"  Karachi -------  7. (SBU) Karachi is taken with the call to help fellow Pakistanis in the earthquake zone.  Collection sites for relief goods have sprung up at schools, on military bases, near mosques and bus stations.  Karachi university students and others have lined up to give blood and appeals for monetary donations are plastered on bill boards and the sides of buildings.  Large amounts of money have reached NGO\'s such as the well respected Edhi Foundation.  Pakistan Navy Karachi Commander Vice Admiral Muhammad Asad Qureshi stated that each of Pakistan\'s armed services stationed in Karachi have \"adopted\" a zone in the earthquake effected area and plan to focus their individual attention in those particular areas. (Note:  It is unclear if this is an organized effort.  End note.)  All major local press was dock-side for the October 18 arrival of the USS Pearl Harbor and off-loading of its humanitarian relief cargo, providing favorable coverage of this USG assistance.  In courtesy calls with the Pakistan Navy\'s District Commander, the Fleet Commander and the Karachi Port Trust, Pakistani hosts thanked the United States for assisting relief operations, saying that they would facilitate future port calls to the maximum extent possible. This warmth seems to be shared by many here in Karachi.  In full dress whites, our visiting US Navy officials received waves and smiles as they passed in a Pakistan Navy motorcade from call to call.  At one traffic intersection a group of covered women leaned out of the back of a taxi-bus to smile and wave.  Pakistani men on the side of the road nodded their heads in agreement.  Balochistan -----------  8. (SBU) In contrast to other parts of the country, sources in Balochistan report that business continues as usual in much of the province.  Collection points appear active only in Quetta and Pashtun areas in the north.  Baloch-audience papers reportedly returned to their normal news coverage at the end of last week.  According to one Baloch tribal leader, most Baloch view AJK and NWFP as totally outside their area of interest.  While tribal loyalty among Pashtuns compel sympathy with their NWFP compatriots, there is no prevailing sense of national tragedy in Baloch areas.  If anything, a certain amount of resentment prevails that a similarly massive national and international relief operation did not materialize when massive floods devestated parts of Balochistan earlier in the year.  9. (C) Comment:  One-week after the earthquake, resentment over what the public views as slow and uncoordinated GOP relief operations continues to build.  President Musharraf remains above-the-fray, leaving the military and the Federal Relief Commission in the Prime Minister\'s Office (the designated execution coordination points for relief efforts) to bear the brunt of the criticism.  While the opposition hopes to use public anger over the GOP response to discredit the President, neither the childish name-calling at the October 14 National Assembly debate or its refusal to attend an October 18 FRC briefing held at the PM\'s Secretariat helped the opposition\'s cause.  The media is asking increasingly uncomfortable questions about the state\'s historic failures on disaster preparedness and tolerance of shoddy construction projects.  Those in the affected-areas remain skeptical of GOP-assistance, largely a factor of their current desperation and beyond the GOP\'s control.  We believe that as the situation stabilizes and reconstruction begins, the GOP retains the opportunity to rebuild its image with these parts of the population.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/20/2005 11:37", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ISLAMABAD 015766  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT 3   ------- SUMMARY -------  1.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) estimates that the earthquake killed 41,121 people and injured 67,634 others, and these numbers are likely to increase.  The USAID/Disaster Assistance Response Team (USAID/DART) reports that the GOP has made a credible effort to respond to the earthquake given the difficult circumstances, and relief activities are moving at a much faster pace than the USAID/DART has observed during other disasters.  Too many non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are operating in easy to reach places, and humanitarian agencies involved in the response are concerned that too much humanitarian assistance will be provided in these areas, while the more remote areas will continue to be neglected.  The U.N. World Health Organization (WHO) reports that water purification plants, chlorine tablets and/or water treatment sachets, tents, blankets, and mobile operation theaters are the most urgent health needs.  The International Organization for Migration (IOM) estimates that between 300,000 and 600,000 winterized tents are necessary.  To date, approximately 20,000 tents from the international community have been distributed, and 130,000 tents are in the pipeline.  The GOP reports that 100,000 tents have been distributed, and 150,000 tents are in the GOP pipeline, but this has not been confirmed.  End summary.  ------------ Health ------------  2.  On October 16, the USAID/DART Health Officer (HO) attended the health cluster meeting.  The USAID/DART HO reported that the International Rescue Committee (IRC) is setting up a 200-bed hospital and equipment in Abbottabad and has excess surgical equipment.  IOM reported that there is an urgent need for paramedics, doctors, and volunteers in Muzaffarabad.  Meeting participants expressed concern about reports from Mansehra indicating that blood is being transfused without adequate screening.  3.  The Pakistani military has established a 100 to 200-bed triage hospital at Chaklala airbase to admit patients directly on arrival.  The Pakistani Ministry of Health (MOH) will decide where to send the patients after treatment.  4.  The GOP will be opening up 10,000 hospital beds throughout the country within the next few days.  The MOH reported that at least 50,000 people are in need of hospital care and have not yet received any medical care. The Pakistani military plans to send a field hospital to the Neelum Valley.  5.  According to WHO, the lack of basic necessities such as food, water, blankets, and tents is also affecting health workers in the field.  The previously existing health system no longer exists as many health facilities have been destroyed or damaged, and health staff are either highly traumatized, injured, dead or taking care of their own family members.  6.  WHO reported that medical and surgical teams are treating thousands of patients per day, and patients are now arriving with infected open fractures and gangrene.  WHO expects that the lack of clean drinking water and sanitation facilities for the affected population could soon create a major health threat if sufficient quantities of drinking water are not provided.  WHO reported that the major risks are diarrheal and pulmonary diseases and the non-treatment of injuries of earthquake victims.  7.  On October 17, the health cluster reported that urgent surgical requirements include both surgical supplies and anti-tetanus globulin.  Additional referral sites are being established in Sindh and Punjab.  WHO reported that the urgent health needs are water purification plants, chlorine tablets and/or water treatment sachets, tents, blankets, and mobile operation theaters.  --------------------- Water and Sanitation ---------------------  8.  On October 17, the U.N. Liaison Officer (LO) attended the water and sanitation meeting and reported that while the situation is reportedly improving, it is still serious.  It has been estimated that less than 20 percent of the critical water and sanitation needs have been met.  The water and sanitation cluster reported that there are more than two million people lacking sanitation facilities.  The priorities are to obtain adequate and safe drinking water, sanitary disposal of excreta, and ensure basic hygiene.  ------------- Food -------------  9.  Food distributions have started in Muzaffarabad.  The food cluster reports that 67,400 people in 29 villages in the Muzaffarabad area have been supplied with high energy biscuits from 19 distribution points.  A second round of distributions will start shortly.  The food cluster reports that 100 metric tons (MT) have been delivered to the Muzaffarabad area as of October 16.  10.  On October 17, a U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative attended the food and nutrition cluster meeting.  The U.N. World Food Program (WFP) reported that a revised flash appeal will be announced on October 24.  WFP is still attempting to assess areas that were affected by the earthquake.  WFP will conduct an aerial reconnaissance in the next two days to determine which roads were damaged and what areas are accessible.  WFP will also try to assess the migration patterns of people.  From the current migration patterns, there is already an assumption that there will be two outcomes regarding food distributions:  large camps for people where food will be needed and food will have to be transported to inaccessible and remote areas.  11.  WFP is examining transporting food from Muzaffarabad to more remote areas for distribution.  WFP is also trying to determine the following:  the amount of food in country, what additional food is coming into the country, percentage of affected areas needing food, and how much food is required to assist affected areas.  WFP\'s goal is to assist the one million most vulnerable people.  Currently, the ration requirements are: 450 grams of wheat flour, 70 grams of vegetable oil, 5 grams of iodized salt, 200 grams of high energy biscuits, and 80 grams of dates.  --------------- Shelter ---------------  12.  The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) continues to report that tents are the top priority, and IOM reported that the immediate need for shelter is becoming more critical as survivors continue to live outdoors in the rain and the cold nine days after the earthquake.  At the October 17 shelter meeting, IOM provided tentative figures and estimated that between 300,000 and 600,000 winterized tents or non-tent shelters would be required.  To date, approximately 20,000 tents from the international community have been distributed, and 130,000 tents are in the pipeline, including tents on the way and those on order that may not arrive until November.  The GOP reports that 100,000 tents have been distributed, and 150,000 tents are in the GOP pipeline, but this has not been confirmed.  Urgent shelter needs exist in Bagh, Balakot, Mansehra, and Batagram.  All tents must be winterized.  According to the GOP, 600,000 tents are needed to support a vulnerable population of 3,000,000 affected residents.  The critical window for the delivery of tents is the next four weeks, as the weather will then worsen.  13.  Although UNHCR would prefer to support spontaneous settlements, the GOP is pressuring UNHCR to establish large camps.  UNHCR is now working in five different locations, and the cluster reported that earthquake victims are now coming to UNHCR camps sites to obtain supplies and are then returning to their home sites.  This leads UNHCR to believe that the problem is one of distribution rather than the need for camps.  ----------------------- Camp Management -----------------------  14.  At the camp management cluster meeting on October 17, participants agreed that the goals of the camp management cluster are to avoid displacement by providing shelter and emergency relief items to people near their homes; provide assistance to informal settlements as a means of preventing the need for larger camps; establish camps only when necessary and keep them as small as possible; when necessary, provide technical assistance to camps established by others; and aim to adhere to Sphere standards.  The United Kingdom\'s Department for International Development (DFID) noted that in four weeks, the weather will change and there will be heavy snowfall.  ------------------- Protection -------------------  15.  The GOP is enforcing a quote No-Adoption end quote policy for the immediate future.  The GOP is also placing orphans in camps with relatives.  Children are currently not being registered as they are evacuated from hospitals. Assessments are being conducted at local hospitals to identify the number of children not registered.  -------------- Logistics --------------  16.  According to the USAID/DART, the military side of the airport is functioning efficiently; however, one of the major problems is the logjam at the civilian airport, as there are many pallets whose contents and owners are unknown.  The logistics cluster group meeting reported that a mapping system is needed for the distribution network. The USAID/DART Team Leader reported that the USAID/DART continues to work with military colleagues to coordinate the offloading and distribution of relief commodities.  For extremely large amounts of commodities, the USAID/DART has recommended that the military link with the U.N. Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) and /or the Pakistani military to arrange delivery.  The UNJLC is in the process of setting up a presence at the airport.  ------------------- Relief commodities -------------------  17.  On October 15, the USAID/DART Administrative Officer and the USAID/DART Public Affairs Officer flew by Chinook with the U.S. military to deliver a pallet of 225 blankets and water containers to Mercy Corps in the village of Jabori in the Sonar Valley.  After delivering the blankets and water containers, the team flew to Balakot to transport women and children needing additional medical treatment to Islamabad.  18.  On October 16, 17, 18, three USAID airlifts of relief commodities carrying tents arrived in Pakistan.  A total of 1,570 tents will be provided to Mercy Corps and transported to the Mansehra region to be distributed between the Battal and Siran valleys.  The value of this assistance including transport is USD 471,436.  19.  On October 18, a USAID airlift of 20 concrete cutting saws arrived in Pakistan.  The value of assistance, including transport, is USD 64,617.  20.  On October 18, two USAID airlifts of relief commodities arrived in Pakistan.  The two airlifts carried a total of 650 rolls of plastic sheeting, 5,000 blankets, and 5,000 water containers.  The total value of this assistance, including transport, is USD 301,750.  ------------- Coordination -------------  21.  On October 17, the USAID/DART Team Leader met with representatives from DFID\'s Conflict and Humanitarian Affairs Department (DFID CHAD) and the European Commission\'s Humanitarian Aid Department\'s Disaster Preparedness Program (DIPECHO) to discuss the coordination of relief efforts and develop a comprehensive response strategy between the three organizations.  22.   The USAID/DART reports that the GOP has made a credible effort to respond to the earthquake given the difficult circumstances, and relief activities are moving at a much faster pace than has been observed by the USAID/DART in other major disasters.  Although there are many problems, the USAID/DART expects to see an improvement in coordination as the GOP moves from a tactical to a more strategic mode.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15463|05ISLAMABAD15736", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/20/2005 13:07", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015769  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL- PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/20/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, PGOV, PREL, PTER, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  ISLAMIST AND EXTREMIST GROUPS ENGAGE IN RELIEF EFFORT  REF: A. (A) ISLAMABAD 15736      B. (B) ISLAMABAD 15463  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (S) Summary: Islamist parties, clergy, and militant/extremist groups are using the Kashmir earthquake to strengthen their public image in affected areas...and to raise money.  Member parties of the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal (MMA) are engaged in independent relief efforts through their charitable foundations.  Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JUD), the parent organization of designated FTO Lashkar-e-Tayyaba (LT) and most visible extremist group currently involved in relief operations, has already received favorable media coverage. In keeping with its long-standing practice, JUD will likely funnel a portion of charitable contributions for earthquake relief to support militant operations.  A number of Muslim charities are also engaged in relief efforts, most prominently Islamic Relief, which while not yet designated as a specially designated national and blocked person has been monitored by the USG for some time.  End Summary.  2. (S) The Islamist parties comprising the MMA are engaged in fundraising for earthquake relief through their charitable foundations.  Most prominent MMA leaders have already traveled to the earthquake zone for well-publicized tours. Al-Khidmat, the Jamaat-e-Islami\'s (JI) charitable arm, is most prominent in Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK), while it shares the stage in North West Frontier Province (NWFP) with Al-Khair, Jamiate Ulema-e-Islam Fazlur Rehman\'s (JUI-F) charitable wing.  JI officials privately claimed to have raised nearly $5 million for relief.  (Note:  Post believes this figure is exaggerated.)  Both have established clinics and distribution points for blankets, food, water, and over-the-counter medicine.  JI and JUI-F have used their charitable arms to raise funds for terrorist/militant organizations in the past.  JUI-F seems to have severed its financial relations with such organizations, although the JI link with the FTO Hizbul Mujahideen may still exist and a portion of funds may be diverted there.  Officials from Jamiat Ulema Pakistan (JUP) and Tehrike Islami Pakistan (TIP) admitted that their parties\' relief efforts have been miniscule, but claimed that they were a necessary and effective public relations tool.  3. (S) JUD is the most visible militant group engaged in relief operations, although we understand that Jaish-i-Muhammad, Harakat-ul-Mujahadeen, Harakat-ul-Jihad-i-Islam, and Hizbul Mujahideen have all launched smaller efforts.  Sectarian extremist groups Sipah-i-Mohammad, Sipah-i-Sahaba, and Sunni Tehrike are also carrying out relief work.  Only JUD and Sunni Tehrike are overtly fundraising, as others are officially \"banned\" organizations.  Regardless of their \"banned\" status, post suspected that these groups still raise funds through affiliated and sympathetic mosques, madrassas, and clergy, who routinely collect \"charitable\" donations during this Ramadan season.  JUD, like most Pakistani militant and sectarian organizations, has a long history of channeling a portion of all donations to their militant arms; post believes it will continue to do so.  4. (S)  JUD relief efforts have been prominently and positively highlighted in the local media.  Articles have praised JUD\'s working alongside the USG in distributing assistance, despite the USG\'s desire to have JUD declared a terrorist organization.  While the GOP has professed a desire to close JUD relief operations, no action has yet been taken.  5. (S) Several Kashmiri militant/terrorist and sectarian extremist organizations are raising funds overseas, either directly or through supportive clerics, particularly in the Persian Gulf, Malaysia, Indonesia, Egypt and Singapore. This revenue flow increases during Ramadan, as clergy seek zakat to support \"charitable\" efforts in Pakistan.  Pakistani clergy fundraise among Islamic communities in Europe and the United States; however, increasingly stringent visa requirements have limited the ability of supporters of extremist/militant/terrorist organizations to travel to these countries.  International Islamic charities are, of course, raising funds for the victims of the earthquake disaster worldwide.  Islamic Relief, in particular, has gained post\'s attention for its relatively aggressive posturing, including having its website listed on CNN and BBC as a possible contact for charitable donations.  (Note:  As Washington is aware, although Islamic Relief is not on Treasury\'s sanction list, it has been investigated and monitored by various USG agencies for some time. End note.)  6. (S) Comment:  The GOP faces a serious dilemma dealing with the proliferation of fundraising and relief efforts by militant/terrorist/extremist organizations, which President Musharraf has publicly promised to close as part of his crackdown on extremism.  While the fact that a portion of the money raised may be diverted to militant activity is disturbing, post is also concerned that volunteers from extremist parties have become the face of relief operations in some difficult-to-access parts of AJK.  With organized relief efforts reaching into remote areas of the disaster zone, post believes that GOP and international actors will supplant militant organizations as the primary source of assistance, leading to quiet closure of militant relief operations with little negative public reactions. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15769", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/21/2005 12:13", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 015856  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: CA, EAID, PK, PREF, PREL, SENV, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  TRANSPORTING TENTS FROM CANADA  REF: A. A) ISLAMABAD 15769 (NOTAL)      B. B) BUTENIS-ENGELKEN OCT 20 E-MAIL  1.  With snow already falling on some areas affected by the October 8 earthquake, getting winterized tents or other forms of shelter to those whose homes were destroyed is quickly emerging as a critical element of relief efforts.  Given the magnitude of the crisis -- the current estimate is three million people were left homeless by the quake -- we will clearly need to draw on tent supplies throughout the world, and call on the resources of the international community to help transport them to Pakistan.  2.  GOP Vice Chief of Army Staff, Gen. Hayat, contacted Ambassador on October 19 and explained that a Mr. Khalid Osman, a Pakistani living in Toronto (tel:  416-938-6909) has raised funds and purchased 7500 winterized tents, each accommodating six people, and is now looking for assistance in transporting them from Canada to Pakistan.  (Note:  we have not been able to confirm the whereabouts of these tents or their suitability for the harsh winter climate of northern Pakistan.  end note.)  Apparently Mr. Osman contacted Pakistan International Airlines, which said it would take three months to transport all the tents -- clearly too long to meet the urgent need.  The GOP has asked for U.S. assistance in transporting those tents to Pakistan, but our own lift capability is already taxed.  3.  Post would appreciate Department or Ottawa contacting the Canadian Government to ask that, as part of Canada\'s contribution to earthquake relief, it arrange to air lift these tents to Pakistan, either through milair or by chartering civilian aircraft.  Providing winterized tents for 45,000 people would be a major step in addressing the shelter crisis.  4.  On October 21, Embassy raised this with Canadian High Commission in Islamabad, which is now conveying Mr. Osman\'s request to Ottawa.  5.  Early response would be appreciated so we can factor this into our own planning.  For Department and Embassy use: should the tents prove suitable for the affected areas, and Canadian Government not be prepared to tranport them to Pakistan, post will recommend using U.S. earthquake relief funds to charter aircraft to bring them to Pakistan.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/22/2005 18:09", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 ISLAMABAD 015860  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT  #5   ------------ Summary ------------  1.  On October 21, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) reported that 62,000 tents were delivered to Pakistan by the international community and 50,000 tents have been delivered by the Government of Pakistan (GOP). IOM further stated that there are currently 194,000 tents available in the international community pipeline, and 45,000 to 210,000 shelters are needed.  The Pakistani military has established sites for 5,000 families (30,000 individuals) in Balakot and Batagram and 3,000 families (18,000 individuals) in Gari Habibullah.  The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is also discussing with the Pakistani military the establishment of additional camps in Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, Shangla, and 10 other locations. USAID/Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) team members in Muzaffarabad continue to report that tents are the priority.  On October 21, the shelter cluster group in Muzaffarabad reported that 1,300 to 1,400 tents have been distributed in the district to date.  Seven to eight percent of Muzaffarabad is considered at high altitude and/or inaccessible, and access to small villages remains a problem.  End summary.  --------------------- Death Tolls ---------------------  2.  According to the Pakistani Federal Relief Commissioner, as of October 21, the October 8 earthquake killed 49,739 people and injured 74,000 others.  The official death toll in the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) alone is 37,958. The most-affected district is Mansehra, where 32,653 deaths and 12,814 injuries have been confirmed thus far.  ------------ Health ------------  3.  On October 19, a USAID/Pakistan representative attended an emergency health cluster meeting and reported that the Ministry of Health (MOH) discussed the importance of the non- governmental organizations (NGOs) supporting widows, children, orphans, and the elderly.  Anti-tetanus globulin remains an urgent need, and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) is trying to meet this need.  The MOH representative at the cluster meeting reported that the number of amputations is increasing, and this will lead to a significant need for rehabilitation services.  A committee has been formed to assess the rehabilitation needs of the affected population. The MOH is setting up intermediate centers in Islamabad to house women and children who are displaced because they are in Islamabad to receive medical care.  4.  According to the GOP, 100 3-person medical teams, consisting of a psychiatrist, a psychologist, and a medical student, have been dispatched to affected areas to treat people, particularly children, suffering from shock.  The health cluster group also reported that Save the Children- U.S. has opened a field hospital in Batagram.  -------------- Food --------------  5.  On October 19, a U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative attended the food cluster group meeting and reported that the flash appeal will be completed on October 21.  The U.N. World Food Program (WFP) reported that there is still an urgent need to determine the number and locations of people who need food assistance, as well as the number of people migrating to cities from villages.  Vitamin A supplementation distribution and measles vaccinations have begun in affected areas.    ----------------- Shelter -----------------  6.  On October 19, a U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative attended the shelter cluster meeting and reported that a shelter cluster working group paper was circulated and proposed the following alternatives to winterized tents:       --Improvised housing:  constructed using materials from donated buildings and donated materials, most likely with wooden frames.       --Rehabilitated housing: repairing structurally sound earthquake damaged buildings.       --Warm Room: (variant of rehabilitated housing) winterizing and heating a single room of a structurally sound damaged building.       --Host family housing:  survivors share housing with families whose housing is intact.  7.  IOM reported that statistics on the number of tents being provided for earthquake survivors and those on the way are still not exact.  The shelter cluster is trying to determine if the 100,000 tents reportedly at GOP disposal and the 150,000 tents in the GOP pipeline include donated tents.  On October 21, the USAID/DART Deputy Team Leader spoke with an IOM representative who stated that 62,000 tents were delivered to Pakistan by the international community and 50,000 tents have been delivered by the GOP. IOM further stated that there are currently 194,000 tents available in the international community pipeline, and 45,000 to 210,000 shelters are needed.  The IOM representative noted that there is no information regarding the GOP\'s pipeline.  IOM has also not been able to confirm whether the GOP has requisitioned tents.  8.  IOM stated that it has had discussions with the leaders of the camp management and logistics cluster on an overall shelter strategy but that so far no conclusions had been reached.  9.  The Rural Support Programmes Network (RSPN) reported that it has been working from Mansehra, in conjunction with the Pakistani military and local officials, and has established approximately 11 camps of 50 tents each.  RSPN discovered that rather than staying in large camps, people preferred to live closer to their own property; for this reason RSPN\'s camp sizes are small, and many people have chosen to take tents and supplies to locations closer to their own property.  10.  On October 21, a shelter meeting was held in Muzaffarabad and the cluster group reported that 1,300 to 1,400 tents have been distributed in the district to date. [Note.  This does not include GOP data or data on tents flown in or trucked in directly from Islamabad.  End Note.] Alternative shelter kits are being developed, as well as a shelter repair (warm/dry room concept) strategy.  Seven to eight percent of Muzaffarabad is considered at high altitude and/or inaccessible, and access to small villages remains a problem.  Teams from Oxfam are making visits to villages and organizing deliveries of relief supplies upon returning to town.  IOM does not yet have a presence in Muzaffarabad, and they are needed to centralize data as well as interface with the GOP and others.  ---------------------- Camp Management ----------------------  11.  UNHCR continues to work closely with the Pakistani military to establish camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs).  The Pakistani military has established sites for 5,000 families (30,000 individuals) in Balakot and Batagram and 3,000 families (18,000 individuals) in Gari Habibullah. The Gari Habibullah site needs brush clearance and leveling before it can be expanded.  Thus far, UNHCR has provided the Pakistani military with 1,000 tents, and approximately 400 tents have been erected.  UNHCR has 12,000 tents in Mansehra, but it will release them and emergency relief supplies gradually to the Pakistani military, which can erect about 200 tents a day.  The International Medical Corps has already established basic health units in the Balakot and Batagram camps.  12.  UNHCR is also discussing with the Pakistani military the establishment of additional camps in Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, Shangla, and 10 other locations.  Since land is at a premium in the mountainous terrain, camps will be crowded and need careful planning, especially in the water and sanitation sectors.  13.  UNHCR has had only a small team of its Pakistani staff in the field; however, with its supply chain in place, UNHCR will deploy international staff and plans to staff five locations by October 21.  UNHCR has brought in seven additional international staff members to help with its camp management activities.  UNHCR\'s primary goals are organization and assistance to informal settlements and the provision of tents and emergency relief supplies to those who want to be located near their destroyed homes.  UNHCR will continue to publicize its efforts to provide camp and non-camp alternatives to those who have lost their homes.  ---------------- Protection -----------------  14.  According to the GOP, the National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) has been mobilized to register and collect data and photographs of all injured and displaced persons, as well as unattended children and women to ensure their safety and security.  --------------- Logistics ---------------  15.  The U.N. Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) is working with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on logistical issues.  Map Action will be conducting a slope analysis of earthquake affected areas to determine what terrain can support tents.  On October 20, the logistics cluster meeting reported that the NATO airbridge has started, and NATO has agreed to let non-NATO members and U.N. related agencies use the air bridge on a one-off basis.  16.  The USAID/DART was distressed to hear that the U.N. Emergency Relief Coordinator, Jan Egeland was calling for a quote Berlin-style airlift end quote for Pakistan.  The USAID/DART reports that the airports are already congested, and forward movement from the airports to remote areas is the main constraint.  The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) has worked closely with the GOP to ensure the maximum number of airlifts within the constraints of safety and air traffic congestion.  The number of landing slots available for helicopters is saturated, and additional airlift capacity that is not coordinated with the GOP or Pakistani military could exacerbate the problem.  The USAID/DART is trying to meet with the U.N. to obtain clarification on Egeland\'s comments.  --------------------- Education ---------------------  17.  The USAID/DART U.N. Liaison Officer (UNLO) met with the U.N. World Health Organization (WHO) and the U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) to discuss the use of medium and large tents for clinics and schools.  Both organizations were interested in the USAID/DART\'s suggestions, and the USAID/DART will further discuss this option once the needs have been determined.  The USAID/DART is working with USAID/Pakistan to determine appropriate spaces for these tent schools and clinics and working with the DOD to provide the large tents to UNICEF and WHO.  USAID/Pakistan sent a three-person foreign service national (FSN) team to Muzaffarabad to work with Ministry of Education (MOE) authorities to test the concept of tents for schools.  USAID/Pakistan will expand the project based upon this assessment.  --------------------------------------------- ----- USAID/DART Activities in Muzaffarabad - October 19 --------------------------------------------- -----  18.  As of October 19, two members of the USAID/DART have established a full-time USAID/DART presence in Muzaffarabad. The team reported that according to the U.N. Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) team representative in Muzaffarabad, all relief commodities arriving in Muzaffarabad are being helicoptered to affected villages for distribution.  The U.N. stated that relief commodities are not arriving in Muzaffarabad quickly enough.  The team reported that that the Pakistani Kashmir government has said that 239,000 tents are needed in the area. [Note.  There are many contradictory figures on the number of tents that are currently needed.  These numbers are unconfirmed.  End Note.]  19.  The U.N. reported that all trauma patients in the area have been evacuated from Muzaffarabad.  The USAID/DART Health Officer (HO) reported that the U.N. believes that the number of casualties being flown to Muzaffarabad has markedly decreased in the last day or so.  20.  On October 19, representatives of several international militaries, the U.N., and NGOs planned to meet to discuss dividing affected areas geographically and to establish priorities in geographic areas.  This plan will be given to the Pakistani military for approval.  21.  The USAID/DART reports that the U.N. will try to place a U.N. Liaison officer with the Pakistani military in Muzaffarabad in order to facilitate flights and coordination.  22.  The USAID/DART spoke to a representative of the United Kingdom\'s Department for International Development (DFID) who reported that Balakot is completely destroyed.  The USAID/DART Structural Specialist also confirmed this information at the shelter cluster meeting where the group reported that the earthquake damaged between 73.5 percent and 90 percent of Balakot.  --------------------------------------------- ------ USAID/DART Activities in Muzaffarabad - October 20 --------------------------------------------- ------  23.  On October 20, the USAID/DART conducted assessments of the two villages of Doong and Dunna, both located approximately 40 minutes northwest of Muzaffarabad.  The team reported that there is no running water, and the villages have not received any relief supplies as supplies are being distributed to villagers at lower altitudes.  In the village of Doong, there are approximately 300 residents and 71 houses.  Fifteen people were killed by the earthquake.  The only building that is still standing is the primary school, and students started their first day of school after the earthquake on October 19.  In Dunna, there are approximately 40 houses, and while the school was damaged, students have started classes again elsewhere. AD/W FOR DCHA/OFDA  24.  According to the USAID/DART, both villages need approximately 50 tents each, and local residents reported that it will start snowing in a month and will continue to snow in some areas until June.  Both villages previously received water through a pipeline that was disrupted due to the earthquake.  Villagers are now obtaining water from streams, distribution points, or bringing it back from elsewhere.  The team noted that both villages have some food and water, but sanitation is now becoming a major issue.  25.  The USAID/DART HO reported that at Abbas hospital in Muzaffarabad, many patients do not want to leave after they have been treated since they have nowhere to go as their homes are destroyed.  The Abbas hospital will have to shut down its surgical capacity as there is a lack of bed space. The USAID/HO noted that doctors are starting to see patients with respiratory illnesses, and there does not appear to be any type of disease tracking system in place.  --------------- USAID Airlifts ---------------  26.  On October 18, two USAID airlifts of relief commodities arrived in Pakistan.  The two airlifts carried 650 rolls of plastic sheeting, 5,000 blankets, and 5,000 water containers.  The total value of this assistance, including transport, is USD 301,750.   The relief commodities were provided to Catholic Relief Services (CRS) and will be delivered to Bisham, Kohistan, and Mansehra.  27.  On October 18, a USAID airlift of 20 concrete cutting saws arrived in Pakistan.  The value of assistance, including transport, is USD 64,617.  The saws were given to Pakistani Civil Defense.  28.  According to the USAID/DART Military Liaison Officer (MLO), as of October 21, the U.S. military has transported 3,124,000 pounds of relief commodities including food, medicines, tents, water, blankets, and clothes to Pakistan to assist earthquake affected victims.  The USAID/DART has facilitated the distribution of approximately 15 percent of these commodities.  29.  As of October 20, USAID/OFDA has provided shelter materials for 67,500 people and blankets for 15,000 persons. USAID/OFDA has distributed medical supplies for 100,000 people for 3 months to treat injuries and disease.  To keep people healthy, USAID/OFDA is providing water treatment to supply safe drinking water to 20,000 people every day, water containers for 15,000 families, and water storage capacity for 8 communities.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/22/2005 18:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 015862  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL - PLEASE PASS TOP CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2015 TAGS: PREL, PK, PGOV, AF, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  KARZAI TO MAKE CONDOLENCE VISIT  REF: ISLAMABAD 15769 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: DCM Patricia A. Butenis, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1. (C)  On October 21, the Afghan Embassy confirmed to post that AfghQsident Karzai plans to make a short condolence visit to Pakistan on Monday, October 24.  According to Afghan Ambassador Tarzi, President Karzai will call on President Musharraff and PM Aziz, followed by a press event.  The Pakistani MFA confirmed to post that a Karzai visit is in the works, but could not confirm the October 24 date.  In addition to preparing for this brief half-day visit, the Afghan Embassy is waiting for the Goverment of Pakistan (GOP) to propose a date for a longer official visit by President Karzai after Ramadan.  (Note:  Ambassador Tarzi attributed the delay in fixing a date for this longer visit to the government\'s attention being focused on earthquake relief, rather than to any reluctance by the GOP to receive the Afghan delegation.  End note.)  2.  (C)  Karzai would be the third head of state to visit Pakistan to offer condolences following the October 8 earthquake, following visits by King Abdullah of Jordan (October 16) and PM Erdogan of Turkey (October 20-21).  3.  (C)  Comment:  If the October 24 meeting visit occurs, it will be the first Musharraf-Karzai meeting since President Karzai\'s visit to Islamabad in March 2005.  Although personal relations between the two presidents have been strained since then, this visit is a sign that the atmosphere is continuing to warm following a Karzai-Musharraf telephone conversation earlier this month. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/24/2005 12:34", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 015950  SIPDIS  FROM THE AMBASSADOR DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/24/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PREF, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  WHAT THE U.S. MUST ACCOMPLISH IN GENEVA  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 15680 AND PREVIOUS       B. ISLAMABAD 15728      C. RIYADH 7591  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  As the United States prepares for the October 26th Geneva Donors\' Conference on the South Asian Earthquake, we face a challenge and an opportunity of almost unprecedented magnitude.  Without indulging in hyperbole, I can assure you that Pakistan - our frontline ally in the war on terror -- is faced with a calamity of stunning proportions.  In the two weeks since the October 8 earthquake, we have come to realize that early projections of human and property losses were well short of the emerging reality.  Today the UN almost doubled its flash appeal for relief assistance to Pakistan:  the inital call for USD 272 million has been raised to USD 522 million to fund shelter, nutrition, health care and logistical support for the next six months.  In order to make a difference on the ground, given the scale of the destruction, and to retain our position on the moral high ground here and throughout the Muslim world, I urge that the U.S. delegation arrive in Geneva prepared to pledge USD 500 million in relief and reconstrution assistance.  Relief Operations -- Acute Need for Months, Not Weeks --------------------------------------------- --------  2.  (SBU) Official estimates from Government of Pakistan (GOP) now place the confirmed death toll at more than 50,000, with another 75,000 seriously injured and 2.5 - 3 million homeless.  These numbers will continue to rise as relief crews push into ever more remote valleys and hamlets. Despite 16 days of 24/7 operations, relief has yet to reach perhaps one-quarter of the population in inaccessible areas of the disaster zone.  Entire cities have been leveled and hundreds of isolated villages have simply vanished. Infrastructure -- roads, bridges, power supplies, telecommunications -- throughout Pakistan-controlled Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) and large swaths of the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) has been destroyed.  I do not exaggerate when I say that the GOP is facing a cataclysm of relief and reconstruction needs, demands on a scale that no country other than the U.S. could face alone.  3.  (C)    For our part, we are rapidly burning through the initial USD 50 million announced by the White House on October 9th.  This does not included the non-monetized expenses of the U.S. military units that are sustaining the GOP\'s present relief operations.  This will not/not taper off anytime soon.  The hard truth is that the \"acute phase\" of the disaster will last for months and that Pakistan will require the combined assistance of USG agencies -- USAID/DART, State and all four military services -- for the foreseeable future.  Even with this extraordinary U.S. mega-relief mission, we are not even close to addressing the magnitude of the relief and reconstruction challenges facing Pakistan.  U.S. officials who have seen the disaster zone first-hand have immediately understood that we must factor acute relief needs for shelter, heavy engineering, health care and logistical support continuing well into the next year into our assistance strategy, even as we simultaneously map out long-term support for the region\'s reconstruction.  Looking Toward Reconstruction -- What Can the U.S. Do? --------------------------------------------- ---------  4.  (C)  To make a lasting difference as Pakistan rebuilds AJK and NWFP -- two regions which collectively qualify as a jihad heartland -- we must go to Geneva prepared to challenge all donors to think big and dig deep.  The near complete loss of physical and social infrastructure demands a multi-national reconstruction effort on the scale of the international response to tsunami earlier this year.  I therefore urge that the U.S. delegation inspire other donors by announcing a pledge of USD 500 million directed toward reconstruction of the education and health sectors:  -- In health care, the USG would have a significant effect by committing to rebuild, equip and staff both tertiary hospitals destroyed in NWFP and AJK, as well as dozens of district hospitals and primary health care facilities.  -- In education, some 2500 schools were destroyed in NWFP and more than 3100 in AJK.  The USG should rebuild at least 200 primary schools, 20 middle schools and 10 high schools in each of the two provinces, as well as restore the Hazara University in the Mansehra District of NWFP and AJK University in Rawalkot.  5.  (C)  In addition to these two vital tasks, the U.S. should also offer to facilitate the GOP\'s reconstruction plans by offering technical assistance in earthquake-resistant construction technologies, including hands-on training for the architects, engineers and construction workers who will rebuild houses, schools, clinics and businesses.  What Can the U.S. Get Others To Do? -----------------------------------  6.  (C)  Even a pledge of USD 500 million will only scratch away at the mountain of reconstruction needs facing the GOP. Just as Pakistan cannot shoulder this burden alone, neither can we -- we must do everything possible to ensure a strong international commitment to Pakistan\'s long-term recovery. Although I remain concerned about the success of the October 26th Geneva Conference (Ref B), an early and strong USG pledge at Geneva is the best means of spurring other donors into action.  Several of the Gulf states have made generous pledges and may be willing to do more.  Europeans hesitant to donate to the GOP out of fear of corruption and questions regarding transparency could take heart from a vigorous U.S. response.  We must encourage these donors to take on projects of a similar scale: rebuilding roads, restoring bridges, reconnecting power grids and communication systems.  Just as the USG is leveraging its emergency relief assistance -- responding to GOP requests for four hospitals by supplying two ourselves and identifying partners who can provide the remainder -- we must also leverage our reconstruction dollars to challenge the international community to do the same.   Generosity Now Will Pay Dividends Later ---------------------------------------  7.  (C)  The U.S. role in the Geneva Conference will be a pivotal point for securing Pakistan\'s new-found confidence that we are sincere in our commitment to a long-term strategic relationship.  Our strong showing in supporting emergency relief operations has prompted many in Pakistan to re-evaluate their image of America.  The U.S. has not enjoyed such a positive reception by the Pakistan people, press and public officials in decades.  Expectations are high, both here and throughout the Muslim world.  Other donors are looking to us to set the bar.  (Note: In addition to snipes in the international press that the inital U.S. pledge of USD 50 million was parsimonious, we have seen reports that other large donors -- including the Saudis (Ref C) -- have been less than impressed with the USG\'s public donation. End note.)  We risk squandering these gains if our leadership in Geneva, both in terms of the generosity of our pledge and our ability to generate commensurate international support, is insufficient to the task.  If we arrive in Geneva with a bold program and the resources to back it up, even the skeptics will take note that the U.S. is as willing to fight extremism and instability by investing in Pakistan\'s recovery -- and, by extension, the Muslim world -- as it is to underwriting the war on terror.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/24/2005 12:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015959  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/24/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: KASHMIRI GOVERNMENT VIEWED AS INEFFECTIVE IN EARTHQUAKE CRISIS  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (C) Summary:  The autonomous Government of Azad Jammu Kashmir (GAJK) has played virtually no role in earthquake relief.  Its bureaucracy was devastated along with the capital of Muzzafarabad, while its political leadership (most of which was in Islamabad at the time of the earthquake) has been roundly criticized for a non-existent performance. Senior Kashmiri politicians are involved in individual relief activities and well-publicized tours of disaster areas, but have not wanted to be linked with GOP-relief efforts that many Kashmiris view as inadequate.  Recognizing that their political fortunes are inextricably linked to continued GOP support, most Kashmiri politicians have been silent on GOP relief efforts.  Several prominent Kashmiris have privately cautioned against any involvement by the GAJK or its bureaucrats in reconstruction efforts, citing widespread corruption in previous development projects.  Instead, they believe that coordination should be done through local community councils and legitimate Kashmiri politicians (read Muslim Conference (MC) and All Parties Huriyat Conference (APHC)).  End Summary.  2. (C) To date, the GAJK has played a minimal role in relief efforts.  Its bureaucracy, mostly based in Muzzafarabad, was decimated by the earthquake, leaving many employees dead, injured, mourning family members, or homeless.  Although there were some stories of amazing efforts on the part of individual AJK civil servants, government generally was absent in the quake\'s immediate aftermath.  When authority was reestablished, it was largely by the military, which remains in effective control in the affected areas with some support from federal civil servants imported from other parts of the country.  Many Kashmiri civil society activists actually welcomed the GAJK bureaucracy\'s absence from relief efforts, noting its tendencies towards corruption and inept management.  3. (C) The political leadership of the GAJK was largely outside of Muzzafarabad at the time of the earthquake. (Note:  Most senior Kashmiri politicians divide their time between Muzzafarabad and Islamabad, spending the majority in the federal capital.  End Note).  Many, like the AJK Prime Minister, returned to Muzzafarabad within 48-hours of the earthquake, generally with television crews and journalists in tow.  While all have spent a great deal of time touring the affected areas and raising funds, none have taken an active role in the coordination of relief or long-term planning for reconstruction.  Even erstwhile political allies have criticized the AJK Prime Minister and his cabinet for being largely absent from disaster management activities and allowing the federal bureaucracy to take the lead.  Following long-standing practice, the Federal Relief Commission has coordinated central government efforts with minimal GAJK involvement.  4. (C) Kashmiri politicians have for the most part chosen to absent themselves from formal GOP relief efforts.  Instead, they and their respective political parties have been independently raising and distributing funds and donations to earthquake victims.  Those that we have spoken with since the disaster, largely from the MC and the APHC, claim privately that many Kashmiris remain resentful of what they view as inadequate central government assistance.  Even so, with the exception of the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (a pro-independence party with few ties to the GOP), Kashmiri leaders have been largely silent on GOP-relief efforts. Comment:  This likely reflects the historical reality that politicians in AJK are largely dependent on the GOP for their political viability.  End Comment.  5. (C) All interlocutors agree that the Kashmiri people must be actively involved in reconstruction.  There is a high-level of skepticism, however, that the GAJK is suited to administer, or even play an active role, in such efforts. The GAJK is widely-viewed as corrupt, incompetent, and illegitimate.  One long-time civil society activist claimed that nearly 65 percent of development projects previously launched by the GAJK were never carried out, despite funds being spent.  Others report that senior GAJK officials and their family members, including the Prime Minister, have already established new \"construction companies\" in the hope of obtaining a portion of reconstruction funds.  The JKLF is advocating that Jamaat-ud-Dawa (the parent organization of designated foreign terrorist organization Lashkar-e-Tayyaba) be taken seriously as a reconstruction partner.  Senior APHC and MC figures have publicly and privately suggested that reconstruction is best coordinated through local community councils (appointed advisory bodies established throughout the area that substitute for local elected government) and that \"legitimate\" Kashmiri parties (i.e. MC and APHC) should be invited to participate in federal reconstruction bodies.  6. (C) Comment:  The earthquake has swept away even the nominal fiction of an autonomous GAJK.  The paralysis of both its bureaucracy and political leadership during this crisis has made federal intervention essential.  As focus shifts from immediate relief to reconstruction, it will become increasingly important for Kashmiris to be involved in planning and execution.  While coordination through the GAJK would be the simplest route logistically, post believes that its poor development track record disqualifies the GAJK as a credible implementing partner.  The GOP, will need to find ways to involve local communities, perhaps through community councils and political parties, directly in reconstruction, as a corollary to more robust discussions with the GAJK leadership.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15862", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/25/2005 1:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 016005  SIPDIS  KABUL PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/24/2015 TAGS: EAID, ECON, MASS, PREL, AF, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: KARZAI CONDOLENCE VISIT TO PAKISTAN OCTOBER 24  REF: ISLAMABAD 15862  Classified By: AMBASSADOR RYAN C. CROCKER.  REASONS: 1.4(B)(D)  1.  (C) Afghan President Hamid Karzai made a brief visit to Pakistan October 24 to express condolences and support for Pakistan in the aftermath of the October 8 earthquake. Afghan Ambassador Tarzi told us that from his perspective, the visit went very well.  Karzai first met with Musharraf who expressed his appreciation for helicopter support and a medical team from Afghanistan.  Musharraf also said that Pakistan hoped to benefit from Afghanistan\'s expertise in managing a massive reconstruction effort with international assistance.  The two leaders then discussed their remarkably similar and largely negative views of NGOs and their agenda, which Tarzi said may not have been overly helpful as Pakistan looks to international assistance but served to strengthen the personal rapport between the two.  Karzai emphasized his visit was a show of solidarity and support, and he and Musharraf agreed that Karzai would return after the Eid holiday for broader-ranging discussions.  2.  (C) Karzai subsequently saw Prime Minister Aziz who emphasized that a strong, stable Afghanistan was at the top of Pakistan\'s regional priorities.  He stressed in particular the importance of the economic relationship, noting that when he had visited Kabul as finance minister and predicted bilateral trade at the $1 billion level, he had been greeted with considerable skepticism.  Trade now exceeds $1.2 billion.  When the discussion veered over into NGOs, Aziz provided something of an antidote noting that they could be an annoyance but also played a crucial role in mobilizing and sustaining international support.  Tarzi said that Karzai and Aziz had a 30-minute one-on-one; he did not have a readout.  3.  (C)  Aziz accompanied Karzai back to the airport and joined him for a brief meeting with the Afghan helo crews and medical teams, with a huge gaggle of Pakistani media in tow. Tarzi said that Karzai had been especially appreciative of this gesture, and predicted it would have a very favorable impact in Afghanistan.  4.  (C) Comment:  This was a good gesture by Karzai, well received and reciprocated by the Pakistani leadership.  It adds further momentum to our combined efforts to get this important relationship back on an even keel. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/25/2005 9:58", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 ISLAMABAD 016024  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT  #6   ------- Summary -------  1.  The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) continues to facilitate the movement of excess U.S. military commodities to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for distribution in affected areas.  The USAID/DART  observed market activity and the delivery of food stocks to private businesses in Muzaffarabad.  The U.N. World Food Program (WFP) is attempting to obtain a needs assessment of the affected areas.  The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) hospital is receiving patients in Muzaffarabad, and a U.S. mobile army surgical hospital (MASH) is becoming operational.  The U.N. and the Pakistani military have developed a long-term six-week transportation plan for relief commodities that will be presented for approval to the Government of Pakistan (GOP) on October 25.  ------------ Death Toll ------------  2.  As of October 23, the GOP reported that the earthquake killed 51,382 people and injured 74,498 others.  According to the U.N., the number of severely affected people is 1.9 million.  Severely affected refers to those individuals who have been affected in more than three clusters (clusters include food and nutrition, shelter, health, and water and sanitation).  --------------------------------------------- --------- Water and Sanitation - October 22 meeting in Islamabad --------------------------------------------- --------- 3.  On October 22, the USAID/DART Water and Sanitation Officer (WSO) attended the water and sanitation cluster meeting and reported that the U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) and other members of the water sanitation sector are aggressively addressing water and sanitation needs in earthquake affected areas.  While water issues are being successfully addressed as relief organizations gain access to affected populations, sanitation related interventions are not as aggressively implemented.  Therefore, the water and sanitation cluster group is promoting sanitation interventions in affected areas and making sanitation the primary focus of the water and sanitation sector.  The cluster group believes the focus by relief organizations on safe water interventions without a corresponding aggressive sanitation intervention campaign will place the affected populations at risk of gastro-intestinal diseases.  The cluster group is actively promoting sanitation and has stated that future meetings shall be devoted to strategizing and identifying solutions to sanitation related issues. 4.  The water and sanitation cluster group\'s plan to address needs in rural areas is to establish supply centers in valleys where water treatment tablets, soap, and water containers will be distributed and hygiene education will occur.  These activities are a priority due to the possibility that rural residents may soon be isolated due to winter weather.  The plan for urban areas is to meet SPHERE standards in urban camp settings, focusing on sanitation interventions such as latrine construction, soap distribution, and hygiene promotion. 5.  UNICEF stated there is a shortage of pre-fabricated latrine slabs.  Oxfam is supplying 1,000 plastic slabs, and UNICEF has contracted with a metal shop in Islamabad for the construction of 1,000 metal latrine slabs.  The metal shop reported to UNICEF that they could construct 100 slabs per day.  If the metal slabs prove acceptable, UNICEF hopes to contract with other metal shops to increase production. 6.  UNICEF is facilitating water and sanitation cluster meetings three times weekly in the humanitarian relief hubs of Muzaffarabad and Mansehra.  Cluster meetings have unofficially started in the hubs of Batagram, Bagh, and Balakot.  Water sanitation meetings in these areas are facilitated by NGO entities designated by UNICEF with the approval of the sector cluster.  Leads in the three hubs are as follows: Batagram-Life for Relief and Development; Bagh- Islamic Relief; Balakot- Oxfam.  UNICEF stated that water sanitation interventions will be directed at the district level. 7.  UNICEF stated that the greatest immediate need is human resources.  UNICEF is expanding its water and sanitation staff to nine employees and hopes to increase the number of national water and sanitation specialists on their staff. UNICEF stated that the present numbers of relief workers addressing water sanitation issues in country is inadequate for the huge area affected by the earthquake.  The cluster group hopes to see an increase in NGO presence in-country over the next several weeks. --------------------------------------------- --- Water and Sanitation - Meetings in Muzaffarabad --------------------------------------------- ---- 8.  On October 24, the USAID/DART conducted a survey of the water and sanitation situation in Muzaffarabad and observed that the streets were relatively free of large piles of solid waste.  Residents were observed obtaining water from public water taps.  The USAID/DART tested water from the piped water system, and the test indicated the water was treated with chlorine.  There was no evidence of open defecation in public areas visited by team members. 9.  A U.N. World Health Organization (WHO) medical officer in Muzaffarabad told the USAID/DART WSO that the infectious disease surveillance system revealed no unusual increases in communicable diseases in the areas reporting data.  The WHO medical officer stated that sanitation in rural areas is a concern, and WHO is adding a water and sanitation specialist to the WHO team to improve its technical capacity in sanitation intervention activities. 10.  The Oxfam Public Health Coordinator stated that Oxfam and the local government have initiated a solid waste clean- up program which had been very effective.  Oxfam supported the local government in re-establishing solid waste collection and is having community clean-up campaigns.  The Public Health Coordinator stated that Oxfam is heavily involved in providing water and building latrines.  Oxfam has built 89 community latrines at camps in Muzaffarabad. Oxfam reported that there were not many people in the camps, and most people are staying near their homes or have left to go to Islamabad. 11.  The CRS Water Sanitation Specialist stated that CRS is no longer providing water sanitation services in Muzaffarabad.  CRS is focusing water sanitation interventions on rural and semi-urban areas.  ----------------------- Food and Nutrition -----------------------  12.  On October 21, a U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative attended the food and nutrition cluster group meeting and reported that cluster group participants are still uncertain as to how food will actually get to people in affected areas.  The group reported that the U.N. Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) and the U.N. Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) needs to double and triple some of their services, especially air capacity within Pakistan.  As the weather starts to changes, ration requirements will change.  WFP will try to incorporate this information into its plans. WFP hopes that its aerial assessments will be able to produce a need assessment of what food is needed, what bridges and roads are accessible, etc. by October 26.  WFP is putting together a strategy for rubhall (tent warehouse) storage capacity at the three hubs in Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, and Bagh.  WFP plans to have a 45-day supply of food at each rubhall hub.  --------------- Health ---------------  13.  The USAID/DART Health Officer (HO) reported that a 100- bed ICRC hospital in Muzaffarabad opened on October 21. ICRC is tracking the names of family members and villages, and if a child is under the age of 15, an adult may remain with the child in the hospital.  The ICRC hospital started receiving patients on October 21.  14.  The Abbas hospital in Muzaffarabad received 787 patients on October 20.  The hospital was damaged, but reopened a few days after the earthquake and has received a total of 10,549 patients since then.  Abbas hospital currently has zero bed capacity and is two to three days from stopping intake of new patients.  15.  Many are encouraging the medical quote tent village end quote idea due to the lack of capacity at the Abbas hospital.  The GOP is starting a basic health unit.  The establishment of a U.S. MASH started on October 21.  The hospital will be located at the Prime Minister\'s Secretariat.  The U.S. MASH will be able to start surgeries  SIPDIS by the evening of October 25.  16.  The Ministry of Health (MOH) plans to immunize 120,000 people against measles, tuberculosis (TB), diphtheria- pertussis-tetanus (DPT), and polio.  Vitamin A distributions are also occurring.  The MOH mobilized four mobile health teams on October 21, and started a health unit in Bagh and Relakot on the same day. --------------------------- Logistics and Coordination ---------------------------  17.  The USAID/DART U.N. Liaison officer (UNLO) reported that the U.N. and the Pakistani military have developed a long-term six-week transportation plan.  The plan will be presented to the GOP for approval on October 25.  Under this plan, all critical items such as shelter materials, emergency relief supplies, and food would be transported from Islamabad to Abbottabad primarily by truck.  At Abbottabad, the Pakistani military and U.N. would establish a heavy lift capacity helicopter base.  From Abbottabad, heavy helicopters would be used to move goods to four locations:  Batagram, Naran, Muzaffarabad, and Chakothi. From these four locations, smaller helicopters would be used to transport items to villages at higher elevations and valleys. 18.  The USAID/DART reports that as of October 24, the U.N. currently has 5 MI-8 helicopters in country, and they are expecting 3 additional Chinook CH-47s in the next 24 hours. These Chinooks were provided by the U.K. Royal Air Force and donated by the United Kingdom\'s Department for International Development (DFID)  19.  On October 24, the USAID/DART team facilitated the movement of excess U.S. military commodities to include 15,000 blankets to GOAL for distribution in Bagh, 43 tents to UNICEF, 1,536 sleeping bags and 840 cases of rations to Mercy Corps, and 107 cartons of medical supplies to WHO.  Of the 43 tents, 22 will be transported to Muzaffarabad and 21 to Mansehra.  These medium-sized tents will be used for schools.  20.  The USAID/DART UNLO reported that UNHAS plans to schedule a meeting with militaries who have flight capacity in Pakistan.  This includes the Pakistani, Japanese, German, American, and British militaries.  The meeting will also include the U.N. and international organizations.  The UNLO spoke to the Joint Task Force (JTF) Liaison Officer (LNO) at the Civil Military Coordination cell to request that the U.S. military possibly play a role in the planning of this meeting.  21.  The U.N. has three hubs in Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, and Bagh.  One-thousand NATO troops will be arriving on October 24.  This mixed battalion will include engineering and medical specialists, and they will be focusing on road infrastructure, latrines, and clearing land for temporary shelters and structures.  --------------- Tent Cities ---------------  22.  According to local media reports, the Cabinet Committee on Earthquake Relief, Reconstruction, and Rehabilitation has decided to set up two quote tent cities end quote for earthquake victims.  The committee has decided that these tent cities will be in Fateh Jang and Chakal.  The tent cities will have electricity, water, and health, and education services.  ----------------------- USAID/DART Assessments -----------------------  23.  On October 23 and 24, the USAID/DART in Muzaffarabad examined damage in Muzaffarabad.  While the team observed many destroyed buildings, streets were clear of debris and a large number of businesses were open.  The team observed many customers visiting shops.  Goods being sold included large amounts of fresh fruits and vegetables and freshly butchered meat.  Streets were clogged with traffic including large commercial trucks transporting food, dry goods, and animal fodder.  The team saw residents rehabilitating buildings and clearing debris and rubble.  The team\'s interpreter reported that food is being sold on the market in Muzaffarabad at 10 percent above the pre-earthquake price.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/25/2005 9:59", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 ISLAMABAD 016025  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT  #6   ------- Summary -------  1.  The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) continues to facilitate the movement of excess U.S. military commodities to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for distribution in affected areas.  The USAID/DART  observed market activity and the delivery of food stocks to private businesses in Muzaffarabad.  The U.N. World Food Program (WFP) is attempting to obtain a needs assessment of the affected areas.  The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) hospital is receiving patients in Muzaffarabad, and a U.S. mobile army surgical hospital (MASH) is becoming operational.  The U.N. and the Pakistani military have developed a long-term six-week transportation plan for relief commodities that will be presented for approval to the Government of Pakistan (GOP) on October 25.  ------------ Death Toll ------------  2.  As of October 23, the GOP reported that the earthquake killed 51,382 people and injured 74,498 others.  According to the U.N., the number of severely affected people is 1.9 million.  Severely affected refers to those individuals who have been affected in more than three clusters (clusters include food and nutrition, shelter, health, and water and sanitation).  --------------------------------------------- --------- Water and Sanitation - October 22 meeting in Islamabad --------------------------------------------- --------- 3.  On October 22, the USAID/DART Water and Sanitation Officer (WSO) attended the water and sanitation cluster meeting and reported that the U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) and other members of the water sanitation sector are aggressively addressing water and sanitation needs in earthquake affected areas.  While water issues are being successfully addressed as relief organizations gain access to affected populations, sanitation related interventions are not as aggressively implemented.  Therefore, the water and sanitation cluster group is promoting sanitation interventions in affected areas and making sanitation the primary focus of the water and sanitation sector.  The cluster group believes the focus by relief organizations on safe water interventions without a corresponding aggressive sanitation intervention campaign will place the affected populations at risk of gastro-intestinal diseases.  The cluster group is actively promoting sanitation and has stated that future meetings shall be devoted to strategizing and identifying solutions to sanitation related issues. 4.  The water and sanitation cluster group\'s plan to address needs in rural areas is to establish supply centers in valleys where water treatment Qets, soap, and water containers will be distributed and hygiene education will occur.  These activities are a priority due to the possibility that rural residents may soon be isolated due to winter weather.  The plan for urban areas is to meet SPHERE standards in urban camp settings, focusing on sanitation interventions such as latrine construction, soap distribution, and hygiene promotion. 5.  UNICEF stated there is a shortage of pre-fabricated latrine slabs.  Oxfam is supplying 1,000 plastic slabs, and UNICEF has contracted with a metal shop in Islamabad for the construction of 1,000 metal latrine slabs.  The metal shop reported to UNICEF that they could construct 100 slabs per day.  If the metal slabs prove acceptable, UNICEF hopes to contract with other metal shops to increase production. 6.  UNICEF is facilitating water and sanitation cluster meetings three times weekly in the humanitarian relief hubs of Muzaffarabad and Mansehra.  Cluster meetings have unofficially started in the hubs of Batagram, Bagh, and Balakot.  Water sanitation meetings in these areas are facilitated by NGO entities designated by UNICEF with the approval of the sector cluster.  Leads in the three hubs are as follows: Batagram-Life for Relief and Development; Bagh- Islamic Relief; Balakot- Oxfam.  UNICEF stated that water sanitation interventions will be directed at the district level. 7.  UNICEF stated that the greatest immediate need is human resources.  UNICEF is expanding its water and sanitation staff to nine employees and hopes to increase the number of national water and sanitation specialists on their staff. UNICEF stated that the present numbers of relief workers addressing water sanitation issues in country is inadequate for the huge area affected by the earthquake.  The cluster group hopes to see an increase in NGO presence in-country over the next several weeks. --------------------------------------------- --- Water and Sanitation - Meetings in Muzaffarabad --------------------------------------------- ---- 8.  On October 24, the USAID/DART conducted a survey of the water and sanitation situation in Muzaffarabad and observed that the streets were relatively free of large piles of solid waste.  Residents were observed obtaining water from public water taps.  The USAID/DART tested water from the piped water system, and the test indicated the water was treated with chlorine.  There was no evidence of open defecation in public areas visited by team members. 9.  A U.N. World Health Organization (WHO) medical officer in Muzaffarabad told the USAID/DART WSO that the infectious disease surveillance system revealed no unusual increases in communicable diseases in the areas reporting data.  The WHO medical officer stated that sanitation in rural areas is a concern, and WHO is adding a water and sanitation specialist to the WHO team to improve its technical capacity in sanitation intervention activities. 10.  The Oxfam Public Health Coordinator stated that Oxfam and the local government have initiated a solid waste clean- up program which had been very effective.  Oxfam supported the local government in re-establishing solid waste collection and is having community clean-up campaigns.  The Public Health Coordinator stated that Oxfam is heavily involved in providing water and building latrines.  Oxfam has built 89 community latrines at camps in Muzaffarabad. Oxfam reported that there were not many people in the camps, and most people are staying near their homes or have left to go to Islamabad. 11.  The CRS Water Sanitation Specialist stated that CRS is no longer providing water sanitation services in Muzaffarabad.  CRS is focusing water sanitation interventions on rural and semi-urban areas.  ----------------------- Food and Nutrition -----------------------  12.  On October 21, a U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative attended the food and nutrition cluster group meeting and reported that cluster group participants are still uncertain as to how food will actually get to people in affected areas.  The group reported that the U.N. Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) and the U.N. Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) needs to double and triple some of their services, especially air capacity within Pakistan.  As the weather starts to changes, ration requirements will change.  WFP will try to incorporate this information into its plans. WFP hopes that its aerial assessments will be able to produce a need assessment of what food is needed, what bridges and roads are accessible, etc. by October 26.  WFP is putting together a strategy Qhall (tent warehouse) storage capacity at the three hubs in Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, and Bagh.  WFP plans to have a 45-day supply of food at each rubhall hub.  --------------- Health ---------------  13.  The USAID/DART Health Officer (HO) reported that a 100- bed ICRC hospital in Muzaffarabad opened on October 21. ICRC is tracking the names of family members and villages, and if a child is under the age of 15, an adult may remain with the child in the hospital.  The ICRC hospital started receiving patients on October 21.  14.  The Abbas hospital in Muzaffarabad received 787 patients on October 20.  The hospital was damaged, but reopened a few days after the earthquake and has received a total of 10,549 patients since then.  Abbas hospital currently has zero bed capacity and is two to three days from stopping intake of new patients.  15.  Many are encouraging the medical quote tent village end quote idea due to the lack of capacity at the Abbas hospital.  The GOP is starting a basic health unit.  The establishment of a U.S. MASH started on October 21.  The hospital will be located at the Prime Minister\'s Secretariat.  The U.S. MASH will be able to start surgeries  SIPDIS by the evening of October 25.  16.  The Ministry of Health (MOH) plans to immunize 120,000 people against measles, tuberculosis (TB), diphtheria- pertussis-tetanus (DPT), and polio.  Vitamin A distributions are also occurring.  The MOH mobilized four mobile health teams on October 21, and started a health unit in Bagh and Relakot on the same day. --------------------------- Logistics and Coordination ---------------------------  17.  The USAID/DART U.N. Liaison officer (UNLO) reported that the U.N. and the Pakistani military have developed a long-term six-week transportation plan.  The plan will be presented to the GOP for approval on October 25.  Under this plan, all critical items such as shelter materials, emergency relief supplies, and food would be transported from Islamabad to Abbottabad primarily by truck.  At Abbottabad, the Pakistani military and U.N. would establish a heavy lift capacity helicopter base.  From Abbottabad, heavy helicopters would be used to move goods to four locations:  Batagram, Naran, Muzaffarabad, and Chakothi. From these four locations, smaller helicopters would be used to transport items to villages at higher elevations and valleys. 18.  The USAID/DART reports that as of October 24, the U.N. currently has 5 MI-8 helicopters in country, and they are expecting 3 additional Chinook CH-47s in the next 24 hours. These Chinooks were provided by the U.K. Royal Air Force and donated by the United Kingdom\'s Department for International Development (DFID)  19.  On October 24, the USAID/DART team facilitated the movement of excess U.S. military commodities to include 15,000 blankets to GOAL for distribution in Bagh, 43 tents to UNICEF, 1,536 sleeping bags and 840 cases of rations to Mercy Corps, and 107 cartons of medical supplies to WHO.  Of the 43 tents, 22 will be transported to Muzaffarabad and 21 to Mansehra.  These medium-sized tents will be used for schools.  20.  The USAID/DART UNLO reported that UNHAS plans to schedule a meeting with militaries who have flight capacity in Pakistan.  This includes the Pakistani, Japanese, German, American, and British militaries.  The meeting will also include the U.N. and international organizations.  The UNLO spoke to the Joint Task Force (JTF) Liaison Officer (LNO) at the Civil Military Coordination cell to request that the U.S. military possibly play a role in the planning of this meeting.  21.  The U.N. has three hubs in Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, and Bagh.  One-thousand NATO troops will be arriving on October 24.  This mixed battalion will include engineering and medical specialists, and they will be focusing on road infrastructure, latrines, and clearing land for temporary shelters and structures.  --------------- Tent Cities ---------------  22.  According to local media reports, the Cabinet Committee on Earthquake Relief, Reconstruction, and Rehabilitation has decided to set up two quote tent cities end quote for earthquake victims.  The committee has decided that these tent cities will be in Fateh Jang and Chakal.  The tent cities will have electricity, water, and health, and education services.  ----------------------- USAID/DART Assessments -----------------------  23.  On October 23 and 24, the USAID/DART in Muzaffarabad examined damage in Muzaffarabad.  While the team observed many destroyed buildings, streets were clear of debris and a large number of businesses were open.  The team observed many customers visiting shops.  Goods being sold included large amounts of fresh fruits and vegetables and freshly butchered meat.  Streets were clogged with traffic including large commercial trucks transporting food, dry goods, and animal fodder.  The team saw residents rehabilitating buildings and clearing debris and rubble.  The team\'s interpreter reported that food is being sold on the market in Muzaffarabad at 10 percent above the pre-earthquake price.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/25/2005 11:31", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 016051  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A MANILA - PLEASE PASS TO USADB AMB PAUL SPELTZ  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, ECON, EFIN, PGOV, PREL, PREF, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  MBS GEARING UP FOR RECONSTRUCTION ASSISTANCE IN ADVANCE OF OCTOBER 26 GENEVA MEETING AND NOVEMBER 18 ISLAMABAD DONOR CONFERENCE   1.  (SBU) Summary:  Although the detailed needs assessment is just beginning, multilateral development banks (MDBs) are trying to come up with funds to support reconstruction needs following Pakistan\'s October 8 earthquake.  The World Bank board will vote October 25 on a $200 million package of earthquake-related enhancements to two existing Bank projects; the board will also take a first look at upcoming initiatives to provide an additional $270 million for earthquake reconstruction ($240 million in new funds for existing projects, $30 million in reprogrammed funds from savings identified in existing programs).  The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is trying to come up with $200 million ($80 million in grant aid, $120 million in Asian Development Fund concessional lending), and is also trying to obtain GOP agreement to reprogram $100 million in savings from some long-standing existing projects to earthquake relief.  The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has, consistent with past practice in similar disasters, offered Pakistan a concessional emergency loan of $375 million (or roughly one quarter of Pakistan\'s IMF quota); having successfully argued to the IMF it would not agree to Post-Program Monitoring by the Fund, the Government of Pakistan (GOP) must now decide if it wishes to draw on the loan.  The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) has offered $252 million in earthquake support, but $200 million of that would be for import finance and lease finance at LIBOR or similar rates.  2.  (SBU) The World Bank and ADB have just launched a jointly coordinated reconstruction needs assessment in the affected areas, with the participation of the GOP and major donors, and results will be presented to the GOP on November 5.  That document will be the basis for a major Pakistan reconstruction conference scheduled in Islamabad for November 18, to which the GOP has reportedly already invited World Bank President Paul Wolfowitz and UNSYG Kofi Annan, who apparently has plans to be in the region at that time.   End Summary.  3.  (SBU) Comment:  It appears that the MDBs appreciate the magnitude of the reconstruction job ahead, though their current plans may need to be scaled up if the needs assessment reveals greater financing needs than anticipated. Given the compelling humanitarian need and the GOP\'s record of strong economic management over the past few years, MDBs think that obtaining their boards\' approval for these plans shouldn\'t be difficult.  We are pleased to see that even if it is just a negotiating tactic, the GOP for now is holding a firm line, saying it does not want MDBs shifting resources away from existing projects designed to meet urgent development needs in social sectors and infrastructure.  End comment.  -------------------------------------- WORLD BANK:  IDENTIFYING $470 MILLION -------------------------------------- 4.  (SBU) John Wall, Country Director for Pakistan (protect), explained that the World Bank was looking at a near-term figure of roughly $470 million for reconstruction and rehabilitation.  This would be comprised of additional funds pumped into existing Bank projects in Pakistan, circumventing the need for the Bank\'s usually extensive review of new projects/designs, and facilitating the rapid disbursal of the new funds.  Two of these project expansions would be voted on SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  MDBS GEARING UP FOR at the Bank\'s October 25 board meeting: $50 million more for the Development Policy Credit for North West Frontier Province and $150 million more for the Poverty Reduction Support Credit (a nationwide program that, inter alia, funds provincial operations in Azad Jammu Kashmir since AJK is not officially counted as one of Pakistan\'s provinces).  The rationale for the infusion of new credit into these programs would be that since both programs were appraised and designed based on a three-year projection of provincial policies and expenditures, any significant change in those -- as the earthquake will certainly require for both AJK and NWFP -- will require adjustments of the projects\' finances (so the provinces aren\'t forced to dislodge other necessary expenditures in order to meet their obligations under these two Bank projects).  The documentation for the expansion of these two projects was complete, and it was expected the Bank board would vote to support their expansion.  5.  (SBU) Bank staff would also on October 25 be bringing before the board - not for approval, since the necessary paperwork hasn\'t been completed, but to give the board a heads up that these projects will be ready for approval within a few weeks -  the expansion of several other existing Bank projects to include earthquake reconstruction:  $100 million more for the National Highways Project (although the highway project is designed to upgrade the main Karachi-Lahore artery, it would be expanded to cover three damaged roads connecting the quake-affected areas with central Pakistan where the main highway runs); $100 million more for the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (to expand the operations of the 61 partner NGOs currently working on microcredit, community infrastructure and capacity building, and mobilize them to rebuild communities); and $30-40 million more for the NWFP and AJK Community Infrastructure Project (to build out infrastructure including water, roads and schools).  In addition, Bank staff would preview for the Board roughly $30 million in undisbursed funds from existing projects that they hope to reprogram to support cash grants for livelihood support and housing reconstruction.  6.  (SBU) Subsequent to this initial package, after the World Bank/ADB joint needs assessment is completed in November, the Bank will consider whether it is necessary to fund an Emergency Recovery Credit (ERC) for Pakistan.  ERCs were announced for India after the Gujarat earthquake and for Sri Lanka after the tsunami, worth several hundred million dollars, but those were funded out of undisbursed balances on Bank projects in those countries.  Since undisbursed balances on Bank projects in Pakistan totals only $30 million (see para 4), any funding for an ERC for Pakistan would have to come from new funds.  7.  (SBU) Wall said it wasn\'t clear to him if the Bank\'s plans would be announced at the Geneva conference on October 26, noting that strictly speaking the conference was about raising money for the United Nations\' flash appeal for relief rather than for longer term reconstruction (this theme reappeared in discussions with most MDBs).  It wasn\'t even clear who from the Bank would be attending the Geneva conference, but not the Bank\'s President.  That said, Wall noted the timing of the October 25 Board meeting would allow the Bank to announce it had identified $470 million in reconstruction financing for Pakistan\'s reconstruction, and SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  MDBS GEARING UP FOR that the Bank\'s Board had already approved $200 million in expanded projected finance.  ----------------------------------------- ADB:  LIKELY TO OFFER $200-300 MILLION ----------------------------------------- 8.  (SBU) ADB\'s Ed Haugh (protect) said ADB was trying to identify earthquake reconstruction funds, since its three-year allocation for Pakistan was already settled and the GOP had made clear it didn\'t want any cannibalization of projects already in that three-year plan.  In view of that, the ADB was planning to come up with $200 million in new money -- $80 million in grant aid, and $120 million from the Asian Development Fund concessional resource (on IDA-equivalent terms).  Beyond that, the ABD was hoping to persuade the GOP to agree to identify savings of $100 million in some long-standing, lingering projects dating back to the early 1990\'s, and reprogram the money from those projects to earthquake assistance (but not cancel those projects). Longer term, the ADB was thinking of ways it could rejigger existing projects to meet reconstruction needs -- for example, the existing NWFP social sector project could shift its focus from programs to school reconstruction.  9.  (SBU) Asked how this compared to the kind of assistance ADB provided in response to the tsunami, Haugh explained that after the tsunami, the ADB took the unprecedented step of dipping into its own resources to fund a $600 million Tsunami Relief Fund.  The largest recipient, Indonesia, ended up receiving roughly $290 million from that Fund, so if the ADB were to announce $200-300 million for Pakistan earthquake relief, the amount would be roughly comparable.  Haugh mentioned the Tsunami Fund currently contained $30-40 million in unspent funds, which might be added to the Pakistan earthquake relief (aternatively, the fund might be re-designated the Asian Emergency Fund).  10.  (SBU) Haugh noted that while the size of contributions was important, both for reconstruction and for sending a political message of support, what was equally important was the effectiveness of the aid--specifically, that it materialize quickly, and be spent within a year or two. Gujarat earthquake aid had been effective in this regard, particularly because there was good local institutional capacity to build on for rapid disbursement; tsunami assistance had been less effective.  Cash grants -- for rubble clearance and for housing -- would be critical.  Haugh noted that NWFP, whose capital Peshawar was not seriously damaged by the earthquake, would be in a much better position to administer assistance than AJK, whose capital Muzaffarabad was one of the worst hit cities.  --------------------------------------------- IMF:  HAS OFFERED $375 MILLION EMERGENCY LOAN --------------------------------------------- 11.  (SBU) The IMF\'s ResRep Henri Lorie (protect) confirmed press reports that IMF Managing Director Rato had, on a brief October 17 visit to Pakistan, extended a $375 million emergency assistance loan, with a 3-5 year repayment term and 0.5 interest rate.  This amount would be roughly equivalent to 25 percent of Pakistan\'s IMF quota; extension of a Fund loan of this magnitude is fairly customary following major natural disasters (both Sri Lanka and the Maldives borrowed SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  MDBS GEARING UP FOR on these terms from the Fund after the tsunami, and Turkey did after its earthquake).  Lorie noted the GOP had been adamant with Rato it would not draw on such a loan if it would involve Post-Program Monitoring (PPM) (which had also been a sticking point when the GOP concluded its special IMF program in December 2004 -- and the Fund had relented). Rato had said given the generally sound state of Pakistan\'s macroeconomy, the Fund would not insist on PPM (Lorie noted this was a judgment call.  Since Pakistan is already borrowing close to 100 percent of its IMF quota, borrowing an additional 25 percent would push Pakistan\'s borrowing to the level where the Fund could insist on PPM, but given IMF confidence in the GOP\'s economic policy team, Rato did not think it necessary).   This exchange has already been reported in the Pakistani press, with Pakistan\'s refusal to accept PPM being characterized as a point of national honor (as was the \"breaking of the begging bowl\" associated with ending of the IMF program in 2005).  The GOP even asked the IMF for written confirmation of Rato\'s statement that the Fund would not insist on PPM--an odd request to make of the Fund Managing Director, Lorie noted, but one that would likely be addressed in Rato\'s letters to his GOP interlocutors thanking them for a productive visit.  This \"victory\" could give the GOP the cover it needs to draw on the IMF emergency loan.  12.  (SBU) Mechanically, Lorie said no further IMF action was necessary to offer the loan; all that remained was for the GOP to send in a letter formally requesting it.  (Note:  we understand such a loan would require IMF board approval.  End note.)  Therefore, Lorie noted, it was possible that the Fund might choose the occasion of the Geneva conference to officially confirm it has extended such a loan to Pakistan. But Lorie noted the U.N. conference on relief was not really a Fund function, and he was not even aware if an IMF representative would attend.  --------------------------------------------- --------- IDB:  HAS ANNOUNCED AID PACKAGE TOTALLING $252 MILLION --------------------------------------------- --------- 13.  During an October 23 meeting with Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, IDB President Ahmad Mohammed Ali (accompanied by OIC SecGen Ekmeluddin Ihsanoglu) announced that IDB would provide $251.6 million to Pakistan as emergency assistance.  $1.6 million of that amount would be grant funding; $50 million as a Sharia interest-free loan (but up to a 1.25% service charge on actual expenses); $100 million would be lease finance (for such things as equipment purchases) with a rate of 3.825 percent, five-year grace period, and 25 year repayment term; and $100 million would be trade finance for the import of petroleum products, with a concessional rate of one year LIBOR (currently approx 4.4%) and 18 month repayment.  IDB Resident Rep Shahid Miah reported that IDB President Ali initially maxed out his individual authority by offering $11 million in emergency assistance and then approached the IDB Board.  The IDB Board, \"in the spirit of Ramadan,\" expanded the package to $251.6 million.  When asked about the relatively high interest rates, Miah explained that while not competitive with other MDBs, they were lower than what IDB normally charges (approximately 5% for petroleum products and 5.1% for lease financing).  Miah also noted that OIC financing includes a preference for purchasing products from OIC countries, including in cases where lowest bids may be SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  MDBS GEARING UP FOR from non-OIC countries.  --------------------------------------------- --------------- NEXT STEPS:  PREPARING FOR NOVEMBER 18 DONORS CONFERENCE ON RECONSTRUCTION --------------------------------------------- --------------- 14.  (SBU) The MDBs and major donors have agreed on a needs assessment that will begin imminently.  Of the 15 functional areas the needs assessment will survey, the World Bank will take the lead on nine and the ADB will take the lead on six; GOP technical experts will participate in all the teams, and the project coordinators will meet on a weekly basis with de facto Finance Minister Salman Shah and Chairman of the new Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority LTG Zubair.  The assessment team will present its report to the GOP on November 5.  That will be followed by a November 18 Donors conference in Islamabad on reconstruction.   Prime Minister Aziz has already asked World Bank President Paul Wolfowitz to represent the Bank at that event, and has also invited Kofi Annan, who reportedly has plans to be in the region at that time. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD16025", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/26/2005 2:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 016063  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2015 TAGS: PREL, PK, MASS, PGOV, EAID, AEMR, ASEC, NATO, UN, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  AMBASSADOR\'S MEETING WITH NATO ASSESSMENT DELEGATION  REF: ISLAMABAD 16025  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On October 25, Ambassador received USN VADM Stufflebeam, commander of the NATO team visiting Islamabad to coordinate NATO\'s earthquake relief deployment to Pakistan. VADM Stufflebeam told Ambassador that he would only be on the ground in Pakistan for the time necessary to conduct a Commander\'s assessment of the situation.  He said that NATO has authorized an initial 90-day Rapid Response Force deployment. NATO has already identified two hospital units that can be deployed in support of earthquake relief:  a Netherlands unit now in Afghanistan, but not currently being used by ISAF, and a Finnish unit.  VADM Stufflebeam reviewed the components of the NATO deployment, saying that Spain would take the lead on light engineering, France on aviation and Italy on maritime transport.  He said that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) has suggested that NATO operate out of the Lahore air field.  He also noted that the UN has solicited a significant level of logistical support from the NATO mission.  2.  (C)  In response to VADM Stufflebeam\'s question, Ambassador discouraged locating the NATO operational center outside Islamabad, although it might make sense for NATO\'s air assets to work out of Lahore.  The Ambassador described the long time horizon for clearing many of the major roads in northern Pakistan, which the U.S. has only begun to fully appreciate as it prepares to deploy an engineering battalion to restore the Neelum Valley road.  He suggested that NATO take on a similar high-impact engineering project. Ambassador also alerted VADM Stufflebeam to Pakistani Army Aviation\'s need for MI-17 parts and maintenance support. Ambassador advised the NATO team to first become familiar with the Pakistan military operations and CENTCOM\'s Disaster Assistance Center - Pakistan (DAC-PAK) at Chaklala air field, then call on Federal Relief Coordinator MG Farooq to determine how NATO could support the GOP\'s operational priorities.  Noting that the proposed early deployment of two hospitals would get the NATO mission off to a great start, Ambassador underscored the importance of all donors staying on point that we are here to support the GOP and people of Pakistan through this crisis.  The Admiral concured. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/26/2005 11:23", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 ISLAMABAD 016073  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT  #7  ------- Summary -------  1.  From October 22 to 23, a team of three Foreign Service nationals from USAID/Pakistan conducted an assessment in Muzaffarabad and several villages that were affected by the earthquake.  The team visited Muzaffarabad city, Shaeed Gali, Hasan Gali, Jabbi Haider Shah, Lamian Battian, and Gari Habibullah.  The team conducted assessments in the health, shelter, livelihoods, and education sectors.  End summary.  -------------------- Current Situation --------------------  2.  The team met with Government of Pakistan (GOP) officials, including the Chief of the Education, Planning, and Development Department and the Additional Home Secretary for Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) to discuss the current situation.  The team learned that the earthquake destroyed the majority of GOP buildings in Muzaffarabad, including civil secretariat buildings, district government offices, and the judicial complex.  The remaining buildings that are still standing have not been inspected or cleared and cannot be used unless they are assessed or repaired.  The majority of school buildings (primary, secondary, high, and university) are destroyed or completely damaged.  3.  These GOP officials told the team that the GOP\'s Annual Development Plan (budget) is being reprioritized for earthquake relief.  The Asian Development Bank project has also been reprioritized for education.  U.N. liaison offices have been established in Muzaffarabad, but there is no AJK government-led coordination system in place.  4.  The USAID team reported that the GOP sent out teams for assessments in areas that are accessible.  The North West Frontier Province (NWFP) provincial government is establishing teams that are going house to house in affected areas giving vouchers to affected residents.  The villagers must come to a main office to receive relief supplies that are listed on the voucher.  The team reported that planning for relief activities must take into account the access restrictions of different affected areas: easy access by main roads; medium access by main roads/jeep-able tracks, short walking tracks; and remote/no access by roads.  For local transportation to villages from the city center, porters with donkeys and small jeeps are available.  Due to the difficulty of access to some villages, the GOP is trying to bring people from higher altitude, inaccessible areas to lower, accessible areas for the winter.  5.  The team met with residents in rural areas and most people are worried about shelter for the upcoming winter. Many residents in earthquake-affected areas are afraid to use structures that are partially damaged.  People are receiving emergency supplies, but not in adequate quantities and not in all locations.  People who are the least affected are receiving the most assistance as they are located closer to distribution points or are able-bodied.  6.  The team reported that buildings constructed using stone masonry were the most affected in terms of damage.  Most houses in rural areas use stone, wood, and soil (for roofs). Those residents who are more affluent use cement blocks for walls.  Some residents have already started clearing up space and are thinking of temporary shelter for winter.  In terms of shelter, tents are not the only option, and the team believes that using tin sheets as well as tarpaulin sheets on structures is an option.  The team noted that in Muzaffarabad, there are between 1,500 and 2,000 masons who could be trained to assist with reconstruction.  7.  The onset of winter is a problem as rains and snow in higher altitude villages will arrive soon.  However the team reports that major infrastructure damage occurred in areas that do not receive snow.  Many residents are sleeping outside in school spaces as the spaces around their houses are full of debris.  The team reported that residents seem eager to participate in a cash-for-work program for rebuilding damaged houses or rubble removal.  ----------------- Shelter ------------------  8.  Tents or temporary shelter are the major concern of all affected residents.  Most of the rural residents located in accessible villages, near roads, and in areas where snowfall is not heavy do not want to move away from their land.  Some have animals and stored food but no shelter and are sleeping outside.  9.  Other residents in rural areas have already started clearing space and are thinking about reconstruction but are constrained by lack of resources.  These residents have requested iron/tin sheets for roofs as they feel that even a tent will not be sufficient after snowfall, and they want to build a temporary room for the winter.  10.  The USAID/DART is working with USAID/Pakistan to re- establish schools using tents from the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD).  DOD Seabees are also engaged in large rubble removal and the USAID/DART is supporting cash-for-work activities for hand rubble removal and site preparation removal.  These emergency interventions will lay the groundwork for some of USAID/Pakistan\'s longer-term reconstruction initiatives.  ----------------- Livelihoods -----------------  11.  According to the team, most community members in affected areas, especially young men who were day laborers in various businesses, are out of jobs and need a source of income.  This is an immediate requirement as many adults and young people who worked in hotels, garages, transport, and daily labor are currently unemployed.  Some options for cash for work include debris removal, restoring sanitation facilities, and reconstruction activities.  12.  Women in rural areas assist in managing households, rearing cattle, collecting firewood, bringing water etc. They are dependent on men for the receipt of relief supplies.  Women who have lost husbands and have young children are now dependent on communities for support.  The team believes that creative ways can be used to get them involved in some sort of economic or reconstruction activity.  The team suggested that widows could be included as educators in tent schools as some surviving teachers may not be able to return to the schools due to injuries or migration.  Educated women may be able to be employed in health and education activities.  13.  Cash-for-work or commodities-for-work will be an important activity.  Cash alone might be an issue, as the cost of commodities rise.  Muzaffarabad has manpower and skilled labor for construction, but they will need training for quality construction in case new design or materials are introduced. In rural areas, immediate reconstruction of houses may be possible but not in urban areas. Removal of debris is an important issue in urban areas.  The GOP plans to build camps in accessible areas, and a center for orphaned children and widows is expected to be built in Muzaffarabad and Mirpur.  14.  The team also reported that Muzaffarabad has two other population groups, in addition to the majority of local residents.  There is a population of approximately 25,000 refugees from border areas of India and a similar number of migrant laborers.  These groups are recipients of relief assistance and will also provide labor for reconstruction and rehabilitation.  ------------------ Education -------------------  15.  The team reported that both the old and new campuses of the University of AJK were completely destroyed in Muzaffarabad.  There are some buildings on the new campus that are still standing, but they have cracks.  The buildings will have to be assessed by experts. It is estimated that 250 students died.  Eighty percent of the student population was from the neighboring districts of AJK.  16.  Almost all the degree and inter-colleges have also been severely damaged.  The reconstruction of the University of AJK is critical as this is the only university serving the region.  17.  Tent schools are an immediate requirement in rural areas and in some parts of the city to bring normalcy to the lives of children affected by the earthquake.  Almost 80 percent of schools have been damaged completely and require rubble removal for site clearance.  All community members agreed that it is important to re-establish schools and involve children in some constructive activity that will assist them in getting over the trauma of the earthquake.  --------------- Health ----------------  18.  According to the team, the buildings of the Combined Military Hospital (CMH), the largest tertiary care hospital, run by the Pakistani military through an agreement with the Government of AJK, have completely collapsed.  According to the Commanding Officer (CO) of the CMH, the earthquake killed approximately 80 percent of the hospital staff.  19.  The CMH was a 450-bed hospital with a staff of 350. Two-thirds of the staff was from the Pakistani military, and the rest were from the Government of AJK.  The hospital also had a large training institute for paramedics.  The team reported that all equipment has been destroyed, and medical assistance is being provided in the existing premises by the French Military Hospital Camp.  There were no facilities nearby to refer complicated cases, until the U.S. Mobile army surgical hospital (MASH) opened on October 25.  20.  The Department of Health in Muzaffarabad has effectively ceased to function as most staff are direct or indirect victims of the disaster and are not reporting for duty.  Medical and surgical field teams report 2,000 patients are being treated daily in Muzaffarabad.  The first three days after the earthquake, most patients were treated for trauma injuries. Currently, about 40 percent of patients are being treated for trauma, and the rest have acute respiratory infections.  21.  The team heard that approximately 50 people are being operated on each day at Abbas Institute of Medical Sciences (AIMS), which is designated as the principal hospital in Muzaffarabad.  The infrastructure at the Abbas hospital is intact, but it is not fully functional.  Surgical services have been re-established with four operation theaters for general and orthopedic surgeons.  The Pakistani military will transfer people and supplies to this hospital.  Abbas hospital has also established a vaccination service.  A dialysis unit is being set up in the next few days to prevent renal complications from crush injuries.  Three vaccination centers and mobile teams have been established in Muzaffarabad (in the central camp, stadium camp, and Neelum Stadium) to vaccinate people against measles and tetanus.  22.  According to statistics provided to the team by the Government of AJK, prior to the earthquake, there were 564 health facilities in AJK and NWFP, and the earthquake destroyed 291, partially damaged 74, and 199 health facilities are currently operational.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/28/2005 1:50", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ISLAMABAD 016138  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT  #8  ------- Summary -------  1.  As of October 25, the death toll in Pakistan reached 53,000, and the total affected population was between 2.7 and 2.8 million people.  Shelter continues to be the primary need of those affected by the earthquake.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) continues to monitor the water and sanitation sector, and the construction of latrines recently increased. The U.N. World Health Organization (WHO) reported no significant increase in the spread of communicable diseases. The GOP continues to work with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to establish additional internally displaced persons (IDP) camps.  The U.N. camp management and protection clusters are concerned with the registration of IDPs in camps.  End summary.  ------- Shelter -------  2.  As of October 25, the total affected population was between 2.7 and 2.8 million people, according to the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM). Approximately 600,000 tents are needed to shelter a population of this size.  To date, the international community and the GOP have each delivered approximately 60,000 tents to affected populations.  With an estimated 180,000 additional tents in the consolidated pipeline, the total number of tents delivered and in the pipeline to date is 300,000.  3.  A shortfall of approximately 300,000 tents exists.  Of this number, OCHA estimates the need for quote shelter solutions end quote to be between 45,000 and 210,000. Approximately 220,000 to 1,000,000 people will likely not receive shelter assistance from the international relief effort.  4.  On October 25, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (USAID/DART) Shelter and Settlements Advisor (SSA) and the USAID/Pakistan Mission Director met with the GOP Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Task Force to discuss housing reconstruction.  Meeting participants discussed the importance of linking relief and reconstruction efforts through emphasis on transitional shelter, and the significant potential that shelter sector investments have for generating livelihoods.  5.  Also on October 25, the USAID/DART SSA, USAID Pakistan Mission Director, and USAID/DART Team Leader met with the GOP Relief Task Force to discuss tent supply and demand issues.  The USAID representatives cautioned that over- reliance on tents might preclude the GOP and international community from addressing other, more appropriate means of shelter.  The USAID/DART SSA provided meeting participants with details on other shelter interventions, including quote one dry room end quote and host/guest family support options.  6.  The USAID/DART Deputy Team Leader attended a meeting with OCHA and IOM on October 25.  Meeting participants noted that to date, hosting and spontaneous camps are accounting for much, if not most, of the accommodations of affected populations.  This trend will likely continue.  Water and sanitation problems are becoming hazards in spontaneous camps.  7.  Many NGOs providing shelter are focusing on rural communities and developing different toolkit models.  They acknowledge that they will not be able to provide large quantities of supplies in this short time period and are consequently working to develop alternate models of supplying winterized housing.  -------------------- Water and Sanitation --------------------  8.  On October 24, the Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources (PCRWR), the research center of the Pakistan Ministry of Science and Technology, announced that the condition of drinking water in the earthquake-hit areas of Abbottabad and Mansehra in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) is satisfactory, but the drinking water in Pakistani- administered Kashmir is not as good.  The PCRWR dispatched 10 field teams to Abbottabad, Mansehra, Balakot, Batagram, Rawlakot, Muzaffarabad, and Bagh to assess the drinking water situation.  These teams found that the condition of the drinking water in Pakistsani-administered Kashmir had deteriorated to a large extent.  9.  In Muzaffarabad, the PCRWR teams continue to monitor water resources, rehabilitation of water supply structures, and the installation of two filtration plans with a capacity of 48,000 liters of water per day.  Approximately 90 percent of the city\'s water mains are functioning.  Remaining leaks in the city\'s water mains will be repaired by next week.  10.  According to the USAID/ART FO, latrine construction in IDP settlements has increased with the arrival of plastic latrine slabs.  Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF)-Holland is initiating a concrete latrine slab reconstruction program.  ------ Health ------  11.  The USAID/DART FO reported that according to WHO, the vaccination campaign in Muzaffarabad is proceeding very well.  Having nearly completed vaccinations in the Muzaffarabad area, 19 two-person teams have expanded their operations to rural areas.  12.  The USAID/DART FO reported that Oxfam has established hygiene promotion committees in each IDP settlement. Islamic Relief has distributed 490 hygiene kits in settlements.  13.  According to the USAID/DART FO, WHO has reported no significant increase in communicable diseases in the earthquake-affected region.  After observing a slight increase in scabies in IDP settlements, WHO requested that hygiene promotion teams and clinical programs include scabies prevention in their hygiene promotion programs.  ------------------ Food and Nutrition ------------------  14.  A U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative reported that in the October 24 food cluster group meeting, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) stated that in almost all of their camps, the Pakistani military has provided most of the food.  Participants in the October 24 U.N. food cluster meeting noted that Save the Children is feeding approximately 150 patients and staff in the Batagram field hospital.  Meeting participants agreed that obtaining shelter is a more pressing problem than obtaining clean drinking water.  --------- Logistics ---------  15.  A representative of the U.S. Embassy/Pakistan reported that in the October 24 U.N. general coordination meeting, the U.N. logistics cluster group discussed the need to create a rough plan for cargo distribution in affected areas.  The U.N. Joint Logistics Center (JLC) is the point of contact for air operations.  As such, the JLC is responsible for comparing requests by NGOs for air shipments to the priority needs list and validating requests.  The U.N. logistics cluster group will present its six-week operations plan at the October 27 coordination meeting.  At present, however, the JLC is not fully active in its role as the point of contact for air operations, and USAID/DART representatives continue to work at coordinating air operations.  16.  According to the JLC, in the past week, JLC staff deployed to the airport operation have more than doubled, aided by the seconding of two GOP liaison officers.  In the next week to ten days, the cargo-carrying capacity of the combined Pakistani and international rotary wing fleet deployed to the emergency is likely to double with the arrival of heavy lift military helicopters.  ---------------------- National Recovery Plan ----------------------  17.  The USAID/DART U.N. Liaison Officer (UNLO) reported that in the October 24 U.N. general coordination meeting, participants stated that President Pervez Musharraf will convene a National Recovery Plan conference on November 18 in Islamabad.  The World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, joined by the G7, are the main partners in the development of this plan, under the direction of the GOP. In the first week of November, President Musharraf will receive a draft document of this plan.  ----------------- U.N. Flash Appeal -----------------  18.  In the October 25 U.N. coordination meeting, participants discussed the revision to the U.N. Flash Appeal, to be introduced on October 28 in Geneva.  The revised appeal will be for USD 500 million.  A major target in the revised appeal will be sustained helicopter operations during the winter months.  ------------------ Damage Assessments ------------------  19.  The USAID/DART UNLO reported that in a U.N. coordination meeting on October 25, participants stated that earthquake modeling has established three levels for use in damage estimates: high, medium, and low.  High impact areas include the cities of Shangla, Batagram, Lari, Balakot, Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, Abbottabad, Bagh, Rawalakot, Kahuta, and Punch.  Medium impact areas include the cities of Bathela, Topi, Indus, Tarbela Dam, Haripur, Wah, and Islamabad.  Low impact areas include Risalpu, Kamra, Nowshera, Mardan, Indus, and Campellpore.  Meeting participants noted that route 25 from Islamabad to Muzaffarabad route 35 from Wah to Shangla are both open.  ----------------------------------------- IDP Movements, Camps, and Camp Management -----------------------------------------  20.  According to the USAID/DART FO, NGOs are reporting that IDP movement is limited because many of the roads in affected areas are closed.  At this point, it appears that people prefer to stay closer to their homes rather than migrate to cities.  The international community is concerned that if supplies do not reach the most vulnerable, this population will begin migrating in the coming weeks.  21.  At present, 19 unregistered IDP camps are located in Muzaffarabad.  Almustafa, a local NGO, is constructing new camps and working with the GOP to move IDPs in unregistered camps to the camps under construction.  In Thori Park, one of the new camps, this NGO plans to provide space and supporting infrastructure for at least 600 tents.  Numerous unresolved issues about security, water and sanitation, and other aspects of the camps characterize the plan for Thori Park.  UNHCR is satisfied with this camp, which will house up to 1,500 tents, and would like to set up additional camps with this NGO.  Many other NGOs, however, have expressed concerns with the camp setup, noting that mega camps are not the correct solution for this environment.  22.  According to the USAID/DART UNLO, participants in the October 25 U.N. coordination meeting reported that seven camps have been established in Mansehra and one in Muzaffarabad.  The UNHCR was absent from the meeting, and other meeting participants were unable to confirm the population present in each camp.  23.  The U.N. camp management and protection clusters are concerned with the registration of IDPs in camps.  UNHCR plans to register IDPs in the camps it is administering and is considering establishing registration for other camps.  -------- Children --------  24.  The international community has asked those who find unaccompanied children in earthquake-affected areas to contact the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) immediately.  If children (under the age of 18) in affected areas are transported to other areas, a relative should accompany the children when possible.  --------------------- USAID/DART Activities ---------------------  25.  The USAID/DART has requested 30,000 blankets for those affected by the earthquake.  The USAID/OFDA warehouse in Dubai will supply these blankets.  Pending aircraft availability, the blankets will be delivered to Islamabad October 30.  26.  Prior to October 24, the USAID/DART had facilitated the transport of 1,150 rolls of plastic sheeting.  On October 24, the USAID/DART facilitated the first of six additional transports of rolls of plastic sheeting.  On October 24 and October 25, two shipments containing a total of 1,660 rolls of plastic, or enough for 8,300 families, arrived in Islamabad.  The first shipment of 820 rolls of plastic sheeting went to GOAL for distribution, and ACTED will distribute the second shipment of 840 rolls.  On October 26, a USAID flight carrying 840 rolls of plastic sheeting, provided to Catholic Relief Services (CRS) for distribution, arrived in Islamabad.  The USAID/DART expects three additional flights containing plastic sheeting to arrive within the week.     CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/28/2005 1:50", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ISLAMABAD 016139  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT  #8   ------- Summary -------  1.  As of October 25, the death toll in Pakistan reached 53,000, and the total affected population was between 2.7 and 2.8 million people.  Shelter continues to be the primary need of those affected by the earthquake.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) continues to monitor the water and sanitation sector, and the construction of latrines recently increased. The U.N. World Health Organization (WHO) reported no significant increase in the spread of communicable diseases. The GOP continues to work with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to establish additional internally displaced persons (IDP) camps.  The U.N. camp management and protection clusters are concerned with the registration of IDPs in camps.  End summary.  ------- Shelter -------  2.  As of October 25, the total affected population was between 2.7 and 2.8 million people, according to the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM). Approximately 600,000 tents are needed to shelter a population of this size.  To date, the international community and the GOP have each delivered approximately 60,000 tents to affected populations.  With an estimated 180,000 additional tents in the consolidated pipeline, the total number of tents delivered and in the pipeline to date is 300,000.  3.  A shortfall of approximately 300,000 tents exists.  Of this number, OCHA estimates the need for quote shelter solutions end quote to be between 45,000 and 210,000. Approximately 220,000 to 1,000,000 people will likely not BANGKOK FQ OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN receive shelter assistance from the international relief effort.  4.  On October 25, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (USAID/DART) Shelter and Settlements Advisor (SSA) and the USAID/Pakistan Mission Director met with the GOP Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Task Force to discuss housing reconstruction.  Meeting participants discussed the importance of linking relief and reconstruction efforts through emphasis on transitional shelter, and the significant potential that shelter sector investments have for generating livelihoods.  5.  Also on October 25, the USAID/DART SSA, USAID Pakistan Mission Director, and USAID/DART Team Leader met with the GOP Relief Task Force to discuss tent supply and demand issues.  The USAID representatives cautioned that over- reliance on tents might preclude the GOP and international community from addressing other, more appropriate means of shelter.  The USAID/DART SSA provided meeting participants with details on other shelter interventions, including quote one dry room end quote and host/guest family support options.  6.  The USAID/DART Deputy Team Leader attended a meeting with OCHA and IOM on October 25.  Meeting participants noted that to date, hosting and spontaneous camps are accounting for much, if not most, of the accommodations of affected populations.  This trend will likely continue.  Water and sanitation problems are becoming hazards in spontaneous camps.  7.  Many NGOs providing shelter are focusing on rural communities and developing different toolkit models.  They acknowledge that they will not be able to provide large quantities of supplies in this short time period and are consequently working to develop alternate models of supplying winterized housing.  -------------------- Water and Sanitation --------------------  8.  On October 24, the Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources (PCRWR), the research center of the Pakistan Ministry of Science and Technology, announced that the condition of drinking water in the earthquake-hit areas of Abbottabad and Mansehra in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) is satisfactory, but the drinking water in Pakistani- administered Kashmir is not as good.  The PCRWR dispatched 10 field teams to Abbottabad, Mansehra, Balakot, Batagram, Rawlakot, Muzaffarabad, and Bagh to assess the drinking water situation.  These teams found that the condition of the drinking water in Pakistsani-administered Kashmir had deteriorated to a large extent.  9.  In Muzaffarabad, the PCRWR teams continue to monitor water resources, rehabilitation of water supply structures, and the installation of two filtration plans with a capacity of 48,000 liters of water per day.  Approximately 90 percent of the city\'s water mains are functioning.  Remaining leaks in the city\'s water mains will be repaired by next week.  10.  According to the USAID/ART FO, latrine construction in IDP settlements has increased with the arrival of plastic latrine slabs.  Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF)-Holland is initiating a concrete latrine slab reconstruction program.  ------ Health ------  11.  The USAID/DART FO reported that according to WHO, the vaccination campaign in Muzaffarabad is proceeding very well.  Having nearly completed vaccinations in the Muzaffarabad area, 19 two-person teams have expanded their ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINQRATOR MARK WARD operations to rural areas.  12.  The USAID/DART FO reported that Oxfam has established hygiene promotion committees in each IDP settlement. Islamic Relief has distributed 490 hygiene kits in settlements.  13.  According to the USAID/DART FO, WHO has reported no significant increase in communicable diseases in the earthquake-affected region.  After observing a slight increase in scabies in IDP settlements, WHO requested that hygiene promotion teams and clinical programs include scabies prevention in their hygiene promotion programs.  ------------------ Food and Nutrition ------------------  14.  A U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative reported that in the October 24 food cluster group meeting, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) stated that in almost all of their camps, the Pakistani military has provided most of the food.  Participants in the October 24 U.N. food cluster meeting noted that Save the Children is feeding approximately 150 patients and staff in the Batagram field hospital.  Meeting participants agreed that obtaining shelter is a more pressing problem than obtaining clean drinking water.  --------- Logistics ---------  15.  A representQve of the U.S. Embassy/Pakistan reported that in the October 24 U.N. general coordination meeting, the U.N. logistics cluster group discussed the need to create a rough plan for cargo distribution in affected areas.  The U.N. Joint Logistics Center (JLC) is the point of contact for air operations.  As such, the JLC is responsible for comparing requests by NGOs for air shipments to the priority needs list and validating requests.  The U.N. logistics cluster group will present its six-week operations plan at the October 27 coordination meeting.  At present, however, the JLC is not fully active in its role as the point of contact for air operations, and USAID/DART representatives continue to work at coordinating air operations.  16.  According to the JLC, in the past week, JLC staff deployed to the airport operation have more than doubled, aided by the seconding of two GOP liaison officers.  In the next week to ten days, the cargo-carrying capacity of the combined Pakistani and international rotary wing fleet deployed to the emergency is likely to double with the arrival of heavy lift military helicopters.  ---------------------- National Recovery Plan ----------------------  17.  The USAID/DART U.N. Liaison Officer (UNLO) reported that in the October 24 U.N. general coordination meeting, participants stated that President Pervez Musharraf will convene a National Recovery Plan conference on November 18 in Islamabad.  The World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, joined by the G7, are the main partners in the development of this plan, under the direction of the GOP. In the first week of November, President Musharraf will receive a draft document of this plan.  ----------------- U.N. Flash Appeal -----------------  18.  In the October 25 U.N. coordination meeting, participants discussed the revision to the U.N. Flash Appeal, to be introduced on October 28 in Geneva.  The revised appeal will be for USD 500 million.  A major target in the revised appeal will be sustained helicopter operations during the winter months.  ------------------ Damage Assessments ------------------  19.  The USAID/DART UNLO reported that in a U.N. coordination meeting on October 25, participants stated that earthquake modeling has established three levels for use in damage estimates: high, medium, and low.  High impact areas include the citiesQangla, Batagram, Lari, Balakot, Mansehra, Muzaffarabad, Abbottabad, Bagh, Rawalakot, Kahuta, and Punch.  Medium impact areas include the cities of Bathela, Topi, Indus, Tarbela Dam, Haripur, Wah, and Islamabad.  Low impact areas include Risalpu, Kamra, Nowshera, Mardan, Indus, and Campellpore.  Meeting participants noted that route 25 from Islamabad to Muzaffarabad route 35 from Wah to Shangla are both open.  ----------------------------------------- IDP Movements, Camps, and Camp Management -----------------------------------------  20.  According to the USAID/DART FO, NGOs are reporting that IDP movement is limited because many of the roads in affected areas are closed.  At this point, it appears that people prefer to stay closer to their homes rather than migrate to cities.  The international community is concerned that if supplies do not reach the most vulnerable, this population will begin migrating in the coming weeks.  21.  At present, 19 unregistered IDP camps are located in Muzaffarabad.  Almustafa, a local NGO, is constructing new camps and working with the GOP to move IDPs in unregistered camps to the camps under construction.  In Thori Park, one of the new camps, this NGO plans to provide space and supporting infrastructure for at least 600 tents.  Numerous unresolved issues about security, water and sanitation, and other aspects of the camps characterize the plan for Thori Park.  UNHCR is satisfied with this camp, which will house up to 1,500 tents, and would like to set up additional camps with this NGO.  Many other NGOs, however, have expressed concerns with the camp setup, noting that mega camps are not the correct solution for this environment.  22.  According to the USAID/DART UNLO, participants in the October 25 U.N. coordination meeting reported that seven camps have been established in Mansehra and one in Muzaffarabad.  The UNHCR was absent from the meeting, and other meeting participants were unable to confirm the population present in each camp.  23.  The U.N. camp management and protection clusters are concerned with the registration of IDPs in camps.  UNHCR plans to register IDPs in the camps it is administering and is considering establishing registration for other camps.  -------- Children --------  24.  The international community has asked those who find unaccompanied children in earthquake-affected areas to contact the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) immediately.  If children (under the age of 18) in affected areas are transported to other areas, a relative should accompany the children when possible.  --------------------- USAID/DART Activities ---------------------  25.  The USAID/DART has requested 30,000 blankets for those affected by the earthquake.  The USAID/OFDA warehouse in Dubai will supply these blankets.  Pending aircraft availability, the blankets will be delivered to Islamabad October 30.  26.  Prior to October 24, the USAID/DART had facilitated the transport of 1,150 rolls of plastic sheeting.  On October 24, the USAID/DART facilitated the first of six additional transports of rolls of plastic sheeting.  On October 24 and October 25, two shipments containing a total of 1,660 rolls of plastic, or enough for 8,300 families, arrived in Islamabad.  The first shipment of 820 rolls of plastic sheeting went to GOAL for distribution, and ACTED will distribute the second shipment of 840 rolls.  On October 26, a USAID flight carrying 840 rolls of plastic sheeting, provided to Catholic Relief Services (CRS) for distribution, arrived in Islamabad.  The USAID/DART expects three additional flights containing plastic sheeting to arrive within the week.     CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD15861", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/28/2005 1:51", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 016140  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  PARTS SHORTAGE MAY SOON GROUND PAKISTANI MI-17 RELIEF OPERATIONS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 15861       B. STATE 196411  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary and introduction:  Since October 8, Pakistan\'s Army Aviation has kept its fleet of heavy-lift MI-17 helicopters in the air flying daily sorties transporting relief supplies to areas devastated the South Asian earthquake.  To accomplish this dramatic shift in its mission, reourceful Army Aviation maintenance crews have turned to cannibalizing grounded MI-17s for parts after having quickly depleting their normal stockpiles of parts.  A shortage of replacement parts will increasingly impair Army Aviation support for earthquake relief operations, as helo sorties decline because aircraft must wait for maintenance (Ref A).  Post estimates that an infusion of USD 16 million is required to restore Pakistan\'s MI-17 fleet to a 70 percent availability level over the next six months.  End summary and introduction.  Pakistani Army Aviation Operations ---------------------------------- 2. (C)  Pakistan Army Aviation has 40 MI-17s, five of which had been seconded to other GOP agencies (Note:  The MI-17 that crashed on October 16 was one of these five.  End note.)  Information available to post\'s Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) and CENTCOM\'s Disaster Assistance Center (DAC) indicated that, as of October 26, ten (10) MI-17s have not been operational recently:  six (6) are being overhauled; one (1) would be uneconomical to repair; one (1) suffered crash damage and two (2) have been identified as excess defense articles and are being cannibalized for parts.  Of the remaining thirty MI-17s:  -- four (4) are out of the country supporting UN missions -- four (4) are out of service for phased maintenance -- two (2) are out of service for inspection -- one (1) is out of service because of a rotor strike -- one (1) is out of service because of a tail boom strike by the main rotor -- eighteen (18) are available for EQ relief operations*  *  Based on ODRP and DAC observations, post believes that true daily availability rate for Pak Army helos is closer to fourteen (14), as maintenance on each aircraft can take 1-2 days.  3. (C)  Pakistan Army Aviation had budgeted for 5000 flying hours for the fiscal year beginning June 30, 2005.  In the weeks since the October 8 earthquake, the MI-17 fleet has been flying at a dramatically accelerated operational tempo: Pakistan Army Aviation claims that it is flying an average of six (6) hours per operation aircraft per day.  At this rate, Army Aviation will burn through its flying hour allotment for the year in the next month.  The cost for 5000 hours of flying based on thirty (30) operational MI-17s is approximately USD 3 million.  Pakistan Army Aviation planners estimate that 15,000 MI-17 flying hours will be required to support earthquake relief through April, based on thirty (3) available MI-17s, the current rate of operation and the eventual withdrawal of USG and other donors\' rotary wing assets.  The current budget to operate Pakistan\'s entire 380 ship aviation fleet is only USD 40 million.  4.  (C)  Pakistan Army Aviation is in danger of becoming Non-Mission Capable within a month; ODRP and DAC have already noted a significant degradation in available aircraft for daily sorties.  Although  Army Aviation Fleet Maintenance Chief BG Najeeb Tariq has requested additional funding for MI-17 parts and services, none has been forthcoming.  Army Aviation maintenance personnel have shared their concerns with ODRP and DAC regarding the availability of parts in the mid- to long-term, as they are quickly consuming available stocks.  (Note: Having ten MI-17s that are not operational has turned into a boon for the maintenance crews, which has been relying on stripping grounded aircraft for parts as a short-term panacea.  End notes.)  5.  (C)  ODRP and DAC estimate that USD 16 million would be necessary to bring Pakistan\'s MI-17 fleet to a sustained 70 percent availability rate:  -- Restoration of one MI-17 with major damage:  USD 1.2 million -- Restoration of two EDA MI-17s cannibalized for parts:  USD 1 million -- Operational costs - 15,000 flying hours for thirty MI-17s over six months:  USD 9 million -- Previously contracted overhaul of six MI-17s:  USD 4.8 million  6.  (C)  If Pakistani Army Aviation fails to maintain a 70 percent availability rate, post questions how the GOP will sustain relief operations throughout the winter.  Many roads in the disaster area will soon be cut off by snow and/or future landslides.  Army Aviation\'s heavy-lift MI-17 fleet is the only realistic mechanism for delivering supplies to earthquake survivors in isolated areas.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD16140", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/31/2005 1:34", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 016190  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SA AND EB DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2015 TAGS: AEMR, EAGR, EAID, ECIN, ECON, MASS, PGOV, PK, PREF, PREL, SENV, AESC, UN, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  UN TRYING TO GET UP TO SPEED  REF: ISLAMABAD 16140 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY:  Mission staff with direct interaction with the UN\'s earthquake relief effort - from the team leader for USAID\'s Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) to emboffs attending UN sectoral cluster groups -- characterize the UN response thus far as \"a day late and a dollar short,\" with improvements coming slowly.  Post gives UNICEF, the World Food Program (WFP), UNHCR, and Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) relatively good marks, but the UN Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) and UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) have gotten more mixed reviews.  As the resident UN representative in Pakistan has no/no background in emergency relief operations, post believes that the UN should immediately appoint an experienced disaster relief coordinator to manage its humanitarian assistance programs in Pakistan. END SUMMARY  UN Helicopter Support ---------------------  2. (C) From the beginning of the relief effort following the October 8 earthquake, U.S. military planners have worked hand-in-glove with Government of Pakistan (GOP) civilian and military authorities, with U.S. helicopters flying relief supplies to affected areas shortly after the earthquake hit. In contrast, twenty days after the disaster, many have wondered what happened to the promised UN helicopters, despite well-publicized UN promises to provide significant additional airlift capacity unfulfilled.  UNHAS has offered twenty MI-8 and six or eight MI-26 helicopters, but DART is skeptical that UNHAS can fund so many aircraft, noting that one MI-26 costs $11,000/hour to operate, not including the cost of the fuel.  DART does credit UNHAS\'s newly-arrived coordinator (a former U.S. Air Force officer) with doing a good job setting up a joint air operations center that meshes well with existing operations led by Pakistan military and CENTCOM\'s Disaster Assistance Center-Pakistan (DAC).  The Embassy\'s Office of Defense Representative-Pakistan (ODRP) also noted that UNHAS is close to finalizing an agreement with the Pakistan Air Aviation to set up a forward operating base in Abbotabad.  Logistic Coordination ---------------------  3.  (C)  The UNJLC has been and continues to be slow in becoming operational; some staff believe that UNJLC should have helped get UN helicopters here faster.  The World Food Program (WFP) is working to maximize the use of existing helicopters by purchasing a fleet of 90 30-ton trucks and 100 10-ton trucks to transit supplies to areas accessible by road, in order to free up helicopters to supply the most isolated areas.  Nutrition, Health Care and Education ------------------------------------  4.  (C)  WFP deserves high marks for quickly opening its warehouses in Afghanistan and sending trucks with high energy biscuits to affected areas.  WFP has not updated its initial estimate of providing food for 1 million people; some experts believe the true figure is actually between 2 and 2.5 million.  WFP must also compile information on how many farmers are harvesting crops and planting new ones, which will determine how much food will be needed in the spring.  5.  (C)  On health care and education, the World Health Organization is doing a good job.  With Pakistan\'s already underdeveloped health system in the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) and Pakistan-controlled Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) shattered by the earthquake, DART wonders whether the GOP will be able to meet enormous needs over the long term. DART has observed some disconnects, such as patients being evacuated from Muzaffarabad even though hospital space was still available there.  UNICEF appeared to be working well with the GOP to set up schools.  Shelter and Camp Management ----------------------------  6.  (U)  UNHCR, which leads the Camp Management cluster has spent $7.6 million from its reserves to fly in over 860 tons of relief supplies including 15,000 winterized  tents.  UNHCR has been working closely with the GOP to establish camps for earthquake survivors, but the difficult terrain in the areas directly affected by the earthquake has made siting camp locations difficult.  Of the sixty sites suggested by the GOP, UNHCR found that two-thirds did not meet UNHCR standards.  UNHCR is working in nine camps, with a potential capacity of over 30,000. UNHCR is also in the process of identifying the locations of the many informal, makeshift camps in the earthquake-affected area, lending a hand to organize and assist the larger ones.  UNHCR has offered technical assistance to the GOP for the camps the government proposes to establish in Islamabad and outside the area affected by the earthquake, but will not play a role in the management of these camps.  DART team members have noted that UNHCR/Geneva is still debating whether UNHCR (vice the International Organization for Migration) should assist internally-displaced persons; this debate could delay UNHCR actions.  Information Coordination ------------------------  7.  (U) DART appreciated OCHA\'s efforts to set up Humanitarian Information Centers (HICs), which provide good demographic, statistical, and mapping information.  One HIC is already running in Muzaffarabad, and two others slated for Mansehra and Bagh.  Hit-or-Miss Coordination with the GOP -------------------------------------  8.  (SBU) Continuing a pattern post flagged early in the crisis, no GOP representative attended the UN\'s October 27 Camp Management Cluster or Shelter Cluster meetings.  The government\'s failure to actively participate in this and other UN cluster group meetings has been a continuing source of frustration to the UN and its NGO partners, many of which do not have sufficient experience with the GOP bureaucracy to know how things get things done here.  Burning Through UN Funding --------------------------  9.  (C) With only one-third of the UN\'s original flash funded, DART noted that WFP is already $40 million in the red, UNICEF $29 million in the red and UNHAS was also deficit spending. Comment -------  10.  (C)  Comment:  At best, the UN\'s coordination on the ground has earned only middling marks three weeks into relief operations.  In many sectors, the UN has struggled to identify and establish effective working relationships with GOP contacts.  The UN\'s lackluster performance to date stems primarily from a deficit of emergency coordination expertise and leadership. Resident UN Representative Jan Vanderhoosle had only been in office a month before the October 8 earthquake, arriving in Pakistan after spending seven years at UNHQ in New York.  He has no/no emergency coordination experience.  Post believes that the U.S. must strongly push the UN to send an experienced expert in disaster coordination to lead the UN effort here.  One name mentioned with approval by the UK\'s Department for Internatioanl Development (and which post would endorse) is Kevin Kennedy. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/31/2005 4:54", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ISLAMABAD 016220  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT #9   ------- Summary -------  1.  The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (USAID/DART) reports that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) is increasingly open to non-tent shelter alternatives.  In Muzaffarabad, the U.N. Children,s Fund (UNICEF) estimates that it has met 80 to 90 percent of SPHERE standards for water.  The GOP has begun registering children in camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs).  The USAID/DART is assisting with the relief to development transition.  The USAID/DART continues to facilitate the arrival of plastic sheeting, and it recently transferred U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) tents to implementing partners, who will distribute them for use as medical clinics and classrooms.  At present, 22 USAID/DART representatives are in Pakistan.  End Summary.  ------- Shelter -------  2.  On October 25, the USAID/DART Shelter and Settlements Advisor (SSA) accompanied the USAID Mission Director to meetings with the GOP Relief and Reconstruction Task Forces and discussed a range of shelter sector issues and options other than tents, including transitional shelter and quote one warm dry room end quote options.  The USAID/DART SSA provided the GOP Relief Task Force Coordinator with a copy of the SPHERE project guidelines for humanitarian activities. This document offers insights on the humanitarian community,s activities, protocols, and outputs.  3.  In discussions between the USAID/DART SSA and the GOP Relief Task Force Coordinator (RTFC), it became clear that the GOP is increasingly open to non-tent shelter options. The RTFC provided a specific example of the Pakistani military deploying three battalions of engineers to the earthquake-affected areas to distribute corrugated metal sheeting and provide guidance on the construction of quote one warm dry room end quote. 4.  The USAID/DART SSA attended an October 27 shelter cluster group meeting in which the International Organization for Migration (IOM) discussed its new shelter strategy paper. IOM plans to organize a group with two or three non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to meet with GOP representatives and discuss pressing shelter issues, including a shift from emphasis on providing tents to implementing other solutions such as shelters improvised from available materials, repair kits for homes, warm rooms, and host family grants.  -------------------- Water and Sanitation --------------------  5.  According to the USAID/DART Water and Sanitation Officer (WSO), UNICEF reported on October 27 that 90 percent of the IDP camps in Muzaffarabad have water tanks in place.  UNICEF is directly managing three water tanker trucks dedicated to delivering water to the Muzaffarabad camps.  UNICEF stated that their control over water delivery to camps will improve the reliability of this service.  UNICEF estimates that it has met 80 to 90 percent of SPHERE standards for water in camps in Muzaffarabad.  UNICEF aims to meet 100 percent of SPHERE standards in the coming days.  6.  The USAID/DART WSO reported that UNICEF intends to meet SPHERE latrine standards in all IDP camps in Muzaffarabad. UNICEF has completed 30 percent of the work necessary toward meeting SPHERE standards, and UNICEF plans to make major progress toward meeting this goal in the next two to three weeks.  The limiting factor in the construction of latrines is the availability of latrine slabs.  UNICEF is investigating and testing different construction techniques in order to increase slab construction.  --------- Logistics ---------  7.  On October 26, a U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative attended a U.N. logistics cluster group meeting.  The U.N. Joint Logistics Center (JLC) plans to have a presence at every logistics base.  Due to looting of CARE cargo in the absence of a CARE representative at the time of the cargo arrival, JLC now requires confirmation of cargo pickup before allowing helicopters with cargo to fly.  8.  At the U.N. logistics cluster group meeting, JLC reported having a productive meeting with GOP officials on October 25.  In this meeting, the GOP reviewed the JLC operational plan, and both parties declared a need for a joint logistical hub and operational center.  The chair of the October 25 meeting stressed the importance of cooperation among humanitarian groups, the Pakistani military, and the U.S. military.  ------------------------- Camps and Camp Management -------------------------  9.  A U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative who attended an October 27 camp management cluster group meeting reported that the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is maintaining its focus on preventing population displacement. UNHCR is transporting tents and supplies to people near their destroyed homes, setting up camps at lower elevations that can be supplied by road during the winter, and identifying and helping to organize and supply the many informal camps.  10.  The U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative stated that UNHCR will not manage camps far from the earthquake-affected areas, but it has offered technical assistance to camps it will not manage.  At the request of the GOP, UNHCR will tour Fateh Jang and Chatwal, two sites in the Punjab District far from the area damaged by the earthquake.  The GOP has proposed this area be used as a site for camps for up to 300,000 people.  11.  Participants at the camp management cluster group noted that UNHCR and its partners, many of them local NGOs, are operating nine camps in earthquake-affected areas.  These camps have a total estimated capacity of 5,200 tents, each large enough for a family of 6 or 7.  As of October 27, 1,308 tents were in the camps, and the total population was 7,170 people.  NGOs are serving hot meals in some camps, but UNHCR expects this service will not last long.  12.  According to the U.S. Embassy/Pakistan representative, meeting participants noted that the GOP Interior Ministry\'s National Database and Registration Administration (NADRA) is registering earthquake victims who are in hospitals.  UNHCR plans to register IDPs in the camps it is administering and is considering registering IDPs in other camps as well.  ---------- Protection ----------  13.  According to reports from the USAID/DART FO, the GOP Office of Social Welfare (OSW) plans to register all children ) both accompanied and unaccompanied (orphan) ) in IDP camps.  However, the OSW lacks training on identifying unaccompanied children and needs assistance to deal with the long-term needs of such children.  14.  On October 27, the USAID/DART FO reported that the GOP has started registering children in the IDP camps in Muzaffarabad.  In one of the new IDP camps, the GOP registered 930 children and did not find any unaccompanied children.  UNICEF reports that it has child protection officers protecting unaccompanied or separated children in the hospitals.  The USAID/DART FO reported that the GOP Ministry of Social Services (MSS) is in need of assistance, as the MSS building and office equipment were destroyed, and 355 staff members are homeless. The MSS also urgently requires technical assistance to deal with the short- and long-term needs of unaccompanied children.  --------- Education ---------  15.  The USAID/DART FO reported that the GOP is encouraging the opening of schools, and UNICEF needs assistance setting up schools in newly registered IDP camps.  Both UNICEF and the GOP Ministry of Education welcome U.S. military assistance to clear debris from 20 priority school sites within affected areas.  Debris-clearing will begin on October 29.  ------------ Coordination ------------  16.  The U.S. military Liaison Officer (LNO) to the USAID/DART attended a U.N. general coordination meeting on October 27.  The LO reported that the GOP plans to move tent camps below the snow line.  Meeting participants stated that three storage facilities will be located at Abbottabad, and each will be capable of storing 400 tons of humanitarian supplies for NGO use.  17.  The USAID/DART Water and Sanitation Officer (WSO) reported that the U.N. Humanitarian Information Center (HIC) will place all its information on a common server at the U.N. compound.  Relief groups will be able to access this server using a wireless network that serves the compound.  18.  The USAID/DART is working with USAID/Pakistan to ensure a smooth transition from humanitarian relief programs, implemented in response to the earthquake, to USAID/Pakistan,s longer term development programs.  ----------------------------- Pakistani Military Activities -----------------------------  19.  According to local media reports, the Pakistani military set up three main reporting and information centers for the security and effective execution of relief, rescue, and rehabilitation operations in the earthquake-hit areas of the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP).  The Pakistani military set up these centers at Havelian, Mansehra, and Gari Habibullah, and military and civil police are jointly manning the centers.  The Pakistani military established 52 free public call offices to facilitate coordination of relief activities. -------------------------------- Relief to Development Transition --------------------------------  20.  The USAID Mission Director, USAID/DART Team Leader, and USAID/DART SSA attended an October 28 meeting of the GOP Federal Relief Cell.  In the meeting, the RTFC gave a detailed, multi-sectoral presentation on current GOP strategy for relief activities through March 2006.  Representatives of international organizations requested that the GOP create a joint strategic planning committee to provide further guidance on sectoral activities.  Following the meeting, the RTFC met with USAID/DART representatives and others and requested additional USG technical advice.  The initial meeting of the strategic planning committee will occur on October 30.  21.  The USAID/DART reported that in the October 28 meeting, representatives of international organizations discussed the pledges made at the recent Geneva conference on the South Asia Earthquake, and noted that the bulk of pledges was for reconstruction activities.  These representatives requested that the GOP emphasize the continued importance of funding relief activities in the near future.  --------------------- USAID/DART Activities ---------------------  22.  On October 27, the USAID/DART facilitated the arrival of 1,770 rolls of plastic sheeting, enough to provide shelter alternatives for 8,850 families.  The plastic sheeting was provided to Save the Children/US for distribution.  23.  The USAID/DART continues to facilitate the movement of excess U.S. military relief commodities.  On October 27, the USAID/DART transferred 29 tents to be used as clinics or hospital support facilities to WHO.  Also on October 27, the USAID/DART facilitated the movement of six tents to UNICEF to be used as classrooms.  24.  On October 28, the USAID/DART transferred 28 DOD tents to UNICEF that will be transported to Muzaffarabad for use as schools; 10 to Mansehra for use as schools; and 3 to Mansehra to be used for child protection purposes.  The USAID/DART also transferred tents to WHO.  WHO transferred 29 tents to Muzaffarabad and 8 tents to Mansehra, all of which WHO will use for medical facilities.  25.  The USAID/DART Economic and Livelihoods Officer (ELO) has been coordinating the initiation of the cash-for-work (CFW) program among international NGOs, local NGOs, and USAID/Pakistan.  USAID/DART coordination will lay the groundwork for a smooth transition between USAID/DART emergency relief activities to USAID/Pakistan rehabilitation and reconstruction activities.  The USAID/DART plans to implement the CFW program in various earthquake-affected areas and will likely center the program on clearing rubble for the reconstruction or improvement of schools, shelter, and possibly hospitals.  The CFW program will inject cash into local economies and facilitate activities that will both prepare for reconstruction and provide locals with a sense of a return to normalcy.  26.  According to the USAID/DART ELO, the USAID/DART has held discussions with the U.S. military Seabees to facilitate the use of their heavy equipment in rubble clearance.  The USAID/DART reported that Seabees seem to be highly interested in joint activities.  Details about implementation are forthcoming.  27.  The USAID/DART ELO met with InterNews on October 28 to discuss information dissemination to earthquake-affected populations.  The USAID/DART ELO noted that earthquake-affected populations need humanitarian assistance as well as access to information, particularly regarding health, water and sanitation, winterized shelter and access to food and NFI.  The USAID/DART will continue to work to facilitate information sharing from relief agencies to affected populations.  ----------------- USAID/DART Status -----------------  28.  Currently, 22 USAID/DART representatives are in Pakistan, working to facilitate USG humanitarian assistance in response to the recent earthquake.  At present, a three-person USAID/DART team, comprising a communications officer, a field officer, and a protection officer, are based in Muzaffarabad.  The team is conducting follow-up assessments and coordinating relief activities with the U.N.  29.  On October 27, a USAID/DART field officer (FO) was deployed to Mansehra to set up a field office for the USAID/DART.  The USAID/DART FO is conducting assessments and coordinating humanitarian assistance.  The USAID/DART will be deploying additional team members to Mansehra in the coming days, including a water and sanitation officer who will travel to Mansehra on October 29. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/4/2005 2:19", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 016473  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/01/2015 TAGS: AEMR, ASEC, EAID, MASS, PGOV, PREL, PK, PAS, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: CHANGING PERCEPTIONS OF AMERICA   Classified By: DCM Patricia Butenis, derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (C) The isolation of many areas impacted by the October 8 earthquake has long afforded Islamist politicians and conservative religious clerics an uncritical audience for their at times extremist worldviews, in which America (or the West) as enemy of Islam featured prominently.  Anecdotal evidence suggests that prominent American and other Western assistance to earthquake victims is chipping away at the heretofore unquestioned acceptance of this worldview and may be isolating its proponents on the ground.  According to civil society contacts, the presence of international relief workers is uniformly welcomed in these areas.  Anti-American or anti-Western sentiment has largely been abandoned in the face of overwhelming need.  2. (SBU) Contacts report that a handful of extremist clergy have attempted to thwart this pervasive change in attitude towards outsiders.  In some villages, religious leaders have spoken against accepting aid from any source other than Islamic donors and have pressed GOP, military, and private Pakistani NGOs to refuse supplies donated by the West.  Their entreaties have been ignored.  Even the Islamist party Jamaat-e-Islami and the Jamaat-ud-Dawa (the parent organization of designated foreign terrorist organziation Lashkar-e-Tayyaba) have gratefully accepted supplies for their relief camps from whatever the source.  A few stories of religious leaders going even further have emerged.  In one case, a local cleric railed against accepting American relief goods that had recently arrived in the village by U.S. military helicopter.  He then attempted to place himself between villagers and the much needed supplies.  NGO sources reported that his own followers removed him, thrashed him, and then began to distribute the supplies to appreciative villagers.  3. (C) During recent iftar dinners with civil society and NGO representatives, poloff inquired whether this change in attitude would endure after relief and reconstruction efforts cease.  The view on NWFP districts was mixed.  Some felt the assistance provided would be remembered, particularly if the USG actively engages in reconstruction of important community institutions like schools or health centers.  Others argued that cultural/religious traditions in this part of the NWFP mandated subservience to religious leaders.  Ignoring such leaders in a crisis was possible, but over the long term, clerics would reestablish their firm grip on public opinion. In Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK), all interlocuters believed that the changes were irreversible.  They attributed the clerics\' hold on AJK to the area\'s isolation from the rest of Pakistan; the region\'s military sensitivity led the GOP to limit travel to AJK by foreigners and Pakistanis alike.  Due to the earthquake, the military had opened the floodgates to facilitate relief and reconstruction.  Shutting them again would be extremely difficult, if not impossible.  4. (C) Comment:  The anecdotal evidence available suggests that public perception of the USG in the earthquake-impacted areas is changing for the better.  The endurance of this shift in public opinion will largely be determined by the durability of American engagement through the reconstruction phase and the success of such reconstruction in more firmly tying these previously isolated regions to Pakistan. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/4/2005 2:24", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 ISLAMABAD 016474  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR LAUREN LANDIS ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT 12: FIELD ASSESSMENT OF BATAGRAM   ------- Summary -------  1.  From October 30 to 31, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (USAID/DART) Economic and Livelihoods Advisor (ELO), Program Officer (PO), Water and Sanitation Officer (WSO), Shelter and Settlements Advisor (SSA), Earthquake Expert (EE), Military Liaison Officer (MLO), Field Officer (FO), and U.S. Army Engineer conducted a multi-sectoral assessment in Batagram District to better understand conditions and the response of the donor community.  This cable summarizes the results of their assessment and analysis, and it provides recommendations for action.  ----------------- Batagram District -----------------  2.  In Batagram District, the USAID/DART performed building assessments in order to devise an effective earthquake mitigation strategy.  The USAID/DART EE and SSA observed that approximately 65 percent of the buildings are stone masonry, 15 percent are reinforced concrete frame, 15 percent are brick masonry, and 5 percent are other types, including adobe.  Nearly one hundred percent of the building stock is non-engineered, was built with poor quality materials, and demonstrates poor workmanship.  Most buildings are two to three stories, but some are four stories.  3.  According to the USAID/DART EE and SSA, buildings in Batagram District manifest a number of major deficiencies. In general, buildings lack integrity between structural elements; the wall-to-wall, wall-to-roof, and column-to-beam connections are not structurally sound.  Reinforcement detailing such as splicing, 90-degree bends in stirrups, large spacing of stirrups, and inadequate reinforcement bars in columns and beams, is a major problem.  Measures for improving earthquake resistance are basic and simple, and local masons, technicians, and engineers can learn such methods.  4.  The USAID/DART EE and SSA reported that some of the families affected in the Allai Valley have traveled to other settlements where they are temporarily living with relatives in a hosting arrangement.  Others have obtained shelter materials (primarily tents) and returned to upland villages, a small number have moved to informal camps, and some affected people have moved into a newly-established government of Pakistan (GOP) camp.  An unknown portion of those who remain will encounter difficulties obtaining adequate food during the winter.  It is uncertain whether camp size will increase as winter sets in.  In general, people prefer to stay near their homes, especially when their livestock and belongings remain in their home area.  5.  The USAID/DART EE, SSA, and WSO paid a visit to the Batagram office of the Sarhad Rural Support Program (SRSP). Following the earthquake, SRSP began implementing relief programming.  SRSP has established 42 tented villages in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), including seven tented villages in Batagram District.  SRSP has not yet erected a tented village in Allai Valley.  Each of SRSP\'s tented villages serves an average of 30 families.  To date, SRSP has served 9,000 people NWFP.  SRSP works with World Vision (WV), the U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF), and Mercy Corps. SRSP is distributing family kits, which include tents, blankets, a tarpaulin, utensils, and other supplies, provided by UNICEF.  SRSP/Batagram employs one engineer and six humanitarian aid workers.  ------ Jessul ------  6.  After the office visit, the SRSP staff joined the USAID/DART EE, SSA, and WSO on a visit to the tent village in Jessul, which SRSP has developed for 25 families.  The USAID/DART EE and SSA observed damaged houses and other building structures and met with people affected by the earthquake.  Affected people in Jessul stated that their first priority is finding a job and their second is repairing and rebuilding their houses.  Currently, the tents in Jessul are pitched in the upland agricultural land. People are using the same traditional water sources that they were using prior to the earthquake, and they are using drainage ditches next to fields for sanitation.  These practices, coupled with the small number of households occupying tents in the village, minimize the need for water and sanitation interventions.  Beginning in March, the affected population will need the land on which the tents are pitched for sowing crops.  Therefore, it is imperative to facilitate seismic-resistant construction training immediately to ensure that imminent repair and rebuilding activities do not reflect past building practices.  This could be achieved through a cash-for-training (CFT) program that would rapidly expand knowledge of seismic-resistance construction among local masons, carpenters, and building professionals.  7.  Cognizant of the need to commence with agricultural activities at the outset of spring, people are beginning to repair and rebuild their houses, to the extent possible, in hopes of beginning full reconstruction in the spring.  Those interviewed remarked that they were waiting for aftershocks to subside before beginning to rebuild their homes.  They expressed the hope that the GOP would help them reconstruct through loans, compensation, or other mechanisms.  They plan to begin repair activities in approximately two weeks.  ----- Mehra -----  8.  The USAID/DART MLO and the U.S. Army Engineer traveled with representatives from the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) to the Mehra site, approximately 40 kilometers (km) northwest of Batagram, on the banks of the Indus River and just off the Karakorum highway.  At this site, the GOP military proposes to build a tented camp to house 40,000 to 50,000 people.  The USAID/DART team observed very little earthquake-related damage along the Karakorum highway, with the exception of one small village, about half of which had slid down a slope.  Survivors from this village are living in tents in their fields along the river.  Road damage to Karakorum highway is minimal.  9.  At Mehra, the team spoke with the Pakistani colonel responsible for establishing the tented camp.  He stated that the GOP intends for people living at higher elevations to move to the camp, which is well below the snow line, before winter begins.  Although the slope of the tent site is not too steep, and the camp has access to water, the site is not large enough to meet Sphere Project Guidelines (SPG) for the projected population.  Currently, 1,000 people are at the site and are receiving support from local non- governmental organizations (NGOs).  The OCHA representative stated that up to 70 percent of the total local population of 140,000 to 190,000 people may move down from the mountains.  Representatives of local NGOs, however, believe that many of these people will likely stay with relatives or in other villages.  10.  GOP military representatives at Mehra told the USAID/DART that the GOP military has a few hundred tents but needs 6,000 to 7,000 tents for this tent city.  The GOP military plans to divide the camp into six to eight sectors, to correspond with existing villages, and proposes to build a helipad to facilitate movement of supplies to the camp. The OCHA representative stated that OCHA plans to remain closely involved in the planning process, providing the GOP military with advice and coordination with NGO partners as needed.  GOP military representatives at Mehra are aware of their knowledge gaps, and appear willing to work with OCHA on camp establishment and management.  ------------------------ Technical Considerations ------------------------  11.  The site for the proposed 40,000-person GOP camp near the Allai Valley is significantly smaller than SPG would suggest.  A 40,000-person camp requires 1.8 million square meters of space, whereas the current useable camp area may be less than 100,000 square meters, according to a representative of OCHA.  Many people leaving the valley are staying with family and friends, or they are obtaining shelter materials and then returning to upland villages. Others would remain in a lowland shelter of some kind only until aftershocks subside. [Comment. At this time, aftershocks continue.  End comment.]  Most people interviewed suggested that social and cultural concerns would undermine occupancy in a camp setting, indicating that people will probably not remain in the GOP camp through the winter.  12.  Many people suggested that as an alternative to tents, which people are willing to accept in lieu of alternative shelter options, they could utilize corrugated galvanized iron (CGI) sheets and a small package of tools and household items in order to create a habitable space from salvaged building materials, and cover it with a solid, weatherproof roof.  Of note, all people interviewed preferred CGI sheets over tents, stating that they could re-use the CGI sheets as part of a more permanent shelter solution in the spring. This finding suggests the need for the design of transitional shelter packages featuring CGI sheets, which can bridge the gap between relief and reconstruction activities.  These packages could be supplemented with straightforward information on seismic-resistant construction measures that could be featured in the CFT program discussed above.  Such an effort would promote the broader objective of quote Building Back Better, Safer, and Faster end quote.  ----------------------------------- Save the Children Food Distribution -----------------------------------  13.  The USAID/DART FO and ELO visited a Save the Children (SC) distribution activity.  The distribution included sleeping bags, tents, and a one-week supply of food rations for one family.  Using effective local community organizers, SC distributed these baskets at a location approximately 45 minutes outside the town boundary.  The USAID/DART witnessed a well-organized distribution at which needy families, who were previously identified and provided with a coupon by local leaders, came to redeem the coupon for the relief package.  The USAID/DART heard reports that the recipients appreciated this orderly system, and the system allowed SC to systematically and efficiently cover their target area.  14.  This system of distribution gives SC strong relations with their beneficiaries and a solid network of capable leaders.  It therefore provides them with a solid platform on which they can carry out the rest of the USAID/OFDA grant in shelter, cash-for-work (CFW), education, and psychological and social work with youth.  SC proposes to carry out these activities in Batagram and in Bana village in the Allai valley.  Though SC is still in the beginning stages of implementation of this grant, the USAID/DART was impressed with the plans and preparations for the execution of grant activities.  ------------------------------------------- USAID/DART Meeting With OCHA Representative -------------------------------------------  15.  Upon the arrival of the USAID/DART, Edward Pearn of the OCHA Field Camp briefed the team.  On October 30, the U.N. had begun holding general donor coordination meetings, and recently the U.N. began holding health cluster meetings with the NGOs and other humanitarian relief agencies operating in Batagram District.  The USAID/DART attended the general donor coordination meeting and listened to progress reports from organizations working in various sectors, including organizations involved in the camp initiated by the GOP military at Mehra.  16.  [Comment:  Regarding U.N. coordination efforts, the USAID/DART noted that nearly one month after the earthquake, the U.N. is just beginning to coordinate relief efforts in this area.  At present, only three U.N. representatives work in this camp.  In addition, local and international NGOs have stated that establishing camps as proposed by the GOP may not be the best approach to address the shelter crisis for those in the Allai valley who reportedly prefer to stay in their home areas.  Many international agencies recognize that the establishment of centralized camps should be used as a back-up to other shelter options.  In summary, to date, the U.N. has not effectively carried out its responsibility of coordinating the relief efforts, and the U.N. may be supporting a potentially ineffective shelter solution.  End comment.]  ------------------------------- Conclusions and Recommendations -------------------------------  17.  Based on its assessment, the USAID/DART concluded the following:  -- The U.N. is slow in starting its task of coordinating relief activities in Batagram District.  -- SC appears to be doing well distributing commodities provided by the U.S. military.  SC appears to be on track for effective implementation of its USAID/OFDA grant.  -- NGOs question the priority of establishing temporary camps.  -- The camp proposed at Mehra could not house as large a population as proposed and comply with SPG.  The tent village at Jessul that was spontaneously established does not currently comply with SPG, although there are no major water and sanitation problems now.  18.  Based on its conclusions, the USAID/DART recommends the following:  -- CFW and CFT programs should be implemented in villages similar to Jessul.  Villages like Jessul are ideal settings for these types of programs.  -- Under the umbrella management of local organizations such as Rural Support Program Network (RSPN), SRSP would be an effective implementing partner for CFW or CFT programs and shelter activities.  -- Relief programs should address the need to enhance the knowledge and capacity of those engaged in construction of earthquake-resistant structures.  This type of program should begin immediately, as people are attempting to repair and rebuild houses.  -- As a complement to CFT programs to build capacity to engage in seismic-resistant construction practices, USAID- funded programs should raise earthquake awareness among the general population through public information campaigns.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/4/2005 15:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 016480  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT PASS TO USAID  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2015 TAGS: EAID, MARR, MASS, PNAT, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE RESPONSE: WHERE WE ARE AND WHERE WE\'RE GOING  1.  (U) Summary.  As we approach the one-month anniversary of the earthquake, post offers this overview of relief efforts to date and an assessment of key priorities for the future. The earthquake itself caused much more damage and loss of life than initially estimated, but the Pakistani and international response has generally been strong -- with the United States leading in most categories of assistance.  The humanitarian relief phase of the assistance effort began with clearing operations and the delivery of search and rescue teams, medical aid, food and shelter.  This phase is continuing with a heavy focus on preparation for harsh winter conditions and it will last at least until winter begins to subside at the end of March.  (We expect the November 19 donors conference will set the agenda for the reconstruction phase of the donor response.)  In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, the U.S. and international donors have focused on airlifting urgently needed supplies and equipment into the theater and onward by helicopter into the affected areas.  The need for air shipments into Pakistan will continue as we prepare for the onset of winter, but the need will diminish over time as NGOs and international organizations find more sustainable sources locally and in the region. The need for helicopter lift into quake-hit regions will continue at least through the winter.  End Summary.  Earthquake Response to Date ---------------------------  2.  (U) As more reliable numbers begin to emerge, the full impact of the 7.6 magnitude earthquake and the level of international response are becoming clear.  The GOP is now reporting 73,000 dead and 69,000 injured.  Press reports suggest that in some areas men are virtually the only survivors, as women and children were predominantly in homes or schools that collapsed. An estimated 2.8 million Pakistanis require shelter assistance.  The humanitarian response to the earthquake is a work in progress, but has for the most part been timely and effective.  The Pakistani military response has been especially impressive, and the GOP response structures have begun to coalesce.  Personnel on the ground are learning fast.  3.  (U) The United States has been quick to respond and has played a very significant and visible role in earthquake recovery.  Six Navy ships have delivered 115 pieces of heavy equipment and 158 tons of humanitarian relief supplies from US, Egyptian, and Gulf State donations.  The USAF has run well over a hundred airlifts into Pakistan.  The US Army, Navy, and NAS have flown over 1,500 helicopter sorties into the north delivering more than 4.3 million pounds of goods. Thirty one U.S., and US funded, helicopters are flying relief missions.   Of the roughly 8,900 tons of relief supplies received by Pakistan by November 3, the U.S. accounts for some 4,100 tons (46 percent), dwarfing any other single donor.  US helicopters have delivered over 2,100 tons of relief supplies; the closest runner up among donors is the UK, with 182 tons (8 percent of the US total).  Even Pakistan (at 496 tons) has delivered less than a quarter of the U.S. total.  4. (U) USAID has committed $41.8 million, with the focus on shelter, water and sanitation and other relief supplies. Military humanitarian assistance is at least $60 million thus far.  DoD has 933 deployed personnel to provide relief and reconstruction assistance and has established a Mobile Army Surgical Hospital (MASH) in Muzaffarabad.  To date, almost 600 patients have been served, including 46 surgeries.  By 7 November a U.S. Marine field hospital will be open in Mansehra.  The Embassy has established and staffed Forward Operating Bases in Muzaffarabad and Mansehra to help coordinate USG aid and assist Pakistani Authorities.  Get Them Through The Winter ---------------------------  5.  (U) The strategic objective of the current relief phase is to get the population of the affected area through the winter, until the end of March.  The key needs include shelter, blankets, food and medical supplies.  6.  (U) Shelter: We estimate that 400,000 households will require some form of shelter assistance and at least 10,000 large tents will be needed to house clinics, schoolrooms, offices and the like.  The GOP maintains that a combination of donor contributions, existing supplies and intensive domestic production will generate 500,000 tents by the end of November.  Assuming the GOP is correct and that the domestically manufactured tents are adequate, the unmet need will be for the larger tents, plus plastic sheeting to upgrade family tents as necessary.  However, we also expect that at least 60 percent of families will choose to stay at or near their existing (destroyed) homes, so the tents will need to be augmented by selected building materials to enable families to self-engineer a \"warm dry room\" during the winter.  These materials include plastic sheeting, corrugated metal roofs and stoves, fuel and household goods.  7.  (U) Blankets: The GOP hopes to provide two blankets per person for an affected population numbering an estimated 3.3 million (i.e., 6.6 million blankets).  Some 3.8 million blankets have been provided to date, leaving a gap of 2.8 million.  8.  (U) Food:  While there is not an immediate acute need for food, orders must be placed soon in order to ensure adequate supplies for the winter, particularly if a large population of refugees moves into the camps being established by the GOP.  The World Food Program estimates the food need at 720,000 metric tons, enough to feed 2.8 million people for 6 months.  As a net food importer, Pakistan will not be able to meet this incremental food need via domestic production; much of it will have to be shipped in.  9.  (U) Other Supplies: Roughly 65 percent of the health infrastructure in the affected area has been destroyed.  Over the longer term, this infrastructure will have to be reconstructed, but there is an immediate need to replenish stocks of antibiotics and other drugs.  We will be ordering up to ten health kits (that can serve up to 10,000 people each for three months).  Other needed supplies include family hygiene kits, tool kits and cooking kits.  An Evolving Relief Effort -------------------------  10.  (U) The initial emergency phase of this humanitarian relief effort has required rapid delivery of supplies and, in many cases, direct execution of relief operations by U.S. and Pakistani military elements.  This emergency phase will last for at least another two weeks as we prepare for the onset of winter.  During this period, U.S. military airlift capacity will be urgently required for delivery to Pakistan of shelter materials, blankets, food and other supplies identified in paras 5-9. Over time, however, there will be a natural transition toward more cost effective and efficient sea-lift transport and delivery mechanisms as partner NGOs develop local sources for these goods.  Despite daily improvement in some road networks, medium helicopter lift will remain essential through the winter to deliver supplies from depots in Islamabad and elsewhere to remote areas in the north isolated by massive land-slides.  Comment -------  11.  (C) The quantity and timeliness of U.S. assistance is beginning to pay measurable dividends in terms of local perceptions of the United States in general and the U.S. military in particular.  English and Urdu press regularly carry pictures of U.S. helicopters and relief supplies as well as articles that credit the U.S. for its response.  In our judgment, U.S. actions have already had a measurable impact on perceptions among Pakistani Kashmiris and within the Pakistani military (most of whom have never had sustained contact with the U.S. military).  In view of what we have already invested, and the positive impact it has had, we will need to be careful as we approach the transition toward a more sustainable USG relief effort. It is essential that Pakistanis not see this transition as a lessening of U.S. commitment and we should seek to preserve the positive visibility our military has received.  12.  (C) U.S. military assets -- including helicopter lift and medical units -- will continue to be needed in some amount through the winter for essential humanitarian reasons. We should also begin to consider whether there are aspects of the reconstruction phase the U.S. military could usefully participate in. The positive and benign aspect of the US military on display in Pakistan and throughout the region may offer a strategic opportunity for continued humanitarian activity as a major premise of military engagement over the next two years. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/7/2005 13:02", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 016553  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL -- PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, MASS, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PTER, ECON, PREF, ASEC, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  A VISIT TO BATTGRAM   1.  (C)  Forward Operating Base Mansehra Officer-in-Charge and Econoffs visited Battgram district on November 5. Settlement patterns have complicated relief as damage is spread across mountain villages with low population densities.  Interlocutors were concerned for villages in the Allai tehsil, many of which have been established at high elevations and would become isolated by winter snow beginning in 15 to 20 days.  The Pakistan military is encouraging the relocation of these villages to a relief camp established at Meira on November 2.  Military officials aim to resettle 40,000 to 50,000 people. Around 2500 have arrived with approximately 50 families (average size of 8-10 people) coming to the camp daily.  Uncertainty persists as to the number who will eventually resettle in Meira, as many may choose to remain in their mountain villages.  Police and military officials reported that some landlords were instructing tenant farmers not to leave their allotted land on threat of eviction.  Approximately 30% of the mountain population is estimated to be in this situation.  2.  (C)  The Pakistan military established the Meira camp adjacent to an earlier facility constructed by the al-Rashid Trust (a Department of Treasury designated person of interest for sanctions purposes), a frequently observed pattern in both Mansehra and Battgram districts.  According to camp supervisor LTC Farz, the military has informed al-Rashid that it will be taking over the al-Rashid facility on November 6. Al-Rashid has reportedly accepted the decision.  3.  (SBU)  Political parties and their affiliated relief organizations were much in evidence.  Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) through both its al-Khidmat charitable trust and its student-wing Islami Jamaat Talaba (IJT) is the most visible. Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam Fazlur Rehman\'s (JUI-F\'s) al-Khair trust has a much smaller presence despite its reported domination of the Battgram political scene.  Local officials claimed that neither the Pakistan People\'s Party (PPP) nor the Awami National Party (ANP) were present in relief efforts. Surprisingly, the Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM), which has no political base in Battgram, had established one fairly large relief camp in the district.  4.  (C)  Unlike in neighboring Mansehra District, Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JUD - the parent organization of the designated foreign terrorist organization Lashkar-e-Tayyaba) was not visibly present in Battgram.  The Battgram city police commander told OIC that he had strict orders to prevent JUD or any banned organization from taking part in relief efforts.  His forces have already prevented JUD from establishing an adjunct relief camp to their tent village across the district border in Mansehra.  5.  (SBU)  The Battgram district administration was criticized for failure to engage in relief operations.  The local police chief claimed the mayor, a wealthy landowner elected with JUI-F and PML support had \"fled\" the district to Islamabad after accusations of selling donated relief goods. The military reported better coordination at the thesil and union council level.  Individual relief coordination commissions for each thesil and union council had been formed consisting of military officials, the elected union and thesil nazims, and their defeated opponents from the 2007 election.  The military reported excellent cooperation in determining relief priorities and missions through this system, which it intended to continue through reconstruction.   6.  (C)  Comment:  The Balakot relief experience is clearly a mixed bag.  Uncertainty over villagers\' intentions during the upcoming winter have made comprehensive planning virtually impossible.  The district government\'s inability to engage on relief operations has forced the military to develop a work around involving other levels of local government.  While cumbersome in its operation, the new system does seem to involve local leaders in planning and could prove valuable in reconstruction.  JUD\'s exclusion from Battgram is welcome, although the proliferation of relief camps to match the dispersed nature of the population may well allow them to operate without detection.  7.  (U)  Embassy Islamabad is transmitting this cable on behalf of FOB Mansehra.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2005 8:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 016577  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL -- PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2015 TAGS: EAID, MASS, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PTER, ECON, PREF, ASEC, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  A VISIT TO BATTGRAM   Classified By: DCM Patricia A. Butenis, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Forward Operating Base Mansehra Officer-in-Charge and Econoffs visited Battgram district on November 5. Settlement patterns have complicated relief as damage is spread across mountain villages with low population densities.  Interlocutors were concerned for villages in the Allai tehsil, many of which have been established at high elevations and would become isolated by winter snow beginning in 15 to 20 days.  The Pakistan military is encouraging the relocation of these villages to a relief camp established at Meira on November 2.  Military officials aim to resettle 40,000 to 50,000 people. Around 2500 have arrived with approximately 50 families (average size of 8-10 people) coming to the camp daily.  Uncertainty persists as to the number who will eventually resettle in Meira, as many may choose to remain in their mountain villages.  Police and military officials reported that some landlords were instructing tenant farmers not to leave their allotted land on threat of eviction.  Approximately 30% of the mountain population is estimated to be in this situation.  2.  (C)  The Pakistan military established the Meira camp adjacent to an earlier facility constructed by the al-Rashid Trust (a Department of Treasury designated person of interest for sanctions purposes), a frequently observed pattern in both Mansehra and Battgram districts.  According to camp supervisor LTC Farz, the military has informed al-Rashid that it will be taking over the al-Rashid facility on November 6. Al-Rashid has reportedly accepted the decision.  3.  (SBU)  Political parties and their affiliated relief organizations were much in evidence.  Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) through both its al-Khidmat charitable trust and its student-wing Islami Jamaat Talaba (IJT) is the most visible. Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam Fazlur Rehman\'s (JUI-F\'s) al-Khair trust has a much smaller presence despite its reported domination of the Battgram political scene.  Local officials claimed that neither the Pakistan People\'s Party (PPP) nor the Awami National Party (ANP) were present in relief efforts. Surprisingly, the Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM), which has no political base in Battgram, had established one fairly large relief camp in the district.  4.  (C)  Unlike in neighboring Mansehra District, Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JUD - the parent organization of the designated foreign terrorist organization Lashkar-e-Tayyaba) was not visibly present in Battgram.  The Battgram city police commander told OIC that he had strict orders to prevent JUD or any banned organization from taking part in relief efforts.  His forces have already prevented JUD from establishing an adjunct relief camp to their tent village across the district border in Mansehra.  5.  (SBU)  The Battgram district administration was criticized for failure to engage in relief operations.  The local police chief claimed the mayor, a wealthy landowner elected with JUI-F and PML support had \"fled\" the district to Islamabad after accusations of selling donated relief goods. The military reported better coordination at the thesil and union council level.  Individual relief coordination commissions for each thesil and union council had been formed consisting of military officials, the elected union and thesil nazims, and their defeated opponents from the 2007 election.  The military reported excellent cooperation in determining relief priorities and missions through this system, which it intended to continue through reconstruction.   6.  (C)  Comment:  The Balakot relief experience is clearly a mixed bag.  Uncertainty over villagers\' intentions during the upcoming winter have made comprehensive planning virtually impossible.  The district government\'s inability to engage on relief operations has forced the military to develop a work around involving other levels of local government.  While cumbersome in its operation, the e yse does eem to involve local leaders in planning and could prove valuable in reconstruction.  JUD\'s exclusion from Battgram is welcome, although the proliferation of relief camps to match the dispersed nature of the population may well allow them to operate without detection.  7.  (U)  Embassy Islamabad is transmitting this cable on behalf of FOB Mansehra.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2005 6:05", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 ISLAMABAD 016641  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  PROTECTION SECTOR REPORT   ------- Summary -------  1.  Due to the enormity and complexity of this emergency and the major focus on providing shelter to villages in the mountains, it has been extremely difficult to monitor relief distributions in order to ensure that vulnerable populations, including those without effective male protection, are identified and receive adequate assistance. In the urban areas, especially in Muzaffarabad city, one month after the earthquake there has not been a registration of vulnerable populations and a prioritization of needs. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the lead in camp management under the cluster system, does not have enough presence on the ground in order to manage the camps. However, the numbers of unaccompanied children are extremely low and the government is working with the U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) to register children in order to assess their needs.  The international community is still trying to meet the population\'s basic needs such as shelter, but much more needs to be done to identify and provide assistance to extremely vulnerable populations such as women-headed households and children at risk.  End summary.  ----------------- Current Situation -----------------  -- Relief Distributions  2.  The emergency relief operations are extremely complicated given the mountainous terrain and lack of information about population movements.  The provision of a safe, warm place to live is the first line of protection for vulnerable populations as winter approaches.  To date, the bulk of the relief operations have centered on providing shelter for people remaining close to their homes in the mountains.  However, in order to get these provisions to the population, the relief community has had to rely on the government of Pakistan (GOP) military, air drops, and relief agencies trekking or airlifting supplies to the mountain villages.  3.  Women in Pakistan are severely disadvantaged and discriminated against, and many fear that the current relief distribution only reinforces this situation.  The issue of ensuring that vulnerable groups receive adequate supplies is extremely difficult to monitor given the logistical difficulties of this operation and the lack of information about vulnerable populations.  Partner organizations asked about this issue have replied that they must rely on the villages to distribute supplies fairly.  One partner organization reported that they sent teams to villages to identify the most needy and vulnerable families.  These families were given tokens to take to a distribution site the following day.  The following day only men attended the distribution site, and there was no follow-up to determine whether the neediest families received the supplies.  Women reportedly received tokens, but no women claimed the relief supplies for which these tokens were issued.  Because there was no monitoring, it is unclear whether the women who received tokens were able to access the aid for which the tokens were issued.  4.  In urban areas there are many reports that women without effective male protection are made to sit in tents at GOP or GOP military sites while relief supplies are distributed to males first, leaving what is left for unaccompanied women. In most distribution sites, only men are visible standing in lines.  In addition, the USAID/DART has received many reports that women are being left behind in the villages to tend to what is left of their property and livestock while the men and the children come down to the valleys and urban areas to receive aid.  Some of the men who have come down to the valleys to receive aid report that there are women- headed households that are still in the mountains that may not be able to travel with their families.  5.  Some organizations are trying to ensure that families that do not have effective male protection or vulnerable families that have taken in separated children are receiving adequate relief supplies.  These organizations do state that they could be doing more to ensure that such families are identified and receive adequate relief supplies.  Some report that the first wave of relief distribution was so overwhelming that they simply have not asked the questions about vulnerability and that systems are not set up to ensure that these cases are being identified and addressed. Setting up these systems will require more resources so that the GOP military and individuals involved in the distribution are trained and sensitized to this issue.  More female workers are needed to distribute relief supplies to vulnerable populations.  Additionally, work needs to be done with communities so that communities ensure that vulnerable families, especially those without effective adult male protection, are receiving adequate relief supplies both in the mountains and the urban areas.  -- Camp Management in NWFP and AJK  6.  With the push to get shelter supplies to the mountain areas there has been less attention focused on camp management and services in the valleys and urban areas.  In the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), the GOP is pushing to establish large IDP camps.   In Azzad Jamu and Kashmir (AJK), the government\'s policy on establishing IDP camps is unclear.  The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has the lead in the U.N. cluster system for camp management, but UNHCR staff on the ground have stated that it does not have sufficient resources, staff, mandate, or leverage to manage the camps.  UNHCR only has a minimal presence of international staff on the ground.  7.  In NWFP, UNHCR stated that the GOP military is doing a good job trying to set up the camps, but the major difficulty is finding sufficient land on which to build the camps and organizations to provide services to the camps. The GOP military reported that it cannot take care of a large number of people in camps and is looking for serious help from the international organizations.  The government in NWFP is trying to set up large camps, because it believes that many people will migrate down to the valleys in the coming weeks.  UNHCR does not believe that there will be a massive migration from the Allai Valley and therefore does not want to put its resources into establishing large camps. UNHCR is providing the military with 18,000 tents and a very general site plan for the camps, and it is identifying the gaps in non-governmental organization (NGO) assistance in the camps.  UNHCR stated that it will only provide assistance for six months and that it does not have the ability to provide assistance to the GOP if there is a massive movement to camps.  8.  In NWFP the GOP military is trying to get the government to take over the responsibility of managing the camps. UNHCR reported that it believes the biggest issue is the unregistered spontaneous camps.  UNHCR is not concerned with individuals camping near their homes in a few tents or less; however, it is extremely concerned over the spontaneous camps.  These camps are being sponsored by political parties or religious organizations.  The conditions in these camps are unacceptable due to lack of sanitation facilities. UNHCR has advised the GOP to zone the area and give specific zones to NGOs to monitor and deliver services to the spontaneous camps.  The GOP should then decide on which camps should be moved into larger camps and develop a long- term plan.  The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reported when they went into these spontaneous camps they found vulnerable families such as women headed households that needed assistance.  At this time there has not been a registration of these spontaneous camps in either NWFP or AJK.  9.  In Muzaffarabad city there are many spontaneous unregistered camps, and to date the GOP has only sanctioned two camps run by local NGOs.  The GOP has not stated its policy with regard to establishing IDP camps in Muzaffarabad, and the military in AJK does not have the same resources to manage the camps as in NWFP.  There are many gaps in the camp services, but water and sanitation is the biggest problem at this time, and security is also a problem.  USAID is coordinating with the U.S. military to build hundreds of latrines for these camps, and other NGOs such as Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), Islamic Relief and Oxfam are also building latrines for the camps.  At this time, UNHCR does not have the resources on the ground to effectively manage the camps.  This problem is compounded by the fact that there are few international NGOs on the ground in Muzaffarabad city providing services.  It is clear that additional assistance is needed in order to provide basic services for the population of the registered camps as well as the spontaneous camps.  In camps that USAID visited, people are still lacking basic necessities such as shelter. In addition, the GOP needs to decide which camps it will close and which camps it will allow to remain open so that basic services can be provided that meet international standards.  10.  No international organization is taking the lead monitoring the movement of people.   For example, in AJK there is no agency monitoring the movement of the population or any agency receiving individuals when they arrive in Muzaffarabad to provide basic information on emergency relief.  Organizations do not want to draw people to urban areas, but people are wandering the city looking for shelter, tents and supplies.  People do not have access to an ongoing reliable flow of information of where they can access emergency relief.  -- Health  11.  The U.N. World Health Organization (WHO) has stated that as many as 60 to 80 percent of the basic health centers and other health care facilities were destroyed in the earthquake-affected areas.  One of the biggest protection issues facing women is the lack of female doctors and nurses.  Some Pakistani doctors report that women have died because they could not be examined by male doctors.  The lack of female health care workers is severely limiting female patients\' access to health care. WHO and other health agencies report that more female doctors and nurses are urgently needed in the earthquake-affected areas.  -- Child Protection  12.  The U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) is the lead on protection activities for the protection cluster.  The GOP imposed a national ban on the adoption of children for a period of six months.  Islamabad has also restricted the relocation of children from quake-affected areas to prevent the abuse and trafficking of children affected by the earthquake.  UNICEF, together with the Ministry of Social Welfare (MoSW), has begun registering all children currently living in emergency settlements across quake-hit areas of Pakistan and AJK.  The GOP wants to have some sort of statistics of affected children including those unaccompanied, with specifications regarding their age and gender groups to facilitate future planning.  In a joint effort with the ICRC, the National Database Registration Authority (NADRA), and several other national and international NGOs, MoSW intends to devise a comprehensive strategy to deal with the problems of orphaned, unattended, separated, injured and missing children.  Organizations are concerned that the MoSW is setting up institutions in other cities such as Peshawar that will care for unaccompanied women, children and separated children with vulnerable families.  13.  In conjunction with MoSW, ICRC is identifying unaccompanied children and tracing their families.  There are very few reports of unaccompanied children by ICRC, UNICEF and NGOs, and there are only a few unconfirmed reports of attempted kidnapping.  It is clear that the MoSW will need a great deal of technical assistance and support in providing care and services for unaccompanied children, separated children with vulnerable families, women-headed households with children, and child-headed households.  This is extremely critical in AJK where the government\'s infrastructure was severely damaged and many government workers were killed or lost their homes and other family members.  International organizations and NGOs will have to advocate for establishing good practices in the area of child protection and monitor the work of the government.  -------------------------- Response of USAID Partners --------------------------  14.  The provision of a safe, warm place to live is the first line of protection for vulnerable populations.  IOM, Save the Children (SC), ACTED, Catholic Relief Services (CRS), the International Refugee Committee (IRC), and GOAL are providing winterized tents, shelter kits, blankets and other materials for rebuilding.  In addition, many partners are starting to focus on doing more to identify vulnerable families such as female-headed households and ensuring that they receive adequate assistance.  15.  In the registered and spontaneous camps, water and sanitation are critical needs, and many of USAID\'s partners are working to establish water supplies and latrines.  In Muzaffarabad, USAID is working with the U.S. military to build latrines in camps where latrines have not been built. In camps where latrines are being built, USAID\'s partners are working to ensure that women have safe access to these facilities.  16.  Credible reports from organizations including UNICEF cite fliers and other information about religious madrassas opening up.  It is critical that the schools are opened quickly not only to counter madrassas but also to try and bring normalcy back to children\'s lives.  In Muzaffarabad, USAID has worked closely with UNICEF and the U.S. military to coordinate the removal of rubble from school sites and set up tent schools as quickly as possible.  USAID and UNICEF have worked closely with the Ministry of Education to identify school sites, including girls\' schools, for rubble removal and tent distribution.  USAID is also establishing cash-for-work (CFW) programs in Muzaffarabad to remove rubble from additional school sites.  USAID partners are establishing school-in-a-box programs and will be addressing psychological and social needs.  17.  International NGOs such as SC, World Vision (WV), and IRC have set up Child-Friendly Centers.  These centers are set up to support play and educational opportunities.  These organizations are reporting that vulnerable families are identifying themselves.  Additional programming needs to be established to help identify these vulnerable families without effective male protection, vulnerable families with separated children, and children-headed households. However, organizations are struggling to provide additional resources to these families.  With USAID assistance, WHO has established permanent teams to provide mental health assistance in the region.  ------------------------------------------- Gaps, Additional Needs, and Recommendations -------------------------------------------  18.  The first wave of relief distribution was so overwhelming that many organizations simply have not asked the questions about vulnerable families focusing on women and children.  Adequate systems are not set up to ensure that these cases are being identified and addressed.   These systems will require more resources so that the GOP military and individuals involved in the distribution of relief commodities are trained and sensitized to identifying vulnerable families and ensure that they receive relief supplies.  In addition, more female workers are needed to distribute relief supplies to vulnerable populations and address health care issues for female patients.  Work needs to be done with communities so that they ensure vulnerable families, especially those without effective adult male protection, are receiving adequate relief supplies both in the mountains and the urban areas.  19.  A registration and prioritization system must be created for vulnerable women and children in the urban areas.  UNICEF and the GOP are registering children, but the purpose of this registration is unclear.  In addition, it will take a considerable time to register all children in the quake-affected areas.  Once identified, these groups must have access to relief supplies, psychological and social help, and other resources.  20.  UNHCR stated that they will only provide limited assistance for six months and that they do not have the ability to provide assistance to the GOP if there is a massive movement to camps.   The GOP and military have better control over the situation in NWFP than in AJK. While there is more control, information, and planning with the registered camps in NWFP, there is still a critical need for additional services in the camps, including latrines and security.  In AJK, the information concerning which spontaneous camps will be kept open and where additional camps will be built is extremely confusing.  To date in Muzaffarabad city, the government has only designated two camp sites.  There are still significant needs in these two camps for basic services.  However, the water and sanitation issues are finally being addressed in most of the camps. The GOP needs to decide which spontaneous camps will be kept open and designate additional sites.  Many of the conditions in the spontaneous camps are unacceptable.  UNHCR needs to identify additional partners to provide basic services in the camps and needs to address the spontaneous camps in both NWFP and AJK.  UNHCR needs additional staff and more resources.  More international NGOs are needed to work in the camps to provide basic services on a long-term basis. This is an extremely urgent issue that is being overshadowed by the critical need to get shelter to the mountain areas and the lack of enough UNHCR staff on the ground.  21.  More assistance needs to be provided for female patients.  The lack of female health care workers is severely limiting female patients\' access to medical services. WHO and other health agencies report that more female doctors and nurses are urgently needed.  22.  More technical assistance should be provided to the MoSW.  This technical assistance would help the GOP deal with the issue of unaccompanied children now and create a long-term plan to handle these issues in the future.  23.  It is clear that the MoSW will need a great deal of technical assistance and infrastructure support in identifying and providing care and services for unaccompanied children, separated children with vulnerable families, women-headed households with children, and child headed households.  International organizations and NGOs will have to advocate for establishing good practices in the area of child protection and monitor the work of the government in this area. " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2005 6:07", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 016643  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, EAGR, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF FOOD SITUATION  ------- Summary -------  1.  As of November 2, approximately 981,800 affected beneficiaries in Pakistan are receiving food aid.  This is 98% of the 1 million caseload identified by the U.N. World Food Program (WFP).  WFP\'s recent assessment estimates more than 2.3 million people are in need of food aid.  Various non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have stated that the number of 2.3 million people in need is too high.  WFP representatives in Pakistan have stated that WFP will maintain its caseload of 1 million people.  WFP has requested that the GOP provide food assistance to the remaining affected populations.  The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) is bringing in a food expert to assess the need for U.S. food assistance.  End summary.  --------------------------------------------- ------------- WFP Joint Emergency Food Security and Nutrition Assessment --------------------------------------------- -------------  2.  Shortly after the earthquake, WFP issued EMOP Pakistan 10491.0.  The EMOP listed the number of beneficiaries as 1,000,000.  On October 26, WFP, the U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) and OXFAM completed a joint Emergency Food Security and Nutrition Assessment to determine the following: the amount of food in country, the amount of additional food coming into the country, the percentage of affected areas needing food, and the amount of food required to assist affected areas.  This assessment identified 2,313,857 people in need of food assistance.  The EMOP figures have been revised accordingly with the Food Requirement for a 5-month period (1 November 2005 through 31 March 2006) at 212,865 metric tons (MT).  3.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) agrees with this finding and is calculating food needs accordingly.  However, various NGOs cite the number of 2.3 million people in need as too high.  WFP representatives in Pakistan have told USAID and USAID/DART representatives that the WFP will maintain its caseload of 1 million and requests that the GOP provide food assistance to the remaining affected beneficiaries.  4.  Additional findings from the WFP Joint Assessment indicate that rice and maize harvest could not be completed in some areas due to landslides and land fissures.  Winter wheat planting would have started in November, but many seed stocks have been buried or spoiled.  The next wheat planting season is summer 2006 with harvest in October 2006.  Fifty percent of the heads of households interviewed in the assessment reported a total loss of grain stocks. Supplementary feeding will be necessary for 440,000 pregnant and lactating women, as well as children under the age of five in rural areas.  ------------------------------ GOP Reaction to WFP Assessment ------------------------------  5.  GOP Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock (MINFAL) Secretary Ismail Qureshi agreed with the WFP assessment that  SIPDIS 2.3 million people are in need of food aid.  In order to meet the food aid need brought on by the earthquake, MINFAL requests 130,000 MT of wheat; 80,000 MT and 50,000 MT will be allocated to the AJK and NWFP, respectively. Calculations are based on a 6-month time frame.  ------------------------------ NGO Reaction to WFP Assessment ------------------------------  6.  On October 29, the USAID/DART Economic and Livelihoods Officer (ELO) met with representatives of the International Refugee Committee (IRC) and Mercy Corps (MC), each of which has at least 20 years experience working in country and employs a number of local residents.  These NGOs hold that fewer than 2.3 million people are in need of emergency food assistance, given existing food stocks, local residents\' coping strategies and strong social networks in earthquake- affected areas.  The NGO representatives remarked that if populations living at high elevations are threatened with food insecurity, they travel to lower elevations for food. Because residences at high elevations are scattered and fairly inaccessible, effective food distribution programs would provide food at strategic distribution points.  Food distribution will become more important in the winter months, as stocks run out.  --------------------------------- Other Reactions to WFP Assessment ---------------------------------  7.  An interagency assessment is currently underway and is expected to be completed on/about November 8.  The Asian Development Bank and the World Bank are facilitating this assessment; a damage and needs assessment for the agriculture and livestock sector is being conducted by the FAO with MINFAL.  Preliminary findings of damage to crops and food stocks show that slides, collapse of stores, and subsequent rains caused widespread damage.  ------------------------------------- USAID/DART Reaction to WFP Assessment -------------------------------------  8.  According to the USAID/DART ELO, a major coping strategy for food insecurity is male heads of households journeying to the lowlands to purchase food, which they provide to their families upon their return.  Many roads are impassable, but some back trails are accessible, allowing those who live at higher elevations to travel to lower elevations to access markets and purchase food.  WFP reports of widespread loss of food are contrary to information gathered by the USAID/DART in the field and by NGO partners. These reports indicate that although some people lost food stocks in the earthquake, people in earthquake-affected areas have fairly significant stocks of food at present, given the recent harvest.  People in affected areas store food underground or keep food in the form of livestock, thereby insulating themselves against food shocks. Populations in affected areas also draw upon their social networks for safety nets.  Although some food assistance is needed, it is not an immediate need because of existing food stocks, coping mechanisms, and safety networks.  According to the USAID/DART ELO, it is estimated that in general, existing food stocks of those sheltering in place could last up to two months, although those who choose to reside in camps will require immediate food assistance.  -------------------------- GOP Request for Assistance --------------------------  9.  The Pakistan Agriculture Storage Services Corporation (PASSCO) has \"operating reserves\" of 1 million MT of wheat. Prior to the earthquake, the planned distribution of the 1 million MT of stocks was: NWFP 270,000 MT; AJK 250,000 MT; Defense Department 150,000 MT; Northern Areas 100,000 MT; Balochistan 230,000.  This distribution is based on last year\'s needs in these food deficit areas.  The GOP estimates requirements of 123 kilograms (kg) of wheat per person per year.  The provinces of Punjab and Sindh meet their own wheat needs by production and private commercial purchases.  10.  The GOP does maintain an operating reserve of 1 million tons.  Therefore, it does not have any reserves to support the affected beneficiaries.  The GOP requests a total of 130,000 MT of wheat to meet the needs of 2.3 million affected people.  To date, the GOP has loaned the WFP 30,000 metric tons (MT) of food aid.  According to the GOP, the Government of Turkey has donated 50,000 MT of food aid which will arrive in 30 days.  The GOP requests that the U.S. Government donate the remaining 50,000 MT of food aid.  -------------------------- Food Distributions to Date --------------------------  11.  WFP has the lead in coordinating food aid and logistics under the UN clusters groups framework.  WFP reported that to date, 518,000 people have received WFP food rations, including high energy biscuits, wheat flour, vegetable oil, and pulses.  Because many roads in valleys are fully or partially blocked, food distributions are taking place at roadblocks as far into the valleys as possible.  From distribution points, mule packs carry food further up into the mountains.  WFP reported a number of distribution constraints.  12.  On October 30, a WFP representative told a USAID/DART representative that WFP plans to provide food assistance for 1 million people because it expects the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to provide food assistance for 150,000 people and the GOP to provide food assistance for the remaining people in need.  13.  MINFAL does not anticipate any disruption of commercial sales by importing additional wheat for the affected areas. Commercial sales since July 2005 total approximately 580,000 MT.  The commercially purchased wheat stays in Karachi and is not transported to the rest of Pakistan.  Therefore, MINFAL does not anticipate a disruption in local markets by additional imported wheat.  --------------------------------- Constraints to Food Distributions ---------------------------------  14.  With the onset of winter, food aid will need to be pre- positioned for approximately 200,000 affected beneficiaries in remote areas.  Preliminary findings of damage and food need assessments show damage to crops and stores of seed and fertilizer.  Food aid will become increasingly important in the winter months as remaining food stocks run out.  The November winter wheat planting has been limited by damages to land and the destruction of agricultural inputs. Therefore, the 2006 spring/summer harvest of wheat will be drastically affected and may require food aid to continue through October 2006.  15.  A USAID/DART food expert will arrive in country by 8 November to ascertain the level of U.S. food assistance that will be required.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/10/2005 9:12", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 016741  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  FIELD VISIT OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR GREG GOTTLIEB  Summary -------  1.    From November 2 through 9, Deputy Director of the Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) Greg Gottlieb visited Pakistan to work with USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) on developing programming and staffing plans for next approximately 150 days of the earthquake emergency.  Mr. Gottlieb also visited several field sites to discuss current programs and concerns with partners, the government of Pakistan (GOP) military, and others.  -------- Staffing --------  2.    The USAID/DART currently consists of 18 members with a broad array of skills.  The general approach is to maintain critical functions in all program, technical support, logistics, and administration as the USAID/DART pushes to meet pressing needs for affected populations prior to the onset of heavy winter.  Several essential staff members are rotating out close to the Thanksgiving holiday.  The USAID/DART has been working with the Response Management Team (RMT) to develop a staffing plan for this critical period. Most positions now have names assigned or proposed, and the USAID/DART is confident that critical functions will be met during the critical period.  While the total number of positions will likely diminish as certain functions are collapsed into a single position, particularly for certain logistics and administrative functions, all essential functions will continue to be filled.  3.    Staffing must be addressed, however, for the period of January through April of calendar year 2006.  Personnel for at least two program officer positions and an administrative officer position in Islamabad, as well as two field officer positions outside Islamabad, must be identified to serve at least for 90 to 120 days.  It would be preferable if a USAID/DART leader also served for the same period of time, but it is foreseeable that experienced leaders could rotate in and out for lesser periods.  4.  The USAID/DART anticipates that it will need to maintain an active and thorough presence at least through April 2006, when the onset of spring will allow many people displaced by the earthquake to return home, especially to remote areas, and actively begin reconstruction.  The presence of longer-term staff will provide consistency of leadership to partners and programs, and enable the USAID/DART to work on a sustained basis with the USAID Mission on integration of relief programs into reconstruction programs.  ----------- Programming -----------  5.  Focus over the next four to six weeks is on securing populations through the spring.  The USAID/DART will continue to support shelter-in-place programs, particularly for more remote areas.  The USAID/DART is not downplaying the need to prepare for many more people coming into camps, but it feels that current programming must focus on supplying those who will stay in place at higher elevations with shelter or shelter materials adequate to get them through the winter. The USAID/DART recognizes that many of those affected may eventually come into camps, in which case the USAID/DART intends to structure funding so that programs can be shifted to camp situations if necessary.  6.    Shelter will therefore be the focus of future funding, along with water and sanitation, and livelihoods and cash-for-work (CFW) programs.  The USAID/DART is currently reviewing proposals to add additional partners in geographic areas that USAID is not now serving.  The team is also considering adding on to current grants to deepen and broaden the reach of existing partners during the next six weeks.  In addition, the USAID/DART Shelter and Settlements Advisor (SSA) is working with all current international NGO partners, as well as the International Organization for Migration (IOM), which is both a USAID/OFDA grantee and a cluster leader, to develop an overall strategy.   The USAID/DART SSA has brought a high level of expertise to a situation still lacking cohesiveness.  The SSA has effectively persuaded the GOP that tents are not the only solution to shelter problem. The USAID/DART shelter strategy will help partners to focus their efforts on appropriate approaches.  It is clear that partners are anxious for leadership in the shelter sector.  7.    The USAID/DART will also focus on support aspects to field programs, including support to civilian air operations.  The USAID/DART anticipates and sees the need forhJe?8@b true in every place of operation, the overall feeling is of a need for improvement. The USAID/DART hopes that the arrival on November 5 of the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Chief of Operations will bring about better coordination between and by UN agencies.  Moreover, the USAID/DART will pursue discussions with OCHA on making U.N. offices more operational.  It appears that several U.N. agencies, notably UNICEF and UNHCR, are still struggling to define their roles as either advisors or operational agencies, when it is apparent that they need to pursue both aspects. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/12/2005 7:10", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 ISLAMABAD 016819  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT  #13: FIELD VISIT OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR GOTTLIEB TO MEHRA TENT CAMP, BATAGRAM, AND BALAKOT   ------- Summary -------  1.  On November 5, Deputy Director of the Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) Greg Gottlieb, accompanied by the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART), traveled to earthquake-affected areas.  The group met with implementing partners and members of the Government of Pakistan (GOP) military in Mehra tent camp, Batagram, and Balakot.  This cable summarizes the group\'s findings.  -------- Batagram --------  2.  The USAID/DART Field Officer (FO) working at the forward base in Mansehra accompanied the group for the day.  Mr. Gottlieb and the USAID/DART traveled to Batagram, where they met with representatives of the GOP military, the Austrian Red Cross, and two of USAID\'s implementing partners, Save the Children (SC) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM).  The SC representative told the USAID/DART that SC has treated 25,000 patients and performed 450 operations in SC medical facilities in Batagram.  GOP has designated SC as the coordinating agency for all of Batagram District.  3.  Mr. Gottlieb met with the regional GOP army commander, Brigadier Khalid, to discuss current relief efforts in Batagram.  The GOP military remains focused on providing shelter materials, particularly tents, to populations in remote areas, although they did not present statistics on how many households have been reached.  The team observed a large stock of tents being airlifted to mountainous areas.  ----- Mehra -----  4.  The USAID/DART traveled with Mr. Gottlieb to the Mehra tent camp, where they met with GOP camp commander Colonel Fraz and other GOP representatives operating the camp, as well as representatives of NGOs providing services to the camp.  The tent camp currently occupies an area of 53,000 square meters.  The GOP plans to add three additional subsectors, each with an approximate area of 50,000 square meters, for a total of 195,000 square meters.  GOP representatives estimate that each subsector can accommodate 900 to 1,100 families.  5.  With an average family size in this camp of eight or nine people, the Mehra site will accommodate up to 30,000 people and has been designed to house people from the Allai mountains and valley, which has a total population of approximately 190,000 people.  Established on October 31, the tent camp was a temporary home to approximately 300 families, or approximately 2,700 people, as of November 5. Thirty new families arrived in the morning of November 5, and Colonel Fraz stated that he expected high numbers of families to arrive as winter approaches.  After the Eid holidays, more people may come down from higher elevations. Since the camp site is only at about 2,000 feet elevation, snowfall should be minimal.  6.  Colonel Fraz stated that when a family arrives, the GOP requests the family\'s identification cards to register camp inhabitants.  Following registration, the GOP gives each family a basket of commodities, which comprises a tent, mattress, blankets, utensils, and food rations for a week.  -- Food  7.  Inhabitants of the Mehra tent camp arrive without food. They are dependent upon the GOP for food.  There appeared to be adequate food stocks for the current population.  Colonel Fraz told the USAID/DART that he would like a communal kitchen to be built.  At present, women are cooking meals for their families inside their tents, which presents a fire hazard.  SC is procuring 300 small propane burners for cooking.  -- Water and Sanitation  8.  At present, two 10,000-liter water purification units, provided by the Austrian Red Cross, are in the camp.  Water from the Indus River is pumped into these units, where it is purified and then pumped to access points in the camp.  The GOP plans to install two water tanks, with a 100,000-liter capacity each, on a hill above the camp.  9.  When the USAID/DART visited Mehra, sanitation was the primary problem in the Mehra tent camp.  As of November 5, there were no latrines in the camp.  However, according to representatives of Save the Children, who spoke with the USAID/DART on November 9, 100 latrines - 50 for men and 50 for women - had recently been installed in the camp.  -- Health  10.  The GOP told Mr. Gottlieb and the USAID/DART that 14 doctors from Cuba are volunteering in the camp.  However, the doctors speak minimal English and no Urdu.  Camp inhabitants have reported a number of illnesses, including bloody diarrhea, watery diarrhea, a few cases of tetanus, and many cases of scabies.  -- Livelihoods  11. According to a SC representative, more people would come to the Mehra tent camp if the camp had a site for livestock grazing, which it currently does not.  People are afraid of coming to the tent camp if that means leaving their livestock, which is often their livelihood, behind.  SC is planning a corral for animals, with an attendant veterinarian.  This will enable families to maintain their animals rather than sell now in a depressed livestock market.  12.  SC plans to establish a cash-for-work (CFW) committee to maintain the tent village.  SC will pay members of the committee to perform maintenance and repairs on the physical facilities of the camp.  The GOP military representative told the group that because many of the men living in the camp are skilled workers, the GOP is interested in implementing CFW programs.  -- Protection  13.  Colonel Fraz stated that the majority of the population of surrounding areas lived in mud houses prior to the earthquake.  In order to preserve a sense of community and local culture, the GOP has laid out the tent camp site at Mehra such that people in the camp live close to people from their home village, in separate areas representing the major villages in the region.  14.  Among the Cuban doctors in the camp are female doctors. Members of the GOP military and NGO representatives working in the camp were acutely aware of the cultural needs for females, ranging from having female doctors to adequate latrines and working stations, in addition to better lighting for the camp.  15.  IOM representatives told the USAID/DART that male heads of households might send their families to the camp but remain with their livestock.  If this happens, additional protection issues will arise.  -- NGO Assistance at Mehra  16.  NGOs have provided a significant amount of the commodities and services at Mehra.  SC provided blankets, rations, and tarpaulins, and it is in the process of procuring hygiene kits and establishing a play space, educational center, and area for livestock grazing.  As described above, the Austrian Red Cross is working to meet the water and sanitation needs of the camp.  The U.N. was seemingly absent.  Colonel Fraz noted several times that representatives from the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had visited several times but had not done anything to date.  -- Outstanding Needs  17.  The GOP military representative in charge of the camp remarked that the Mehra tent camp needs additional large generators for the health unit and water system; searchlights, which provide light and enhance camp security at night; and latrines.  -- GOP and NGOs\' Two-Pronged Strategy  18.  The GOP and NGOs are engaged in a two-pronged strategy to provide humanitarian assistance to those affected by the earthquake.  The GOP and relief organizations are simultaneously delivering relief commodities to hard-to- reach areas in order to promote shelter in place, and the GOP and relief organizations are also attempting to provide basic services to tent camps to encourage people in need of shelter to temporarily relocate to camps.  19.  This strategy is evident in Mehra camp.  The GOP military, in conjunction with NGOs in Mehra camp, is attempting to move supplies up the Allai Valley.  The road up the valley recently opened to small vehicles and pickups. The GOP and NGOS have a limited ability to move humanitarian commodities up the valley, however.  Under the direction of the GOP military, IOM is sending small pickups up the valley to encourage people in the valley to come down to the Mehra tent camp.  Concurrently, the GOP is overseeing the establishment of facilities in the Mehra camp to entice people to come down from the valley and into the camp.  -- USAID/DART Assessment and Recommendations  20.  The USAID/DART acknowledges that many more people may come down into tent camps.  However, the USAID/DART holds that current programming must focus on supplying those who will stay at higher elevations with shelter or shelter materials, sufficient to protect them against the winter weather.  Many of the affected people may eventually come into camps, in which case the USAID/DART intends to adjust funding and shift program focus to camp situations if necessary.  ------- Balakot -------  21.  Mr. Gottlieb and the USAID/DART also traveled to Balakot, where they discussed the distribution of humanitarian relief supplies with GOP military representatives in charge of the distribution and assessed the situation on the ground.  The population of Balakot and the surrounding areas is approximately 350,000 people.  In this area, approximately 20,000 people perished in the earthquake, according to a member of the GOP military. Areas of Balakot, including the area that the USAID/DART visited, are nearly 100 percent destroyed.  A member of the GOP military told the USAID/DART that despite this total destruction, people are reluctant to leave their homes, as they hope that they will be able to salvage any remaining personal effects once they are able to sift through the rubble.  The USAID/DART observed a number of people living in makeshift shelters above the ruins of their destroyed homes.  Recovery of bodies had only ended a few days previously.  22.  A representative of the GOP military told the USAID/DART that the GOP encourages the establishment of tent villages because such villages facilitate the distribution of commodities.  The USAID/DART observed piles of commodities for distribution near the helicopter landing pad in Balakot.  The GOP military was coordinating the distribution of these commodities.  (Comment:  In Balakot, as at the Mansehra tent camp site, Mr. Gottlieb and the USAID/DART observed a distinct absence of the U.N.  End comment.)  -- Meeting with ACTED  23.  In Balakot, Mr. Gottlieb and the USAID/DART met with two representatives of ACTED, one of USAID\'s implementing partners.  According to these representatives, ACTED arrived in Balakot and Bagh o/a October 15.  ACTED is targeting remote areas in the west valley above Balakot, where other NGOs are absent.  Through funding from the USAID Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA), ACTED aims to reach 3,000 beneficiaries with housing interventions.  ACTED might decrease the materials it is distributing to each family in order to serve more families.  Many heads of households located at higher elevations are descending to Balakot to obtain blankets and quilts, which they bring with them back to their families.  Very little information about targeted populations is available.  It is unclear how many people live in the valley where ACTED is working, although there are indications that the number is very large.  24.  ACTED reported effective cooperation with the GOP military.  ACTED stated that when it has commodities for distribution, it relays this message to the GOP military the day before the distribution, who in turn relays this information to affected populations.  People from affected areas travel by foot up to four hours to obtain commodities supplied by ACTED.  25.  In the absence of a shelter strategy from the international community, ACTED is distributing plastic sheeting and tools.  ACTED is attempting to procure these materials and move these materials as quickly as possible to remote locations.  26.  ACTED stated, and the USAID/DART observed, that the U.N. was noticeably absent from Balakot.  ACTED representatives told the USAID/DART that Balakot lacks coordination from the U.N.  Thus, the GOP military hosts daily coordination meetings with NGOs.  Because of a shortage of undamaged office space, the majority of the NGOs active in Balakot are based in Mansehra, which compounds the coordination problem in Balakot.  Most of the NGOs in Mansehra are focused on humanitarian relief efforts in Batagram, not Balakot.  -- USAID/DART Assessment and Recommendations  27.  As is the case with other areas that the USAID/DART has assessed, the U.N. was absent in the area of Balakot that the USAID/DART surveyed on November 5.  The U.N. is not coordinating cluster group meetings in this area, and the GOP military has begun hosting such meetings.  The apparent absence of the U.N. in its role as coordinating mechanism, as well as the lack of U.N. commodities in this area, is problematic.  28.   Organizations providing humanitarian assistance in Balakot, as in Mehra, should pursue the two-pronged strategy of both providing humanitarian commodities for those who have sought refuge in camps and also transporting and distributing commodities in hard-to-reach areas.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/14/2005 2:13", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 016827  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5   E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  THE ROLE OF NGOS IN THE USAID/DART EMERGENCY RELIEF EFFORTS   ------- Summary -------  1.  The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) subscribes to the overall Government of Pakistan (GOP) Federal Relief Commission (FRC) strategy that primary focus at this stage in the relief effort should be placed on providing in-situ shelter and food security support for earthquake-affected residents.  Through its non-governmental organization (NGO) programming, the USAID/DART supports this strategy with implementation activities that focus on commodity distribution, shelter, water and sanitation, livelihoods, protection, health, and education.  The USAID/DART has programmed its NGO funds judiciously to cover the key sectors in critical geographic areas in a balanced, strategic manner.  End summary.  ---------------- Funding Strategy ----------------  2.  The USAID/DART subscribes to the overall GOP FRC strategy that primary focus at this stage in the relief effort should be placed on providing in-situ shelter and food security support for earthquake-affected residents. Secondary focus should be placed on camp-based needs for those who come down from higher elevations due to their inability to endure the harsh winter conditions.  This dual strategy both addresses the priorities of the locals and implements a fail-safe mechanism to assure survival.  3.  USAID/DART field reports as well as reports from NGOs indicate that much of the earthquake-affected population will remain in place, but a significant number will move down to lowland areas to reside in both spontaneous and organized tented camps.  A two-pronged strategy provides the best means to address both situations.  --------------- NGO Programming ---------------  4.  Through its NGO programming, the USAID/DART supports this overall strategy with implementation activities that focus on commodity distribution, shelter, water and sanitation, livelihoods, protection, health, and education. As of November 10, nine international NGOs have been selected to receive an approximate total of USD 20 million through USAID\'s Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA).  The activities funded in these grants emphasize the primary focus of in-situ shelter, livelihoods, health, and education.  They also cover camp-based needs in water and sanitation, livelihoods, health, and protection.  U.N. organizations have received more than USD 12.9 million in OFDA funding in response to the earthquake.  In addition, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) have received USD 8 million in OFDA funding.  OFDA has funded NGOs and U.N. organizations in order to target affected populations in rural and urban areas, respectively.  5.  The USAID/DART is regularly meeting with the country directors of the NGOs currently receiving USAID funds to discuss their issues, bottlenecks, and collective means of maximizing impact.  The USAID/DART believes that targeting NGO activities to the greatest needs of the two-pronged strategy, and facilitating frequent discussions to optimize and possibly redirect activities, represents a targeted yet flexible means of addressing the greatest needs in the relief effort of Pakistan.  6.  This support to NGOs has been provided in a deliberate, phased manner.  The USAID/DART has committed three tranches of funds.  The first round total was approximately USD 22 million, including support for four U.N. agencies:  the U.N. Children\'s Fund (UNICEF), the U.N. Joint Logistics Center (JLC), the U.N. World Food Program (WFP), and the U.N. World Health Organization (WHO).  Through this first round of funding, the USAID/DART also committed support to IOM, ICRC, and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), primarily for cluster-based coordination and technical support.  The second round total was USD 11.5 million, provided to Action Contre la Faim (ACF), ACTED, Catholic Relief Services (CRS), GOAL, and the International Rescue Committee (IRC) to kick-start field activities in non-food item distribution, shelter, water and sanitation, health, education, and livelihoods.  7.  The third round of proposals is currently under review. For this round, international and local NGOs have submitted approximately 25 proposals.  The USAID/DART, including its technical experts, is carefully scrutinizing these proposals to ensure focus on strategy, high-quality implementation, appropriate geographical distribution based on need, accountability of funds, and current gaps.  Various proposals passed the initial screening for the third round, and thus far three are recommended for funding.  8.  The USAID/DART is utilizing maps provided by the U.N. and U.S. military to determine where to meet the needs of the earthquake-affected population.  The USAID/DART is also encouraging NGOs to work in the most affected areas.  Before approving funding, the USAID/DART undertakes checks to ensure that NGOs do not overlap coverage.  9.  These three tranches of grants constitute a step-by-step approach in order to ensure that NGOs are not only working effectively but also are able to address the emergency relief needs that evolve over the course of this disaster relief operation.  ------------------------------- NGOs and GOP Military Relations -------------------------------  10.  While NGOs typically tend to be critical of government responses in disaster situations, the USAID/DART\'s NGO partners have praised the GOP military\'s participation in this disaster.  NGOs active in this disaster response have indicated that the GOP military is distributing tents in an appropriate manner and in critical need areas.  Despite media reports to the contrary, USAID cites reports from NGO field representatives to assert that the GOP military has assumed a great deal of responsibility in the relief efforts and performed well under difficult circumstances. Not only has the GOP military proven effective in this exercise in terms of its reach and responsiveness, but it has also been keen to learn from the donor community best practices in addressing technical issues such as camp management, relief commodity distribution, and water and sanitation interventions.  ---------------------------------- USAID/DART Collaboration with NGOs ----------------------------------  11.  The USAID/DART thus continues to work closely with NGOs that have potential to be effective in this context, and will achieve the balance of providing strong and effective support to the relief efforts while exercising flexibility and judiciousness in the use of available resources.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/14/2005 4:04", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 016834  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT #14: MEETING WITH OCHA SENIOR HUMANITARIAN ADVISOR   ------- Summary -------  1.  On November 6, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) met with representatives of all seven implementing partners in Pakistan.  On November 7, Deputy Director of the Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) Greg Gottlieb and USAID/DART staff met with Kevin Kennedy, the new U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Senior Humanitarian Advisor for Pakistan.  Building on input the USAID/DART received in the November 6 meeting, Mr. Gottlieb, Mr. Kennedy, and others discussed the current state of U.N. activities and humanitarian coordination.  End summary.  ---------- Background ----------  2.  On November 6, the USAID/DART met with representatives of OFDA,s implementing partners in Pakistan:  ACTED, Action Against Hunger, International Rescue Committee (IRC), Catholic Relief Services (CRS), GOAL, Mercy Corps, and Save the Children/US.  In this meeting, representatives of all seven implementing partners stated that the U.N. is not operational in most areas, and in areas where it is functioning, it is ineffective.  According to the non-governmental organization (NGO) partners, the U.N. is neither stepping up to its role as coordinating mechanism nor sending effective representatives to the field.  ----------------------------------- Meeting between USAID/OFDA and OCHA -----------------------------------  3.  On November 7, Mr. Gottlieb and members of the USAID/DART met with Mr. Kennedy, who has just arrived in Pakistan as the OCHA Senior Humanitarian Advisor.  At present, the U.N. has a permanently positioned Resident Coordinator whose responsibilities generally include managing emergency relief operations.  Mr. Kennedy assumed humanitarian duties that the Resident Coordinator has previously shouldered alone.  4.  In the meeting, Mr. Gottlieb drew from the information he received at the November 6 meeting and from two days of field visits, outlining the problems that the USAID/DART has identified in the current U.N. cluster system.  Mr. Gottlieb stated that at present, an insufficient number of U.N. personnel are on the ground, and those who are on the ground lack adequate experience coordinating emergency relief efforts.  Mr. Gottlieb noted that within the U.N. cluster system, little coordination between the cluster groups in Islamabad and the field exists.  The shelter cluster is particularly weak, and it has not made plans for protection in the camps.  Mr. Gottlieb stated that he believes a disconnect exists between the Government of Pakistan (GOP) and NGO activities.  5.  Mr. Kennedy stated that the international community needs to recognize the primacy of the GOP military in the humanitarian relief operation, relative to other disasters. Based on his limited time in country, Mr. Kennedy agreed with the USAID/DART,s observation that coordination in the field appears to be much better than coordination in Islamabad.  He also remarked on the importance of coordinating helicopter operations, which are currently being conducted by seven groups, both military and civilian.  6.  Mr. Kennedy remarked that the GOP Army Engineers, current rate of shelter repair is far too slow.  Mr. Kennedy stated that he hoped that the Operation Winter Race concept developed by the U.N. Joint Logistics Center (JLC) and World Food Program (WFP) will help close the gap.  Mr. Gottlieb noted that NGO representatives throughout earthquake-affected areas have stated that the U.N. Children,s Fund (UNICEF) is the most effective U.N. agency in this disaster response, while NGO representatives and others working in the field are most concerned with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, (UNHCR) performance in camp management and protection and the International Organization for Migration,s (IOM) performance in shelter.  7.  The USAID/DART team leader highlighted the importance of influencing Major General Nadeem Ahmed, Deputy Chairman of the Federal Relief Commission, on shelter construction.  Mr. Kennedy replied that it is critical that UNHCR staff in Pakistan take a more active role in camp establishment and management.  He also stated that a full-time U.N. presence is necessary in any Joint Operations Center that the GOP may establish.  ----------- Conclusions -----------  8.  USAID,s NGO implementing partners in Pakistan are unanimous in their concern with the poor performance ) and, in some cases, total absence ) of the U.N. in the humanitarian relief efforts.  9.  The USAID/DART believes that the arrival of Mr. Kennedy as Senior Humanitarian Advisor will have a very positive impact on U.N. management of the emergency relief operation as it enters a critical phase. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD16642", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/14/2005 10:29", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 016837  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON, SENV, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: CRITICAL NON-FOOD RELIEF SUPPLIES: WHAT IS STILL NEEDED  REF: ISLAMABAD 016642  Summary:  Drawing on the latest Government of Pakistan Federal Relief Commission (FRC) documents, information from the UN, and discussions with NGO partners, the DART undertook an analysis of the current requirements, supply, and pipeline for certain key non-food items, in order to determine where critical shortfalls exist, as a follow-up to discussion in REFTEL.  This cable summarizes the current situation with regard to a number of critical items, and reviews OFDA efforts to address shortfalls where necessary.  While it is difficult to identify shortfalls with any degree of precision, it appears that while there may be an overall surplus of tents in general, properly winterized tents (both family sized and larger ones) remain in short supply.  End summary.  1. DART staff has reviewed documents from the Government of Pakistan Federal Relief Commission (FRC), information from various UN reports, and input from a number of NGO implementing partners, in order to evaluate current requirements and available supplies for a number of critical non-food items.  These include tents, blankets, stoves, plastic sheeting, corrugated galvanized iron (CGI) sheets, and plywood.  2. While the overall number of available tents is close to the FRC requirement, most of these are not designed for cold weather, and sufficiently winterized tents remain in short supply.  Estimates of total tents now distributed, in warehouses awaiting distribution, and in the pipeline (with estimated delivery by 30 November) vary from 500,000 to over 600,000.  The current overall requirement, according to the FRC, is 473,000, suggesting a surplus ranging from 25,000 to over 100,000.  Several caveats should be noted regarding these numbers.  On the one hand, UN OCHA believes that many tents have been double counted, because of both donors and implementing NGOs taking credit for the same tents, which would reduce the available supply.  Also, a number of tents were evidently lost during airdrops to remote areas.  On the other hand, the pipeline estimate does not include additional surplus tents from DOD (over 3,000) which we anticipate receiving.  In addition, the FRC tent requirement has not been adjusted downward to account for various non-tent shelter-in-place solutions (plastic sheeting, CGI roofs, etc.).  3. In addition to small (family-sized) tents, there is still a major requirement for large tents that can serve as schools or medical clinics.  The GOP estimates that over 6,000 schools were destroyed, and another 5,500 damaged, in the two affected provinces, as well as over 350 health facilities. Based on this damage, the GoP has projected a need for 30,000 large tents as a subset of the overall requirement.  We have provided about 300 military GP Medium and Large tents to NGO partners, and several hundred more are in the DOD pipeline. We are now in the process of bringing in over 100 large high altitude tents from Alaska for the Government of Pakistan, and over 450 large tents, now in Kabul, for the Pakistani NGO RSPN.  The FRC has not provided an estimate of current and projected supplies for large tents.  The DART believes that the anticipated US contribution will not be sufficient to close the gap, and will continue to seek additional DOD tents and encourage other donors to contribute large tents.  4. The requirement for blankets is somewhat ambiguous.  FRC estimates a total requirement of 3.3 million, with over 2.7 million now provided.  According to UN OCHA, there are about 400,000 more in the pipeline.  However, the FRC just this week halved its blanket requirement (from 6.6 million), and identified a new requirement for an equal number of mattresses (3.3 million).  There are no figures available on current or projected supplies of mattresses.  Some NGO partners are providing foam pads, which they are easily sourcing locally, while others are providing extra blankets (anywhere from two to five per recipient) instead of mattresses.  As such, we can assume an outstanding blanket requirement of anywhere from 200,000 to over 2 million. Discussions with NGO partners indicate that, although there may not be sufficient blankets available in Pakistan, there are more stocks in the region that may be accessed.  About 200,000 additional blankets have been identified in DOD stocks for this operation.  If needed by NGOs, DART logistics team has found several local sources for commercial procurement of blankets.  5. Small stoves for cooking and heating are another new item recently added by the FRC.  Their estimate is identical to the tent requirement (473,000), suggesting one stove per household.  However, NGO partners believe that a significant number of people, at least 20 percent, would have kept stoves from their permanent homes, reducing the overall requirement.  Again, there is no way of accurately estimating the current supply or pipeline.  Some NGOs are procuring propane stoves, for use in urban areas at lower altitudes where gas supply is possible, while most are looking at wood burning, Bukhari type stoves.  Some NGOs have found that these are now in short supply in Pakistan, and lead times are too long (45 days or more).  DART Logistics has found local commercial sources if needed by NGOs, and such stoves can be procured in India and other countries in the region.  6. In addition to items identified by FRC, DART has looked into the availability of several other critical commodities. One item consistently requested by partners is additional USAID specification plastic sheeting (in fact, one NGO alone requested 2000 to 4000 rolls).  To date we have provided 6,150 rolls of sheeting to NGOs, but given its multiple uses the requirement is significantly higher.  DART is now procuring on a test basis 5,000 locally produced plastic tarps (roughly equivalent to 450 rolls, though of a thinner grade) for implementing partners, and has identified other commercial sources for such sheeting.  Already two implementing partners alone are in the process of procuring over 35,000 sheets of such plastic.  While this thinner plastic may not be ideal, the DART does not at this time anticipate a need to completely exhaust all worldwide OFDA stocks of plastic sheeting for this operation.  7. A second item which is essential to our shelter strategy is corrugated galvanized iron (CGI) for roofing of damaged houses.  DART has conducted a market analysis of locally available CGI and provided this info to implementing partners.  Several NGOs are already procuring CGI from these and other sources.  In addition, the Government of Pakistan is making major purchases of CGI itself to support shelter. The DART does not anticipate a requirement to import CGI from the US or other sources outside the region.  8. Finally, the DART has looked into available sources of plywood, which are critical to construction of latrines. Both DART assessments and discussions with implementing partners indicate that latrines are in dreadfully short supply.  Failure to address this need rapidly will exacerbate public health problems, especially in tented camps.  DART is now procuring 500 sheets of plywood locally, which will probably be provided to UNICEF.  In addition the US Navy Engineers (Seabees) now operating at Muzaffarabad are constructing latrines.  DART Logistics has identified local commercial sources of plywood for our NGO partners.  9. In addition to supplies of key commodities, the FRC has identified other critical requirements that are quantified by budget figures rather than numbers of items.  In the water/sanitation sector, the FRC estimates $10 million is needed for water tankers, pumps, generators, purification tablets, trucks and incinerators.  This figure, however, does not include any funding for construction of latrines.  In the public health sector, the FRC has estimated that $8.5 million is needed for immunizations, disease surveillance, drugs, medical equipment, and vector control.  The donors, conference scheduled for November 19 will address these and other longer term sectoral needs in much greater detail.  10. In the next few weeks, the Government of Pakistan, UN, and NGOs will undertake a major effort to move critical supplies to vulnerable earthquake affected areas before the onset of winter.  It is expected that estimates of anticipated supplies and shortfalls of key items will change, as more items are distributed and the better information is available from the field.  The DART will continue to refine its analysis and report on the changing situation in the weeks to come.     CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/14/2005 11:25", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 016850  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, MOPS, ECON, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  KAGHAN AND ALLAI VALLEYS  1. Summary: A team from the Embassy\'s Forward Operating Base in Mansehra (Officer-in-Charge (OIC), USAID/DART Field Officer, U.S. Military Liaison Officer) and representatives of five USAID-funded NGOs visited the Northern Kaghan and Allai Valleys on November 9.  In both areas, Pakistan military commanders are strongly encouraging villagers to relocate for the winter to facilitate assistance efforts.  In northern Kaghan, where most families migrate south to Balakot annually, this advice is being followed.  In Allai, however, most people appear reluctant to leave and will continue to require significant assistance.  Alternative shelter programs will be critical to survival in Allai during the winter months.  Geological activity in Allai remains a significant concern and rumors of volcanic activity continue to persist. Villagers appear grateful for USG assistance and have a generally positive view of Pakistan army efforts.  They are, however, resentful at the provincial government and many political parties for their perceived lack of response.  End Summary.  Kaghan Valley -------------  2. The northern end of the Kaghan Valley centered around the town of Narang was completely isolated by landslides that destroyed the area\'s one access road.  Resupply of this area of Kaghan has been limited to helicopter support flights from the Pakistan militar.  The road opened for the first time to light vehicle traffic on the morning of the delegation\'s arrival.  According to local villagers, the area around Narang has traditionally been seen as having too harsh a climate for winter settlement.  Most villagers spend 8 months of the year in Narang engaged in both agriculture and the tourist industry and then move down the valley to Balakot for the winter after the final potato harvest.  Prior to the earthquake most families had temporary shelter for themselves and their livestock in Balakot.  This is now destroyed.  3.  Villagers told us that, as in previous years, only about 25 people will remain in the Narang area during the winter. Most will stay in the tourist hotels, which did not appear to sustain significant damage during the earthquake.  Foodstocks in the village are sufficient for these remaining individuals.  Those intending to leave the village will do so in about 12 days, after the harvest is in.  There is a serious concern among villagers that the tent camp being established in Jaba Farms (where the army is encouraging villagers to go) lacks sufficient tents, facilities for livestock, and education for children.  The private schools in Balakot in which parents usually enrolled their children are now piles of rubble.  This migratory pattern contrasts with the southern Kaghan Valley, where at least half the population has told NGOs that they intend to remain in place for the winter.  Based on this information, U.S.-funded NGOs intend to continue to focus their supply efforts in southern Kaghan operating out of Paras.  Allai Valley ------------  4.  FOB Team visited two sites in the Allai Valley: the Rashang Union Council and the town of Bana, the center of relief operations.  Military officials present in both locations were adamant that villagers had to leave the valley to survive.  They were strongly encouraging villagers to migrate south to the tent city being established in Marai, Shangla District.  For a variety of reasons, villagers seemed reluctant to make this transition.  Those we spoke with cited concern for their property, safety of their domestic animals, historical ties to their villages, and suspicion about conditions in the camps.  Military officials, in cooperation with NGOs, faced an uphill battle addressing these concerns. Even the most optimistic officials that we spoke with estimated that only half the area\'s population of 60,000 would move south. Based on movement to date (the harvest in Allai is essentially finished), the final numbers departing may be far lower.  5.  The major need in the Allai Valley appears to be shelter.  Insufficient numbers of winterized tents have arrived, although shipments by helicopter (essential due to blocked roads in many areas) continue to arrive.  Military and NGO representatives were skeptical that even properly winterized tents would be sufficient to allow individuals to survive in the harsh winter climate of the area.  In addition, transport of such tents before the weather shifts appears a near impossible task.  As an alternative, NGOs strongly pushed for funding of alternative shelter programs.  These would provide construction kits and advice to enable villagers to rebuild appropriate accommodation using materials from their collapsed houses.  Villagers seemed open to the idea and were already recovering stones, timber, and corrugated sheeting from their collapsed properties, most of which could easily be reused.  Foodstocks in Allai appear in relatively good shape, despite some damage from the earthquake, although no comprehensive study is available.  Prepositioning of food is still a welcome activity, although some of it may go unused. Villagers continued to report smoke and fire coming from some mountains in Allai.  Military commander in Rashang reported that Battela Mountain was a particular concern.  Political Perceptions ---------------------  6.  Villagers were uniformly positive about the USG role. Many had received supplies from U.S. military and INL helicopters and clearly believed that we were going to assist long-term.  The active presence of U.S.-funded NGOs in the Allai Valley further enhances this positive view.  Similarly, villagers were grateful to the Pakistan Army for its role in facilitating assistance.  Soldiers were often the first relief personnel on the ground and had delivered a great deal to the local populace.  The only tinge of resentment was towards the consistent messages requesting villagers to leave their homes.  The provincial government was routinely criticized for its virtually invisibility.    Villagers claimed that, although provincial ministers and officials had visited, they had done nothing to provide needed relief. Asked about the political parties, there was great resentment towards the Pakistan Muslim League, Pakistan People\'s Party, Awami National Party, and Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam Fazlur Rehman.  Village elders claimed none of them had done anything to help and were only interested in votes.  Frequent contrasts were made with Jamaat-i-Islami, whose on-the-ground relief camps appear to have done a great deal to improve its image.  Comment -------  7.  The northern Kaghan Valley appears unique in the area, as it already has a long history of winter migration to the south.  We do not believe that other areas will follow this pattern.  Particularly in the Allai Valley, in-place assistance will be critical through the winter months and must include an immediate emphasis on alternative shelter that can be developed in relatively short order.  Food supplies in these areas will need to be monitored by on-the-ground personnel and logistical plans will need to be developed to distribute on an as-needed basis.  8. Embassy Islamabad is transmitting this cable on behalf of FOB Mansehra. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/14/2005 12:38", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 016875  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, ECON, ASEC, AEMR, MASS, MOPS, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  AREAS IN MANSEHRA DISTRICT WITHOUT ASSISTANCE   1. (U)  Summary:  Embassy Forward Operating Base - Mansehra Officer-in-Charge (OIC) and Emboff accompanied NWFP Parliament minority leader on a November 7 tour of Mansehra tehsil.  During the visit, it became clear that relief was not reaching several areas damaged by the October 8 earthquake.  Resentment at the provincial and national governments remains high in these areas and may cost the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal (MMA) and Pakistan Muslim League (PML) significantly.  Ironically, the natural beneficiaries of such resentment, the Awami National Party (ANP) and the Pakistan People\'s Party (PPP) are noticeably absent.  End Summary.  2.  (U)  At the invitation of the NWFP parliament minority leader, OIC and Emboff visited the towns of Bafa, Ghulibal, Guidepur, and Kularha, all located in Mansehra tehsil. During the visit, OIC observed that, despite reports to the contrary, damage in these villages was extensive.  Much of the damage was in the interior of housing compounds, where back and interior residential walls had collapsed, thereby evading the initial rapid assessments.  With most NGOs and IOs focused on the more visibly damaged areas of Balakot, Battgram, and Allai, villagers have received little or no assistance.  Shelter needs appear particularly acute in these areas.  Only tens of tents, most sent by friends and relatives in other parts of the country, have reached the area although up to 6000 may be needed.  3.  (U)  Minority leader Khan has generated significant goodwill in this area, which he claimed had not supported him in the last election, through provision of 200 tents distributed throughout the area.  According to local leaders, no other political leader has provided any significant support.  Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F), the previously leading party in the area, was described as hypocritical by local leaders.  It had sought support during elections, but abandoned the people in their time of need. Jamaat-e-Islami (JI), whose al-Khidmat Foundation had established nearby camps, clearly had little support in the villages.  Elders claimed a reluctance to accepts JI support, as \"the party always wanted something in return.\"  4. (U)  Locals expressed the strongest ire for the provincial government and the civilian side of the federal government, which they equated with the Pakistan Muslim League (PML). Villagers claimed that they accepted that the army and internationals needed to focus on more devastated and inaccessible areas like Battgram, Balakot, and Allai.  The provincial and federal government should, however, also be able to provide assistance to less affected areas.  They called on the provincial government to do more to provide emergency shelter and financing for rebuilding.  They also requested government assistance in re-designing houses to prevent collapse in the future.  No village elders directly requested USG assistance, instead seeking our help in pressing the provincial and federal government to do more. At a lunch attended by the Brigadier commanding the NCO school at Shinkiari, villagers expressed gratitude for Pakistan Army efforts to assist.  They requested help, however, in obtaining victim registration cards, which would allow them to obtain assistance at Army supply distribution centers.  Most claimed that their villages had been bypassed by Army damage surveyors who had issued the cards.  The Brigadier promised to raise the problem with superiors.  5.  (U)  OIC asked villagers about the role of secular opposition parties in providing aid to their areas.  Elders claimed that neither the ANP nor the PPP had been seen.  Both appeared only at election time and had no real grassroots base in the area.  The somewhat surprising beneficiary of this political vacuum is a little-known local party - the Hazara Quami Movement (HQM).  Financed by an expatriate local who lives most of the time in the United States, HQM has established relief camps near the area, and its graffiti has begun to appear throughout Mansehra and Battgram.  HQM\'s calls for increased autonomy for the three Hazara districts of Abottabad, Mansehra, and Battgram appears to be gaining resonance.  Locals repeatedly cited neglect from Peshawar and Islamabad as the reasons for their growing sympathy towards the HQM.  6. (SBU)  Comment:  The lack of assistance to villages in this part of Mansehra is not unique.  NGOs are consistently finding pockets missed by initial surveys as they push further into Mansehra and Battgram districts.  Anger at the provincial and civilian side of the federal governments is likely to persist absent a more proactive assistance program.  While we believe that the HQM fascination is likely to be short-lived, its underlying premises of neglect from Peshawar and the need for increased local control of resources may well endure.  End Comment.  7. (U)  Embassy Islamabad is transmitting this cable on behalf of FOB Mansehra. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/15/2005 1:55", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ISLAMABAD 016881  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART WATER AND SANITATION SECTOR ASSESSMENT    ------- Summary -------  1.  From October 19 through November 13, a water and sanitation officer (WSO) was deployed to Pakistan as part of the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART).  Through numerous trips through affected areas; assessments, and interviews with representatives of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), Government of Pakistan (GOP) officials, and others, the USAID/DART WSO has determined that the greatest water and sanitation needs are in urban camps, particularly those in Muzaffarabad.  The lack of water and sanitation facilities in these camps places the internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the camps at risk of acquiring sanitation-related diseases.  The U.N. Children,s Fund (UNICEF) and other relief groups are gradually addressing this critical issue, although progress is slow.  In rural areas, the water and sanitation situation is not ideal, but people appear better able to cope with existing conditions. The primary risk to the rural population is the damage to spring systems, which forces rural residents to obtain their water from contaminated streams.  The primary water and sanitation intervention in rural areas is the distribution of hygiene kits and individual water purification materials.  In rural areas with denser populations, the quick repair of heavily used spring systems is necessary.  End summary.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Coordination of Water and Sanitation Interventions --------------------------------------------- -----  2.  The coordination of water and sanitation interventions is being conducted at the five humanitarian hubs:  Mansehra, Balakot, Batagram, Muzaffarabad, and Bagh.  Overall water and sanitation coordination is being conducted out of Islamabad. The following information is based on site visits made from October 22 through November 9.  --------------------------------------------- ---- Islamabad: Current Water and Sanitation Situation --------------------------------------------- ----  3.  At the national level, water and sanitation activities focus on acquiring and delivering resources to implementers at the humanitarian hubs, developing a national disaster strategy, and allocating UNICEF human water and sanitation resources.  At present, the critical resource shortage is the limited supply of latrine slabs.  However, the USAID/DART has purchased plywood for the U.S. Navy Construction Battalion,s (Seabees) construction projects in earthquake-affected areas.  Additionally, UNICEF has investigated numerous options to resolve the shortage, including procuring locally manufactured sheet metal slabs, obtaining plastic latrine slabs manufactured in Dubai, arranging for the local manufacture of plywood slabs, and accessing slab construction materials.  UNICEF is aggressively addressing this issue.  4.  UNICEF has developed an immediate water and sanitation relief strategy that involves four major interventions.  The first is the delivery of hygiene kits with basic instructions to rural populations.  Where feasible, rural gravity-flow spring systems will be repaired.  Where this is not feasible, individual water purification supplies will be provided to families.  The second intervention is providing basic water and sanitation interventions to residents of spontaneous camps in urban areas.  Basic interventions proposed include providing a chlorinated water supply, simple pit latrines designated by sex, hygiene kits for each family, and rudimentary solid waste collection.  The third intervention is providing water and sanitation interventions in planned camps.  Given the more permanent nature of planned camps, proposed interventions include potable water sources on site, pour flush latrines designated by sex, washing areas designated by sex, hygiene kits for each family, and solid waste collection.  The fourth intervention is coupling simple, standard hygiene education programs with all water and sanitation interventions delivered to affected populations.  5.  UNICEF is actively recruiting and assigning water and sanitation professionals for the relief effort.  UNICEF water and sanitation professionals who deployed at the beginning of the relief effort are due to return to their permanent positions.  UNICEF says it will replace them with locally recruited staff.  6.  The USAID/DART will continue to monitor UNICEF,s progress in resolving the latrine supply issue.  UNICEF has requested that USAID provide 10,000 sheets of marine-grade three-quarter-inch plywood and plans to construct latrine slabs from the plywood.  The USAID/DART has sourced a local supply of marine-grade plywood for the Seabees and UNICEF.  7.  The USAID/DART will also monitor UNICEF,s replacement of field staff.  Failure of UNICEF to replace field personnel in a timely manner will result in disruption of water and sanitation coordination activities at the humanitarian hubs.  --------------------------------------------- ------- Muzaffarabad: Current Water and Sanitation Situation --------------------------------------------- -------  8.  The USAID/DART WSO reported that UNICEF is coordinating water and sanitation activities in the Muzaffarabad humanitarian hub, where water and sanitation cluster meetings are held twice weekly.  Addressing unacceptable water and sanitation conditions in the urban tent camps is the priority water and sanitation issue in the region around Muzaffarabad.  The Muzaffarabad city water plant is operating, and the water distribution system is functioning. Tanker trucks are delivering water to tent camps.  9.  In the Muzaffarabad urban area, over 19 camps are a temporary home to more than 10,000 people.  With many residential, government, and retail structures destroyed, Muzaffarabad city sustained extensive damage in the earthquake.  While drinking water has been provided in the tent camps, sanitation conditions in the camps have been neglected.  The poor sanitation conditions in the urban camps are due to several factors:  the lack of camp managers and latrine slabs, limited water and sanitation human resources among the relief agencies due to NGO focus on rural areas, and the failure of NGOs to monitor and ensure proper maintenance of the urban camp latrines.  10.  Recent outbreaks of diarrhea in urban camps have brought increased attention and resources to bear on improving sanitation conditions in urban camp areas.  The U.N. World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, USAID, and the rest of the relief community are actively working to improve sanitation conditions in urban camps.  The relief community is refurbishing or replacing latrines.  UNICEF has coordinated the reassessment of the urban camps, using a survey tool approved by the water and sanitation cluster group.  The reassessment will allow the cluster group to appropriately target resources and water and sanitation interventions.  11.  Water and sanitation interventions in rural areas of Muzaffarabad District are limited to providing basic hygiene items and dispatching emergency response teams.  These joint WHO/UNICEF teams take specimens to investigate the cause of severe diarrhea cases, provide water purification materials, and conduct basic hygiene education.  12.  The USAID/DART will closely monitor water and sanitation activities in urban camps in Muzaffarabad and, when possible, provide technical support.  The Seabees, construction of latrines and latrine slabs for urban camps is an excellent example of directing U.S. military assets towards addressing critical needs.  --------------------------------------------- --- Mansehra: Current Water and Sanitation Situation --------------------------------------------- ---  13.  Mansehra city was not as severely damaged by the earthquake as was Muzaffarabad.  Because the urban population in Mansehra was not heavily impacted, sanitation in urban camps, while an important issue, is not a priority.  Rather, the priority in the region is the water and sanitation issues at planned camps in the area.  The GOP military has assumed responsibly for management in many camps.  Unfortunately, camp managers have allowed IDPs to settle in these camps prior to the completion of the camp infrastructure.  This has led to rapid unplanned construction of inadequate water and sanitation facilities.  The cluster group in Mansehra focuses much of its efforts on responding to the water and sanitation needs in these camps.  14.  In Mansehra District, UNICEF has assumed responsibility for coordination of the water and sanitation sector. However, UNICEF appears to be more a passive participant than the coordinating agency.  In Mansehra, the water and sanitation cluster meeting occurs twice weekly and is led by the Mansehra District Water, Environmental, and Sanitation Department (WES) manager.  Water and sanitation cluster meetings focus primarily on water and solid waste.  When the USAID/DART WSO asked the WES manager whether latrine-related issues were ever discussed at these meetings, the WES manager stated that Oxfam was building   latrines.  Oxfam told the USAID/DART WSO that they were building latrines but that the latrine construction program was poorly coordinated and NGO resources were scarce.  15.  In Mansehra District, the local Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program has identified a total of 107 camps, each of which has more than 20 tents.  Of these 107 camps, the cluster group is focusing its efforts on 47 camps designated by the government as critical camps.  IDP camps in Mansehra region are in rural areas and appear to have adequate space for planned sanitation facilities.  16.  According to UNICEF, the UNICEF Hygiene Promotion Specialist for Mansehra District held a Hygiene Program training on November 12 and 13.  NGO hygiene promotion specialists attended the training, where they were trained on implementing a standardizeD hygiene promotion program.  17.  The USAID/DART has encouraged the water and sanitation cluster in Mansehra meeting to include latrine construction activities in its meeting agenda.  The USAID/DART has also encouraged the establishment of a latrine working group, if time constraints do not allow this issue to be discussed at the regular cluster meeting.  Such a group could tackle latrine construction issues and report at the water and sanitation cluster meeting.  18.  The USAID/DART closely monitors progress on the development of water and sanitation in planned camps.  It is highly likely that camp managers will allow tent camps to become overpopulated.  If the USAID/DART determines that the population of a camp is overloading the camp,s sanitation facilities, the team can take immediate action to encourage the camp management to stop settlement in the camp or, if possible, increase the number of sanitation facilities in the camp.  --------------------------------------------- --- Batagram: Current Water and Sanitation Situation --------------------------------------------- ---  19.  In Batagram District, the earthquake significantly damaged rural homes.  However, Batagram town itself does not appear to be severely damaged.  The commercial district of Batagram does not appear to have sustained significant damage.  Local shops are open, and business appears brisk. The Batagram city water plant is functioning.  Only one major urban camp with approximately 100 tents was observed in Batagram city.  The USAID/DART WSO received reports that residents of this camp were IDPs from the hills surrounding the town.  20.  UNICEF is coordinating water and sanitation sector issues in Batagram District.  Water and sanitation cluster meetings are held twice weekly.  The priority water and sanitation issue in Batagram District is increasing NGO presence in the region and at Mehra tent camp, located one hour north of Batagram on the Indus River.  The GOP is planning Mehra tent camp to accommodate 40,000 IDPs, who the GOP expects will arrive from higher elevations in the Allai Valley.  In Mehra tent camp, Save the Children/US has done an excellent job providing basic sanitation interventions in a timely manner as residents have begun to arrive at the camp. The Austrian Red Cross is providing safe water at the camp.  21.  In rural areas of Batagram District, the water and sanitation priority is the delivery of hygiene kits and water purification supplies to remote areas.  22.  As in Mansehra, the USAID/DART will closely monitor progress on the development of water and sanitation in planned camps in Batagram District.  It is likely that camp managers will allow overpopulation of tent camps if left unmonitored.  If the USAID/DART determines that the population of a camp is overloading the camp,s sanitation facilities, the team will take immediate action to encourage the camp management to stop settlement in the camp or, if possible, expand the camp,s sanitation facilities.  --------------------------------------------- -- Balakot: Current Water and Sanitation Situation --------------------------------------------- --  23.  A town of approximately 50,000 people, Balakot was completely destroyed by the earthquake.  Local NGOs reported an 80% fatality rate in the urban area.  The lack of large numbers of urban camps in the city of Balakot supports this figure.  The absence of urban IDPs may also be the result of previous residents evacuating Balakot city.  24.  ACTED reported that in Balakot, the GOP military is coordinating relief operations, and Action Contre la Faim (ACF) is holding informal water and sanitation coordination meetings.  Representatives of ACF stated that they are constructing 100 latrines per week for the IDPs located in Balakot.  ACF is combining the latrine construction ) the informal sector priority in Balakot ) with a hygiene promotion program.  In Balakot, the German Red Cross is providing clean water  25.  In rural areas of Balakot, the water and sanitation priorities are repairing gravity-flow spring systems in valleys north of Balakot and supplying remote rural residents with hygiene kits.  26.  The USAID/DART is encouraging UNICEF to place a water and sanitation professional in Balakot to coordinate sector activities and assist NGOs with the implementation of water and sanitation interventions.  UNICEF must take an active role in the coordination of water and sanitation activities in the area, as the Balakot water and sanitation sector cannot be effectively managed from Mansehra, as is currently the case.  -------------------------------------------- Bagh: Current Water and Sanitation Situation --------------------------------------------  27.  The USAID/DART WSO visited Bagh but had insufficient time to assess the area.  Like Balakot, Bagh is a small rural community.  Although the town sustained significant damage, businesses appeared to be operating.  The displaced urban population did not appear to have access to latrines. Displaced urban residents are living in spontaneous camps along a mountain stream and at a larger camp near the center of town.  UNICEF is the lead water and sanitation sector coordinator in Bagh.  Cluster meeting are held regularly but meeting dates and times were not available at the time of the visit. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/21/2005 21:04", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 ISLAMABAD 017267  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT PLS PASS USAID MANILA PLS PASS USADB  E.O. 12958:  DECL:  11/20/2015 TAGS: EAID, ECON, PK, PREL, SENV SUBJECT:  SUCCESSFUL DONOR CONFERENCE GIVES MAJOR BOOST MUSHARRAF AND U.S. IMAGE  CLASSIFIED BY:  DSCG 05/01 JANUARY 2005, EDITION 1, REASON: 1.4(D)  1.  (SBU)  summary and comment.  The Musharraf Government is basking in the glow of a successful November 19 donor reconstruction conference that raised $6.0 billion (GOP\'s current internal figure, as of November 21 evening) in pledges for earthquake reconstruction, comfortably in excess of both the World Bank/ADB needs assessment estimate (of $5.2 billion) and the GOP\'s own estimates of its likely take going in (closer to $3.5-4.0 billion).  The largest pledges at the conference (preliminary figures including both new commitments and previously announced commitments) were:  World Bank:  $1 billion; Asian Development Bank:  $1 billion; United States:  $510 million; Saudi Arabia: $420-573 million (depending on whether export credits are included); Islamic Development Bank:  $502 million; China:  $326 million; and Iran:  $200 million.  While most major bilateral donations came from OECD countries and the Gulf states, Musharraf made a point of praising the (smaller) donations and participation of regional neighbors including India, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Bhutan.  2.  (U)   President Musharraf outlined a blueprint for reconstruction that contained:  a plan to give cash grants to owners to rebuild their houses (with guidance to make them earthquake proof); plans to rebuild and improve the education and health systems in the affected areas; a GOP initiative to make facilities like schools or hospitals or even entire villages or tehsils (boroughs) open to \"sponsorship\" by donors from within Pakistan and abroad; and an announcement that Pakistan woul create a permanent volunteer corps to build on the spirit of voluntaris evident in the earthquake aftermath.   3.  (C)  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) and media are characterizing the conference as a tremendous success that reflects how Pakistan\'s post-9/11 foreign policy has ended the country\'s international isolatio and brought it the support of the rest of the world. The substantial U.S. contribution of $510 million (which is one of the two largest bilateral contributions, along with that of Saudi Arabia) has been singled out for special praise by Musharraf and the media.  Privately, GOP interlocutors from Musharraf and Aziz on down have note a pledge of this magnitude will do much to change America\'s image in Pakistan, while Aziz and others have also thanked us for U.S. efforts to encourage other donors to make robust pledges.  4.   (SBU)  In coming days, post will try to obtain the GOP\'s final tally of the pledges made at the conference (including trying to determine where U.S. encouragement for rapid disbursement may be productive) as well as ascertain further details on the reconstruction program sketched out by Musharraf at the conference.  5.  (C)  Comment:  the substantial U.S. pledge for reconstruction, following on the momentum generated by our pivotal role in the earthquake relief effort, has given us a rare opportunity to reshape public perceptions of America here in Pakistan, and to diminish the appeal of extremism more generally.  Our efforts have led to real changes in attitudes and behavior, not just among GOP interlocutors but also among the Pakistani public and media.  Post is working now on ways we can consolidate and build on those gains.  End comment and summary.  The donor conference:  pledges of $6 billion 6.  (U)  After a brief introductory video (in which the image of a big American flag hanging across the interior of a relief helicopter was th only image of a foreign flag), and brief introductory remarks by Conference Chair PM Shaukat Aziz and U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan, President Musharraf delivered the keynote address, laying out Pakistan\'s detailed blueprint for post-earthquake reconstruction. Among the highlights, he: -  Thanked the 75 countries and organizations represented at the conference, and singled out for special thanks the participation of India; -  Outlined the scope of the devastation (73,00 people died; an equal number seriously injured; 400,000 households affected, affecting 3.5 million people; an entire generation of children in the affected areas lost in collapsed schools); -  Praised the quick response of the Pakistani people and army, and explained that Pakistan had launched a national volunteer movement to tap into the energy of young Pakistanis who had voluntarily left their jobs to help with rescue operations;  -  Expressed the \"deep gratitude of the Pakistani people\" to the foreign participants in the rescue operation, and praised as \"massive\" the foreign support to the relief operation; -  Outlined the steps being taken to address the challenges of the relief operation (logistics, shelter, economy) and updated the \"on the whole satisfactory\" progress made to date. -  Explained that in order to restart economic activity to the region, the GOP would, by the end of November, pump 20 billion rupees ($350 million) in the local economies, giving 100,000 rupees ($1667) to the next of kin of those killed in the quake, 50,000 rupees ($833) to the seriously wounded; 25,000 ($417) to the less seriously wounded; and 25,000 ($417) rupees to each of the 400,000 affected households. -  Noted that in the needs assessment agreed by the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the GOP, $3.5 billion would be for reconstruction; $1.6 billion would be to sustain the relief operation for the coming year; and $100 million would be for rehabilitation efforts; -  Explained that for the 400,000 homes destroyed or seriously damaged by the earthquake, Pakistan would use an owner-driven approach, with each household receiving $3300 dollars to rebuild, and receiving guidance from military engineers and the new national volunteer corps o how to make the new homes earthquake proof. Musharraf noted the GOP\'s goal would be to complete the reconstruction of homes by the end of 2006.  Given the demand for construction material, some may be sourced from abroad and paid for by assistance pledges. -  Explained the GOP would be encouraging sponsorship of specific reconstruction projects by donors (both within Pakistan and from abroad).  Information on specific projects open for sponsorship would b available on a GOP website; -  For housing, a village cluster of 100 houses could be sponsored for $330 K, and for that sum the village would be named after the sponsor (Musharraf noted the Pakistan still has major cities like Abbotabad and Jacobabad named after their founders). Sponsoring home reconstruction throughout an entire tehsil (borough) would cost $50 million; sponsoring home reconstruction throughout an entire provincial district would cost $150 million. -  Explained that the GOP would prefer that sponsorship be applied to health and education facilities.  For housing, rather than have direct sponsorship by donors or self- construction by donors -- both of which could lead to disparities in housing levels (and/or unsuitable housing) -- the GOP would prefer that money be contributed to the President\'s Relief Fund from which it will be used to finance owner-driven housing reconstruction. -  Said that the education infrastructure in the affected areas would be rebuilt in a manner that is modular and earthquake proof, and would be rebuilt with a goal of universalizing education in the affected area (this meant the GOP\'s estimate for the cost of reconstructing the education system in the affected areas was $614 million, or roughly 30 percent higher than the $472 million figure cited in the needs assessment); -  Said that for the health sector, rebuilding in line with needs (rather than simply duplicating the facilities destroyed in the earthquake) would come to $412 million, or roughly 36 percent more than the figure cited in the needs assessment (to rebuild earlier facilities). -  Explained that in order to protect destitute women, the orphaned, and disabled (the rehabilitation phase), the Ministry of Social Welfare would create rehabilitation centers modeled on the Ashyana (nest) project in Hattian, and in order to generate economic activity there would encourage microfinance (including the Khushalli Bank of Pakistan) and skill development by NGOs and volunteer groups. -  Appealed to Pakistanis both within Pakistan and throughout the world to donate generously, sponsoring the reconstruction of facilities or even \"adopting\" entire villages, tehsils, or districts.   (Later in the conference it was explained a subsequent donor conference would be held to raise reconstruction funds from domestic and expatriate Pakistanis.) -  Assured that the reconstruction plan, and the receipt and disbursement of funds, would be implemented in a transparent manner, an be monitored by both external auditors and an oversight committee of eminent persons.  Committees comprised of parliamentarians, local government and military representatives would oversee local-level disbursement of funds. -  Appealed to India, \"to the government of Indian Held Kashmir ... to the All Parties Hurriyat Conference and other Kashmiri groups\" to work together to turn the earthquake into an opportunity to improve Indo-Pak relations and solve the Kashmir dispute.  This, he said, could be \"India\'s donation\" to the earthquake relief effort.  7.  (SBU).  Prime Minister Aziz closed the conference by noting his quick calculation indicated that pledges of assistance were received fo $5.4 billion, in excess of the $5.2 billion figure cited in the needs assessment (and closer to the GOP\'s own calculation that rebuilding the health and education systems in the affected areas with necessary improvements would push the total reconstruction cost to $6 billion). November 20 Pakistani press reports cited a figure of $5.8 billion.  These numbers seem to include both new pledges and previous pledges, as most donors did in their presentations (an unconfirmed November 21 press report said the conference raised $3.4 billion in new assistance), and include grant and loan assistance; it i not clear whether all pledges (e.g., export credits, IMF emergency loan are included in these initial tallies.   The GOP\'s Economic Affairs Division, which handles foreign assistance issues, is still compiling final figures, which Embassy will report septel.  On November 21 evening, GOP contacts told us their current internal calculation -- still preliminary --is that the pledges made at the conference totaled $6 billion, of which roughly $3.6 billion were new pledges (and $2.4 billion were pledges announced previously).  8.  (U)  Individual donors made the following pledges (NOTE:  this reflects initial numbers committed by delegates to the conference, as recorded by embassy notetaker and the press, with additional details as available). -  World Bank (represented by Praful Patel, Vice President, South Asia region):  $1 billion -  Asian Development bank (Haruhiko Kuroda, President): $1 billion; -  United States (USAID Administrator Andrew Natsios):  $510 million; -  Saudi Arabia:  $593 million (of which $133 million grants, $187 concessional loans, $120 million in private donations, and $153 in export credits, which are not usually counted as assistance); -  Islamic Development Bank (Ahmed Mohamed Ali, President):  $502 million (reflecting an additional $250 million that IDB management will propose to the IDB board, on top of $252 previously committed); -  IMF (Iqbal Zaidi, Senior Advisor to the Executive Director): reiterated offer of $375 million loan for balance of payments support (NOTE:  GOP contacts told us this number was not being included in the final tally of assistance pledges); -  China (Wu Dawei, Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs):  press reports $326 million (of which the majority is a new $300 million concessional loan); -  Iran (Mohammed Saeedi Kia, Miinister for Housing and Urban Development):  $200 million (in medium term credits); -  Turkey (Mehmet Ali Sahin, Deputy PM and Minister of State):  $150 million (appears this was previously announced); -  France (Philippe Douste-Blazy, Minister for Foreign Affairs):  $124 million (of which $94 million in new concessional loans on top of $30 million previously announced); -  United Kingdom (Gareth Thomas, Deputy Minister of International Development): $120 million in new contributions; -  Japan (Yasuhisa Shiozaki, Senior Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs):  $120 million ($100 million in new yen loans on top of $20 million in grant aid previously announced); -  European Commission (Benita Ferrero-Waldner, Commissioner):  $110 million in grants (not clear if this figure includes Commission assistance previously announced); -  Germany (Ambassador Gunter Mulack):  $100 million (in a new package of commitments agreed November 16.  This appears to be on top of earlie contributions of $31 million from the German Government and $24 million from private donations in Germany); -  UAE (Ali Bin Abdullah Al-Kaabi, Minister for Labor):  $100 million (previously announced); -  Kuwait:  $100 million (previously announced); -  Netherlands (Ambassador Willem Andreae):  has pledged over $72 million so far, and will consider additions to that when Development Minister visits Pakistan in two weeks; -  Norway:  $70 million (Government will ask Parliament for an additional $35 million on top of $35 already spent; will also consider debt swap). Other countries announcing contributions included:  Indonesia; Azerbaijan, Australia (which will announce a new assistance package during Prime Minister Howard\'s upcoming visit);  Jordan; Bangladesh ($2 million); Afghanistan; India (re-affirmed Geneva pledge of $25 million in export credits); Ireland; Italy; Malaysia (additional $1 million on top of 3.3. million in cash and kind previously pledged); Cuba, Sweden (additional $20 million in grants over three years on top of $25 million already pledged); Korea; Morocco; Thailand (additional $300 K on top of previous commitment of $250 K); Denmark ($18.5 million total to date, and considering more); Switzerland ($40 million over five years, plus several million in private donations from Swiss citizens); Bhutan; Czech Republic; Spain; Singapore; Canada; Greece.  The reaction:  praise for Musharraf, Aziz ... and the United States   9.  (C)  The GOP has publicly termed the conference a big success, and has privately told us they were elated by the strong showing since they went into the conference knowing of only $3.5 billion in pledges.  President Musharraf was quoted as telling the press the results showed Pakistan enjoyed the respect of the world community, was not in isolation, and would be receiving help from around the world to help rebuild.  At his luncheon following the conference, Musharraf said (this was subsequently released to the press):  \"I would be remiss if I did not single out some countries who have been particularly generous.  And in this, I would like to pinpoint two countries who have exceeded $500 million dollars, that is, the United States of America and Saudi Arabia. We are extremely grateful to these countries for contributing so much to us.\"  (Musharraf also singled out for thanks countries that pledged more than $100 million --  the United Kingdom, German, UAE, Kuwait, and European Union/Commission -- and the World Bank, ADB and Islamic Development Bank.)  At the luncheon, Musharraf privately asked the USDel to express thanks to President Bush and said U.S. generosity at the conference would have a lasting positiv impact on America\'s image in Pakistan in a way that an incremental approach would not have.  Prime Minister Aziz also thanked the USDel for the significant U.S. pledge, which he said helped set the tone for the entire conference, and he also expressed appreciation for U.S. efforts to encourage other donors (the Japanese delegation and ADB delegation each also noted that U.S. encouragement had been helpful to efforts to strengthen their contributions).  10.  (U)  Media reaction to the November 19 conference has been uniformly positive, both for the GOP and for the United States.  In a November 20 editorial, the Dawn (Pakistan\'s leading English language daily) said the conference resulted in \"an encouraging pledge of $5.8 billion ... [which] should serve to cheer up a government that had been fighting with its back to the wall and facing intense criticism from the opposition [for slowness of relief operations],\" and stated \"The U.S. is the single biggest donor country, having increased its contribution to $510 million (including money already given).\"  [NOTE:  the Dawn editorial reported the Saudi contribution as $391 million, which apparently leaves out the $153 million in export credits and some other part of the Saudi aid package.]  The November 20 \"The News\" had the front-page headline \"PM basks in \'foreign policy success\' and quoted PM Aziz as saying the conference results demonstrated that \"The foreign policy being pursued by President General Pervez Musharraf has started showing results;\" other articles in the News called the Saturday conference \"a celebration of Pakistan\'s foreign policy.\" On November 21, the Daily Times had an editorial (headline:  \"World Rallies around Pakistan\") noting the earlier decision of opposition parties\' (ARD and MMA) to stay away from the conference, said there was \"definitely an incomprehensible sense of dismay in thE opposition camp at the success of the government to get the world together.\" The editorial continued, \"In the final tally of aid pledges, there are a few surprises for the pessimists and for those who think that Pakistan\'s post-9/11 foreign policy has isolated the country instead of bringing it in tune with the rest of the world. The U.S., together with Saudi Arabia, is at the top of the list of countries in bilateral pledges.... The American pledge of half a billio dollars has come in the wake of opinion surveys in Pakistan saying 90 percent of the respondents hated President Bush and loved Osama bin Laden and that Al Qaeda was not responsible for 9/11 attacks.\"  11.  (U)  The Urdu press has been equally upbeat about the donor conference results.  The leading mass circulation daily \"Jang\" in a Monday editorial called the conference results \"not only testimony of the success of the efforts of President Musharraf and PM Shaukat Aziz but also a reflection of trust in the government\'s efforts for the rehabilitation\" of quake-affected areas and people.  The second highest circulation daily \"Nawa-e-Waqt\" noted \"Among those provided the most ai are the World bank, Asian Development Bank, America and Saudi Arabia.\"  A Monday editorial in the Urdu daily \"Din\" stated \"It is worth mentioning here that the U.S. increased its assistance three-fold, raising the final figure to $510 million out of which 300 million would be provided in cash.\"  The populist Urdu daily \"Khabrain\" stated in a November 21 editorial, \"The international community\'s response has been beyond Pakistan\'s expectations.  Undoubtedly, President Musharraf and PM Aziz deserve praise for organizing this conference, although some circles in Pakistan were creating the impression that the international community was not interested in helping Pakistan.\"  The center-right daily \"Pakistan,\" in a November 21 editorial, said \"America has announced the most aid in the Donors Conference, which is approximately $510 million.  American Congress had urged the Administration to increase it to one billion.... The Government can rightly feel proud of the outcome of the conference... America and its allies have lent wholehearted support to their ally Pakistan; it is also a reflection of the confidence reposed in Presiden Musharraf.\"  12.  (SBU)  By November 21, print media had begun to give some space to (inside) stories reporting opposition parties\' criticism that the donor conference has not been as great a success as asserted since much of th assistance is being provided in the form of loans, which will ultimatel increase Pakistan\'s debt burden (Note:  no individual country\'s assistance is referenced in these stories.  It is post\'s understanding that the U.S. $510 million aid package is likely to be al in grants or in-kind).  Next steps   13.  (SBU)  In the coming days, post will try to obtain the GOP\'s final tally of the pledges made at the conference (including trying to determine where U.S. encouragement for rapid disbursement may be productive).  Post will also try to obtain further details on the reconstruction program sketched out by Musharraf at the conference, and try to pinpoint how the various components of the U.S. assistance pledg (USAID funds and programs, DOD support, and private sector financing) can be most effective. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/22/2005 11:46", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 017311  SIPDIS  DEPT PASS TO USAID  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, ECON, PHUM, PK, AORC, UN, Earthquake SUBJECT: SIX WEEKS AFTER PAKISTAN\'S EARTHQUAKE:  ASSESSING THE UN\'S PERFORMANCE   Summary -------   1.   With few exceptions, UN agencies were inadequate to the task in the weeks immediately following Pakistan\'s earthquake.  In some cases they remain so.  Certainly the challenges have been great, involving overwhelming needs, difficult terrain, multiple donors and the need to work closely with Pakistani leaders and agencies that were initially uncertain and uncoordinated.  That said, some UN agencies have been remarkably slow to adapt, despite the obvious urgency as winter conditions set in.  Because these agencies are responsible for coordinating donor activities in their sectors, these shortcomings have had a cascading impact on the effectiveness of other relief operations operating in affected sectors.  NGOs working in the field have been frustrated by sometimes interminable discussions on minutiae and have pushed hard for better UN leadership.  Overall Assessment ------------------  2.  This cable is based on observations in Islamabad and the field by Embassy staff and USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) and reflects numerous meetings with UN representatives and NGO implementing partners.  3.  The UN was late in appreciating that a second disaster was looming after the initial search and rescue phase -- specifically that hundreds of thousands, if not millions would require shelter assistance to survive the harsh Himalayan winter.  In contrast to many NGOs, the UN was slow to provide funding and deploy qualified personnel and assets in response this threat.  One UN employee characterized the UN response to date as a \"disgusting operation\" and a \"pathetic show.\"  His view, almost one month after the earthquake, was that UN agencies did not generally send their best people.  The UN also had initial difficulties in dealing with Pakistani authorities, though coordination improved after the GOP established the Federal Relief Commission (FRC) as the coordination entity for disaster response.  While the performance of UN agencies improved over time, their failures in the early weeks suggest they are not equipped to deal with crises like this one, where lives depend on a rapid response.   4.  The UN and its defenders assert that UN agencies were inadequately funded and that performance improved as funds came in.  There is some truth to this, but we note that on October 12 (four days after the earthquake) the U.S. disbursed two million dollars each to UNICEF and WHO, three million to IOM and almost four million to WFP ($3.5 million for air operations and $300,000 for the Joint Logistics Center).   U.S. NGOs that were provided similar sums a few days later have much more to show for their efforts in terms of impact on the ground.  (Though in fairness, these NGOs were able to focus more exclusively on relief delivery and in some cases had more latent in-country capacity.)  5.  Beginning at para 10 below, we rank the key UN agencies on their performance over the first month following the disaster, with the strongest performers first and the weakest last.   We acknowledge an inherent degree of unfairness in this ranking as UN agencies are not funded equally; it is probably no coincidence that WHO and UNICEF, the best funded agencies, get the best marks.  Moreover, the varying sectors in which UN agencies operate also vary in complexity.  Donor Coordination ------------------  6.  The UN was quick to assume leadership of Islamabad-based \"clusters\" that seek to coordinate emergency response in various sectors.  However, in most sectors there have been too few qualified UN personnel on the ground to provide effective leadership, and little vertical coordination between the clusters in Islamabad and corresponding ones in the field.  As such, the overall effectiveness of the UN, both in field operations and in providing technical advice to NGOs and the GOP, has been limited.  There has been a general disconnect between Pakistani Government and NGO activities, and while the UN is not entirely responsible, more effective UN coordination could have helped considerably.  USAID NGO implementing partners are fairly unanimous in their concern with the poor performance (and in some cases, total absence) of the UN in humanitarian relief efforts.  7.  The UN\'s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has been heading donor coordination meetings in Islamabad since the day after the earthquake.   In early November (following guidance provided by US and UK reps) OCHA dispatched a Senior Humanitarian Advisor, Kevin Kennedy, to more effectively pull together the efforts of different agencies.  Kennedy, a former U.S. Marine officer with extensive disaster coordination experience, has been a welcome addition, and recognizes the leading role the Pakistani military must play.  His initial assessment was that coordination in Islamabad lagged well behind coordination in the field and indications are that he has already reduced the disparity in the weeks since he arrived.  8.  In the field, UN Disaster Assistance Coordination (UNDAC) teams were sent to coordinate the initial donor response. The U.S. Forward Operating Base in Mansehra gives UNDAC good marks for its work in the NWFP.  OCHA is now assuming this coordination function from UNDAC and the transition seems to be proceeding smoothly.  However, while the UN\'s coordination efforts in the field under UNDAC and OCHA seem to be reasonably strong, they have not succeeded in improving the implementation record of other UN agencies.  9.  Soon after the operation began, the UN established a HIC (Humanitarian Information Center), collocated with OCHA at the UNICEF building in Islamabad.  The HIC has provided some useful maps and contact information, but has generally been in a passive mode, receiving information from clusters and NGOs rather than proactively seeking information on concentrations of vulnerable people and field conditions. HIC staff in Pakistan were largely trained in an operations model for working in slow-onset, complex humanitarian disaster and have not yet adjusted to the need to work in the compressed time scale of a natural disaster.  WHO ---  10.  The World Health Organization (WHO) could have done more to promptly address dangerously unsanitary conditions in Muzzafarabad camps, but overall it gets good marks, both in coordinating the health cluster and in addressing needs on the ground.  WHO continues to provide disease surveillance through 29 reporting sites, diligently quashing unconfirmed rumors of epidemic outbreaks while continuing to monitor for important indicative diseases such as cholera.  It has helped restart health facilities that were damaged by the earthquake, through provision of tents, mobile units, medicines and medical supplies, and conducted with UNICEF a mass measles vaccination campaign for those between 6 months to 15 years old.  No massive outbreak has broken out in any of the camps or settlements, indicating that the vaccination has been generally successful.  11.  WHO was the first and only UN agency to deploy to hard-hit Balakot, where it has been a continuing presence for over two weeks now, coordinating with the NGOs and monitoring health trends in the area.   Under WHO leadership, the health cluster group in Mansehra is working well together to cover health needs and gaps in assistance for the affected population, and is trying to increase collaboration between emergency care and medical practitioners who will eventually take over the long-term care for these patients.  UNICEF ------  12.  NGO representatives throughout the affected area say UNICEF is performing reasonably well as the lead agency for water and sanitation, protection, education and nutrition. UNICEF has done an adequate job in the water and sanitation area, developing  a comprehensive relief strategy involving four major interventions, including hygiene kits for rural populations, basic interventions for residents of spontaneous camps in urban areas (chlorine tablets, simple pit latrines, hygiene kits, rudimentary waste collection), interventions in planned camps (potable water sources on site, pour flush latrines, washing areas, hygiene kits, waste collection), and standard hygiene education programs for all affected populations.  In Muzaffarabad, UNICEF has been aggressive in addressing the shortage of latrine slabs, purchasing plywood for the U.S. Navy Seabees projects, procuring locally manufactured sheet metal slabs, obtaining plastic slabs from Dubai, and arranging for local production of plywood slabs. The story is not as favorable in the NWFP, where its sanitation efforts have lagged.  (In Shangla District\'s Mehra camp, which houses 6,200 people, UNICEF has built only 20 pit latrines.) It has been less effective in coordinating the work of other NGOs in the field, which has led to a duplication of effort in several camps.  A lack of UNICEF leadership has also sometimes allowed Pakistan\'s Department of Water and Sanitation to steer donor funding toward a wishlist of long-standing water projects at the expense of crucial hygiene and sanitation efforts.  13.  UNICEF seems to be doing better in coordinating and implementing protection, education and nutrition programs  It has helped restart schools that were damaged by the earthquake by providing large tents and school supplies and working with NGOs to set up child-friendly spaces in camps. It has also offered psychological support to those traumatized by the disaster and disseminated health messages throughout the communities.  In addition, UNICEF working with WFP has distributed high energy biscuits to some 25,000 children through the school system, and has completed a nutrition survey training this month.  Assessments from the field suggest that UNICEF logistics personnel have been effective and energetic.  WFP ---  14.  The World Food Program (WFP), which chairs the logistics and food/transportation clusters, has a poor, but improving record.  On the logistics front, its initial efforts were weak but improved dramatically after the arrival of one of its most able people, Amer Daoudi, Chief of its Logistics Service in Rome.  WFP\'s role in this cluster is complex, in that it can directly task the UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) which operates the helicopters leased by the UN, but not the UN Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC), an interagency body funded by separate contributions that oversees schedules and coordinates all modes of transport (ground, fixed wing aircraft, and helicopters).  15.  Field assessments of WFP\'s performance in the food cluster do not paint a favorable picture.  It has been slow in gathering information on where the NGOs are working and areas that are not being served.    NGOs have bitterly complained about the lack of coordination resulting in duplication of food distributions and competition for food supplies among NGOS.  While some of this can be blamed on NGOs, strong WFP leadership would certainly have led to a more effective and timely distribution of food resources.  UNJLC -----  16.  The performance of the UN Joint Logistics Center in coordinating transportation has been mixed.  Early in the operation there were a significant logistical problems in managing air cargoes arriving at Islamabad Airport.  These problems have receded somewhat with improved inventorying of incoming goods.  The most complex challenges in the logistics field have related to use of helicopter assets where UNJLC is not yet up to the task of coping with the numerous actors involved.  UNJLC is tasking not only the UNHAS helicopters, but also British helicopters, while the U.S. military is receiving helicopter taskings from the Pakistani military. As a result, too many missions have been flown to sites that were accessible by road, resulting in longer wait times for some NGO cargo that did actually need to move by air. In some cases UN pilots did not have proper maps or grid coordinates and were hampered by limited English language facility.  17.  The WFP\'s Amer Daoudi was instrumental in the recent establishment of a Joint Air Operations Center, in which the Pakistani military, UN, US, and other militaries would divide up necessary helicopter missions to avoid duplication and ensure all areas are reached.  UNHCR -----  18.  UNHCR is responsible for the camp management cluster, and of all the UN agencies, it has probably been the weakest performer.  In part this is because it conceives its role as planning and training -- equipping others to administer camps.  It has not adjusted easily to the existing emergency situation where lives are at stake and there is no time to train others to do the work.  (By the third week UNHCR had over 20 people working on earthquake relief in the NWFP, but the affected area in the NWFP is very large.)    In addition, UNHCR has been hampered by a lack of qualified personnel, effective leadership and limited resources on the ground. During a number of visits to the field, DART personnel encountered no UNHCR presence whatsoever, including in major tented camps.  Pakistani military representatives made reference to UNHCR driving through their areas of operation, talking briefly with them, and then leaving with no follow-up visits.   One DART field officer had a discussion with a UNHCR representative who was, nearly a month into the operation, unsure of the exact mandate of his agency, and the degree to which it should be involved in camp design and management.  Other UN representatives pointed out the need to push UNHCR to take a more active role in this area.  19.  In fairness, part of the difficulty was that UNHCR had to wait until the army and the government\'s Federal Relief Commission (FRC) provided sites.  The very rugged terrain of the affected area offers few flat areas, and some suitable sites are not available. Once sites were identified, the army often pitched tents without consulting anyone, making it necessary for UNHCR to work with the military to reconfigure the camp to make it meet appropriate standards for displaced people.   As with other UN agencies, UNHCR\'s early performance suffered because no government entity was speaking authoritatively for the GOP on relief plans.  The UN also had to adjust when the FRC made major changes to the shelter plan.   (Performance has improved recently as UNHCR has fielded additional staff, allowing it to dispatch quick impact teams to fix water, sanitation and other problems in camps.)  IOM --- 20.  The International Organization for Migration (IOM) has failed to offer effective leadership for the critical shelter cluster.  It has adopted a facilitative, rather than a leadership role and was slow to establish effective avenues of cooperation with the GOP.  IOM has devoted considerable time and human and financial resources to field operations focused on the movement of supplies, which has diverted attention from the important task of strategically managing the Shelter Cluster.   NGOs in the NWFP complain that IOM employees are ineffectual and spend too much time collating databases instead of addressing urgent needs.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/25/2005 8:10", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 017384  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: THE SITUATION IN KOHISTAN    1. Summary:  Southern Kohistan fared somewhat better than neighboring provinces during the October 8 earthquake with only two subdistricts affected and comparatively less damage.  In terms of assistance, however, the 50-55% of the affected areas, population left homeless have fared far worse.  Only limited assistance has reached the area and corruption at the local and provincial government level has diverted needed resources.  International and national NGOs are entirely absent in the district,s Pattan subdistrict, and even the Islamist parties, which enjoy broad support in the district, have not initiated relief camps.  The Pakistan army is cognizant of the lack of aid, and has promised to divert additional resources, particularly shelter, to the area. Officials, however, stress that their impact will be limited without additional support from the UN and international NGOs.  End Summary.  2.  OIC, Emboff, and A/RSO visited the Pattan subdistrict in southern Kohistan on November 15 to review damage and assess relief and recovery operations in the area.  The earthquake in southern Kohistan was relatively less severe than in other areas of NWFP.  Most damage that we observed was caused by landslides that were triggered by the initial quake as opposed to the outright collapse of buildings that we have witnessed elsewhere.  While deaths were reportedly minimal (locals who are familiar with landslides took evasive action in the minutes after the quake which probably saved lives), injuries, particularly broken bones and contusions from falling rock were frequently observed.  Between 25,000 and 30,000 people (50-55% of the populations) were left homeless by the earthquake/landslide and significant damage was caused to the limited road network and electricity/communication infrastructure.  3.  Locals in Pattan subdistrict identified shelter as their priority need.  Absent assistance, they claimed that it will be impossible for many to survive the upcoming winter.  In their view, between 4000 and 5000 winterized tents or alternative shelters would be necessary to meet the need in this area.  Only a few hundred tents had arrived in the subdistrict.  Locals expressed a willingness to build alternative shelter if provided with needed tools, but were very concerned that it would be impossible to complete such shelters before significant snowfall began in the area.  4.  The equitable distribution of the limited available supplies within Kohistan was a significant concern.  Military relief flights have been turning over all goods to the local governments for distribution (in contrast to other areas where direct distribution by the military is the norm). Local military commanders attributed this decision to a lack of personnel to handle distributions unilaterally.  According to locals, the district, subdistrict, and union council nazims have been distributing supplies based on political and family affiliation rather than need.  For example, close relatives of the district nazim had been provided with several roles of plastic sheeting despite having suffered no damage to their houses.  That sheeting was now for sale in the local market.  In addition, locals claimed that the Provincial Revenue Minister had been channeling all provincial (and to the extent that he could) federal relief goods towards Palas subdistrict (his home constituency). They adamantly maintained that conditions in that subdistrict were far better than in theirs (due to time constraints, OIC could not visit Palas).  5.  Despite their concerns over distribution, locals were effusive in their praise for relief flights organized by the Pakistani and American militaries ) their only source of assistance to date.  In contrast, they were dismissive of UN entities and NGOs who they maintained had not been seen in the region.  OIC observed that northern Shangla and Kohistan were virtually devoid of the presence of any NGOs and IOs (in contrast to other areas where they are much in evidence). Similarly, locals were disappointed by the absence of relief efforts from Islamist parties in the district.  Neither JI nor JUI-F had relief camps in the Pattan subdistrict despite steadfast political support for these parties from locals. Locals claimed to be reevaluating whether these parties merited their support in future.  6.  The Pakistan military was aware of the serious deficit in relief supplies reaching southern Kohistan.  OIC spoke with NWFP Chief of Relief Operations, Maj. Gen. Shakil who was visiting the district by helicopter on the same day.  Shakil admitted that supplies had been inadequate, largely because the military had not previously obtained a clear picture of need in the area.  Shakil instructed his officers to send six relief flights per day to Pattan over the following week. Military officials in Mansehra claimed that a portion of those were sent but that they included largely food and NFIs not shelter.  Shakil stressed that absent an IO/NGO presence in the district, the army would be hard-pressed to meet the significant needs in the area.  7.  Comment: Due to the comparatively less damage in Kohistan, NGOs and IOs have yet to focus on this area.  While we agree that needs are unquestionably greater in other areas of the NWFP, complete neglect of this area is of significant concern, especially given the typically harsh winters and a lack of viable alternatives for most of the population.  The Pakistan military seems genuine in its desire to assist, but is also cognizant that its resources are limited and cannot meet the needs without outside assistance.  Nepotism has certainly complicated relief efforts in the area, but is likely an outgrowth of limited resources and may well evaporate with significant relief supplies.  We believe that additional focus on Kohistan needs to be a priority for the international community.  End Comment.  8. Embassy Islamabad is transmitting this cable on behalf of FOB Mansehra. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/25/2005 11:44", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 017421  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT 15: THE MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE IN EARTHQUAKE-AFFECTED AREAS  ------- Summary -------  1. With the onset of winter, some Pakistanis living at higher elevations are beginning to relocate temporarily to lower elevations.  The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) has received reports, however, of people moving not just from the mountains to camps at lower elevations, but also from the camps back up to the mountains.  Movement varies by district, as well as by location within the district.  This population movement is likely the result of a number of factors, including the need to find food and shelter during the winter months, Government of Pakistan (GOP) payments for earthquake-related losses, seasonal migration patterns, and the lack of basic services in some tent camps.  Agencies providing humanitarian aid must structure their programs to take into account population movement.  As additional information regarding population movements becomes available, the USAID/DART will adjust funding as necessary.  End summary.  ---------- Background ----------  2. With the onset of winter, some Pakistanis living at higher elevations are beginning to relocate temporarily to lower elevations.  The percentage of the population that relocates for the winter varies throughout the country.  The October 8 earthquake has disrupted typical movement patterns this year.  ----------------------------------- Movements of People within Pakistan -----------------------------------  3. The USAID/DART has received reports of people moving not just from the mountains to the camps but also from camps at lower elevations back up to the mountains.  Movement varies by district and location within the district.  On November 13, a representative of USAID/Pakistan reported that in Mansehra, approximately 90 percent of people from the northern Kaghan Valley intended to leave the valley within the week.  However, this pattern is a part of an annual migration pattern, as the winters at elevations in the northern Kaghan Valley are harsh.  Approximately 30 percent of people who live in the southern and central Kaghan Valley have already left their homes.  In some parts of Mansehra, up to half of the people who left in the aftermath of the earthquake have returned to their homes, and as of November 13, people living in this area continue to return.  In the Kala Dhaka Tribal Area, however, less than 5 percent of the population has left their homes as people in this area are essentially self-sufficient and typically do not leave home.  4. A representative of USAID/Pakistan reported that in Batagram tehsil, approximately 10 percent of people living in isolated areas have left for other locations.  Most of these people have joined family members elsewhere in Pakistan, and people who have not left have expressed an intention to remain.  5. In Allai tehsil, approximately 10 percent of the population has left for other locations, with most going to Mehra Tent Camp.  A USAID/Pakistan representative reported that as temperatures drop, more people will continue to leave their homes, although it is unlikely that 50 percent of the population in this area will leave, as the GOP military predicts.  -------------------------------- Reasons for Population Movements --------------------------------  6. Recent population movement in Pakistan is likely the result of a number of factors, although the most basic reason is to find shelter and food.  In addition, some individuals or families are likely moving in order to claim GOP payments for earthquake-related loss.  Further, seasonal migration is a traditional coping mechanism of many who live at higher altitudes.  The USAID/DART has also observed that in some areas of Pakistan, people living in tent camps have returned to the site of their former homes.  7. GOP Payments for Earthquake-Related Loss: One of the factors affecting Pakistanis\' movements is the GOP\'s commitment to disburse funds to those affected by the earthquake.  On November 11, President Musharraf announced that the GOP would immediately disburse 100,000 Pakistani Rupees (PKR), which is approximately USD 1,666, to the next of kin of those who died in the earthquake, PKR 50,000 (USD 833) to people injured in the earthquake, and PKR 25,000 (USD 416) to those whose houses were damaged or destroyed. According to a USAID/Pakistan representative in Mansehra, reports from the field suggest that the GOP\'s progress with the monetary distributions is mixed.  8. A USAID/Pakistan representative reported that in earthquake-affected areas, district governments have received funds to make payments for deaths of family members.  District governments are organizing payment disbursal.  Each district government appears to be disbursing funds differently.  Among districts, the progress at which disbursal is proceeding varies.  9. As of November 14, Pakistani citizens who lost property in the earthquake had not received compensation. Compensation for the loss of loved ones, however, was being paid in Abbottabad, Mansehra, Batagram, and Shangla. District officials who spoke with USAID claimed that payments will continue until the available GOP funds run out or all victims are compensated.  10. While some people can claim payments in camps, others are required to return to their villages to collect their compensation.  In Mansehra and Abbottabad, affected people can file a claim in any union council in the district. Before payment is made, the claim is verified against the record in the union council where the death occurred.  In Batagram, people filing a claim must do so in the union council where the death occurred.  Officials from Batagram district have stated that they have no way of cross-checking records from offices elsewhere in the district.  Payment is particularly complicated for those who have moved from Battgram\'s Allai Tehsil to Mehra Camp, which is located in the neighboring Shangla district.  Shangla claims that it will make immediate payments based on a death certificate issued within the district boundaries that identifies earthquake as the cause of death.  11. Seasonal Migration: The USAID/DART has received numerous reports that people in certain areas of Pakistan, especially Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK), have two and sometimes three homes at varying altitudes.  This allows them to move to lower altitudes as temperatures drop.  The USAID/DART is unable to ascertain the extent to which current movement is part Pakistanis\' annual migration patterns.  12. Lack of Basic Services in Tent Camps: The USAID/DART has received reports of individuals in tent camps returning to their home sites, even though the homes were damaged or destroyed.  At this time, the USAID/DART cannot definitively ascertain the reason for people\'s departure from camps to their home sites; however, the USAID/DART believes that this is likely due to lack of water and sanitation, shelter, food, or other basic services in certain camps.  ------------------------------- Implications for Relief Efforts -------------------------------  13. Because affected populations continue to be mobile more than a month after the October 8 earthquake, agencies providing humanitarian aid must structure programs to take into account this population movement.  The USAID/DART, GOP, and relief organizations are structuring relief efforts around a two-pronged strategy.  The USAID/DART, GOP and relief organizations are simultaneously delivering relief commodities to hard-to-reach areas in order to promote shelter in place.  At the same time, those providing humanitarian aid are also attempting to provide basic services to tent camps to encourage people in need of shelter to relocate temporarily to camps.  14. Through the use of its Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Coordinator from the interagency Humanitarian Information Unit of the State Department, the USAID/DART is also guiding partners to identify and assist areas of the greatest unmet needs.  The Disaster Assistance Center (DAC) established by the US military has provided the USAID/DART with maps, indicating areas where earthquake destruction, lack of road access, and population density intersect, which roughly represent areas of greatest unmet needs.  Supported by these maps and the GIS coordinator, the USAID/DART is strategically programming resources by guiding NGO partners to target assistance in the areas identified.  This critical collaboration among USG agencies and NGOs will enhance the impact and efficiency of USAID/DART program funds.  15. Through funding to its implementing partners, the USAID/DART follows this two-pronged strategy, both providing basic services to tent camps and delivering relief commodities in hard-to-reach areas.  The USAID/DART maintains that current programming must focus on supplying those who will stay at higher elevations with shelter or shelter materials, sufficient to protect them against the winter weather.  If many of the affected people do come into camps, the USAID/DART will adjust funding and shift program focus to camp situations if necessary.  The USAID/DART continues to monitor the movement of people within Pakistan. As additional information becomes available, the USAID/DART will adjust funding accordingly to ensure that assistance reaches affected communities.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/25/2005 15:12", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 017426  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART ECONOMICS AND LIVELIHOODS REPORT   ------- SUMMARY -------  1. Immediately following the October 8 earthquake, relief agencies concentrated efforts on providing affected populations with urgently needed humanitarian assistance and shelter to assure survival during the upcoming winter months.  The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team\'s (DART) program has provided robust support for these activities, but has also taken steps to promote livelihoods and market revitalization.  The USAID/DART has led this transition and to date, has provided approximately USD 4.5 million to seven NGO partners to implement cash-for-work (CFW), cash-for-training (CFT), and voucher activities.  The USAID/DART has collaborated closely with USAID/Pakistan to design, fund, and implement programs that can transition to longer-term, mission-supported programs.  End summary.  ---------- Background ----------  2. Since the October 8 earthquake, USAID, the Government of Pakistan (GOP), UN agencies, and NGOs have focused their efforts on emergency medical care, distribution of food and emergency relief supplies, and shelter activities to assure survival of the earthquake-affected population during the winter months.  Such activities have been and will continue to be important to address the immediate needs of earthquake- affected population.  To complement these activities, the USAID/DART is also promoting livelihoods and market revitalization that will assist people in obtaining their own food, shelter, and other needs.  3. To promote livelihoods and revitalize local markets, the USAID/DART has funded seven NGO partners to undertake activities including clearing roads; removing rubble and salvaging construction materials on-site at destroyed schools and hospitals; clearing shelter sites and community infrastructure by community-based groups; rebuilding community infrastructure; performing carpentry work to assist in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of family dwellings; constructing and rehabilitating latrines; and performing other labor-intensive camp-based activities.  --------------------- Implementation issues ---------------------  4. Implementation of additional livelihoods activities has had to wait, however, due to several factors.  During Ramadan, which began on October 4, the vast majority of Pakistanis fasted during the day and were, therefore, not enthusiastic about participating in CFW activities until Ramadan\'s end in early November.  In addition, the scarcity of local NGO implementing partners, poor road access in proposed activity areas, generous cash remittances from diaspora communities, and the difficulty in organizing activities due to the dispersal of settlements in the rural hillsides, also delayed livelihood programs startup.  --------------------------------------------- - President Musharraf\'s cash disbursement scheme --------------------------------------------- -  5. On November 11, President Musharraf announced that the GOP would immediately disburse 100,000 Pakistani Rupees (PKR), which is approximately USD 1,666, to the next of kin of those who died in the earthquake, PKR 50,000 (USD 833) to people injured in the earthquake, and PKR 25,000 (USD 416) to those whose houses were damaged or destroyed.  This has created disincentives for affected populations to engage in CFW activities due to the promise of large inflows to communities.  6. As reported septel, this payment scheme has generated much publicity, although early reports received by USG officials at the Forward Operating Base in Mansehra suggest that implementation of the program has been inconsistent. Some district governments have already received funds to disburse to families that lost members.  In Mansehra, officials are allowing victims to file claims in any union council in the district, which are then verified against the record in the union council where the victim died. Battagram, however, is requiring victims to file in the union council where the death occurred, as officials are unable to cross check records from offices elsewhere in the district.  Payment is particularly complicated for those who have moved from Battagram\'s Allai Tehsil to Mehra Camp, which is located in neighboring Shangla district.  Shangla authorities claim that they will make immediate payments based on a death certificate issued within the district boundaries that identifies earthquake as the cause of death. Abbottabad is using the Mansehra model.  7. To date, no money has been provided to compensate for lost housing.  Payment is administered by the district governments, with each seeming to have its own disbursement mechanism.  As a result, progress is varying from district to district.  For example, the Mansehra district government claims to have made payments for deaths to the families of 70 percent of victims, although NGOs claim the actual rate is closer to 40 percent.  The Battagram district government claims to have made payments for deaths to the families of approximately 50 percent of victims.  The Shangla district government claims to have compensated 100 percent of those who lost family members, but this cannot be verified due to the scarcity of NGOs working with victims in this district. The Abottabad district government reports to have made payments for deaths to the families of 60 percent of victims, but NGOs believe the figure may be closer to 20 percent.  8. District authorities indicate that payments will continue until available federal funds are exhausted or until all victims are compensated, but no officials were able to estimate a timetable for the program\'s end.  The USAID/DART observes that the process of settling claims and disputes will likely take many months if not years to complete.  The USAID/DART will continue to monitor the implementation of this program to assess the impact on proposed USAID livelihoods and market revitalization activities.  ---------------------------- USAID/DART-FUNDED ACTIVITIES ------------------------------------------  9. In addition to facilitating the distribution of urgently needed relief commodities, the USAID/DART believes that livelihoods and economic revitalization will play a key role in the food security and recovery of the earthquake-affected area.  To date, the USAID/DART has provided approximately USD 4.5 million to seven NGO partners to implement Cash for Work (CFW), Cash for Training (CFT), and voucher activities. NGOs have undertaken assessments, identified priority areas and beneficiary populations, and mobilized teams to implement programs.  For quick start-up, some NGOs are working directly with community leaders rather than continue searching for local partners:  10. ACTED: Providing CFW for individuals to clear debris, salvage reusable materials, and engage in basic reconstruction of the infrastructure.  11. American Refugee Committee (ARC): Providing opportunities for 7,000 heads of households to rebuild homes with professional assistance, and is hiring skilled carpenters to supervise the building process.  12. Catholic Relief Services (CRS): Focusing programs on debris clearing, rehabilitation of public spaces and shelter rehab/reconstruction are currently underway.  13. GOAL: Providing non-agricultural workers with employment on civil and public works rehabilitation.  14. International Rescue Committee (IRC): Thus far, IRC is engaging in limited CFW activities to assemble emergency household shelter kits.  15. Mercy Corps: Employing local residents to clear rubble, prepare sites, and undertake shelter reconstruction and rehabilitation at a rate of 100 per day.  16. Save the Children/US (SC/US): CFW activities to improve Mehra camp have begun and SC/US plans to undertake CFT activities to promote seismic building guidelines.  17. In total, CFW and CFT programs funded by USAID will directly benefit approximately 45,000 people and indirectly benefit an additional 250,000 people.  The USAID/DART will continue engaging in discussions and sharing information regarding the implementation of livelihoods programs with its implementing partners.  This dialogue allows implementing partners to increase their implementation pace and efficacy.  ---------------------------- Transition to USAID/Pakistan ----------------------------  18. The USAID/DART has collaborated closely with USAID/Pakistan throughout the earthquake response and is developing a program to transition livelihoods activities to USAID/Pakistan.  The USAID/DART will fund proposals that both address immediate opportunities for livelihoods and market revitalization, while transitioning to longer-term reconstruction activities in support of the Mission reconstruction program.  Proposed activities under review and development include community-based earthquake-resistant shelter construction training, which will eventually bridge to mission-supported earthquake-resistant construction of schools and hospitals.  The USAID/DART is also exploring the possibility of revitalizing local markets through activities to support micro-finance and/or promotion of business development skills.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD16643", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/28/2005 13:25", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 017557  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA KISAACS, GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, Earthquake: USAID/DART Situation Report SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT 16: UPDATE ON FOOD SITUATION  REF: ISLAMABAD 16643  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. In October 2005, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) reported that preliminary assessments by the UN World Food Program (WFP) estimated more than 2.3 million Pakistanis in need of food assistance per reftel.  At that time, several NGOs suggested this figure was too high, but more recent assessments and field work by WFP, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Livestock (MINFAL), support the original WFP estimate of at least 2.3 million people requiring food aid as a result of the October 8 earthquake.  2. Since November 9, the USAID/DART Food For Peace Officer (FFPO) has been assessing the food aid needs of earthquake- affected populations in consultations with the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) Attache, Government of Pakistan (GOP), WFP, UK Department for International Development (DFID), and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Currently, the amount of wheat in country is adequate to meet food needs until April 2006.  WFP requires additional support, however, to cover the associated costs of food distributions through April.  The USAID/DART, in collaboration with the US Mission, continues to work closely with the GOP, donors, WFP and other UN agencies, ICRC, and NGOs to address food issues, and prevent any breaks in the pipeline in the coming months. End Summary. -------------------- FFPO Assessment Trip --------------------  3. Since November 9, the USAID/DART Food For Peace Officer (FFPO) has been in-country assessing the food aid needs of earthquake-affected populations in Pakistan.  To obtain information about the food, agriculture, and livestock situation on the ground, the FFPO reviewed the recently completed joint MINFAL/FAO report, quote Assessment of Damage to Crops and Livestock Sectors Due to Earthquake unquote.  In addition, the FFPO conducted field assessments and coordinated closely with the USDA Attache, the GOP Federal Relief Commission\'s (FRC) food cluster, WFP, DFID, and ICRC.  4. On November 15, the UN undertook an extensive assessment of the major earthquake relief hubs to determine the food security situation and assistance needs over the coming months.  The FFPO accompanied the WFP Special Envoy for the earthquake disaster, DFID disaster assessment expert, UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) Head, and WFP Head of Logistics for the earthquake disaster response.  The team visited WFP operational centers in Abbottobad, Mansehra, Batagram, Muzaffarabad, Garhi Habibullah, and Balakot.  WFP cooperation with the GOP Military and local authorities was good and the WFP implementing partners responsible for food distribution, although still setting up their operations, were beginning to receive and distribute food aid.  The FFPO noted that after initial start-up difficulties, the WFP logistics operation was becoming more efficient.  The USAID/DART will remain engaged to ensure that WFP operations continue to improve as assets grow and relations with other responders to the earthquake relief effort are consolidated and harmonized.  5. During the field visit, the FFPO observed that the GOP is providing compensation, as promised, to those who have lost their homes or family members during the earthquake.  As reported septel, death compensation is 100,000 Pakistan Rupees (approximately USD 1,666), while assistance for housing losses is 25,000 Rupees (USD 416).  In Balokot, residents have begun receiving 3,750 Rupees (USD 62) per month as a tent compensation for those who are in tented villages following the earthquake.  Officials expect that persons displaced will be able to use this subsidy to purchase food and necessities.  -------------------------------------------- The FAO/MINFAL Livestock and crop assessment --------------------------------------------  6. Completed in early November 2005, the FAO/MINFAL assessment results are consistent with the earlier WFP/UNICEF earthquake assessment, which found 3.5 million people affected by the earthquake.  Of this number, FAO/MINFAL indicated that 2.3 million people were homeless and in need of additional food and material assistance. This number has also been accepted by the GOP.  In the hardest hit areas, up to 50 percent of livestock was lost and 95 percent of all animal shelters destroyed.  Up to 75 percent of the maize crop, 50 percent of the wheat crop, and more than 30 percent of the rice crop was lost, as well as substantial animal fodder.  According to FAO/MINFAL, direct and indirect losses to crops, livestock, and irrigation infrastructure were more than USD 440 million.  Prior to the earthquake, six of the nine affected districts were already among the most food insecure parts of Pakistan.  As the winter progresses, livestock losses will likely increase due to exposure and a shortage of fodder. Earthquake victims are widely reported to be asking for assistance with shelter for their livestock.  7. The GOP, WFP, and ICRC are responsible for ensuring that the 2.3 million affected persons receive food.  WFP is responsible for the 1 million most inaccessible beneficiaries, ICRC has targeted another 150,000 in the Neelum Valley, and the GOP is tasked with assisting the remainder in accessible areas and major urban centers.  8. According to all indicators, Pakistan has enough wheat this year to meet needs countrywide.  Assuring that the wheat reaches the vulnerable and homeless, however, may present a challenge.  Of the 2.3 million earthquake victims identified as requiring food aid by the various assessments to date, WFP\'s caseload of 1 million for the next 6 months will require nearly 102,000 MT of food aid, including 76,000 MT of wheat.  Regardless of how the wheat is procured-even if donated-it will still require considerable financial inputs to mill, transport, store, handle, and distribute. Presently WFP has resources to process and deliver 16,000 MT.  WFP requires additional support to cover associated costs of food distributions.  Transport cost of delivering food aid to earthquake victims is significant, due to the need for helicopter support to reach up to 200,000 people in mountainous and inaccessible areas.  ----------------------- USDA Wheat contribution -----------------------  9. To date, USAID/OFDA has provided more than USD 8.9 million to WFP for humanitarian air operations, logistics, and administrative support.  USAID/FFP has provided WFP with 2,880 MT of PL Title II food assistance valued at more than USD 3.4 million.  On November 21, USDA offered Pakistan a USD 12 million wheat contribution, assuring adequate supplies to meet the needs of WFP\'s 1 million caseload until April 2006.  The USAID/DART will continue to assess conditions during the winter to determine food needs after April.  10. USDA\'s contribution of USD 12 million will cover costs for an estimated 46,000 MT of bulk wheat, plus the cost of shipping to Karachi.  The donation will not include port charges, handling and transport from Karachi, milling, fortification, storage, or final distribution to beneficiaries.  Instead, these costs will have to come from donor contributions to WFP\'s Emergency Operations (EMOP) appeal for the Pakistan earthquake.  11. According to WFP\'s latest resource update, the EMOP for 1 million beneficiaries over 6 months calls for 101,501 MT of food aid at a cost of nearly USD 26.5 million for food, and a total cost of more than USD 55.8 million, including food and all associated costs.  As of November 18, the EMOP has received approximately USD 21.1 million against its appeal, leaving a shortfall of more than USD 34.7 million. As of November 20, WFP is reaching 845,000 beneficiaries, including the ongoing operation for 200,000 Pakistanis in the most difficult to reach areas of the earthquake zone before the onset of the winter snow.  ---------- Conclusion ----------  12. Developing a clear picture of food aid needs for the population affected by the Pakistani earthquake and coordinating an appropriate response is an ongoing challenge.  Presently, sufficient wheat exists in country to allow WFP to draw down its needs.  The USDA offer of a USD 12 million contribution, replacing wheat used by WFP for immediate distribution, provides reassurance that WFP operations will continue beyond the winter.  USAID/FFP is also working on sending 2,600 MT of vegetable oil for WFP distribution.  With these two contributions in place, the WFP pipeline will be healthy.  WFP has funding to cover operations until the end of 2005, but does not yet have the necessary funds to cover associated costs, including road transportation and distribution, to continue its obligation through April 2006.  The USAID/DART, in collaboration with the US Mission in Pakistan, continues to work with the GOP, donors, UN agencies, ICRC, and NGOs to address this urgent HQ UEUCO AIHIGN GEFO J3/J5 EO. 1258: N/A TGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK  SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART SITUATION REPORT 16: UPDATE ON FOOD SITUATION  issue, and prevent critical food shortages in the coming months. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD16837", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/29/2005 14:08", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 017621  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: ONGOING NEEDS ASSESSMENT FOR RELIEF EFFORTS  REF: ISLAMABAD 16837  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. With the onset of winter, relief activities are moving into a critical stage where the needs of the earthquake- affected populations must be met efficiently and quickly. The difficulty of this task has been exacerbated by the changing climatic conditions, which are significantly altering the number and locations of people moving into tented camps.  Field reports indicate the need to improve the distribution network for relief commodities, the winterization of tents, and sanitation conditions in the growing camps.  The USG continues to play a vital role in meeting Pakistan\'s requirements for earthquake relief and recovery.  DOD services and excess commodities have been vital and will continue to be critically needed as winter sets in. End Summary.  -------------------------------------- Federal Relief Commission (FRC) Update --------------------------------------  2. In early November 2005, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) analyzed requirements, supply, and pipeline for relief commodities to determine critical shortfalls, per reftel.  This exercise drew available information from the latest FRC documents, USAID implementing partners, US Military, and the UN.  3. Unlike previous versions, the latest November 26 FRC report did not provide an update on needs, but focused on what relief communities had provided thus far.  Although the report contained flaws and was incomplete, the update gave humanitarian agencies an opportunity to refine information on their contributions.  The difficulty for the FRC in undertaking a gap analysis has been exacerbated by recent changing demographic and climatic conditions, which affect the number and location of people moving into spontaneous and planned tent camps and, consequently, relief requirements.  --------------------------- USAID Field Reports of Gaps ---------------------------  4. With the first snowfall in earthquake-affected areas on November 27, the requirement for detailed information on evolving needs is becoming more urgent.  Although the available information is incomplete, the DART has been able to draw the following conclusions:  5. Shelter: At this time, sufficient tents appear to have been distributed, but according to the International Organization for Migration (IOM), only 15 percent are winterized.  Following the snowstorm on November 27, a report from the Sirin Valley indicated that many of the tents had fallen.  In addition, there continues to be a shortage of large-sized tents that could be used for dormitory style arrangements.  Size, quality, and winterization remain top priorities for this commodity.  6. Shelter Commodities Pipeline: Shelter commodities such as corrugated galvanized iron (CGI) sheets are available in Pakistan although prices in-country have increased and quality is variable.  In addition, shelter commodities can be procured regionally.  One NGO has opened up a supply chain of CGI sheets from Dubai and report that it takes approximately one week from order date to clearance of customs in Karachi.  At an NGO coordination meeting convened on November 24 by the DART, eight organizations discussed the possibility of pooling together to submit group orders to assure a smooth flow of reasonably priced, high quality shelter materials from Dubai, India, or China.  7. Water and sanitation: Sanitation, particularly in camps, is an increasingly critical issue because of the onset of winter, the lack of appropriate shelter, and the resulting movement of people from the hills into spontaneous and planned tent camps.  Sanitation problems are not only a matter of constructing latrines, but are strongly related to camp management and education.  Effective camp management and education programs would allow organizations to site sanitation areas in the correct location, as well as teach camp residents the appropriate use of sanitation facilities.  8. Logistics: Several USAID-funded NGOs report increased landslides and slippery roads in the Neelum and Allai valleys because of the recent rain and snowfall.  Seven roads are currently impassable at various points, totaling 35 kilometers, and the conditions will worsen as winter sets in.  Regarding airlift, UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) states that present funding levels of USD 38 million have secured operation of current air assets through April (thirteen MI-8s and two MI-26 helicopters).  This falls short of their USD 99 million goal, which would provide 22 MI-8s and 5 MI-26 helicopters for 6 months.  9. Field reports indicate that food availability is sufficient at this time, but difficulties remain in the distribution network.  As winter worsens, and if there is an increase in the movement of dwellers into camps, it will be more difficult for the FRC to track the critical commodity needs of the affected popultion.  ---------------- DOD\'scriica ole -------------------  10. Although civilian air support has increased in recent weeks, DOD air assets remain the backbone and most reliable component of the Pakistani military logistics chain.  With the onset of winter, already significant humanitarian needs in earthquake-affected areas of Pakistan will likely increase and logistics will be even further constrained. The adverse effects of snow and rain on relief supply distributions and the unpredictability of movements of populations will require strengthened transportation and logistics networks.  Given this outlook, it is clear that DOD plays a key role in the earthquake relief operation. DOD services and excess commodities have been vital and will continue to be critically needed as winter sets in.  --------------------- DART Response Actions ---------------------  11. USAID has provided more than USD 18 million in alternative shelter activities and winterization of tents to eight NGOs, assisting an estimated 420,000 beneficiaries. Further, the DART is planning to provide an additional USD 4.5 million for critical shelter activities.  To address water and sanitation problems, the DART has already provided USD 1.16 million to four NGOs for activities that will assist 97,000 beneficiaries.  In addition, the DART is committing approximately USD 3 million to address water and sanitation problems in spontaneous and planned tent communities in Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) and Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP).  The DART is continuing to program its resources to address changing needs as they arise.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD16837", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/29/2005 18:10", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 017623  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: ONGOING NEEDS ASSESSMENT FOR RELIEF EFFORTS  REF: ISLAMABAD 16837  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. With the onset of winter, relief activities are moving into a critical stage where the needs of the earthquake- affected populations must be met efficiently and quickly. The difficulty of this task has been exacerbated by the changing climatic conditions, which are significantly altering the number and locations of people moving into tented camps.  Field reports indicate the need to improve the distribution network for relief commodities, the winterization of tents, and sanitation conditions in the growing camps.  The USG continues to play a vital role in meeting Pakistan\'s requirements for earthquake relief and recovery.  DOD services and excess commodities have been vital and will continue to be critically needed as winter sets in. End Summary.  -------------------------------------- Federal Relief Commission (FRC) Update --------------------------------------  2. In early November 2005, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) analyzed requirements, supply, and pipeline for relief commodities to determine critical shortfalls, per reftel.  This exercise drew available information from the latest FRC documents, USAID implementing partners, US Military, and the UN.  3. Unlike previous versions, the latest November 26 FRC report did not provide an update on needs, but focused on what relief communities had provided thus far.  Although the report contained flaws and was incomplete, the update gave humanitarian agencies an opportunity to refine information on their contributions.  The difficulty for the FRC in undertaking a gap analysis has been exacerbated by recent changing demographic and climatic conditions, which affect the number and location of people moving into spontaneous and planned tent camps and, consequently, relief requirements.  --------------------------- USAID Field Reports of Gaps ---------------------------  4. With the first snowfall in earthquake-affected areas on November 27, the requirement for detailed information on evolving needs is becoming more urgent.  Although the available information is incomplete, the DART has been able to draw the following conclusions:  5. Shelter: At this time, sufficient tents appear to have been distributed, but according to the International Organization for Migration (IOM), only 15 percent are winterized.  Following the snowstorm on November 27, a report from the Sirin Valley indicated that many of the tents had fallen.  In addition, there continues to be a shortage of large-sized tents that could be used for dormitory style arrangements.  Size, quality, and winterization remain top priorities for this commodity.  6. Shelter Commodities Pipeline: Shelter commodities such as corrugated galvanized iron (CGI) sheets are available in Pakistan although prices in-country have increased and quality is variable.  In addition, shelter commodities can be procured regionally.  One NGO has opened up a supply chain of CGI sheets from Dubai and report that it takes approximately one week from order date to clearance of customs in Karachi.  At an NGO coordination meeting convened on November 24 by the DART, eight organizations discussed the possibility of pooling together to submit group orders to assure a smooth flow of reasonably priced, high quality shelter materials from Dubai, India, or China.  7. Water and sanitation: Sanitation, particularly in camps, is an increasingly critical issue because of the onset of winter, the lack of appropriate shelter, and the resulting movement of people from the hills into spontaneous and planned tent camps.  Sanitation problems are not only a matter of constructing latrines, but are strongly related to camp management and education.  Effective camp management and education programs would allow organizations to site sanitation areas in the correct location, as well as teach camp residents the appropriate use of sanitation facilities.  8. Logistics: Several USAID-funded NGOs report increased landslides and slippery roads in the Neelum and Allai valleys because of the recent rain and snowfall.  Seven roads are currently impassable at various points, totaling 35 kilometers, and the conditions will worsen as winter sets in.  Regarding airlift, UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) states that present funding levels of USD 38 million have secured operation of current air assets through April (thirteen MI-8s and two MI-26 helicopters).  This falls short of their USD 99 million goal, which would provide 22 MI-8s and 5 MI-26 helicopters for 6 months.  9. Field reports indicate that food availability is sufficient at this time, but difficulties remain in the distribution network.  As winter worsens, and if there is an increase in the movement of dwellers into camps, it will be more difficult for the FRC to track the critical commodity needs of the affected population.  ------------------- DOD\'s critical role -------------------  10. Although civilian air support has increased in recent weeks, DOD air assets remain the backbone and most reliable component of the Pakistani military logistics chain.  With the onset of winter, already significant humanitarian needs in earthquake-affected areas of Pakistan will likely increase and logistics will be even further constrained. The adverse effects of snow and rain on relief supply distributions and the unpredictability of movements of populations will require strengthened transportation and logistics networks.  Given this outlook, it is clear that DOD plays a key role in the earthquake relief operation. DOD services and excess commodities have been vital and will continue to be critically needed as winter sets in.  --------------------- DART Response Actions ---------------------  11. USAID has provided more than USD 18 million in alternative shelter activities and winterization of tents to eight NGOs, assisting an estimated 420,000 beneficiaries. Further, the DART is planning to provide an additional USD 4.5 million for critical shelter activities.  To address water and sanitation problems, the DART has already provided USD 1.16 million to four NGOs for activities that will assist 97,000 beneficiaries.  In addition, the DART is committing approximately USD 3 million to address water and sanitation problems in spontaneous and planned tent communities in Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) and Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP).  The DART is continuing to program its resources to address changing needs as they arise.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/1/2005 8:05", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 017711  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  USAID/DART COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ORGANIZATIONS IN THE RELIEF EFFORT  ------- Summary -------  1. Coordinating relief efforts and ensuring that USAID implementing partners reach populations in need without duplicating efforts are significant aspects of the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team\'s (DART) work.  Given the difficulties of this humanitarian operation, there is a need for collaboration and the sharing of both resources and information.  The USAID/DART is collaborating intensively with the U.S. military, other donors, the Government of Pakistan (GOP) military, and other GOP entities.  Members of the USAID/DART have greatly facilitated collaboration in areas of critical need.  Coordination, collaboration, and the sharing of information and material resources have helped maximize the impact of the USAID/DART\'s field work and programming.  End summary.  --------------------------------------------- - Overview of USAID/DART Coordination Activities --------------------------------------------- -  2. Since October 10, the USAID/DART has been on the ground in Pakistan to coordinate the humanitarian response to the October 8 earthquake.  The USAID/DART is supporting programs in the areas of emergency and transitional shelter, water and sanitation, livelihoods, and emergency health.  The USAID/DART is also supporting airlifts of relief commodities, logistical activities, and coordinating U.S. military contributions to the relief effort.  Coordinating relief efforts and ensuring that USAID implementing partners reach populations in need without duplicating efforts are significant aspects of the USAID/DART\'s work.  3. A number of difficulties, including damaged and impassable roads, bottlenecks in the supply chain, and the rapidly narrowing window of opportunity due to the onset of winter, hamper the provision of humanitarian assistance. Given the difficulties of providing assistance in this setting, there is a need for relief agencies to share both resources and information.  -------------------------------- Collaboration with U.S. Military --------------------------------  4. The USAID/DART has collaborated intensively with the U.S. military, other donors, GOP military, and other GOP entities such as the Federal Relief Commission (FRC).  The USAID/DART includes a Military Liaison Officer (MLO) who, on a regular basis, meets with U.S. military officers to facilitate the distribution of commodities to both local and international NGOs, as well as other organizations.  5. The USAID/DART has collaborated with U.S. Disaster Assistance Center (DAC) officers in the planning of field activities.  The DAC shares its geospatial information on vulnerable populations, based on criteria that include road access, population density, earthquake-related damage, and altitude.  The USAID/DART is using this information to channel NGO implementation activities to these most vulnerable areas.  The DAC has also provided satellite photos that USAID/DART and its implementing partners use to target and plan interventions.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Collaboration with NGOs and other relief organizations --------------------------------------------- ---------  6.  The USAID/DART also collaborates with international NGOs, UN agencies, and aid organizations of foreign governments.  The USAID/DART has met with the U.K. Department for International Development (DFID), the Australian Government\'s Overseas Aid Program (AusAID), and the government of the Netherlands.  The USAID/DART has engaged in discussions and shared information with these organizations on their strategies, program priorities, performance of and support to the UN, and NGO funding.  In addition, DART is providing the part-time services of a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) coordinator to assist the UN\'s humanitarian information center (HIC) to establish base maps, obtain and interpret information on what donors and NGOs are implementing in the field, and present them in a format that will increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the overall relief effort.  ------------------------------- Collaboration with GOP military -------------------------------  7.  The USAID/DART attends coordination and strategy meetings-both sector level and gap analysis-with the FRC and GOP military on a daily basis.  The USAID/DART is a key player in the determination of the most effective means to support earthquake-affected populations.  In the field, USAID- and USAID/DART-funded NGOs collaborate extensively with local GOP military officials.  NGOs work under the protection of the GOP military and provide technical information to them in their execution of important relief activities, particularly camp administration and the distribution of food and relief commodities.  ------------------------------- Collaboration in Affected Areas -------------------------------  8.  The USAID/DART Field Officers (FOs) and Protection Officer (PO) have greatly facilitated collaboration in areas of critical need in Mansehra and Muzaffarabad.  In these areas, the FOs and PO have attended coordination meetings on a regular basis, where they meet with USAID implementing partners and other humanitarian relief agencies active in the earthquake response to help plan and better target their activities.  The USAID/DART FOs and PO work with implementing partners and others in the field to identify and meet needs in order of priority and solve problems that arise.  Technical specialists in shelter, wat/san and livelihoods also have collaborated extensively both in the field and in Islamabad to coordinate and improve the overall relief effort.  ---------- Conclusion ----------  9.  Taken together, all of the above coordination, information sharing, and resource sharing activities have helped to maximize the impact of the USAID/DART\'s fieldwork and programming.  The USAID/DART continues to seek further collaboration with donors, NGO partners, U.S. government organizations, and GOP organizations.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD13943|05STATE202805", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/1/2005 12:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 017835  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SA AND EB  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2015 TAGS: ECIN, ECON, ENRG, EPET, ETTC, IN, IR, PK SUBJECT: IRAN PIPELINE DEMARCHE DELIVERED; GOP DISCUSSIONS WITH IRAN CONTINUE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 013943      B. STATE 202805  Classified By: DOS Classification Guidelines  1.  (C) SUMMARY:  GOP officials took Ref B demarche points on the Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline under consideration but had no immediate reply.  Petroleum Secretary Waqar met with Iranian officials in Tehran November 16-17 in what was termed a \"confidence building\" meeting that discussed routing options, gas quality, and price for the proposed Iran-Pakistan-India gas pipeline.  The meeting follows the Government of Iran\'s passing a terms sheet on the proposed pipeline similar to one that it gave to the Government of India on September 10.  Waqar will visit India in mid-December, and a tripartite meeting in Tehran is expected to follow.  The GOP also will attend a January meeting in Ashgabat on the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline, while the visits of two Chinese energy delegations to Pakistan reflect China\'s growing interest in the region.  END SUMMARY.  Pakistan Petroleum Secretary\'s Nov 16-17 Visit to Tehran ============================================= =========== 2. (C) On November 14, Deputy Econ Counselor met Pakistan Petroleum Additional Secretary Shawkat Durrani and delivered Washington\'s Ref B points, which Durrani took under consideration.  Durrani reported that after a two-month delay (Ref A), the Government of Iran in early November had passed the Government of Pakistan (GOP) a terms sheet that he believed was similar to one that Iran had given to the Government of India on September 10.  Durrani indicated that Iran has offered to sell gas from its South Pars fields, but his frustration with Iranian interlocutors was evident.  He described his Iranian counterparts as \"very cunning and mercantile....They place no value on time and are willing to discuss all but the price.\"  3. (C) Duranni expressed concerns about Iran\'s insistence that all aspects of any pipeline arrangement be made \"according to Iranian law.\"  Specifically, he said that the Iranians were insisting on a \"buyback scheme,\" requiring that any gas purchased under a pipeline deal be sold to the National Iranian Gas Company and resold to the government/consortium purchasing the gas.  As he saw it, a private company developing the Pars Gas Field would sell the gas to the Iranian Government, which would then sell it to new GOP-owned Interstate Gas Company.  (Interstate is the new GOP-owned entity that the GOP has tasked with working on the Iran pipeline).  Interstate would then sell the gas to the Sui North and Sui South gas companies (both currently being privatized).  The Sui companies then would sell to the end-user customers.  Regulatory, commercial, legal, and financial issues under Iran\'s framework were also concerns. Durrani noted that India had hired a financial advisor for the project and the GOP hoped to select its own advisor by the mid-December.  4. (C) At a November 25 follow-up meeting with Durrani, he confirmed that he had shared the Washington talking points with Petroleum Secretary Waqar but that Waqar had made no comment on the points, describing the Iran pipeline discussions as \"a long process.\"  Durrani related that at the Tehran meetings Waqar had discussed pipeline routing options, gas quality-- and price.  He informed that Waqar would travel to Canada soon, and in mid-December he would visit India to discuss the Iran pipeline.  Durrani said that following Waqar\'s meeting in India, a tripartite Iran-Pakistan-India meeting would be held, most likely in Tehran.  Progress on TAPI and LNG ======================== 5. (C) Regarding the proposed Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline, Durrani indicated that Petroleum Secretary Waqar would attend a January meeting in Ashgabat, and Petroleum Minister Amanullah Khan Jadoon might also attend.  He confirmed that the Government of Turkmenistan had not confirmed quantity or availability of gas from its Dovelatabad reserves, and he speculated that GOT might finally disclose information on the reserves at the meeting.  For the GOP to proceed, however, Durrani indicated that the GOP would need reassurances about the security of a pipeline running through Afghanistan.  6. (C) On liquified natural gas (LNG), Durrani confirmed that a financial advisor resident in Karachi had been selected and the GOP was hoping to get an initial set of suggestions for setting up a GOP regulatory policy framework shortly (though he reiterated that LNG would not be sufficient to meet all of Pakistan\'s growing energy needs).  He stressed that the GOP was continuing its efforts to completely privatize the natural gas sector and due diligence continued apace in preparation for privatization of the Sui North and South Gas companies.  Growing Chinese Interest in Pakistan\'s Energy Sector ============================================= ======= 7. (C) Asked about press reports that the GOP was considering establishing a Pakistan-China Energy Forum, Durrani confirmed that a six-member delegation of the China Development and Reform Commission, led by Zhang Yuquing, had just visited Pakistan to explore investment opportunities in the oil and gas sector.  Durrani described the commission as one of China\'s highest decision-making bodies for energy policies, and said that the visit was an outgrowth of Prime Minister Aziz\'s 2004 visit to Beijing.  He said that the delegation had good discussions, including on the proposed  Iran pipeline, and the delegation then visited India.  Durrani said that the Chinese had expressed interest in becoming a partner in building pipelines, refineries, and fuel transport.  Durrani added that the Chinese National Chemical Engineering Group Corporation (CNEGC) was expected to visit Pakistan November 29 to discuss working in the energy sector, including developing the Thaar coal fields, constructing a refinery/oil storage facility along Pakistan\'s coast, and installing an LNG facility near Karachi (Pakistan is simultaneously pursuing multiple pipeline/LNG options.  While LNG will help, LNG cannot fully meet Pakistan\'s growing energy needs).  Minimal Earthquake Damage to Pakistan\'s Natural Gas Network ============================================= ============== 8. (C) Durrani reported that earthquake damage to Pakistan\'s 64,000 KM natural gas network was minimal because most pipelines are built in the southern part of the country, stopping short of Abbottabad, about an hour\'s drive south of where the most severe damage occurred.  Damage was mostly to Liquid Propane Gas (LPG) shops and petrol pumps.  As part of the national relief effort, public and private gas companies had donated approximately 430 million rupees (approximately $7.3 million). CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/2/2005 8:33", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 017853  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART USING GIS TO IDENTIFY UNMET HUMANITARIAN NEEDS  ------- SUMMARY -------  1.  Since the beginning of the earthquake response, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) has included a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Officer.  The GIS Officer, currently from the U.S. Department of State\'s Humanitarian Information Unit, regularly prepares maps and information products to demonstrate the extent and type of humanitarian requirements and show the locations of partner activities.  USAID-funded nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) recently submitted information on the coverage area of their activities, which was transferred to a GIS program and displayed in a comprehensive map.  The USAID/DART used the map to identify unmet humanitarian needs and avoid duplication of services.  The GIS Officer has provided an important service to the USAID/DART by providing the team with \"eyes on the ground\" knowledge.  End Summary.  ------------- Scope of Work -------------  2.  In the early stages of a disaster, maps are developed to show areas that are most severely affected, the number of people in need, and accessibility to the affected areas. Much of this information is reported and mapped as large polygons, each colored to reflect a single piece of data such as the percent of damage.  Once this information is mapped, demand is often created for more detailed information about specific areas.  --------------------- Maps as Program Tools ---------------------  3.  In recent years, GIS has become an important tool for the humanitarian and disaster response community and at present is widely used in the earthquake response in Pakistan.  The US military is using GIS for helicopter landing zones and delivery of materials; the UN Humanitarian Information Center and Joint Logistics Center both have GIS staff for production of specialized maps; and some NGOs are using GIS for information management.  Additional details regarding multi-agency information management in the Pakistan earthquake response will be reported septel.  4. The USAID/DART is creating maps to track the operational locations of implementing partners in order to determine if needs are being met and if areas exist where people are not being reached.  Maps are also used to identify gaps in coverage to enable implementing partners to expand their areas of operation to cover these needs.  On November 17, the USAID/DART invited partner nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to a coordination meeting in Islamabad that included a mapping exercise.  Each partner delineated their area of operation on a paper topographic map and the information was then transferred to a GIS system through on-screen digitization.  The partners\' working areas were displayed as distinct polygons.  Once all of the partner program data was digitized onto one map, the USAID/DART had a collective visual representation of all NGO program areas.  5.  The USAID/DART Program Officer held follow-up meetings with individual NGOs and took along maps showing the combined program areas as well as a detailed map showing the operational area of each NGO.  The maps triggered discussions about on-the-ground coordination between NGOs working in the same location, areas where needs appeared to be unmet, delivery routes to the areas, and possible duplication of NGO services in a particular area.  Partners were also asked to add any program updates to the maps.  The changes were subsequently relayed to the GIS Officer to more accurately reflect the reality on the ground.  6.  The USAID/DART used the maps produced by the GIS Officer to assist with grant proposal reviews.  Program staff entered new or second tranche grant proposal information in the GIS to determine if the areas specified in the proposal were already covered, whether the proposal appeared to extend into an area with no previously identified damage, and to ascertain whether the proposed program location could be modified to cover an area of identified need. Information from this process was used to support funding decisions.  7.  At a second coordination meeting on November 24, NGOs were asked to provide additional information for mapping. NGOs responded to a questionnaire that asked if partner programs were meeting all or partial needs for shelter and emergency relief commodities.  They were also asked if they knew of areas where these needs were not being met.  In some cases, individual NGOs were working in up to seven separate sites and implementing different programs at each site. Data from the questionnaire was then linked to the respective NGO polygons in the GIS by the GIS Officer.  Maps were produced showing commitments for winter shelter kit distribution and emergency relief commodity distribution.  ------------------ A Replicable Model ------------------  8.  To promote donor collaboration, the USAID/DART shared map products with colleagues at the UK\'s Department for International Development (DFID).  Recognizing the value of the GIS program, DFID has begun to implement a similar program to map the program location of DFID-funded NGOs.  At DFID\'s request, the GIS Officer is providing assistance in duplicating the same model with DFID-funded NGOs.  ----------------------------- Value Added for USAID Mission -----------------------------  9.  USAID/Pakistan requested the assistance of the GIS Officer in identifying and testing GIS software for possible use in the Mission.  To more effectively display the geographical coverage of programs, USAID/Pakistan aims to import spreadsheets with location coordinates into a comprehensive map.  The GIS Officer recently gave a one-hour GIS presentation and demonstrated ways that GIS tools can be useful for program management.  The Mission plans to use maps created by the GIS Officer designed to track the locations of USAID-funded earthquake activities as a starting point for reconstruction planning, thereby allowing USAID to build on existing relationships with local government officials, NGOs, and other stakeholders.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD17311", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/6/2005 7:56", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 ISLAMABAD 018030  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNERusd 158.2  SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, PKEAID, UN, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  UN CREATES ANOTHER MEDIA STORM  REF: ISLAMABAD 17311  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. On December 3, 2005, the UN Resident Representative and Humanitarian Coordinator (UNHC) in Pakistan stated that the relief effort is on a knife,s edge and called for increased donor support for the USD 550 million UN Flash Appeal.  Local and international media picked up on the UNHC,s remarks and have recently painted an increasingly dire picture of the humanitarian situation in the earthquake-zone and the under-funded response effort to date.  Often based on incomplete and inaccurate information, many reports fail to recognize significant efforts by the entire humanitarian community, especially donors, NGO partners, and the Pakistani military, in providing timely and effective humanitarian interventions.  Although much work remains, the response to date has undoubtedly saved lives.  With the situation continuing to evolve and the emergency phase expected to continue through the spring, the USG is committed to responding rapidly as winter conditions arrive.  End Summary.  ---------- Background ----------  2. On December 3, the UNHC, Jan Vandemoortele, convened a press conference to draw attention to humanitarian conditions and appeal for additional UN funding.  Although the precise text of Mr. Vandemoortele remarks is not available, quotations from the conference were widely carried by the local and international media.  The comments require further clarification as they have often been based on incomplete and inaccurate information, thereby presenting a skewed picture of the situation on the ground.  ---------------- Response efforts ---------------- 3. UNHC comment: The worst enemies we face are not the mountains, not the winter; the worst enemies we face are complacency and pessimism.  a. USG Response: The USG welcomes the UN recognition of the importance of action, particularly in the face of a delayed initial response by UN agencies per reftel.  This assertion, however, fails to recognize the large-scale efforts by the entire humanitarian community to the October 8 earthquake, and the significant impact of the response.  b. Donors: In addition to the response to the UN appeal, bilateral assistance from the USG, the UK,s Department for International Development (DFID), and the European Union is well over USD 200 million.  c. Department of Defense (DOD): Although civilian air support has increased in recent weeks, DOD air assets remain the backbone and most reliable component of the Pakistani military logistics chain.  As of November 30, DOD had completed 2,004 sorties, carrying more than 4,817 tons, 11,544 passengers, and 3,656 medical evacuations; off loading 254 aircraft and approximately 7,289 tons of humanitarian cargo.  DOD commodities provided include 3,116 tents, 200,058 blankets, and 600 tent heaters.  d. Government of Pakistan (GOP): The GOP military has assumed a great deal of responsibility in the relief effort and performed well under difficult circumstances.  Not only has the GOP military proven effective in terms of reach and responsiveness, but it has also been keen to learn from the donor community best practices in addressing technical issues such as camp management, relief commodity distriution, and water and sanitation interventions.  Moreover, the GOP is reportedly building 5,000 shelters a day, and assuming the costs for the shelter provided.  e. NGOs: USAID implementing partners were on the ground within days of the earthquake, and remain at the forefront of emergency response efforts.  ----------------------- Increased Funding Needs -----------------------  4. UNHC comment: The situation remains very difficult and indeed we are on a knife,s edge.  a. USG Response: To date, the UN has received USD 158.2 million to the Flash Appeal, and USD 64.5 million more pledged.  With the addition of an estimated USD 100 million bilaterally from donors, more than half of the amount requested has been received thus far.  In the face of a compressed timeline for response, the UN appeal for more funding needs to be packaged with clear indication of how monies will be expended.  The Flash Appeal has requested USD 550 million, but includes funding for secondary and tertiary programs, rather than just immediate, life-saving needs.  On December 2, the UN released a Winter Plan for the critical period of December 2005 through February 2006.  However, the Winter Plan does not indicate how much funding is needed for the critical emergency sectors.  As not all sectors are on a knife,s edge, UN agencies need to triage and better prioritize needs.  -------------- Food Situation --------------  5. UNHC comment: Emergency food stocks were built up, but rations had been cut so they could last longer.  a. USG Response: Actually, rations were not cut to extend resources, but rather because in some areas, food was already available as was the case in ICRC,s distribution area, where full rations were not needed.  The UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) is covered at the current level (nearly meeting its target of 100 MT a day), through February, based Q.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE:  UN CREATES ANOTHER MEDIA STORM  on a caseload of 1 million people.  With a recent USDA donation of 46,000 MT of wheat, the food pipeline is healthy.  b. With the food aid pipeline stabilized, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) recommends a shift away from a primary focus on food assistance to addressing unmet shelter needs.  ------- Shelter -------  6. UNHC comment: Vandemoortele stressed that most people were using blankets, tarpaulins and whatever else they could lay their hands on to bring their tents up to standard to get through the winter.  a. USG: This takes a negative slant on people using available materials to rebuild, despite the fact that the use of recycled materials is an important component of the widely supported shelter strategy, as it speeds up reconstruction and allows people to remain in place.  This protects assets and livelihoods, rather than forcing them to go to makeshift camps and facing the associated health hazards of displacement.  To support this strategy, the USAID/DART is providing NGO partners with shelter kits to assist rebuilding efforts in affected areas.  7. According to media reports, a UN official in charge of providing shelter also warned that 90 per cent of the 420,000 tents handed out were not ready for winter.  a. USG: Inaccurately attributed to the UN, this is a statement by an International Organization for Migration (IOM) official.  The UNHC acknowledges that although 90 per cent of tents are not winterized, it does not mean that they are inadequate; the proportion of inadequate tents is much smaller.  Moreover, non-winterized tents can be used at lower elevations or reinforced with additional materials such as blankets, plastic sheeting, or bubble wrap for insulation. ---------------- Health/Nutrition ----------------  8. Recent media reports have highlighted the possibility of deteriorating health status as harsh winter conditions are realized.  Although cases of diarrhea, acute respiratory infections (ARI), and pneumonia have been reported, to date, no major communicable disease outbreaks have been reported. Accurate health baseline data for northern Pakistan is limited.  The earthquake-affected residents, in particular those living in remote areas at high altitudes, are vulnerable each year, with high levels of chronic malnutrition.  According to USAID/DART field staff, a significant number of people die each year from ARI and pneumonia.  The UN has acknowledged that conclusions regarding increased cold weather-related mortality rates are premature.  ----------------------------- Improved Health and Education -----------------------------  9. With limited medical facilities in northern Pakistan prior to the earthquake, many residents are likely accessing health services for the first time, due to the influx of clinics in the affected areas as part of the humanitarian response. This may lead to the appearance of a higher incidence of disease compared to normal levels, but may be attributed to improved disease surveillance and more consistent reporting.   10. One positive aspect of the humanitarian response that has been largely overlooked by the media is the higher number of children enrolled in school in the IDP camps*some for the first time.  In past years, schools are usually closed for a few months during the winter; however, this year the schools will likely remain open, due in part to the presence of the international aid community.  While some media reports have criticized the quality of tents used for temporary schools, the tents are meant to be used as daytime structures.  The children attending school also receive the benefits of hygiene education, which includes lessons on the use of latrines, a skill that will improve the children,s health when they return home.  ---------------------------- Conclusions: The Big Picture ----------------------------  11. Although recent media reports have seized on the shortfalls of the earthquake relief operation and the UNHC has publicly remarked that the relief effort is on a knife,s edge, it is important to note that incomplete reports are misleading, fail to recognize significant efforts by the entire humanitarian community, and do not provide an accurate picture of the evolving situation.  12. While it is important to anticipate and prepare for a deteriorating situation, some media reports are basing a worst-case scenario on faulty assumptions.  One often repeated scenario is that massive population movements from remote higher elevation areas to the valley will overwhelm the limited space available in existing camps, resulting in large-scale deaths from freezing temperatures.  USAID/DART field reports, as well as reports from NGOs, indicate that much of the earthquake-affected population will remain in place rather than moving to camps.  In addition, the GOP has prepared for this contingency by developing plans to move displaced populations if necessary to Punjab Province, an area with a milder climate where concerns about winter conditions, lack of access, and crowded conditions are insignificant.  13. The earthquake-affected population faces an uncertain future and significant challenges remain.  The USG remains committed to responding rapidly as winter conditions set in. USG resources have been vital in meeting Pakistan,s requirements for earthquake relief and recovery and will continue to be critically needed during the coming months. Misleading media reports, generated in this and other cases by comments from UN officials, only cloud the overall picture and make accurate assessments and responses that much more difficult. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD17311", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/7/2005 12:45", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 ISLAMABAD 018159  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, UN SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY -- PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE: UN CREATES ANOTHER MEDIA STORM  REF: ISLAMABAD 17311  CORRECTED COPY OF ISLAMABAD 18030; SECTIONS MISSING FROM ORIGINAL  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. On December 3, 2005, the UN Resident Representative and Humanitarian Coordinator (UNHC) in Pakistan stated that the relief effort is on a knife,s edge and called for increased donor support for the USD 550 million UN Flash Appeal.  Local and international media picked up on the UNHC,s remarks and have recently painted an increasingly dire picture of the humanitarian situation in the earthquake-zone and the under-funded response effort to date.  Often based on incomplete and inaccurate information, many reports fail to recognize significant efforts by the entire humanitarian community, especially donors, NGO partners, and the Pakistani military, in providing timely and effective humanitarian interventions.  Although much work remains, the response to date has undoubtedly saved lives.  With the situation continuing to evolve and the emergency phase expected to continue through the spring, the USG is committed to responding rapidly as winter conditions arrive.  End Summary.  ---------- Background ----------  2. On December 3, the UNHC, Jan Vandemoortele, convened a press conference to draw attention to humanitarian conditions and appeal for additional UN funding.  Although the precise text of Mr. Vandemoortele remarks is not available, quotations from the conference were widely carried by the local and international media.  The comments require further clarification as they have often been based on incomplete and inaccurate information, thereby presenting a skewed picture of the situation on the ground.  ---------------- Response efforts ----------------  3. UNHC comment: The worst enemies we face are not the mountains, not the winter; the worst enemies we face are complacency and pessimism.  a. USG Response: The USG welcomes the UN recognition of the importance of action, particularly in the face of a delayed initial response by UN agencies per reftel.  This assertion, however, fails to recognize the large-scale efforts by the entire humanitarian community to the October 8 earthquake, and the significant impact of the response.  b. Donors: In addition to the response to the UN appeal, bilateral assistance from the USG, the UK,s Department for International Development (DFID), and the European Union is well over USD 200 million.  c. Department of Defense (DOD): Although civilian air support has increased in recent weeks, DOD air assets remain the backbone and most reliable component of the Pakistani military logistics chain.  As of November 30, DOD had completed 2,004 sorties, carrying more than 4,817 tons, 11,544 passengers, and 3,656 medical evacuations; off loading 254 aircraft and approximately 7,289 tons of humanitarian cargo.  DOD commodities provided include 3,116 tents, 200,058 blankets, and 600 tent heaters.  d. Government of Pakistan (GOP): The GOP military has assumed a great deal of responsibility in the relief effort and performed well under difficult circumstances.  Not only has the GOP military proven effective in terms of reach and responsiveness, but it has also been keen to learn from the donor community best practices in addressing technical issues such as camp management, relief commodity distribution, and water and sanitation interventions.  Moreover, the GOP is reportedly building 5,000 shelters a day, and assuming the costs for the shelter provided. e. NGOs: USAID implementing partners were on the ground within days of the earthquake, and remain at the forefront of emergency response efforts.  ----------------------- Increased Funding Needs -----------------------  4. UNHC comment: The situation remains very difficult and indeed we are on a knife,s edge.  a. USG Response: To date, the UN has received USD 158.2 million to the Flash Appeal, and USD 64.5 million more pledged.  With the addition of an estimated USD 100 million bilaterally from donors, more than half of the amount requested has been received thus far.  In the face of a compressed timeline for response, the UN appeal for more funding needs to be packaged with clear indication of how monies will be expended.  The Flash Appeal has requested USD 550 million, but includes funding for secondary and tertiary programs, rather than just immediate, life-saving needs.  On December 2, the UN released a Winter Plan for the critical period of December 2005 through February 2006.  However, the Winter Plan does not indicate how much funding is needed for the critical emergency sectors.  As not all sectors are on a knife,s edge, UN agencies need to triage and better prioritize needs.  -------------- Food Situation --------------  5. UNHC comment: Emergency food stocks were built up, but rations had been cut so they could last longer.  a. USG Response: Actually, rations were not cut to extend resources, but rather because in some areas, food was already available as was the case in ICRC,s distribution area, where full rations were not needed.  The UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) is covered at the current level (nearly meeting its target of 100 MT a day), through February, based on a caseload of 1 million people.  With a recent USDA donation of 46,000 MT of wheat, the food pipeline is healthy.   b. With the food aid pipeline stabilized, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) recommends a shift away from a primary focus on food assistance to addressing unmet shelter needs.  ------- Shelter -------  6. UNHC comment: Vandemoortele stressed that most people were using blankets, tarpaulins and whatever else they could lay their hands on to bring their tents up to standard to get through the winter.  a. USG: This takes a negative slant on people using available materials to rebuild, despite the fact that the use of recycled materials is an important component of the widely supported shelter strategy, as it speeds up reconstruction and allows people to remain in place.  This protects assets and livelihoods, rather than forcing them to go to makeshift camps and facing the associated health hazards of displacement.  To support this strategy, the USAID/DART is providing NGO partners with shelter kits to assist rebuilding efforts in affected areas.  7. According to media reports, a UN official in charge of providing shelter also warned that 90 per cent of the 420,000 tents handed out were not ready for winter.  a. USG: Inaccurately attributed to the UN, this is a statement by an International Organization for Migration (IOM) official.  The UNHC acknowledges that although 90 per cent of tents are not winterized, it does not mean that they are inadequate; the proportion of inadequate tents is much smaller.  Moreover, non-winterized tents can be used at lower elevations or reinforced with additional materials such as blankets, plastic sheeting, or bubble wrap for insulation.  ---------------- Health/Nutrition ----------------  8. Recent media reports have highlighted the possibility of deteriorating health status as harsh winter conditions are realized.  Although cases of diarrhea, acute respiratory infections (ARI), and pneumonia have been reported, to date, no major communicable disease outbreaks have been reported. Accurate health baseline data for northern Pakistan is limited.  The earthquake-affected residents, in particular those living in remote areas at high altitudes, are vulnerable each year, with high levels of chronic malnutrition.  According to USAID/DART field staff, a significant number of people die each year from ARI and pneumonia.  The UN has acknowledged that conclusions regarding increased cold weather-related mortality rates are premature.  ----------------------------- Improved Health and Education -----------------------------  9. With limited medical facilities in northern Pakistan prior to the earthquake, many residents are likely accessing health services for the first time, due to the influx of clinics in the affected areas as part of the humanitarian response. This may lead to the appearance of a higher incidence of disease compared to normal levels, but may be attributed to improved disease surveillance and more consistent reporting.   10. One positive aspect of the humanitarian response that has been largely overlooked by the media is the higher number of children enrolled in school in the IDP camps*some for the first time.  In past years, schools are usually closed for a few months during the winter; however, this year the schools will likely remain open, due in part to the presence of the international aid community.  While some media reports have criticized the quality of tents used for temporary schools, the tents are meant to be used as daytime structures.  The children attending school also receive the benefits of hygiene education, which includes lessons on the use of latrines, a skill that will improve the children,s health when they return home.  ---------------------------- Conclusions: The Big Picture ----------------------------  11. Although recent media reports have seized on the shortfalls of the earthquake relief operation and the UNHC has publicly remarked that the relief effort is on a knife,s edge, it is important to note that incomplete reports are misleading, fail to recognize significant efforts by the entire humanitarian community, and do not provide an accurate picture of the evolving situation.  12. While it is important to anticipate and prepare for a deteriorating situation, some media reports are basing a worst-case scenario on faulty assumptions.  One often repeated scenario is that massive population movements from remote higher elevation areas to the valley will overwhelm the limited space available in existing camps, resulting in large-scale deaths from freezing temperatures.  USAID/DART field reports, as well as reports from NGOs, indicate that much of the earthquake-affected population will remain in place rather than moving to camps.  In addition, the GOP has prepared for this contingency by developing plans to move displaced populations if necessary to Punjab Province, an area with a milder climate where concerns about winter conditions, lack of access, and crowded conditions are insignificant.  13. The earthquake-affected population faces an uncertain future and significant challenges remain.  The USG remains committed to responding rapidly as winter conditions set in. USG resources have been vital in meeting Pakistan,s requirements for earthquake relief and recovery and will continue to be critically needed during the coming months. Misleading media reports, generated in this and other cases by comments from UN officials, only cloud the overall picture and make accurate assessments and responses that much more difficult. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05Islamabad16345", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/9/2005 14:19", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ISLAMABAD 018328  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART BOLSTERS SHELTER WINTERIZATION EFFORTS  REF: Islamabad 16345  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. The rapid onset of the Himalayan winter has brought greater urgency to efforts to winterize shelters of earthquake-affected populations.  Agencies are stepping up efforts to ensure that families receive adequate winterization materials and tools, including blankets and plastic sheeting to reinforce non-winterized tents.  The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) is strongly advocating for shelter needs to receive higher priority through the Shelter Cluster mechanism-an interagency working group chaired by IOM comprised of GOP officials, UN representatives, NGOs, and donors.  The USAID/DART is also working closely with the US Embassy and Departments of State and Defense to reinforce this message with GOP officials. Further, USAID is airlifting an additional 6,000 sheets of tarpaulin and 2,500 blankets that can be used to insulate the walls and floors of tents or shelters.  In coordination with the Shelter Cluster, the USAID/DART is also exploring other winterization options in order to rapidly address immediate shelter needs.  End Summary.  -------------------------------------------- Coordinating the Race for Thermal Protection --------------------------------------------  2. The USAID/DART Shelter and Settlements Advisor (SSA) reports that there has not been a significant increase in the population requiring shelter assistance as estimated soon after the earthquake of October 8, 2005.  What has changed, however, is the worsening of conditions due to the onset of the Himalayan winter.  As a result, winterization of current shelters has become increasingly urgent.  3. At present, the number of people requiring shelter assistance remains imprecise, with agencies using a range of planning figures.  Per reftel, the USAID/DART estimates that 400,000 households or 2.8 million people have shelter needs as a result of the earthquake.  The International Organization for Migration\'s (IOM) planning figure for a worst-case scenario is 3.2 million homeless.  4. The number of remaining shelter needs is also ambiguous. According to the GOP\'s Federal Relief Commission (FRC), shelter needs have largely been met, particularly for residents at the 5,000 feet elevation, above which people are particularly at risk due to extreme cold and lack of access during the winter months.  IOM staff in Islamabad also reported that 100 percent of people still living above 5,000 feet will have received shelter assistance by December 10.  5. (Comment: These assertions of 100 percent shelter coverage are widely disputed by USAID/DART field staff, NGOs, and IOM staff in the field, all of whom argue that the level of shelter assistance achieved thus far falls far short of 100 percent.  At a December 8 Cluster Meeting, NGOs even disagreed with an estimate that 80 percent of shelter needs had been met, indicating that the coverage was even lower in areas where they were working.  In its latest draft of the winterization strategy, IOM reduced the 100 percent estimate to 90 percent and, in light of the discussion at the December 8 meeting, may reduce it even further.  In addition, IOM clarified that the 100 percent figure refers to the actual distribution of shelter materials.  However, residents may not have used the materials for shelter construction.  6. Comment continued: Local commanders responsible for populations in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) are taking two approaches to meeting shelter needs.  In AJK, there is a strategy to shelter people in place, outside of camps, whereas in NWFP, the GOP has encouraged camp settlements.  The disconnect in how to best address shelter needs stems in part from the fact that initially the GOP position on shelter was to encourage all affected populations to migrate to camps and in part from the fact that AJK has relatively few sites suitable for camps and NWFP has many. End comment.)  ------------------- Shifting Priorities -------------------  7. In light of rapidly approaching winter conditions when access to populations requiring shelter assistance will be restricted, the percentage of shelter materials presently carried by helicopters should receive higher priority.  One reason for urgency is that shelters cannot be built once snow is on the ground.  8. Due to concerted efforts by donors, the UN World Food Program (WFP), and the GOP, the food supply in high altitude areas is generally considered within the humanitarian community to be adequate, with a healthy pipeline of food though the winter.  In addition, there is locally-produced food available from this year\'s harvest.  9. As a result, USAID/DART field staff and NGO partners report that at present, shelter is the primary concern of affected populations remaining in or near their homes.  The GOP and WFP recently redistributed geographic responsibilities to manage the effective distribution of food commodities, with WFP covering the most difficult areas to access.  As of December 1, WFP began to move its operations from main population centers to Allai, Kaghan, Neelum, Lipa and other high elevation valleys.  These areas are unlikely to be served by the market because of snowfall, landslides, or the fact that normal harvest and trading patterns were interrupted by the effects of the earthquake.  Further, the USAID/DART Food for Peace Officer is currently in Mansehra to assess food needs and explore options for food relief at a later date should the situation change and pockets of needs emerge.  -------------------------------------------- Delays in Transportation of Shelter Supplies --------------------------------------------  10. One reason for delays in the delivery of shelter materials is the inexperience of some NGOs with logistical operations.  For example, the UN Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) has cited cases of improperly packaged shelter materials and instances when NGOs have not followed established channels to request air support from UNJLC.  As a result, at times helicopters have been ready to pick up NGO shelter commodities but could not transport them as scheduled.  11. Further complicating the timely provision of shelter assistance are some GOP restrictions on the importation of commodities, which have caused long sourcing and procurement delays.  For example, corrugated galvanized iron (CGI) sheets, manufactured in India but purchased in Dubai, have been stalled in customs for nearly three weeks.  To date, waivers appear to have been granted on case-by-case basis, and the humanitarian community has requested a blanket waiver from the FRC to facilitate relief efforts.  There is some speculation that delays are due to market protection issues; however, this has not been confirmed.  In an effort to take immediate corrective action, the USAID/DART is pursuing the possibility of establishing a joint commodity warehouse, likely in tandem with the UK\'s Department for International Development (DFID), where commodities would be collectively warehoused and made available to the humanitarian community as needed.  --------------------------------------------- - USG Efforts Regarding Urgency of Shelter Needs --------------------------------------------- -  12. At this time, the USAID/DART\'s strategy reflects an emphasis on expedited shelter relief to the high altitude affected region.  It is anticipated this will be the case for the next several weeks, with the main objective being to meet critical shelter requirements while there is access to these elevations and needs persist.  The bulk of relief commodities transported during this time will consist of CGI sheets, plastic sheeting and blankets.  Based on recommendations from USAID/DART\'s SSA, further commodities for shelter kits, such as nails, screws, rope and sand bags, are being considered.  A \"Special Standards Task Force\" was also established as of December 4 at the Forward Operating Base in Muzaffarabad to ensure quality control and consistency in shelter supplies.  In addition to the attention to high elevation areas, the USAID/DART will be closely tracking shelter requirements below 5,000 feet, especially in organized and spontaneous camps and congested urban settings.  In this regard the USAID/DART strategy entails diligent oversight of humanitarian relief in the areas of health, and water and sanitation needs.  13. With the situation becoming more critical, the USAID/DART has undertaken the following actions in recent days to raise awareness regarding the urgency of shelter needs:  14. Encouraged agencies to take immediate action to transport a greater percentage of shelter materials to affected areas, and to increase emphasis on meeting shelter needs.  The priority should be providing more emphasis on shelter needs, rather than discussion leading to consensus on what percentage of shelter needs remained to be met.  15. Advocated with the FRC to prioritize the immediate shelter needs of affected populations, especially located in hard to reach areas above 5,000 feet.  With the deadline for intervention December 15 to 20, the USAID/DART advocated a shift to shelter rather than continued emphasis on food. With food largely available in Mansehra and Muzaffarbad, according to USAID/DART field assessments, and the fact that food aid can be transported after winter sets in; the provision of shelter assistance to those without should be prioritized.  16. Refocused dialogue at Shelter Cluster meetings at the Islamabad and field levels in Mansehra and Muzaffarabad to ensure that shelter needs receive appropriate attention. USAID/DART staff reported a continued disconnect between the field staff and the agencies in Islamabad.  17. Engaged multi-agency efforts, including DOD, UNJLC, and WFP to ensure that movements of shelter commodities are most effectively transported.  On December 9, DOD Disaster Assistance Center (DAC) staff attended an NGO meeting to provide training and guidance on the proper procedures for requesting air support and the appropriate packaging and off- loading of relief materials.  18. The USAID/DART is in discussions with DFID, regarding joint support of a commodities warehouse with resource materials purchased locally or within the region for NGOs to access easily, compared to the current bureaucratic system that is subject to significant delays.  -------------------------- Assistance Efforts to Date --------------------------  19. USAID: In support of the overall shelter strategy, USAID has provided 66,500 sheets of tarpaulin, 45,000 blankets, 1,570 winterized tents, and 455 tents since the beginning of the emergency.  In addition, USAID funded eight NGO partners to provide shelter assistance to approximately 75,500 households.  As agencies step up winterization efforts, USAID is airlifting an additional 6,000 sheets of tarpaulin and 2,500 blankets that can be used to insulate the walls and floors of tents or shelters.      In addition, the USAID/DART is conducting field assessments to gauge the capacity of implementing partners to scale up current operations in light of winterization needs.  20. DOD: Through the Joint Operations Center (JOC), the US military is working with the UNJLC and the GOP Military to develop a \"smart pull\" or requirements based strategy to appropriately distribute relief supplies.  Instead of instituting a set percentage of the type of commodities that are delivered across the board, the shipments are determined by the end point receivers to \"pull\" the most-needed commodities to the field.  In addition, as of December 7, DOD had provided 4,602 tents, 250 rolls of plastic sheeting, 232,092 blankets, and 600 heaters.  Additionally, DOD provided air support to transport shelter commodities.  21. Multi-agency efforts: The Shelter Cluster is coordinating the multi-agency winterization and shelter efforts.  On December 5, the Shelter Cluster reported that approximately 35,000 self-help shelter kits have been distributed and the GOP military has built an estimated 40,000 transitional shelters.  In addition, the international humanitarian community and the GOP military have distributed more than 612,562 tents and more than 4.1 million blankets.  By December 10, the Shelter Cluster estimates that agencies will have distributed 174,000 sheets of CGI.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD18328", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/13/2005 4:28", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 018492  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART MONITORS DISTRIBUTION OF RELIEF COMMODITIES IN ALLAI VALLEY  REF: Islamabad 18328  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. On December 11, 2005, the US Military provided helicopter transport to Pashtu and Gangwal villages in the remote earthquake-affected Allai Valley for three USAID/DART members, the Commander of the 3rd Marine Hospital Shinkiari and Mansehra, and the US Embassy\'s Mansehra Forward Operating Base Officer in Charge (OIC).  The team was accompanied by a representative from USAID partner NGO, Save the Children US (SC-US), which is working in eight Union Councils in the Allai Valley.  Due to access constraints to this area, air support is imperative for transport of emergency relief.  SC-US is distributing urgently needed household and shelter kits and food to these areas, and plans to cover the eight union councils by December 23. Distribution is ongoing, and is addressing the particular issue of women\'s access to relief in these communities.  The USAID/DART will continue to conduct field visits to monitor humanitarian conditions in affected areas. End summary.  ------------------------------------ Limited Access to Pashtu and Gangwal ------------------------------------  2. On December 11, the US Military facilitated site visits by helicopter to two villages in the remote earthquake- affected Allai Valley for three USAID/DART members, the Commander of the 3rd Marine Hospital Shinkiari and Mansehra, and the US Embassy\'s Mansehra Forward Operating Base OIC. The team was accompanied by a representative from USAID partner SC-US, which is working in eight Union Councils in the Allai Valley, including Pashtu, a village located at 5,161 feet, with a population of approximately 17,000 people, and Gangwal, which had 12,000 residents, and is located at 5,413 feet.  3. Descent into the valley was striking in that homes throughout the region were nestled into steep hillsides-many close to the tree-line on snow-clad mountains.  Gusts of wind made landing difficult in Pashtu, and provided a strong indication that winter conditions are at the doorstep of the valley\'s residents.  The USAID/DART noted that helicopter assistance is imperative for transporting relief items to this area.  According to SC-US staff, the one road providing access to Pashtu has been blocked since the October 8 earthquake, and the primary means of movement between the larger town of Banna, located in the main Allai Valley, and Pashtu village is a steep trail that drops deeper into the valley.  ------------------------- Distributions In Progress -------------------------  4. During the USAID/DART\'s visit to Pashtu, a distribution of non-food items (NFIs) was underway for a targeted 2,000 households to receive winter shelter and/or household kits, containing plastic sheeting, saws, hammers, picks, wire, nails, axes, stoves, shawls, and blankets.  (Note: SC-US is targeting distributions of food and shelter and household kits to an estimated 12,288 households in Pashtu, Bateela, Rashang, Banna, Biari, Sakargah, Jambera, and Batkool union councils in the Allai Valley. End note).  SC-US is providing the kits to 2-3 villages a day, with plans to cover all 25 villages by December 23 if weather conditions permit.  5. SC-US has also completed a survey in Gangwal village, Rashang Union Council, and already delivered shelter and household kits to half of the 1,700 families identified for assistance.  Similar to the distribution strategy employed throughout SC-US operational areas, households at higher elevations-as high as 7,000 feet in Rashang-are receiving priority for distribution of the kits.  6. The UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) has been providing the necessary helicopter support to airlift these relief commodities.  SC-US staff reported that in the past week, UNHAS delivered a combination of food and emergency supplies, with airlifts of NFIs exclusively in the last four days in response to the urgent need for transport of shelter and winterization materials.  The USAID/DART observed that the GOP military, CARE, and Swiss Humanitarian Aid have also provided relief to this village, and another NGO has just arrived to help the Pashtu people construct dome tents.  ------------------------------------- Women\'s Access to Relief and Services -------------------------------------  7. During the course of the visit, USAID/DART members observed only a few women in the distance, in the midst of hundreds of men and boys who were lined up to receive household and shelter kits.  The ability of women to access relief remains one of the foremost concerns of the USAID/DART.  In an effort to ensure that women are not excluded, SC-US worked with community members and local NGOs to identify beneficiaries through a community survey.  Among the most vulnerable population, widows and female-headed households received priority.  In Pashtu, SC-US identified 214 widows with the assistance of the local population.  As these women were registered, they were given three \"chits\", or colored pieces of paper, which entitled them to a special relief package containing shelter and household kits and food.  At the same time, the women were asked to select a trusted family/community representative who would be authorized to submit these chits for commodities to transport to the women\'s shelters.  SC-US is following-up with monitoring activities and home visits to ensure that the materials reach each widow.  8. On December 6, SC-US established a temporary hospital in nearby Banna, staffed with male and female physicians, several of whom are Pashtu and Urdu speaking.  Of particular note is that more than 60 women are lining up daily to access health care as a result of the presence of female doctors at the hospital.  SC-US staff noted that some women in the community are receiving health services for the first time, as this access to services did not exist in the past. To improve access even more, SC-US plans to add a separate hospital entrance for women in the coming days.  9. SC-US efforts to ensure access for women to shelter materials and health services demonstrate how USAID/OFDA partners are providing equitable life-saving relief while respecting cultural sensitivities.  In early January, a gender specialist will join the USAID/DART as a Protection Officer to address this and other gender concerns.  -------------------------------- Shelter Remains Priority Concern --------------------------------  10. The USAID/DART paid special attention to the issue of food availability during the site visits to Pashtu and Gangwal and the flyover of the Allai Valley.  Through SC-US, WFP has provided a 45-day ration for blanket distribution in Pashtu.  Throughout the valley, the team observed mounds of recently reaped maize and wheat on the terraced rice paddies next to damaged homes.  Some of the mounds were covered with plastic tarpaulin to protect the harvests from the elements. While it is unclear what percentage of the normal crop yields were lost as a result of the earthquake, the USAID/DART continues to find in interviews with villagers that food needs appear to be adequately addressed.  At this juncture, shelter is the primary concern. 11. According to several residents who were waiting to receive their shelter kits, people generally want to stay in their communities, even in high elevation areas.  This sentiment was corroborated by SC-US\'s field staff in Pashtu, many of whom are from the affected village.  12. Supplies for construction of sturdier shelters are in great demand.  The USAID/DART continues to raise related questions about the viability of tents to withstand the harsh winters and whether or not villagers are \"saving\" tents.  It may be that some people are safeguarding the tents that are too flimsy to live in, but could serve as shelter for livestock and/or grain storage.  The USAID/DART will continue to follow this issue in order to assure the best use of commodities distributed at these high elevations.  -------------------- Water and Sanitation --------------------  13. Traditionally, villagers in these remote communities walk several miles to obtain potable water.  Although there were some functioning pipes in Pashtu that provided a trickling of water, SC-US noted that pipes had been damaged and water availability is limited.  In discussions with SC- US staff, the team learned that it is not uncommon for men to bathe infrequently during the winter months.  Some men bathe when visiting the larger town of Banna, where they can purchase a bucket of hot water at a barber shop with special rooms for washing.  However, this is reportedly not an option for women.  These cultural hygiene habits are likely to have health implications for communities in \"spontaneous\" camps if more people move to these areas.  ----------- Conclusions -----------  14. With the rapid onset of winter conditions, the USAID/DART continues to address the shelter needs of vulnerable populations.  Based on the monitoring visit to Pashtu and Gangwal, distribution of key survival shelter and household kits appears to be proceeding on schedule.  In particular, SC-US is recognizing the needs of women in obtaining relief commodities, specifically shelter materials and health services.  On December 11, USAID airlifted an additional 6,000 sheets of tarpaulin and 2,500 blankets that can be used to insulate the walls and floor of tents or shelters per reftel.  The USAID/DART will continue to conduct field visits to monitor humanitarian conditions.  15. The USAID/DART extends a special thanks to the US Military in Pakistan for its services in enabling the team and its partners access to conduct rapid assessments and monitor program progress.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD17557", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/16/2005 13:57", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 018810  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: CONFUSION OVER WFP AND GOP DIVISION OF FOOD DISTRIBUTION RESPONSIBILITIES  REF: Islamabad 17557  ------- SUMMARY -------  1. On December 1, 2005 the U.N. World Food Program (WFP) and the Government of Pakistan (GOP) implemented a new division of geographic responsibilities to distribute food to approximately 2.3 million people in the earthquake-affected areas of Northern Pakistan.  The GOP requested that WFP move its urban-based operations from main population centers to Allai, Kaghan, Neelum, Lipa and other high altitude valleys to take advantage of WFP\'s logistical capacity delivering food in difficult to access areas.  The GOP is covering urban areas and rural areas easily accessible by road and has taken over WFP operations in Mansehra.  However, in the geographic areas covered by the GOP,  WFP is maintaining food distributions within UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) tented camps, UN Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) tented schools, hospitals, and supplementary feeding programs for children under five and pregnant and lactating women.  USAID nongovernmental partners (NGOs) have expressed frustration that the local government has not effectively communicated the terms of the new agreement to beneficiaries, creating unmet expectations.  Despite these concerns with the details of food distribution responsibilities, there is currently an adequate supply of food in Pakistan for earthquake victims. End Summary.  ---------------------- Splitting the Caseload ---------------------- 2. At the outset of the emergency, the international humanitarian community took a collegial approach to determining areas of operation for food distribution.  For the most part, NGOs on the ground identified their areas of operation and coordinated with WFP to target beneficiaries and establish emergency food distributions.  In addition to WFP and NGO efforts, the GOP was also providing food, leading to some duplication of efforts.  3. On December 1, a new agreement went into effect that clarified areas of responsibilities and caseloads, making the entire movement and provision of food more efficient and maximizing individual organizational strengths.  WFP is using a combination of land transport and helicopters to provide food to UNHCR tented camps and the difficult to access rural areas.  The GOP and the provincial governments are covering urban and less affected areas, as well as insuring that markets and commercial food distribution networks are uninterrupted.  WFP and the GOP are each responsible for providing food to 1.1 million people. Additionally, the International Committee for the Red Cross and Red Crescent (ICRC) is continuing its feeding and support program in the lower Neelum Valley for 150,000 beneficiaries.  ----------------------------------------- Food Operations under the New Arrangement -----------------------------------------  -GOP Operations-  4. The GOP is responsible for ensuring food security to approximately 1.1 million people living below 5,000 feet elevation by reactivating markets in the earthquake zone and launching cash compensation programs for earthquake victims who lost family members and/or had homes damaged or destroyed.  When necessary, the GOP will provide direct food distributions; however, to the extent possible, the GOP will rely solely on market mechanisms to provide food and other commodities at reduced prices as well as government subsidized stores called \"Utility Stores.\"  The GOP is DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DORKEN allocating more than 300,000 metric tons (MT) of wheat flour to Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) and Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) governments to be channeled through the utility stores and other market outlets.  On December 9, the FRC reported that there are 30 operational utility stores in the earthquake-affected areas and a further 12 will be established.  -WFP Operations-  5. WFP is assisting its caseload of 1.1 million people through direct food distributions and supplementary feeding though March 2006.  As of November 30, WFP had distributed 23,101 MT of emergency food commodities, of which 1,924 MT were distributed via air transport.  This figure represents approximately 25 percent of the overall 101,000 MT required to feed the WFP caseload.  6. Through cooperating partners, WFP is providing blanket one-month food rations of 96 kilograms per six-person family to 751,221 people living above 5,000 feet elevation and other difficult to access areas in AJK and NWFP.  Of this total, there are an estimated 441,221 beneficiaries in AJK and 310,000 in NWFP.  WFP has sub-offices in Muzaffarabad, Bagh, Ghari Habibullah, and Batagram.  7. In addition to the general food distribution, WFP is providing or will provide food in UNHCR tented camps for up to 250,000 persons who have lost their homes, means of livelihoods, and income and are now living in tents in rural, urban, and semi-urban areas.  In facilities supported by UNICEF and the U.N. World Health Organization (WHO), WFP is providing hospital feeding for up to 5,000 patients.  8. To support the nutritional needs of children, WFP is providing fortified blended cereal along with the general food distribution for children aged 6 months to 5 years.  In affected villages and tented camps, these children are receiving wheat soya blend (WSB) as a supplementary ration, and WFP has the capacity to reach up to 150,000 beneficiaries.  WFP is also conducting emergency school feeding for 150,000 primary school children in UNICEF- supported tent schools.  In tented and open air schools, UNICEF/WFP-supported schools that were destroyed, and selected government schools that were destroyed, children are receiving high energy biscuits and dates.  ----------------------------------- WFP\'s Winter Logistics and Pipeline -----------------------------------  9. WFP will continue to provide rations through March 2006 by helicopter in snow-covered inaccessible areas and by truck to accessible UNHCR camps, school feeding sites, and supplementary feeding programs.  WFP has deployed 46 mobile warehouse tents with a total capacity of approximately 23,000 MT, utilized for food storage as well as for non-food item pre-positioning.   All NGOs and agencies assisting in the earthquake relief effort have free access to mobile warehouse storage.  An additional 22 mobile warehouse tents are in the pipeline and will be used to strengthen the logistics capacity of WFP and its cooperating partners. This is particularly valuable as it supports the ongoing effort to establish storage points as close as possible to beneficiary populations.  10. According to the USAID/DART Food for Peace Officer (FFPO), the WFP food commodity pipeline is quite healthy. WFP is currently distributing 2,400 Metric Tons (MT) of vegetable oil provided by USAID/FFP.  An additional USAID/FFP donation of 2,490 MT of vegetable oil is currently being finalized.  Presently, sufficient wheat exists in country to allow WFP to draw down its needs.  Per reftel, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) offer of a USD 12 million contribution to replace wheat used by WFP provides reassurance that WFP operations will continue beyond the winter. (Note:  Although the WFP food commodity pipeline is healthy, WFP does not yet have the necessary funds to cover associated costs, such as road transportation and distribution, to continue its obligation through April 2006. The USAID/DART, in collaboration with the US Mission in Pakistan, continues to work with the GOP, donors, UN agencies, ICRC, and NGOs to address this important need. End note.)  ------------------------------------------- Confusion over Division of Responsibilities -------------------------------------------  11. The new division of food assistance responsibilities makes good use of the respective operational capabilities of WFP and the GOP since WFP is delivering food to the most difficult to reach areas and the GOP is supporting areas that are easier to access.  However, preliminary field reports suggest some difficulties with the handover process. NGOs have expressed frustration over the fact that the GOP has not effectively communicated the division of responsibilities to beneficiaries, leading to confusion among the population and unmet expectations.  12. In Mansehra, where WFP has handed over food assistance responsibility to the GOP, NGOs are particularly frustrated with the closure of WFP\'s office, which has left the logistics, food and nutrition, and information technology clusters without leadership.  WFP is now handling NWFP operations from Ghari Habibullah but cluster meetings are still held in Mansehra.  Field staff from some of WFP\'s cooperating partners are also concerned that the GOP has not yet taken over food distribution in several areas in Mansehra since WFP\'s departure.  13. In one example of NGO frustration, in Bagh District, AJK, USAID implementing partner GOAL was providing food and shelter assistance in eight union councils prior to the shift in operational areas.  As parts of Bagh District now fall under the GOP\'s operational area, GOAL ceded food responsibilities in five of the union councils to the GOP. However, GOAL is still implementing USAID shelter projects in these five union councils.  As GOAL is still present, but no longer providing food, GOAL\'s community mobilizers are receiving complaints.  GOAL reported that even the local Bagh Administrator and military representatives were not aware of the shift.  14. According to the USAID/DART FFPO, the disconnect between the decision to divide food aid areas and the local governments\' knowledge of this decision is fairly universal in both NWFP and AJK.  At a December 9 food cluster meeting in Islamabad, humanitarian agencies recommended to the FRC that the GOP raise community awareness via radio campaigns. At the meeting, the FRC representative seemed surprised by NGO statements that local government and GOP military representatives on the ground were not aware of the new agreement.  He stated that although the local government should spread the message at the district level, the FRC Commissioner could also make a radio address.  15. The USAID/DART FFPO is currently in Mansehra, and is meeting with a range of humanitarian actors to assess the food situation and address questions raised regarding food distribution responsibilities.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD17311|05ISLAMABAD17632", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/21/2005 13:25", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 019100  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA ACTION TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, UN, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: UN PERFORMANCE SHOWS IMPROVEMENT BUT OVERALL LEADERSHIP STILL LACKING  REF: A) ISLAMABAD 17311 B) ISLAMABAD 17632   ------- SUMMARY -------  1. More than two months into the earthquake relief effort, the UN has made some improvements in response to early criticisms of start-up delays and performance issues reported in ref A.  However, a lack of overall UN leadership, poor coordination, and insufficient staff continues to undermine the Pakistan earthquake response.  Most urgently, the UN should deploy a disaster expert to oversee the entire UN humanitarian operation. End summary.  ------------------------ Overview of the Response ------------------------  2. The humanitarian community marshaled massive resources to respond to the devastating October 8 earthquake in Pakistan. Overwhelming humanitarian needs, difficult terrain, and harsh winter weather conditions make the response particularly challenging.  There were also a large number of stakeholders, including numerous donors, humanitarian agencies, and GOP officials.  3. Rather than deploying a disaster expert to supervise multi-UN agency efforts at the start of the earthquake response, the UN Resident Coordinator who was already overseeing the UN Development Program,s portfolio in Pakistan became the UN Humanitarian Coordinator (UNHC).  The deployment of OCHA,s Director for Coordination and Response Kevin Kennedy was a welcome step to pull together the efforts of UN agencies more effectively, but Mr. Kennedy,s tenure in Pakistan was too brief.  4. The UN also piloted a &cluster lead8 system to replace the &collaborative approach8 of informal sectoral working groups that had been employed in previous emergencies.  Under the cluster system, agencies are appointed as leads to represent the interests of and formally develop a strategy for an entire sector.  Therefore, the cluster response places heavy demands on staff time for meetings and planning, taking away from operations.  Cluster leads are also failing to communicate and coordinate among themselves, which is hampering an integrated response.  While it may be too late to abandon the cluster approach in Pakistan, the UN needs leadership to pull together the cluster leads to ensure more information-sharing and cohesion among and across the sectors.  --Coordination and Information Management--  5. Undermining UN coordination and information sharing is the inadequate staffing of the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).  In particular, OCHA,s Humanitarian Information Center (HIC) has insufficient staff to manage and respond to large-scale information needs. According to its mandate, the HIC serves as the primary information collection point and gathers information submitted voluntarily by NGOs, other UN agencies, and the GOP.  Cluster leads are responsible for submitting sector information to the HIC; however, they have not yet developed standardized reporting formats.    Without enough HIC staff, there is no comprehensive information management system, and competing and often contradictory information streams have emerged.   ---------------------------------- Progress of Individual UN Agencies ----------------------------------  --Relief commodities--  7. There were significant early logistical problems managing air cargo shipments arriving at Islamabad Airport (Ref A). These have receded with improved inventory of incoming goods, and the slowdown in the number of airlifts arriving.  One remaining concern is that current UNJLC procedures do not identify transportation missions according to urgency of need but by location and access.  As a result, transportation is logical and efficient, but may fail to consider time sensitivity.  8. A UN Operational Data Management Team is now being formed to collect information systematically about the commodities pipeline. The arrival of a new UNJLC head on December 13 may also improve information collection and dissemination.  --WFP Food Assistance--  9. WFP has made progress since ref A and the food aid pipeline is healthy.  WFP field staff is dedicated and knowledgeable; in general, WFP and its cooperating partners are doing a competent and sometimes innovative job.  One concern is that WFP may have too quickly passed its responsibility to the GOP in Mansehra.  NGOs there are frustrated with the closure of WFP,s office, which has temporarily left the logistics, food and nutrition, and information technology clusters without leadership.  --Essential Services--  10. UNICEF staff have demonstrated strong technical skills in the water and sanitation sector.  Some UNICEF staff have shown more initiative than others, but have generally coordinated well with local government officials and the overall effort has been satisfactory to very good.  One concern is that UNICEF field staff are overstretched and unable to monitor closely projects in such a large coverage area.  To augment UNICEF efforts, the USAID/DART provided technical assistance to repair the damaged well at Mehra camp.  USAID also funded two staff positions through an NGO partner to provide surge capacity and oversight of water and sanitation activities.  11. The Camp Management Cluster lead, UNHCR, has doubled its camp management budget and increased the number of personnel and teams in the field per ref B.  To date, UNHCR has received USD 30 million in contributions, which is sufficient to cover camp management through March 2006, when the FRC and UNHCR plan to close camps. --------------------------- Comment and Recommendations ---------------------------  12. Overall, UN agencies have made progress since the early days of the response.  The deployment of experienced staff including Kevin Kennedy, and WFP Chief of Logistics Service, Amer Daoudi, led to significant improvements in UN operations.  The UN Secretary General, as well as directors from UNDP, UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP, and WHO traveled to Pakistan in the past two months, helped to rally agencies, efforts. Post also welcomes the announcement of former President Bush as Special Envoy for the South Asia Earthquake Disaster to pressure donors to honor pledges made in Geneva and Islamabad.  13. Although most individual agencies have shown improvement since ref A, the lack of sufficient staff and poor overall coordination continue to undermine the earthquake response. Post recommends the following:  a) The UN should immediately deploy a disaster expert to assume the role of the UNHC and oversee the entire UN operation.  Post recommends conveying this recommendation to the UN Secretary General, possibly through former President Bush.  At present, there is no leadership to hold the cluster leads accountable and ensure that information is shared between the field to headquarters and across different clusters.  The UNHC also needs special authorities for procurement and staffing.  b) Introduction of the cluster system concept was inappropriate for this major disaster response.  At this stage, it is too late to abandon the cluster approach, but the situation would improve by deploying UN staff with disaster experience and improving decision making authority for cluster leads. c) The HIC lacks sufficient staff to manage and disseminate incoming data.  Competing systems must be streamlined to better prioritize immediate interventions, identify gaps, and avoid duplication of efforts. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05Islamabad16881", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/29/2005 5:03", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 019471  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake, PKEAID SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART WATER AND SANITATION UPDATE: ADDRESSING PROBLEMS IN NWFP  REF: Islamabad 16881  ------- Summary -------  1. The USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) water and sanitation officer (WSO) in Mansehra is addressing critical sanitation and water supply issues in Mehra and other camps, and providing technical assistance to agencies working in earthquake-affected areas of Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP).  In December 2005, the WSO accompanied Government of Pakistan (GOP) engineers on assessments in 35 destroyed and severely damaged communities.  To provide surge capacity and additional oversight of water and sanitation activities, USAID has funded two staff positions through an NGO partner.  A USAID/DART update of the water and sanitation situation in Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) is reported septel.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- --- Addressing Water and Sanitation Problems in NWFP --------------------------------------------- ---  2. USAID/DART WSOs are currently based at the US Embassy\'s Forward Operating Bases in Mansehra, NWFP, and Muzaffarabad, AJK, to monitor water and sanitation conditions in the earthquake zone and ensure adequate water and sanitation to prevent environmental health risks.  A USAID/DART WSO has been conducting assessments and providing technical guidance to agencies implementing emergency water and sanitation programs.  WSO recommendations have emphasized correcting critical gaps in community water and sanitation systems, and supporting field coordination.  3. As reported reftel, the UN Children\'s Fund (UNICEF) is coordinating water and sanitation issues in the affected areas of NWFP, with priority on interventions in camps. Mehra tent camp, located one hour north of Batagram on the Indus River, is currently the largest planned camp in the earthquake zone, with an estimated population of 16,000. The GOP has planned for Mehra to accommodate up to 30,000 people.  According to the USAID/DART, the camp growth rate is declining, but may increase if weather conditions worsen in the higher elevations of the Allai Valley.  4. The USAID/DART WSO reports that UNICEF\'s coordination of water and sanitation activities in Mehra has generally been good.  However, initial camp latrines built by contractors collapsed due to poor construction.  Following an assessment of Mehra, the USAID/DART WSO worked with the GOP military and UNICEF to upgrade the latrine design, supervise repairs of collapsed latrines, and oversee the construction of new ones.  In addition, the WSO established a construction tracking system to assure an adequate number of latrines were built to stay ahead of population increases at Mehra and other camps.  UNICEF is working with a new contractor, Solidarites, to construct latrines and maintain existing ones.  5. Another concern in Mehra Camp was the reduced supply of drinking water due to technical problems with the camp\'s well.  In response, the WSO provided guidance on proper well operation and arranged for US military electricians to rewire the control box.  Currently, the well is operating at full capacity.  To assure that water supplies remained adequate, the WSO advised the camp management to construct a second well.  This process is underway as of December 24. The WSO also worked directly in planning and implementation of backup water delivery to other camps.  --------------------------- Providing Technical Support ---------------------------  6. Since arriving in Mansehra, the USAID/DART WSO has actively engaged with UN agencies, NGOs, and local GOP officials on water and sanitation issues, especially in the interagency cluster meetings in Balakot and Batagram.  One important intervention by the WSO was focusing the cluster to support local authorities in conducting assessments and identifying priorities for reconstruction.  During December, the WSO accompanied GOP engineers on assessments in 35 destroyed and severely damaged communities.  USAID partners International Medical Corps (IMC) and ACTED have arranged for transport of materials to targeted communities.  The WSO has also coordinated with UNICEF, IMC, and ACTED for interventions in Paras, where people are reportedly drinking water from the river.  7. According to the USAID/DART, UNICEF field staff have demonstrated strong technical skills in the water and sanitation sector, but are overstretched and unable to monitor closely projects in such a large coverage area.  To augment UNICEF efforts, USAID funded two additional staff positions through NGO partner IMC to provide surge capacity and additional oversight of water and sanitation activities. One staff member is already on the ground and working on UNICEF water and sanitation activities.  8. To support sanitation activities and improve health surveillance, the USAID/DART WSO has been collaborating with partner agencies on disease reporting to monitor conditions, particularly in more densely populated camps.  The WSO has arranged for waterborne hygiene disease reporting to support the water and sanitation clusters.  Maintaining disease reports allow agencies to remain current on trends and provide advanced indication of potential outbreaks.  The WSO has collaborated with the UN World Health Organization (WHO) to provide \"early warning\" information to field cluster meetings.  9. Sanitation and hygiene promotion are critical activities for curbing the spread of disease in urban and densely populated camps.  Managing the use of latrines, as well as providing facilities with warm water for washing during the winter months are current priorities, especially in unorganized camps.  To support improved hygiene and bathing, the WSO met with partner NGO Action Contre La Faim (ACF) and the UN Development Program (UNDP) to review a plan for heating water and setting aside a bathing area in camps. The WSO has provided recommendations to modify the program that ACF plans to initiate in Balakot.  CROCKER " }
