
"13389","1/20/2004 18:07","04QUEBEC12","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201807Z Jan 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUEBEC 000012 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
OTTAWA FOR ECON GALLEGHER 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN EWHEELER, EB/IPC SWILSON, EB/TPP/BTA/EWH DSHEEHAN 
STATE PASS HSS PLAISIER AND MCGINNIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, CA, Trade, FDA, Health 
SUBJECT: FDA INTERNET PHARMACY MEETINGS IN QUEBEC CITY 
 
 
1.  Summary:      FDA representatives met with Quebec officials 
January 12 to discuss the internet pharmacy trade and other 
issues related to an upcoming meeting between FDA Commissioner 
McClellan and Premier Charest in Davos.  In his meeting with 
Commissioner McClellan, Premier Charest is likely to ask when 
the U.S. will implement the rest of legislation on U.S. 
pharmaceutical imports.   Despite differences in federal and 
provincial systems, the Health Canada representative present 
offered Ottawa\'s full support to Quebec on cross-border 
enforcement investigations relating to provincial regulations. 
Health Canada is moving forward with unannounced compliance 
inspections on internet sites starting in February to examine 
how regulations were being applied to these sites.  End Summary 
 
2.  FDA Assistant Commissioner for International Programs 
Melinda Plaisier and Director of Pharmacy Affairs Thomas 
McGinnis had two meetings on January 19 to discuss the internet 
pharmacy trade in Quebec.  The first was with provincial 
officials; the second with provincial pharmacy regulators, and a 
Health Canada representative. The genesis of the meetings was a 
request by Premier Charest to meet with Commissioner McClellan 
in Davos January 23 to discuss the pharmacy issue, and concerns 
about the impact of new U.S. bioterrorism regulations relating 
to cross-border trade.  FDA indicated that Commissioner 
McClellan might also raise potential GMO labeling legislation in 
Quebec. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
---------- 
QUEBEC REGULATING INTERNET PHARMACIES 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
---------- 
3.  The President of the Quebec Order of Pharmacists (OQP) 
Jean-Yves Julien and the Director of Investigations Jocelyn 
Binet, representing the regulatory side of Quebec\'s 
pharmaceutical industry, stressed the strict enforcement and 
control regime on internet pharmacies in Quebec.   Only about 4 
% of the orders placed with Canadian internet pharmacies are 
received in Quebec.   Quebec is the only jurisdiction in North 
America where one must be a registered pharmacist to own a 
pharmacy, thereby affording strong legal remedies for violators. 
   He reported that no pharmacists in Quebec own internet sites 
inside the province.  In any case, OQP would oppose internet 
pharmacies because they would not meet their professional 
standards.   Currently three internet sites in the Montreal area 
are being sued, by the OQP, for selling medication abroad. 
 
4. Prescriptions signed by U.S. physicians are not valid in 
Quebec.  Internet pharmacy businesses look for Canadian-licensed 
doctors to co-sign or rewrite them without a consultation -- an 
unethical practice, said Julien.  Based on the Quebec code of 
ethics, physicians and pharmacists must have face-to-face 
contact with the patient or can be sued by the disciplinary 
committee.  Julien said, moreover, that his pharmacists are no 
longer accepting a co-signature by a Canadian doctor at face 
value. 
 
5. As the head of Quebec\'s pharmaceutical licensing body, Julien 
underscored that pharmacists were not mere vendors or 
distributors of drugs, but provided a professional service, a 
dimension that he felt was too often neglected in the internet 
pharmacy debate.  The OQP is taking a very comprehensive look at 
the safety and quality of the cross-border drug trade, with a 
particular emphasis on services such as the appropriateness of 
medications.   Quebec passed new legislation last year, Bill 90, 
that allows pharmacists to adjust prescriptions made by 
physicians and request follow up procedures such as blood tests. 
 Pharmacists maintain the security of drugs and services and can 
be sued for practices against the public interest.  At this 
time, at least one person is being sued personally for \"illegal 
exercise of a profession.\"  The case is pending a decision by a 
Superior Court judge.  Julien also noted, in passing, that 
direct advertising by drug firms to consumers is prohibited in 
Quebec, making it easier for physicians to prescribe less 
expensive drugs. 
 
6.  Chief investigator Binet told the FDA officials that the 
OQP, the federal RCMP, and DEA officials based in the state of 
Vermont have been working closely together on a number of cases. 
 He said that cross-border enforcement is extremely difficult 
because of the complexity of getting Canadian law enforcement 
officials across the U.S./Canada border.  Cross-border travel in 
the OQP investigations were facilitated only by virtue of 
personal contacts within U.S. law enforcement, which insured 
that a briefed-inspector was on the border when needed.  The FDA 
visitors offered to assist in facilitating entry into the U.S. 
of an investigator, should the case arise again. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
LONGER TERM REPERCUSSIONS 
---------------------------- ----------------------------- 
7.  Representatives of two Quebec ministries, Laval Poulin, 
Director of Intergovernmental Affairs at the Ministry of 
Agriculture, and Richard St Cyr of the Ministry of Economic 
Development, expressed concern about the potential impact on the 
local health care situation because heightened demand for 
prescription drugs from the U.S.    In his meeting with 
Commissioner McClellan, Premier Charest is likely to ask when 
the U.S. will implement the rest of legislation on U.S. 
pharmaceutical imports.   Quebec is concerned that one impact 
could be pressure to increase prices of drugs for the province\'s 
universal medical plan. 
 
8.  FDA\'s Plaisier pointed to the exponential growth of the 
international cyber drug trade over the last decade.  While it 
is an issue in several countries, recently the spotlight has 
fallen on Canada.   Pressure in the U.S. to provide access to 
less expensive prescription drugs may give rise to new 
legislation in Congress.  FDA has been mandated to report back 
to Congress by December on how to bridge the gap between the 
U.S. and Canadian systems, said McGinnis.  There are real 
concerns about transshipments, drug subpotency and quality. 
Counterfeiting is a huge concern.  Drugs subject to a recall can 
be swapped out and redistributed with a date change.  Since last 
summer, a number of controlled substances have begun to flow 
into the country, i.e. codeine, valium, and ephedrine (diet 
pills).  Some of this is originating for the first time from 
Canada.  The Quebec side said they saw no trend toward 
controlled drug exports from the province: pharmacists report 
cross border visitors were buying largely medications for blood 
pressure control, cholesterol, and erectile problems). 
 
------------------------- 
HEALTH CANADA 
------------------------- 
9.  The meetings elicited lively and useful exchanges between 
the FDA, Quebec provincial officials, OQP, and Health Canada. 
Health Canada Associate Director General Daniele Dionne offered 
full federal support to Quebec.  She said Ottawa was ready to 
work more closely with provincial regulatory bodies.  FDA 
officials were struck her notification that Health Canada was 
moving forward with unannounced compliance inspections on 
internet sites starting in February to examine how regulations 
were being applied on these sites.  Dionne said her Ministry and 
FDA had recently signed an MOU on information sharing and 
pledged to remain in close contact in this regard.  She also 
stressed the need for close federal/provincial cooperation. 
With safety as the principal concern, she underscored that none 
of the 6000 pharmacists in Quebec are involved in illegal 
internet practices; cyber companies are going elsewhere because 
of Quebec\'s effective regulatory system. 
 
------------------------------ 
BIO- TERRORISM ACT 
----------------------------- 
10.  As the U.S. is Quebec\'s number one client in terms of food 
exports, BTA legislation has a direct impact; the Charest 
government has provided comments through the federal government. 
 Quebec\'s main concern is prior notification for importation 
into the States: the province\'s concerns were reflected in the 
initial regulations.   Poulin said the province appreciated the 
8-month soft enforcement period.   The industry and farmers need 
time to adjust; they are hopeful they will be adequately 
prepared when the Act comes into full effect next summer.   So 
far, there has been no appreciable impact on the border, but the 
program is new and it is still winter.   The 8-month soft 
enforcement period would end in the middle of the fresh produce 
period.  For the time being, transportation companies only 
receive warnings at the border.   Quebec representatives asked 
whether it would be possible to harmonize the BTA regulations 
with existing the FAST and CPAT programs at the border.  FDA 
replied that the initial BTA regulations were drawn up under a 
tight deadline, but that there would be another 30-day comment 
period in March. 
 
---------------------- 
GMO LABELING 
---------------------- 
11.  Asked about potential food labeling legislation, the Quebec 
officials said a parliamentary commission had been formed to 
look at food safety.  Under this umbrella the commission may 
examine and suggest legislation on GMO labeling.   The committee 
is expected to report to the National Assembly in the spring. 
Public hearings will follow.  Both the federal and provincial 
governments share jurisdiction on food labeling and must 
harmonize their approach.  Inter-provincial and international 
trade is under federal jurisdiction while internal provincial 
trade is under Quebec control. 
 
12.     Comment:  The FDA representatives underlined that America 
was primarily focused on safety issues, and the point was made 
more effectively than has often been the case because they 
emphasized that high American demand for drugs, combined with 
the curtailing of deliveries by drug producers, would create 
market pressures that would inevitably open the path to 
counterfeiters and undermine even the efforts of even the best 
regulatory authorities.  This message was well received by the 
Quebec side, for whom legal and professional (safety) issues are 
as much at stake as political and economic concerns.    The 
participants all focused on the longer-term potential for 
problems caused by the cross-border internet pharmacy trade. 
Health Canada\'s participation was appreciated in that it allowed 
the Quebec side to differentiate between provincial and federal 
systems in a way that elicited cooperation. 
 
 
 
KEOGH 
"
"14133","2/20/2004 15:33","04QUEBEC33","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
WHA/CAN FOR TERRY BREEZE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, CA 
SUBJECT: THE QUEBEC SPONSORSHIP SCANDAL AND ITS AFFECT ON NATIONAL 
UNITY 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The scandal involving misuse of public funds 
for shoring up federalism in Quebec has caused a strong drop in 
support for federal Liberals in Quebec and a concurrent surge in 
support for the Bloc Quebecois.  Quebecers are angry at what 
they perceive as \"Quebec-bashing.\"  Jean Charest and the 
provincial Liberal party have so far remained above the fray and 
are distancing themselves from their federal counterparts, 
although there are indications that the scandal may get worse. 
Charest\'s vision of a new era of federalism is being sorely 
tested, but Quebec\'s initiative on forming a Council of the 
Federation will go on, with the next meeting taking place in 
Vancouver February 23-24.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Prime Minister Paul Martin passed through Quebec 
February 16 for damage control on the sponsorship scandal and to 
stop the hemorrhage of public support for the Liberals.  In a 
recent Leger Marketing poll, 75% percent of Quebec respondents 
thought that Martin knew about the subsidies, or at least, 
should have known.  A February 11-12 CROP poll showed a drop in 
support for federal Liberals in Quebec to 35%; the Bloc 
Quebecois showed 47% support.  President of the National 
Assembly Michel Bissonet (PLQ) admitted to CG Keogh February 20 
that the Bloc might gain around 20 seats in the next general 
election because of the scandal.  Note: February 17, Minister 
for Natural Resources Sam Hamad downplayed the depth of negative 
public reaction, telling CG the Bloc is an \"empty\" party, where 
voters temporarily park their votes when they are mad at the 
government. End Note. 
 
3.  (SBU) Bissonet said that Quebecers are angry and offended 
for having been implicated in a flag-waving campaign that went 
wrong, and that has set off the Canadian blame-game that is 
cynical about bending over backwards to placate Quebec 
separatists.  Politicians in Quebec wince over the image of a 
corrupt political culture in the province, with its invidious 
comparison to European politics.   They tend to dismiss the 
current outcry as \"Quebec-bashing,\" although they acknowledge 
that political scandals relating to countering separatism have a 
long history in Quebec.   Certainly, the logic of heavy 
federalism behind the subsidies scandal has never gone down well 
with the provincial Liberals.  Jean Charest has been at pains to 
emphasize his loyalty to Quebec and determination to defend the 
province\'s interests.  He was not close to former PM Chretien. 
Embattled at home, Charest Liberals are now distancing 
themselves from Martin Liberals who have become a liability for 
the PLQ, and vice versa. 
 
4.  (SBU) In a February 17 editorial interview with Le Solely, 
Martin insisted heads would roll if they were implicated in 
impropriety.  Among provincial names mentioned prominently in 
the press in the scandal are Jean Pelletier, head of ViaRail and 
former Chief-of-Staff for Chretien, Andre Ouellet, head of 
Postes Canada, and Michel Vennat of the Banque du Developpement 
du Canada.   Local press have reported on criticism of Minister 
for Heritage Canada Helene Scherrer, who had dealings with one 
of the implicated companies, Groupaction, to manage a $250,000 
sponsorship for the World Junior Downhill Ski competition in the 
Quebec region (allegedly the firm was paid a $30,000 commission 
to show the Canadian flag in and around the site). 
 
5.  (SBU) Scherrer strongly denied any impropriety in a February 
18 conversation with CG.  \"I was not even elected when involved 
in the ski event.  The program was there for people to use. If 
anyone had known about malfeasance, they would not have touched 
the money.\"  As for the Bloc Quebecois gaining from the scandal, 
Scherrer accused Bloc Chief Gilles Duceppe of encouraging groups 
in his riding to apply for federal funds - $1.9 million in 
FY2001-2, $2.3 million in FY2002-3  -\"when he was supposed to 
know something fishy was going on.\" 
 
6.  (SBU) So far the provincial Liberal Party (PLQ) has escaped 
direct involvement in the scandal, and continues to promote its 
vision of Quebec finding a new place in Canada.  February 19, at 
a meeting of Consuls General in Quebec, Charest insisted: \"this 
government has nothing to do with it.\"   He called the scandal 
\"shocking\" but said the storm would pass.  Norman MacMillan, 
President of the Liberal Caucus, insists that the PLQ, including 
Jean Charest and his entourage, had no knowledge of the 
accounting fraud. He noted the worst excesses took place in 1997 
after the failed sovereignty referendum.  At that time, Charest 
was head of the federal Conservative Party, in opposition to the 
Liberals.  Respected journalist Alain Dubuc (former chief 
editorialist of La Presse, now Editor of Le Soleil) concurs that 
Charest had no involvement in the federal sponsorship scam. 
 
7. (SBU) Of course, rumors abound.  One high-level government 
contact hinted to CG that the revelations so far are the tip of 
the iceberg and that the PLQ will eventually be implicated. 
While some commentators point out that Charest himself is 
relatively insulated from the scandal, others insinuate that the 
weak link is Groupe Everest, one of the companies involved in 
the scandal, which managed Charest\'s 1997 campaign.  MNA 
Bissonet believes the scandal will deeply undermine the Martin 
forces in the province and said the scandal could have a 
\"Watergate\" dimension. 
 
8.  (SBU) Until the recent scandal, political observers here 
have tended to characterize Quebec Liberals as a house divided: 
federalist Liberals, either in the Chretien or Martin camps, 
center-left Bourassa Liberals, conservative Charest Liberals. 
One result of the current scandal, however, has been public 
papering-over traditional divisions.  There is less evident 
partisanship.  Charest told the recent CG gathering that his 
three main priorities relate to the demographic problems of an 
aging population, \"fiscal imbalance\"/budget priorities, and 
promoting cultural diversity.   On the latter point, he noted 
the federal government has been the main supporter of cultural 
institutions in Quebec, e.g. Radio Canada, and that if federal 
monies dried up it would cause a lot of problems. 
 
9.  (SBU) Quebec\'s initiative on forming a Council of the 
Federation will go on, however.  Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs Benoit Pelletier told CG February 19 that all Provincial 
and territorial premiers (possibly with the exception of 
Nunavut) will be meeting February 23-24 in Vancouver.  This 5th 
reunion/first full meeting of the Council will create a 
Secretariat to be based in Ottawa, a body to handle fiscal 
 
SIPDIS 
imbalance, and will agree on a common agenda.   Asked if 
relations with Ottawa have been affected by the subsidies 
scandal, he confirmed it would complicate relations, in that 
Ottawa might not want to make any concessions to Quebec in the 
current environment.  Negotiations with Health Minister 
Pettigrew are not yet arranged.  \"Everything is on hold because 
of the scandal,\" but Pelletier said he thought things would work 
better after the federal elections. 
 
10.  (SBU) Comment:  Charest is keen to propagate new relations 
with the rest of Canada\'s provinces and with Ottawa and to 
promote national unity, although not at Quebec\'s expense.  His 
vision of a new era of federalism is being tested by the 
sponsorship scandal; the widespread cynicism over political 
corruption that it has engendered is obviously a source of 
frustration as the Quebec Premier tries to establish a new place 
for Quebec within Canada and on the international scene. 
Charest does have the advantage - unlike PM Martin - of time. 
He knows where he wants to go.  With 4 years of his mandate 
still ahead of him, he is focused on mending fences with some of 
the civic groups he alienated through precipitous legislation at 
the end of 2003.  After the elections, if the Liberals regain 
power, and if Martin is the leader, he also hopes to renegotiate 
Quebec\'s place on the international scene.  Some of these larger 
visions may go on hold though if indeed the subsidies scandal 
continues to grow.  Quebecers are likely to insist on 
individuals being held accountable. 
 
 
 
KEOGH 
"
"14234","2/24/2004 18:27","04QUEBEC35","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03QUEBEC233","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUEBEC 000035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT PASS USDOC IMPORT ADMIN TERPSTRA 
WHA/CAN - BREESE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ENRG, PREL, PGOV, EMIN, CA, Energy, Softwood lumber 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC NATURAL RESOURCE MINISTER ON SOFTWOOD,ENERGY 
 
REF: 03 QUEBEC 233 
 
 
1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Natural Resources Minister Sam Hamad told 
CG Keogh February 17 that a combination of allocation quotas at 
a level of 35% and dropping the 48/52 split of the accumulating 
duties as proposed by the U.S. would form the basis of a 
softwood lumber deal.  A substantial portion of the duties, if 
not all, should be returned to Canada, he asserted.  He also 
told us that log validation was one of his main concerns and 
stressed that the province was impatient to see a Quebec annex 
published in the policy bulletin.   Minister Hamad has asked to 
meet the Ambassador when he visits Quebec in March and arrange a 
working lunch and presentation on energy.  He also requested 
assistance in visiting the United States for exposure to U.S. 
views and policies as a VOLVIS this summer.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
Softwood Lumber 
---------------------- 
2.  (SBU)  On February 17, CG Keogh and Pol Asst Nadeau met with 
Sam Hamad, Quebec Natural Resources Minister, and his staff 
director Jean Quenneville.  Allocation of export quotas at the 
historical level of 35%, or better, and an important slice of 
the duties, if not all, instead of the current 52/48 proposal 
favoring the U.S., would be a palatable solution and clinch a 
softwood lumber deal tomorrow, asserted Hamad.  He also 
commented that log validation was one of his main focuses while 
stressing that the province was impatient to see a Quebec annex 
published in the final USDOC policy bulletin on lumber. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Energy and Ambassador March Visit 
-------------------------------------------- 
3.  (SBU)  Hamad  proposed a working lunch with the Ambassador 
March 23 in Quebec with a focus on energy security.  The hold on 
natural gas exploration in the Gulf of St Lawrence, because of 
environmental concerns relating to sonar activity that disturbs 
belugas and other marine life, did not preclude exploitation of 
current known reserves.  Hamad made it clear the hold was 
temporary while other less invasive tests were developed for use 
in exploration.  However, negative public opinion remained a 
factor, he stated.  An immense pocket of gas, he named \"Old 
Harry,\" located between Newfoundland and Quebec\'s Ile 
d\'Anticosti, is even bigger than the Hibernia Project.  Hamad 
noted tht the oil sands in the Canadian West will run out in 
about 30 years, so that other energy sources must be identified. 
 
4.  (SBU)  The Minister added that he was working on a 
broad-based national prosperity strategy on regional 
development.    He is looking to attract investments to Quebec 
and getting more U.S. involvement, especially in the mining 
sector.  A new source of diamonds was discovered in Northern 
Quebec at Mont Ottish two weeks ago by Ashton Mining.   Ashton 
is a small company and they are still in the exploration phase. 
At this stage, it is a 50/50 partnership with Quebec government 
agency SOQEM. 
 
---------------------- 
VOLVIS Program 
---------------------- 
5.  (U)  Sam Hamad expressed strong interest in participating in 
an individual VOLVIS program in the US.  He said the best timing 
for him would be sometime in the summer, ideally in early July, 
once the provincial legislature has recessed.    In Washington 
we suggested  meetings at State, the Department of Energy, and 
Commerce to discuss softwood lumber, as well as a trip to 
Houston to look at the energy sector, California (Sacramento and 
San Francisco) for wind energy and conservation practices. 
Hamad was enthusiastic about going to Yale and Harvard 
universities to meet with think tanks.  He said his main areas 
of interest would be energy policy, and renewable sources of 
energy. 
 
6. (SBU)  Comment:  Mr. Hamad was not entirely clear about what 
he thought would be acceptable (and workable) \"ballpark figures\" 
from Quebec\'s point of view to resolve the softwood lumber 
impasse.  There is obviously room for interpretation as well as 
a continued strong desire to end the dispute. 
"
"14527","3/3/2004 16:21","04QUEBEC41","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUEBEC12","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031621Z Mar 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAN BREESE 
DEPT PASS HHA FOR STEIGER 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR MELLE AND CHANDLER 
USDOC FOR WORK AND HERNANDEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, CA, Trade 
SUBJECT: JANSSEN-ORTHO PROMOTES MANAGED PRICE INCREASES FOR QUEBEC 
PHARMACEUTICALS 
 
REF: QUEBEC 0012 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary: Consulate met with Janssen-Ortho 
representatives February 25 to discuss their plan to get the 
Quebec Government to adopt a modified American-style pricing 
system that would manage price increase pressures in the 
pharmaceutical sector.  After a meeting with the Quebec Ministry 
of Health, they reported back that the GC was pleased with a 
fresh approach to the problem that could address their needs.  A 
final response will probably not be forthcoming until early 
October.  Since the proposal would require regulatory change, 
and with balkiness on the part of the public over a perceived 
double standard in drug pricing, it is unlikely the Quebec 
Government will take the bait, no matter how adventageous.   End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) CG Keogh and Pol Asst Nadeau met February 25 with 
Janssen-Ortho Inc, the Toronto-based pharmaceutical subsidiary 
of Johnson & Johnson.  Dr Penny Albright, Vice President for 
Government and Health Economics, Robert Kamino, Senior Director 
Strategic Business Licensing and Acquisitions, and France 
Mignault, Regional Director of Health Policy and Governmental 
Affairs had requested the meeting to outline a proposal on 
managing price increase pressures in the pharmaceutical sector 
that they were about to propose to the Government of Quebec. 
Janssen-Ortho is the fourth largest pharmaceutical company in 
Canada in terms of sales (Pfizer is first).  Quebec represents 
about 12% of total drug sales in Canada. 
 
3. (SBU) Quebec has historically been more responsive to the 
pharmaceutical industry than any of the other Canadian 
provinces.  In Janssen-O\'s view, the Parti Quebecois had been 
good for the industry, but the current Liberal government is 
seen to be pragmatic and pro-US, with strong interest in 
attracting U.S. investment.   According to Janssen-O, Quebec is 
the key to resolving the disparity in the price of prescription 
medicines between the U.S. and Canada that has encouraged cross 
border Internet sales, because its legislation has stricter 
pricing rules.  In short, if Quebec is on board, the other 
provinces are likely to follow, they reasoned. 
 
4.  (U)  In Quebec, there are more than 10,000 people employed 
in the pharmaceutical industry.  The market was $3.2 billion in 
2002.  Brand name pharmaceutical research and development in 
Quebec has increased by nearly 500% since 1988 to $423.2 million 
in 2001.  The Quebec government paid over $1.9 billion for 
prescription medicines through the Regie de l\'Assurance Maladie 
du Quebec (RAMQ) in 2003, up 9% over 2002.  This makes Quebec\'s 
public drug plan one of the two largest and most influential in 
Canada, but the government is hard pressed to continue with this 
outlay.  The GQ has strongly discouraged drug price increases. 
There have been none since the early 1990\'s. 
 
5. (SBU) This policy has caused friction between the Counseil du 
Medicament and the manufacturers.  In addition, the cancellation 
of the formulary update (the normal deadline for price changes 
would be March 5) is of particular concern to the industry. 
Quebec has decided to delay the formulary until June.  The 
Janssen-O representatives said the postponement of the decision 
to add new drugs to the provincial list is preventing access to 
new and better drugs.  As the pressure on the system increases, 
RAMQ is faced with several options: losing access to 
pharmaceuticals if they continue to reject price increases; 
delisting products with increased prices; or accepting price 
increases of 2-3 percent when the provincial health budget is 
already under extreme strain. 
 
6. (SBU) An alternative, proposed by Janssen-Ortho, is 
negotiated prices that would allow increases in some cases 
(private insurers) while reducing the price for RAMQ.  In 
addition, the RAMQ could negotiate the price of a newly 
introduced product before listing it on the formulary to achieve 
an initial price that is lower than other customers.  There are 
no legislative or legal impediments to implement this sort of 
arrangement in Quebec. 
 
7.  (SBU) According to Janssen-O, discussions with the RAMQ have 
been underway for 3 years.  At the start, the answer was a flat 
out \"no.\"  Quebec drug plan representatives defended all 
Quebecers against price increases and treated the proposal as a 
threat to the \"Quebec Model\" of social justice, to avoid any 
perception that the government might be in cohoots with the 
pharmaceuticals industry.  The government mood remains sensitive 
and careful but there is a recognition that the system is not 
working, said the Janssen-O reps.  Finance Minister Yves Seguin 
has already said he will have difficulty balancing the budget, 
in part because of lower federal transfer payments for 
healthcare. 
 
8.  (SBU) Compounding the PLQ government\'s problem, 1.5 million 
Quebecers are over 65 years of age.  1 million are on some sort 
of social assistance; 1.7 million are under the Quebec 
government drug plan; and 4 million are covered by private drug 
insurance.   At present, there are approximately 2,000 products 
listed on the Quebec formulary, many of which are generics. 
Because of the province\'s social justice component, it lists 
certain products not covered by other provinces, i.e. 
anti-smoking patches.   Quebec lists more drugs, and does it 
faster, than other Canadian province.  However, this represents 
only 60 percent of the total drugs approved by Ottawa. 
 
9.  (SBU)  The Janssen-O representatives see the new pricing 
scheme as a win-win situation for the industry and the Quebec 
government.  A segment of society would pay more, i.e. privately 
insured customers would be hit by a 4% increase, but the elderly 
would greatly benefit from this scheme.  This would help Quebec 
manage the pharmaceutical budget and deal with the current 
confrontation with the industry. 
 
10.  (SBU)  Following their February 25 meeting with Assistant 
Deputy Minister of Health Jocelyne Daganais and staff members, 
Janssen reported back that the GQ was pleased with a fresh 
approach to the problem of drug pricing that addressed the 
government\'s needs as well as the interests of the industry. 
The government is studying options and would be taking several 
months to assess the situation, probably working to an October 
deadline (the dates when they would normally implement changes 
to the drug plan are June 1 and October 1).  They mentioned that 
the major issues to resolve with Janssen-Ortho\'s proposal were 
the need for regulatory change to enable implementation and the 
need for assessing how the various stakeholders would perceive 
this arrangement. 
11.  (SBU)  Comment:  The Quebec Government is in a real bind 
over balancing the budget and grappling with increased health 
costs and diminished \"equalization\" payments from Ottawa. 
Increased medical costs are real issues because of the rise in 
the dollar, internet pharmacies, and higher expectations on the 
part of Quebecers who voted the PLQ into office on a health 
platform.  The government has tried to implement pragmatic 
polities early in its administration.  However, Charest is not 
doing well in the polls.  Ultimately, we think it is unlikely 
that the Quebec government will find going to a U.S. pricing 
system palatable, with the need to implement new regulations and 
the fear of criticism for \"double standard\" healthcare.   End 
Comment 
 
 
 
KEOGH 
"
"14689","3/8/2004 13:27","04QUEBEC43","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03QUEBEC163","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000043 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAN 
DEPT PASS INTERIOR FOR BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, SENV, EMIN, CA 
SUBJECT: PAUL OGALIK REELECTED AS PREMIER OF NUNAVUT 
 
REF: 03 QUEBEC 163 
 
 
1.  (U)  March 5, sitting Premier Paul Okalik received the 
consensus to continue as Premier of Nunavut over contender Tagak 
Curley, the MLA from Rankin Inlet.  Ogalik brings his strengths 
of experience (he has had 5 years as Premier) and education, 
which includes a law degree, to the job.   Now that Ogalik is 
back at the helm, he has to face many fiscal and social 
challenges. 
 
2.  (U)  Jobs, housing, education and health are the 
bread-and-butter issues of most elections in Canada; however, in 
the eastern Arctic, these concerns are in the context of a 
debate over modernizing and retaining traditional Inuit 
practices.   The non-partisan system established in Nunavut in 
1999 allows candidates to run on their own platforms, without 
political party guidelines.  In the February 16 general 
election, 82 candidates ran for the 19 seats in the legislature. 
 Fundamentalist Christian beliefs versus secularism were a force 
in the territorial election and played into the contest for 
Premier.  \"Third party\" groups worked to support candidates, 
most notably Nunavut\'s labor movement and the rapidly growing 
fundamentalist Christian movement.  The former pressed for 
social justice and human rights; the latter, a loosely organized 
network of churches and bible study groups over the territory, 
have pressed for traditional Inuit cultural values. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Ogalik is a confident, articulate, liberal modernist, 
intent on moving Nunavut in the secular Canadian mainstream.  He 
has created awareness of Nunavut nationally, successfully 
negotiating with the Prime Minister on issues such as increased 
health benefits for the territory, and participating at 
Premiers\' conferences.   He ably represents Nunavut in 
international fora, and has visited aboriginal communities from 
Alaska to Australia.  That he wanted to continue as Premier is 
evidence that he has a high tolerance for dealing with difficult 
financial responsibilities and pressing social problems that 
resist easy solutions.  He moves easily between Inuit and 
non-Inuit culture.  He is bilingual in English and spent several 
weeks in Quebec last year doing French immersion.  That having 
been said, he comes across as a person well integrated into 
Inuit culture - simple and straightforward.  He can be found 
standing in line at Inuit traditional feasts and walks around 
Iqaluit without a bodyguard or a retinue. 
 
4.  (SBU)  On the other hand, these strengths of flexibility and 
cross cultural ease can be perceived as liabilities by the more 
traditional Inuit, who are concerned about the erosion of Inuit 
culture and language, and specifically \"modernist\" thinking, 
e.g.  the Human Rights Bill, passed in the fall of 2003, 
includes protections for gays.  Curley, while the loser in the 
race for Premier, had considerable support in the community, and 
acknowledged he was reentering politics to protest the 
territory\'s human rights legislation.  Traditionalists also 
worry that Ogalik has not done enough on economic development 
and employment for Inuit. 
 
5.  (U)  Diamond mine development, a source of future revenue, 
remains a distant promise, although three new mines in the 
Kivalliq and Kitikmeot regions may start producing within the 
life of the new Nunavut government.   For now, Nunavut remains 
almost entirely dependent on transfer payments from Ottawa to 
support its administration and services for the 27,000 
Nunavummiut.  The Conference Board of Canada estimated in a 
study released in early February that with the current annual 
capital budget of $75 million, Nunavut \"will incur an 
infrastructure investment shortfall of $40-50 million annually 
for the next five years.\"  The absence of roads, ports and other 
facilities is already causing developmental distortions, the 
study says.  \"The lack of infrastructure has led to a 
concentration of exploration activities on or near coastal 
waters, while inland resources are left stranded.\"  The study 
also painted a grim picture of increased strains on the Eastern 
Arctic society as younger Inuit reach working age to be faced 
with no jobs, increasing housing shortages and criminality. 
\"Nunavut is the only jurisdiction in Canada to have a higher 
rate of violent crimes than property crimes: overcrowding no 
doubt adds to the problems\" the study concludes. 
 
6.  (SBU)  To improve the territory\'s fiscal situation, Ogalik 
will certainly be working to capitalize on better relations with 
a federal government that may be more responsive to the needs of 
the Arctic territory.  Conversations with him in Iqaluit last 
year and more recently with his staff reenforce his conviction 
that Nunavut must eventually gain control over non-renewable 
resources and get a share of resource revenues through what is 
now called a \"devolution\" agreement, i.e. the transfer of 
responsibility for mining, oil and gas exploration and 
development from Ottawa to Nunavut.  Such a deal would see the 
GN getting a share of renewable resource royalties.  Another 
priority is a larger share of fishing quota in waters adjacent 
to Nunavut.  More costly, and probably even more remote, would 
be an economic development agreement between Ottawa and Nunavut. 
 Nunavut\'s Sivummut Economic Development Group presented Ottawa 
with a proposal last December to create a new 5-year, $66 
million Economic Development Agreement.  So far, however, there 
has been little or no response from the federal government. 
 
7.  (SBU)  On more day-to-day issues, Premier Ogalik will be 
facing social challenges such as reducing suicide rates and 
instituting new programs for inmates to reduce violent crime. 
He will oversee implementation of the Wildlife Act that assists 
the management of wildlife issues with elders, as well as the 
controversial Human Rights Act. 
As a top priority, he needs to increase the proportion of Inuit 
working in the Nunavut Government, which means preparing more 
young Inuit in post secondary education.  In Nunavut, government 
jobs are the main source of work, but currently less than half 
of these are filled by Inuit.   Climate change, that is already 
affecting the North-West Passage and hunting conditions are 
other concerns.  These will be among the issues that we will 
raise when the Ambassador visits Nunavut in April of this year. 
 
 
 
KEOGH 
"
"14707","3/8/2004 17:47","04QUEBEC44","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUEBEC 000044 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PREF, PHUM, CA, CVIS, KISL, SMIG 
SUBJECT: ALGERIAN SEEKING HAVEN IN QUEBEC CHURCH ARRESTED AND 
DEPORTED TO U.S. 
 
1. (U)  The case of an Algerian asylum-seeker who had been 
living in Montreal for the last six years came to a head this 
weekend.  Mohamed Cherfi, 35, was finally refused asylum by the 
Canadian government and was deported to the United States March 
5.  The case has sparked demonstrations and outcry in the press 
over the violation of traditional church sanctity. 
 
2.  (U) Cherfi had sought refuge at St-Pierre United Church in 
downtown Quebec City on February 10 at the invitation of pastor 
Reverend Gerald Gore.  Cherfi was arrested by several local 
police on March 5 and was taken to the border the same day and 
handed over to U.S. officials.  According to press reports, he 
is currently detained in Malone, New York awaiting to be 
returned to Algeria, his home country.  Cherfi had reportedly 
transited through the United States on his way to Canada in 
1998. 
 
3. (U) A solidarity committee and several internet sites have 
been set up in Cherfi\'s defense and a national day of action is 
planned in Quebec City, Montreal, Ottawa, Toronto, Edmonton and 
Vancouver March 9.  His defenders claim he was targeted for 
removal from Canada because of his political activism in favor 
of \"non-status\" Algerians and other refugees.  Cherfi and his 
Canadian girlfriend Louise Boivin claim he will be tortured and 
perhaps killed if returned to Algeria. Among those have called 
for the end of deportation procedures and the repatriation of 
Mr. Cherfi to Quebec are Parti Quebecois MNA for Taschereau 
Agnes Maltais (former Minister for Cultural Affairs), local Bloc 
Quebecois MP Christiane Gagnon, Amnesty International and the 
Quebec League of Rights and Liberties.  Quebec Minister for 
Citizen Relations and Immigration Michelle Courchesne has 
reportedly turned further comment and action over to her federal 
counterpart Anne McLellan. 
 
4. (SBU)  Comment:  This is the first time we have heard of 
sanctuary in church being \"violated\" in Quebec in recent 
history.  While it is not a legal protection, it has become a 
accepted that police will not arrest someone inside a place of 
worship.  Minister Courchesne mentioned the case to CG 
Bernadette Allen this weekend when they were both attending a 
non-governmental seminar on racial profiling in Canada.  We 
expect this case will continue generating public interest, 
particularly if Cherfi is returned to Algeria. 
 
5. (U) Montreal contributed to this cable. 
 
 
 
KEOGH 
"
"14754","3/9/2004 18:25","04QUEBEC46","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091825Z Mar 04
","UNCLAS QUEBEC 000046 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAN TERRY BREESE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, CA 
SUBJECT: ADQ\'S MARIO DUMONT PREDICTS UPHILL BATTLE FOR JEAN CHAREST 
 
 
1.  (U)  Summary:  The Quebec Assembly resumed March 9 and 
Action Democratique\'s Mario Dumont foresees major struggles for 
the Liberal government.  The stage is set for fiery labor 
negotiations with public sector employees and the upcoming 
provincial budget may not generate the big tax cuts promised 
earlier by Charest.   After almost one year in power the 
Liberals have dipped drastically in the polls, with now only 30% 
of overall support.  Young Dumont appears to have fully 
recovered from his unsatisfactory electoral performance last 
year and is ready to take on the Charest government.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (U)  March 8 -- the eve of the reopening of the Quebec 
legislature after a three-month break -- CG and PolAsst met with 
Action Democratique du Quebec (ADQ) leader Mario Dumont.  Dumont 
has a unique insider\'s view of the National Assembly in his 10 
years as an MNA, and has seen 3 governments come and go.  He 
also has an outsider\'s perspective. The ADQ is not recognized as 
a political party in the Assembly.  Despite winning over 18 
percent of the vote in the last election, Dumont still only 
gained 4 seats, so that he has very little time accorded for 
questions on the floor. 
 
3.  (U)  Dumont predicted an uphill battle for Premier Charest 
in the upcoming session.   He faces stormy labor negotiations 
with 500,000 public sector employees, controversy over his 
electoral reform bill, a budget which will be difficult to 
balance, resistance to efforts to reengineer the Quebec Model, 
and skepticism over nebulous round-tables on health, education, 
family and regional development.  In addition, referendums on 
municipal demergers loom as a source of contention in June. 
 
4.   (SBU)  Reviewing Charest\'s last few months in office, 
Dumont concluded that his mantra of \"I have a mandate\" is not 
shared by most Quebecers, who are unsure of the mandate, and 
confused as to whether Charest is really a Liberal.   Dumont 
cited the mishandling of the Mohawk crisis in Kanesatake and the 
announcement of the construction of the Suroit natural gas 
project, now postponed, as critical mistakes.   In Quebec, 
hydroelectricity has an almost mythic value among Quebecers. 
The PLQ government\'s decision to go ahead with the gas project 
despite massive public protest is a monumental political error, 
said Dumont, since polls showed an estimated 90% of Quebecers 
were against it.  The Suroit debacle has had an extremely 
negative impact on the PLQ government\'s credibility: a large 
number of party members were unwilling to back the government at 
the Liberal general council meeting held a few weeks ago, he 
added.   Dumont was equally critical of the performance of 
Natural Resources Minister Sam Hamad, whom he accused of 
amateurism and inexperience.   Regarding Kanesatake, Dumont 
thought there was a negative public perception that Chief 
Gabriel had been abandoned by the provincial government. 
 
5.  (SBU)  On relations with the unions, Dumont predicted 
widespread confrontation with public sector employees.  The 
provincial Liberals were elected with labor union support but 
less than a year after taking office, the government is 
confronting these same elements.  The barely 30% voter 
satisfaction levels show Liberal campaign promises and the math 
do not add up.  In Dumont\'s view, Charest has a 3- week window 
of opportunity to make some points with Quebec voters before 
federal elections are announced for May or June.  Public 
attention cannot be split between provincial politics and the 
electoral campaign, he concluded.   The sponsorship scandals 
would continue to be a distraction.  Charest\'s hands are tied 
because he cannot defend Ottawa.  It is \"revolting\" for 
Quebecers, said Dumont, to be enmeshed in a scandal over misuse 
of federal funds for a program they did not want, but sensed was 
ongoing.  \"No-one in Quebec ever thought a few Canadian flags 
scattered across the province could ever change deeply rooted 
political views among voters.  But everyone knew before the 
Auditor General\'s report that there was something wrong: the 
report only revealed the scope of it.\" 
 
6.  (SBU)  Comment:  Despite his relative youth (34) Dumont is a 
political veteran and a savvy analyst, particularly of budget 
and economic issues.   He seems to have regained his enthusiasm 
for politics, after the ADQ\'s disappointing showing in the April 
2003 elections.  His own party has scaled back its vision 
considerably.   Dumont said in the upcoming session, the ADQ 
would focus on legislation to protect essential services such as 
day care and public transportation, especially for the elderly 
who are dependent on this service to obtain medical care (32 
percent of the population of Montreal depend on public 
transportation, he estimated).   Despite his limited 
representation in the Assembly, he remains a force to be 
reckoned with. 
 
 
 
KEOGH 
"
"15352","3/25/2004 19:01","04QUEBEC57","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUEBEC 000057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, ECON, PREL, CA, Environment 
SUBJECT: MAGDALEN ISLANDS SEAL HUNT CONTROVERSY CONTINUES 
 
1. Summary: CG visited the ice floes off the coast of the 
Magdalen Islands March 10 to observe the harp seal population on 
its annual migration from Greenland.  As many as 350,000 young 
seals may be culled in the hunt this year, although this year\'s 
higher quota may well not be reached.  Opponents of the hunt 
decry it for being cruel and unsustainable.  Federal and 
provincial authorities, fully aware of the public relations 
problem surrounding the hunt, defend its conduct and claim it is 
the most strictly controlled and supervised hunt in the world. 
They are investigating alternative methods of killing the seal 
other than with clubs and rifles that can leave seals wounded. 
Harp seals number over 5 million, three times what they were in 
the 1970s.  Despite the ban of seal products in the U.S. and 
Europe, the industry earned about $15 million last year, 
primarily from pelt sales to Norway, Denmark and China. End 
Summary. 
 
2.  The commercial hunt for harp seals off the Magdalen Islands, 
in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, began March 24 - by no coincidence 
the same day as a campaign against the hunt by the international 
animal welfare movement.  Madelinots who live on the 
archipelago, and for whom the seal hunt is a way of life and 
source of income, have equally strong sentiments in favor of the 
hunt. 
 
3.  The ice field where the Greenland harp seals breed and 
whelp, situated an hour\'s helicopter ride from the \"Maggies,\" is 
the only place in the world where it is possible to land and 
observe the seals before the hunt or to monitor sealing 
activity.  (Note: the Atlantic off Newfoundland, where the 
majority of the harp seal population congregate, is too rough to 
permit observation).  Around 200 people visited the fragile ice 
floe during the first half of March this year, prior to the 
start of the hunt that goes into May, when the sea ice breaks 
up.  CG traveled onto the ice via helicopter March 10 to observe 
the hundreds of thousands of seals that travel 2,000 miles from 
the Arctic to give birth and mate before returning to Greenland. 
 Madelinot sealers, temporarily acting as ecotourist guides, 
were there to explain the hunt and the lifecycle of the seal.  A 
mass of seals and their white-coated pups were visible on the 
ice floe.  As many as 350,000 young harp seals may not make the 
return voyage. 
 
4.  This year the Gulf of St Lawrence is 40 percent covered with 
ice - some years it is 80 percent.  Storms have moved the ice 
field against the Prince Edward Island coast.  The strength of 
the sea ice depends on rain that refreezes and makes it more 
solid.  If the ice is too thin, seal pups, lacking enough 
blubber, fall off the ice floes and can drown.  There were 
reports of mass drownings last year. Six of the last nine 
winters have been unusually mild.  This year, the ice is light 
but quite solid. 
 
5.  An exhaustive census in 1999 counted 5.2 million 
Greenland/harp seals, up from 2 million in the 1970\'s.  In 1983, 
the Canadian government banned the killing of newborn 
\"whitecoat\" seal pups that are still being nursed by their 
mothers.  It is still permitted to kill young seals that have 
molted, becoming grey at around two weeks of age, and have gone 
from 24 to 80 lbs.  Hunters do kill adult seals, but reports 
from the Canadian government show that the vast majority of 
seals killed in the hunt are \"beaters\" - young seals from 12 
days to 12 months old, that thrash the water as they swim.  In 
the 2002-2003 hunt, 96.6 percent were beaters under 3 months of 
age.  The number of seals killed last year was reported to be 
286,238 - more than at any other time in the past 35 years.  The 
new quota announced in 2003 would allow 975,000 harp seals to be 
\'harvested\' over 3 years, through 2005. 
 
6.  The actual hunt is not open to outside observers (it is 
pretty bloody and gruesome to watch), except for Federal and 
provincial inspectors in boats.  Non-governmental opponents 
arrive unannounced on the ice or from the air; they submit video 
evidence of probable violations to Canada\'s Department of 
Fisheries and Oceans, but they claim no charges have been placed 
to date.  Protesters have been trying to stop the seal hunt 
since 1969, leading to a ban by the EEC on all import of harp 
seal products and to the U.S. Marine Mammal Protection Act 
(MMPA).  Opponents denounce the hunt as cruel and unsustainable. 
 Because of its remoteness, in areas with little oversight, they 
claim the hunt continues to break the rules while sanitizing the 
activity with phrases such as \"Seal fishery\" and \"harvest.\" 
Anti-sealers accuse hunters of skinning conscious seals (over 40 
percent of the time), dragging live seals across the ice with 
hooks, and shooting and wounding seals. 
 
7.  While I was not able to witness the hunt first hand, I spoke 
to a number of hunters and federal fisheries officials who 
monitor the hunt, and to local environmental activists.  Their 
views were not widely differing - the seal hunt is accepted as a 
part of life on the islands.  The seal museum presents both 
sides of the debate, however; all my local interlocutors clearly 
knew they have a tremendous public relations problem with the 
hunt.  Local inspectors with whom I spoke insisted the hunt is 
subject to strict controls and is well supervised. 
 
8.  Roger Simon, Area Director of Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 
who has been inspecting the hunt for over 20 years, flatly 
denied charges of cruelty.  He said sealers are required by law 
to perform a simple blink reflex test to determine if the seal 
is dead before skinning it.  He acknowledged that as in other 
creatures, there are some involuntary muscle spasms after death 
that could explain movement.  We discussed alternative methods 
of killing the seals humanely, including ballistics and lethal 
injections.  Simon said that a shot against the head, as in an 
abbatoir, would not be a good alternative because the thin 
cranium of the young seal would allow a bullet passed through, 
merely wounding.  He asserted that the only sure way to kill a 
seal was the traditional method of a well-aimed blow to the 
front of the skull. 
9.  In refuting the charge of hunters skinning seals while still 
conscious, Simon claimed that if a hunter tried to skin a moving 
animal, he would damage and destroy the value of the pelt.  He 
conceded that there is still some muscle reflex observable in 
dead seals.  Simon said only a certain caliber of ammunition is 
authorized to promote a clean kill, but he acknowledged there is 
some degree of wounding.  Tests are going on with veterinarians 
who work in abbatoirs to find more acceptable methods. 
 
10.  All of those close to the resource with whom I spoke 
insisted that the hunt is conducted in a clean and professional 
manner; they underscore it is the most closely monitored hunt in 
the world.  They note that the seals coming to whelp from 
Greenland are growing in number, to the point that they are 
threatening the fish stocks.  The federal government controls 
the seals while they are in the water; the provincial government 
controls them once they are dead.  Under provincial law, the 
complete and precise use of every seal killed must be accounted 
for.  Hunters must be licensed.  Before getting a permit, 
commercial sealers must do 20 hours training and must work under 
a professional sealer for two years. 
 
11.  Donald Leblanc, who has spent all his life sealing and 
currently is the main trainer on humane techniques of killing, 
bleeding and skinning seals for people seeking permits, 
described the strict standards of the 20-hour course, including 
mandatory classes by veterinarians, pelt classers, and 
academics.  Leblanc admitted there were some bad practices but 
said these were the exception and not condoned.  Most hunters 
know the habits and respect the marine mammals, he said. 
 
12.  Forty years ago, people on the Islands ate seals to 
survive, but the context has now changed.  Both Simon and 
Leblanc told CG that quality has become essential: The 
collection of seal pelts \"is more artisanal than industrial.\" 
The commercial seal hunt is for pelts and oil.  Pelts are worth 
from C$40-70 if they are perfect, and include the tail.  The 
seal\'s blubber, attached to the pelt, yields 40 lbs of oil that 
can produce 500 anti-cholesterol health capsules (Omega 3). 
There is not much market for the meat.  Most seal carcasses are 
left on the ice where they are consumed by gulls, fish and sea 
lice.  The industry earned about $15 million last year, 
primarily from pelt sales to Norway, Denmark and China. 
 
13.  Regarding sustainability, anti-sealers point out marine 
mammals have proved vulnerable in the past.  Walrus herds used 
to be abundant off the Islands: British navigator Peter 
Haldimand noted in his diary in 1765 that about 100,000 walruses 
could be seen along the shores of Grande Entree Island.  Abusive 
commercial slaughter meant that by 1799, the walrus had 
completely disappeared from the Islands.  Madelinots point out 
that harp seals are the second most abundant seal in the world, 
however.  Hunters say that the adult seal eats around 5 pounds 
of fish a day, taking a bite of the best part and leaving the 
rest.  It is clear that for the Madelinots, keeping the seal 
population in check is an advantage to the annual hunt. 
 
14. The GOC is clearly aware of the impact of the hunt on fish 
stocks, especially cod.  Federal inspector Simon told CG that 
the Canadian Government has responded to the controversy on 
killing young harp seals not by prohibiting the traditional hunt 
but by implementing strategies for the long-term management of 
the seal population.  For today\'s hunter on the Magdalen 
Islands, the seal hunt is an important part of making a living 
following the 1990 moratorium on cod fishing and the drop of 
fish stocks (e.g. 85 percent drop in ocean perch stocks).  The 
complete moratorium on cod fishing last year means that lobster 
fishing has become one of the Islands\' main resources (5 million 
pounds), as well as snow crabs, eels, mackerel and herrings. 
These catches do not compare to the $15,000 a sealer can make 
during the few weeks of the spring hunt.  The islanders were 
quick to assure CG they were not getting rich through sealing, 
however, and they point out that the quotas are rarely achieved 
- less than half is common. 
 
15.  Comment:  The practice of killing young seals with clubs 
remains a subject of international concern and U.S. 
congressional interest.  In my travels to Nunavut and to the 
Magdalen Islands, the subject of opening the U.S. market to 
Canadian sealing products, currently prohibited under the Marine 
Mammal Protection Act, is a constant refrain.  The beauty of the 
Islands and the friendliness of its people not withstanding, 
Madelinots can be sure to have another media battle brewing 
while the controversial killing of young harp seals continues, 
even if it now involves grey seals, and not the fluffy 
whitecoats. 
 
 
 
 
KEOGH 
"
"16991","5/17/2004 22:50","04QUEBEC79","Consulate Quebec","CONFIDENTIAL","04OTTAWA1249","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 QUEBEC 000079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CAN FOR BREESE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  5/17/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, CA, Elections 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC FEDERAL ELECTION PREVIEW 
 
REF: OTTAWA 1249 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: susan keogh, consul general, Quebec, State. 
REASON: 1.5 (B) 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: susan keogh, consul general, Quebec, State. 
REASON: 1.5 (B) 
 
1.  Confidential - entire text. 
 
2.  (C)  Summary:  Politicians and pundits in Quebec from all 
persuasions were remarkably consistent on the prospects of the 
Liberals, Bloc Quebecois and Conservatives in the upcoming 
federal elections in recent conversations with DCM Kelly and CG 
Keogh.  The forecast was for a big win for the Bloc, around 50 
seats, barring complete voter fatigue on the subsidies scandal 
and holiday apathy among youth that is generally pro-Bloc. 
Currently, the Liberals trail the Bloc by 15 percent in Quebec. 
None of our interlocutors thought the Conservatives would win 
any seats although Stephen Harpers\' command of French made him a 
favored candidate in a French debate. 
There was general consensus, even from Liberals, that PM Martin 
would head a minority government.   End Summary. 
 
--------------------- 
BACKGROUND 
--------------------- 
3. (C)  During DCM Steve Kelly\'s visit to Quebec City May 12-14, 
we did the rounds of provincial political figures as well as 
media, academic and other pundits to discuss the federal 
elections, expected to be announced May 23.   From whatever side 
of the political spectrum, the views were remarkably consistent 
on the prospects of the Liberals, Conservatives and Bloc 
Quebecois.  Uniformly, commentators thought there would be a 
minority Liberal Government in Ottawa, including Jean Pelletier 
(please protect), formerly Jean Chretien\'s Chief of Staff and 
recently fired from ViaRail because of the subsidies scandal. 
Following is a snapshot of Quebec opinion as the parties gear up 
for federal elections. 
 
----------------------- 
LIBERAL PARTY 
----------------------- 
4.  (C)  To the extent that Paul Martin is looking for help from 
Quebec, he cannot expect much. The federal Liberals have taken a 
steep tumble in all the polls since the unraveling of the 
subsidies scandal.  Their current standing is at 30 percent. 
The scandal has left Quebecers, particularly francophones, more 
disaffected and less likely to participate in the election. 
Opposition leader Bernard Landry said Quebecers were not so much 
disgusted or angry but rather felt scorned (\"mepriser\") by the 
actions of federal politicians. 
 
5.   (C)   The current doldrums of Jean Charest\'s provincial 
Liberals does not mean that federal Liberal candidates will shun 
the PLQ.  Provincial Minister for Municipal Affairs Jean-Marc 
Fournier said that federal candidates did want the PLQ to turn 
out for them and this would happen, despite PLQ discomfort over 
the scandal and discontent over federal interference in 
provincial jurisdictions like municipalities (naturally, a view 
not shared by beneficiary Mayor Jean Paul L\'Allier).    There is 
also the sticking point on fiscal imbalance.  It probably gets 
down to personal contacts.  Liberal MNA Margaret Delisle 
commented that the 50-year separation of the federal and 
provincial parties had never precluded campaign support.   She 
clearly plans to help her friend Helene Scherrer, Minister of 
Canadian Heritage, on the hustings. 
 
6.  (C)   Most of our interlocutors gave Helene Scherrer,  the 
only Quebec City MP in the Cabinet, little hope of getting 
reelected, although Margaret Delisle was hedging her bets. 
Based on the \"all politics is local\" dictum, the \"demerger\" 
movement may be a factor negatively affecting Scherrer\'s 
campaign.  Voters in towns and cities amalgamated into 
megacities in Quebec January 2002 have the chance to vote in a 
referendum on whether to withdraw.  Jean-Marc Fournier said the 
demerger debate is impacting federal candidates, in that some 
are being forced to give opinions on this emotional neighborhood 
issue.  While the demerger referendum is distinct from the 
federal elections, there may be some spillover in terms of voter 
fatigue as the referendum will occur on June 20. 
 
7.  (C)  In addition, the election is sandwiched between 
Quebec\'s Jean-Baptiste Day June 24 and the Canada Day July 1, 
when everyone is in holiday mode.  Mario Dumont pointed out that 
the well-organized Liberal machine could profit by getting its 
generally older supporters to the polls.    Television 
journalist Pierre Jobin observed that with the arrival of summer 
and the end of the school year, television viewing goes way down 
among younger voters, so that they are likely to pay less 
attention to campaign issues and the elections. 
--------------------------------- 
CONSERVATIVE PARTY 
--------------------------------- 
8.  (C)  With the appropriate caveats, none of our contacts gave 
the Conservatives much chance of winning any seats in Quebec. 
The consensus was they have little organization on the ground 
and barely any candidates.  Head of the Action Democratique du 
Quebec Mario Dumont underscored the Conservatives\' lack of depth 
and difficulty in finding people to stand for them.  He cited 
one example of a candidate who was being billed as being a 
former ADQ official: Dumont said the man had been a steward on 
the ADQ bus during the last provincial elections, and had been 
fired for incompetence. 
 
9.  (C)  Nonetheless, Stephen Harper in his personal capacity 
received a number of  positive comments.  Harper has made a 
surprisingly strong impression among Quebec\'s \"thinking public\" 
because of his confident, attractive persona and good command of 
French.  Many commented he was more bilingual than Paul Martin, 
whose French is perceived as halting and lacking in spontaneity. 
 Several commentators thought Westerner Harper would do better 
than Quebecer Martin in a French debate, if there were one. 
 
10. (C)   Some people said Harper\'s mindset was much too 
conservative for Quebecers, but others countered that in his 
visits to Quebec, Harper had muted \"more extreme\" views (i.e. 
more out of step with Quebec\'s progressive attitudes) on social 
issues such as abortion and homosexuality.   One dissenting note 
was from Jean-Marc Fournier, Minister of Municipal Affairs, who 
found Harper to be lacking warmth.    Mario Dumont opined that 
Harper uses his visibility in Quebec - with or without seats - 
to leverage votes in Ontario.  His campaign in Quebec has 
enhanced his image as a \"country-wide\" candidate.  Dumont also 
thought the Conservatives were hoping for a big Bloc Quebecois 
gain as a hedge against a Liberal majority. 
 
------------------------- 
BLOC QUEBECOIS 
------------------------- 
11.  (C)  Views on the prospects of the Bloc Quebecois also were 
relatively consistent.  The subsidies scandal had been a 
godsend.   Former Deputy Minister of International Relations 
Diane Wilhelmy, who retired from government service May 15, 
characterized it as \"manna from heaven.\"  Before the scandal 
broke, the Bloc had been dying and was considered increasingly 
irrelevant.  Voters had a \"Three times elected and what have 
they done for us?\" attitude.   Gilles Duceppe was considered a 
one-note leader.   Now, almost everyone gave the Bloc excellent 
prospects in the election, with estimates of around 50 seats of 
a total 75, although Margaret Delisle cautioned they had gone 
way up and would come down somewhat by June 28.  Currently the 
polls give the Bloc 45% of the vote. 
 
12. (C)    Bernard Landry made the generational case: younger 
voters favor the Parti Quebecois and by logical extension the 
Bloc.   But as a number of our contacts noted, this does not 
take into account the timing of the election in mid-holiday 
season, along with the perennial difficulty of getting out the 
youth vote.  Mario Dumont also commented that the polls showing 
45-plus percent support in Quebec for sovereignty - the first 
article of both the PQ and BQ constitutions - was misleading. 
The three bases for sovereignty have been: threats to the French 
language, unequal job opportunities, and lack of political 
leverage.  All three have been overcome.  The Quebec identity 
has already been won, de facto, Dumont asserted.   The Bloc has 
capitalized on the subsidies scandal but is not providing a 
vision for the future.  Dumont thought that after a few weeks on 
the campaign bus, the press would be sick of hearing about 
misuse of taxes and would want some new ideas. 
 
13.  (C)  Comment:  The Bloc is riding high in Quebec at the 
moment .  The formerly fading party began its electoral campaign 
May 15, without waiting for Paul Martin to blow the whistle. 
The platform is not new: a \"Quebec Model\" social agenda, 
regional development, and \"Quebec\'s place in the world\" 
(including opposition to the war in Iraq and BMD). The Bloc\'s 
new slogan \"Un parti propre au Quebec,\" which could mean either 
\"A clean party\" or \"Quebec\'s own party\" is a double entendre 
allusion to the federal Liberal scandals.   Dumont may be right: 
although the Bloc will certainly do well, it could lose some 
support if its campaign hammers on the misuse of federal taxes 
when health is clearly the most important issue for Quebecers. 
While the Conservatives still have poor organization here, we 
found it interesting that Harper is widely perceived to be more 
effective in French, and in debate, than PM Martin, giving 
himadded credibility. 
 
 
KEOGH-FISHER 
"
"16992","5/17/2004 22:52","04QUEBEC80","Consulate Quebec","CONFIDENTIAL","04MONTREAL68","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

172252Z May 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
MONTREAL FOR DHS - KUPSCHE 
WHA/CAN FOR BREESE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  5/17/2009 
TAGS: ASEC, PREL, PGOV, PHUM, CA 
SUBJECT: KANESATAKE CALM BUT CONFRONTATION CONTINUES 
 
REF: MONTREAL 68 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: susan keogh, consul general, Quebec, State. 
REASON: 1.5 (B) 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: susan keogh, consul general, Quebec, State. 
REASON: 1.5 (B) 
 
1.  Confidential - Entire text. 
 
2.  (C)  Summary:  The situation within the Mohawk settlement of 
Kanesatake, a territory (not a reserve) bordering the U.S., 
remains tense and complicated but some progress has been made in 
keeping the peace in the past week.  Quebec\'s provincial police 
force (SQ) has taken the lead in mounting day and night patrols 
in Kanesatake without incident in close coordination with the 
RCMP.  Grand Chief James Gabriel, burned out of his house in 
January by a mob, remains in a hotel in the Montreal area. 
Quebec\'s Miniistry of Public Security told DCM Kelly and CG 
Keogh that the tripartite strategy is to avoid counterreaction 
by the heavily armed \"warriors\" and to deal with criminal 
elements through the court system.   The Quebec authorities have 
asked for greater coordination with the FBI on the situation. 
End Summary 
 
3.  (C)  In a meeting with Deputy Minister Luc Crepaualt and 
Director General Georges Beauchemin May 14, the two told DCM 
Kelly and Quebec Consul General Keogh that the situation in the 
Kanesatake territory bordering the U.S. is calm but fragile. 
\"Warriors\" among the 1,400 inhabitants continue to pose major 
security headaches for the Quebec Ministry of Public Security, 
however, with a very aggressive, confrontational approach, 
although some progress has been made in the last week. 
 
4.  (C)  At the request of the aboriginal authorities, Quebec\'s 
police force (SQ) has been conducting regular day and night 
patrols in the territory for the past week, apparently 
well-received and breaking several weeks of no-man\'s land 
lawlessness.   There is solid cooperation with the RCMP 
including daily telephone calls.   While the 7-week-old 
tripartite policing agreement between the SQ, RCMP and Grand 
Chief James Gabriel\'s Band Council is now being implemented, 
Gabriel remains in a hotel near Montreal (\"living high at 
government expense\") with a troop of several dozen Mohawk 
warriors, unable to return to Kanesatake.  An election to see if 
Gabriel can continue as Grand Chief is planned for July 7. 
Meanwhile, Mohawks from other reserves continue to arrive in 
Kanesatake, including some from Colorado, to join in the 
resistance. 
 
5.  (C)  Apart from the patrolling, Beauchemin said any police 
operations would be interpreted as an \"invasion.\"  The Quebec 
Government wants to avoid a 1996 Oka-type situation where a 
mechanized brigade had to intervene and there were costly social 
and political reactions.  \"Anything we do to squash a fly will 
give rise to huge problems.\"  The strategy is to avoid 
counterreaction and \"psychodrama\" by keeping a low profile. 
 
6.  (C)  The Charest Government has refused a $1.5 million 
request by Police Chief Ed Thompson to increase the native 
police force to 38 people.  Thompson and his peacekeepers have 
never been able to patrol and had to retire after being pelted 
with rocks and sticks, with minor injuries.   Having funded the 
first group of warriors/police that Gabriel hired earlier this 
year, who were virtually taken hostage inside Kanesatake, we 
understand Ottawa is also hesitating to provide more police 
forces. 
 
7.  (C) The role of Quebec security forces is prominent because 
Kanesatake is not a reserve but a settlement (\"etablissement\"). 
The patchwork of land belongs to the federal government but it 
does not have the status of reserve territory.  Federal law 
applies to governance but the province canene ito agreemens 
ith th BandCunci on olicin.  The Qubec police (SQ) are 
more accepted than the RCMP.  With long memories, the Mohawk 
remember that the RCMP killed one of theirs in 1916.  Beauchemin 
described the situation as akin to a family quarrel with people 
held hostage: the two embattled factions have been warring for 
200 years, he added.  A 5-year old law to consolidate the area 
in a new juridical arrangement has not been implemented.  This 
ambiguity has contributed to the current anarchic, destabilized 
situation at Kanesatake.  It started as a governance problem 
with related Band Council members refusing to talk to each 
other, but degenerated into a law-and-order problem with a lot 
of firepower involved.   Beauchemin spoke of rocket launchers, 
among other weaponry, in the hands of the warriors, seen in the 
newspapers in military fatigues and with faces covered. 
Beauchemin noted that these weapons were easy to acquire: he had 
spent 15 minutes on line and was able to purchase a whole range 
of weapons: \"You can get anything on the Internet from the 
United States,\" he said.   In his view, the Mohawks were 
prepared to use them. 
8.  (C)  The Quebec side acknowledged that a breakdown of law 
and order of the magnitude that has happened at Kanesatake would 
be intolerable outside of an aboriginal area.  Trying to avoid a 
costly confrontation, yet dealing with scofflaws, they have 
launched three criminal investigations, infiltrating the highly 
criminalized elements and using the courts to prosecute 
offenders.  One investigation involves those charged with 
offenses during the riot of January 12; another involves the 
burning of Chief Gabriel\'s house; a third involves a mixed squad 
of police in a longer-term investigation of organized crime. 
Asked about U.S. role, the Public Security Ministry officials 
requested (as Minister Chagnon has asked us in the past) better 
coordination with the FBI in a situation where U.S. interests 
are involved and the SQ is taking a lead role on the ground. 
Some \"gun slingers\" have already arrived from the U.S., and more 
could come.  Beauchemin said in this case, the situation could 
evolve negatively, although he thought this to be unlikely. 
 
 
 
KEOGH-FISHER 
"
"18773","7/15/2004 18:11","04QUEBEC107","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04HALIFAX134","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUEBEC 000107 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
OTTAWA FOR ECON AND DHS/ICE 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EWWT, KCIP, PHSA, PTER, PREL, KCRM, MARAD, Ports, IMO 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC PORT AUTHORITY COMPLIES WITH ISPS CODE 
 
REF: A. HALIFAX 134 
 
     B. MONTREAL 696 
     C. TORONTO 1132 
     D. LIMA 3239 
 
 
1.  Summary:  The Port of Quebec announced significant 
investments to heighten security at its six harbor facilities 
hence fulfilling the International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
International Shipping and Port Security Code (ISPS).    With 
financial assistance from the federal government to help meet 
the requirements, the Quebec Port Authority has committed Cdn$1 
million this year to improve port infrastructures and increase 
staffing.  U.S. Coast Guard audited facilities July 1.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  The Quebec Port Authority (QPA) announced investments worth 
Cdn$1 million to comply with the ISPS requirements that took 
effect July 1, 2004.  Transport Canada on May 14 approved a port 
facility plan and a cost and security assessment, and will 
reimburse 75% of the total investments.  Quebec harbormaster 
Michel Petit told us that the sums will add security fencing, 
gatehouses, magnetic control cards, and surveillance cameras to 
monitor the port area.  A new coordination center was also put 
into operation and will operate in partnership with the local 
RCMP division, Canadian Coast Guard, and municipal police.  The 
QPA has also quadrupled the number of port police, made of up 
contract security agents, on the site. 
 
3. Petit was reluctant to provide further details on the new 
measures, maintaining it was protected information.  (Post heard 
of the measures via a radio news item; it was not covered in the 
usually more thorough local print media, nor is it noted on the 
Port website.)  Petit pointed out that U.S. Coast Guard and 
Transport Canada officials had audited the port facilities on 
July 1, which easily met the set standards. Work is steadily 
underway, he said, and should be totally implemented by December 
2004. 
 
4.  Quebec City attracts 58,000 cruise ship passengers, many of 
which are Americans arriving from Boston and New York, as well 
as 21,000 crew members.  In 2003, the Port of Quebec handled 
20.2 million tons of merchandise; mainly wheat, iron ore, 
clinker, methanol, newspaper, crude and jet oil, and alumina. 
Port Director Ross Gaudreault announced that 2003 ended with 
record tonnage - a 45% increase over the preceding two years. 
The new security initiatives put into place will improve the 
monitoring of shipments and passengers arriving and circulating 
in the metropolitan Quebec City area. 
"
"18819","7/16/2004 20:11","04QUEBEC108","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","04OTTAWA224|04OTTAWA489","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUEBEC 000108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHDC (BONNER) 
DHS OFFICE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (OPTICAN) 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN (WHEELER/MCCULLA), EB/TPP/ABT/ATP (BARBARA 
YODER), EB/EPPD/PD (MARTHA DEUTSCHER) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO, ETRD, EAGR, PTER, CA, Agriculture, Trade 
SUBJECT: MIXED PREDICTIONS ON BTA ENFORCEMENT IMPACT ON QUEBEC 
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE EXPORTERS 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 000224 
     B. OTTAWA 000489 
 
 
1. Summary:  As the August 12 deadline for BTA enforcement draws 
near, a report in the Quebec City daily \"Le Soleil\" claims that 
most small Quebec agricultural export companies have yet to 
comply with the BTA requirements for registration and are 
unprepared for prior notice.  The article said that exporters 
will encounter some nasty surprises when the rules are fully 
implemented next month, and the provincial economy will suffer 
as a result.  the great majority of large producers, however, 
have already registered or are awaiting accreditation from FDA. 
ConGen follow up with key players, however, gave a mixed 
picture.  End Summary 
 
2.  Claude Tardif, Vice President of the Quebec Exporters and 
Manufacturers (Manufacturiers et exportateurs du Quebec (MEQ)), 
told \"Le Soleil\" and Consulate, that he believes that only 35% 
of small and medium-sized exporting companies were currently 
accredited in accordance with the BTA. \"There is still some 
resistance,\" he said \"but one does not fool around with FDA.\" 
The larger food producers such as Lassonde and Aliments Carriere 
have been ready for months, said Tardif. The Quebec trucking 
industry appears to be better prepared, with 95% of their 
exporting members (the majority of which belong to large-scale 
transportation companies) already registered.  MEQ provides 
assistance for training and coaching related to various 
complicated customs issues.  As an organization, Tardif told us, 
the MEQ was more concerned about the C-TPAT cargo security and 
customs clearance standards than with BTA.  Tardif\'s grim view 
was echoed by Garth White of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business (Federation canadienne de l\'entreprise 
independante (FCEI)), a fifth of whose 105,000 members are in 
Quebec.  \"Le Soleil\" quoted White as saying that a large 
majority of FCEI members are not prepared and pointed a finger 
at Ottawa for failing to effectively inform members.  These 
producers, he predicted, will complain when U.S. Customs truly 
takes action next month. 
 
4.  Quebec agricultural organizations, however, were more 
sanguine.  Director Andre Coutu of the Quebec Agri-Food Export 
Club (Club export agro-alimentaire du Quebec) said that his 
members are set.  \"No one finds it amusing, it\'s a lot of 
paperwork.  Inspections are more frequent but we have no choice. 
 Washington is in charge.\"  Likewise, Andre Turenne, Director of 
the Quebec Produce Marketing Association (Association quebecoise 
de la distribution des fruits et legumes), said that most of 
their members are in compliance. The perception among QPMA 
members is that the BTA is not an issue. In his view, Ottawa did 
a good job at getting the word out among members, many of which 
attended several meetings with U.S. and Quebec officials. 
Turenne, however, he said the association is still highly 
concerned about border delays, especially with seasonal exports 
and sees potential problems connected to the prior notice 
mechanism.  He noted that there was only a single Virginia-based 
center for prior notice, and wondered whether it would be enough 
to meet the demand. 
 
5.  Monique Trudel at the Quebec Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Food judged that the situation was under control 
among Quebec produce growers.  She told us that there was no 
sign of any problems in the short term, and eventual issues will 
be dealt with on a case-by-case basis.  \"Le Soleil\'s\" article 
elicited little or no reaction at the Ministry, she stated.  The 
Ministry could not provide input on the status of transport 
companies, but assumed the figures quoted in the article were 
correct.  She said that she had seen no evidence in support of 
the charge that Ottawa had failed to effectively circulate 
information on the new rules. 
 
6. Comment:  Like any significant procedural change, the 
efficacy of public information campaign and of the BTA system 
itself will be evident only when it goes fully into effect. 
Given the time sensitive nature of agricultural produce, 
however, any glitches will result in significant economic loss 
to Quebec producers.  End Comment. 
 
 
 
 
 
STRUDWICK 
"
"19756","8/13/2004 19:06","04QUEBEC128","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000128 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, SCUL, PHUM, ETTC, ECPS, Telecommunication 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC CITY RADIO STATION CLOSURE SPARKS POLITICAL AND 
CULTURAL DEBATE 
 
1.  Summary:   A local radio station ordered to close by the 
Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission 
(CRTC) as stirred up an expected storm of controversy in the 
Quebec capital, and has also captured extensive national and 
international press attention since the decision was first 
announced July 13.  This is reportedly the first time the CRTC 
has moved to close a station solely on the basis of (offensive 
and abusive) verbal content on the air.  Since 1996, the 
programming of CHOI-FM has been the subject of numerous 
complaints with respect to the conduct of its announcers and the 
spoken word content that is aired, including offensive comments, 
personal attacks and harassment.  The station, however, has 
portrayed the decision as a blow to freedom of expression, as 
has \"Reporters Without Borders.\"  50,000 supporters took to the 
streets in Quebec City on July 22, and another 5,000 bussed to 
Ottawa on August 10, to press the federal government to reverse 
the decision.  Some Quebec politicians are joining the call for 
a review by the courts before the August 31 closure, and several 
are looking for a new deal with Ottawa that will give the 
province greater control over broadcasting in Quebec.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  The CRTC is an independent agency responsible for regulating 
Canada\'s broadcasting and telecommunications systems.  The 
Commission ultimately reports to Parliament through the Minister 
of Canadian Heritage.  Its nine panel members are appointed by 
the federal government and individuals are usually selected with 
an eye to insuring that all regions are represented.  In its 
decision issued July 13, the CRTC found that on numerous 
occasions, CHOI had failed to comply with the 1986 Radio 
Regulations as well as the station\'s own Code of Ethics, as 
required by its license.  It ordered that station closed by 
August 31.  At the same time, the CRTC announced a call for 
applications for broadcasting licenses to operate a new 
French-language station in Quebec City. 
 
3.  On July 22, Quebec City witnessed its largest public 
demonstration since the 2001 Summit of the Americas when an 
estimated 50,000 people swelled the 8 kilometer march from 
suburban Ste-Foy to the Old Port, as CHOI broadcast an amplified 
heartbeat.  CHOI\'s main personality, talk-show host Jeff 
(Jean-Francois) Fillion was greeted with rock-star adulation 
when he took to the podium at the march\'s terminus.  Unlike most 
local demonstrations, the CHOI march did not have the Quebec 
unions at its core, but was promoted on the airwaves by the 
radio station itself, which apparently expected a maximum of 
5,000 protesters.   For the August 10 rally in Ottawa, the 
station rented 50 buses and launched an appeal to fans. 
According to press reports, the tickets sold rapidly at the 
symbolic price of $9.81 (CHOI broadcasts at 98.1 MHz).  5,000 
Quebec fans and local supporters staged an emotional, but 
peaceful, rally at the federal capital.  Fillion broadcast live 
from Parliament Hill and admitted on the air that the station 
had \"made some mistakes.\"  Heritage Minister Liza Frulla (a 
Quebec Minister of Cultural Affairs in the 1990s) reaffirmed the 
federal government position that the CRTC decision was 
\"irreversible.\"  She said the decision was reached by an 
independent agency and could not be reversed by the government. 
Station owner Demers requested a meeting with PM Paul Martin and 
was turned down.  The station has now hired the prominent and 
flamboyant Quebec City lawyer Guy Bertrand, and appealed the 
decision before a federal court judge, supported by a 
10,000-page petition. 
 
4.  CHOI-FM is the principal asset of Genex Communications Inc, 
which was formed in 1996 by Patrice Demers, a then-executive 
with Telemedia, which was forced to give up its recently 
acquired CHOI license on competition grounds.  The French 
pronunciation of its call letters, CHOI, is a synonym for 
\"choice,\" and the name of its corporate parent proclaims its 
target audience: the post-baby-boom generation X\'ers.  CHOI 
currently attracts half the listeners in its market, which has a 
population of one million.  CHOI initially programmed 
exclusively contemporary (largely American) rock music, and 
quickly ran afoul of the CRTC for not airing a sufficient 
proportion of Canadian and French-language music. The station 
introduced talk-radio about three years ago, with Jeff Fillion 
holding forth on a three-hour morning show, and 25-year veteran 
Andre Arthur airing for two hours during the evening commute. 
Over the years, hosts Fillion and Arthur, who emulate Howard 
Stern in the U.S., have been repeatedly sued by both private 
citizens and public figures on a variety of grounds, including 
defamation.  (Arthur was pulled from the airwaves in 2001 when 
he worked for neighboring station CJFM.) 
 
5.  The CRTC put CHOI on two years\' probation in 2002 for 
failure to comply with regulations regarding, among other 
things, abusive comment, the submission of logger tapes, 
insufficient French-language vocal music, and sex-role 
portrayal.  The Commission also considered that the station\'s 
hosts were \"relentless\" in their misuse of the public airwaves 
despite unequivocal reprimands and warnings by the CRTC.  In 
February 2004 the Commission called Genex to a public hearing in 
Quebec City to deliberate the possible suspension or non-renewal 
of CHOI-FMs license.  Genex failed to convince the panel, 
reportedly denying a problem existed, and continued to broadcast 
the same subject matter.  In the current debate, CHOI has never 
publicly entertained the notion of firing Fillon, suggesting 
merely that he be fined.  Indeed, for CHOI to abandon its 
talk-radio style would likely destroy its prominent place in the 
local radio market. 
 
6.  Quebec politicians have joined in the debate, focusing both 
on the freedom of expression dimension and on questions of 
regulatory authority.  Telecoms is a federal jurisdiction, but 
culture falls under provincial authority and has high visibility 
in Quebec.  Quebec Premier Jean Charest publicly expressed his 
disagreement with the ruling and called for better 
representation of Quebec interests on the CTRC.  He also called 
for an administrative agreement with Ottawa to give the province 
greater powers over radio and telecommunications.  Action 
Democratique du Quebec leader Mario Dumont also demanded that 
the province be given control over its broadcast policy (albeit 
via (illegal) provincial legislation).  Provincial Opposition 
leader, Bernard Landry of the Parti Quebecois, said that the 
case should be settled by the courts, and expressed sympathy for 
the fifty CHOI employees who would lose their jobs.  The Bloc 
Quebecois, however, issued a statement reiterating the 
independence of action of the CRTC and its unwillingness to 
interfere.  Conservative Stephen Harper\'s Quebec lieutenant 
Josee Verner said the \"CRTC decision was of unprecedented 
severity,\" and harshly criticized the government for its 
inaction.  The recent incidents drew international attention 
among the journalistic community, with \"Reporters Without 
Borders\" declaring the case to be an unprecedented \"case of 
curbing freedom of expression and censorship.\" 
 
7.  The CHOI decision and the significance of the unanticipated 
public outcry has stirred up and dominated discussion among 
local citizens and the media to an extent not seen since the run 
up to the Iraq War.  One very vocal group adopts the ground 
staked out by Demers and defends the station under the banner of 
free speech and information, often pointing out the role of the 
station in calling politicians to account and uncovering 
scandals.  Others, however, question how far freedom of 
expression should be allowed to go, see CHOI as part of the 
\"hate radio\" phenomena, its \"investigations\" as irresponsible 
calumny, and who think that the station had been given its 
chance to clean itself up.  Others have seen in the CHOI 
phenomenon evidence of hidden trends.  In a guest piece in Le 
Soleil August 8, Laval University sociologist Simon Langlois 
suggested that the volume of CHOI\'s support did not reflect blue 
collar/white collar differences, but rather the \"angry young 
white men\" hypothesis.  Langlois noted that half the radio 
listeners aged 18-34 in the Quebec area listen to CHOI, along 
with a quarter of the listeners in the 34-44 cohort.   He said 
that many of these young men are junior college and university 
educated.  Langlois also said that a third of student listeners 
and a third of unemployed listeners tuned to CHOI.  The 
station\'s attraction, he contended, rested with its alternative 
music and its non-politically correct discourse. 
 
8.  Comment.  The CHOI affair could become an unexpected 
political test for Liberal leaders Jean Charest and Paul Martin. 
 An administrative deal between Quebec and Ottawa on 
telecommunications, an exclusive federal competency, would rule 
out the need for constitutional amendments, but discussions 
would test the new federal-provincial relationship under 
Martin\'s minority government leadership.  The extent of 
attention the CHOI case has struck among the political class has 
some commentators cynically pointing out the link between this 
political \"crusade\" and the provincial by-elections scheduled 
September 20, the first since the provincial Liberals came to 
power in the elections of May 2003.  End Comment. 
 
 
STRUDWICK 
"
"20842","9/22/2004 0:01","04QUEBEC169","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUEBEC128","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CAN FOR TERRY BREESE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, CA, Elections, Liberal Party 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC BY-ELECTIONS :  LIBERALS DEFEATED IN THREE OUT OF 
FOUR SEATS 
 
REF: QUEBEC 0128 
 
 
1.  This cable was jointly prepared by the Quebec City and 
Montreal Consulates. 
 
2.  Summary:  In the first test of its support among voters 
since its election victory in April 2003, the Quebec Liberal 
government held four provincial by-elections on September 20; 
three in the Montreal area and one in Quebec City.  Premier Jean 
Charest lost three of the four ridings up for grabs.  As 
predicted, the Liberals were re-elected in their stronghold of 
Nelligan, and the Parti Quebecois was re-elected in the Gouin 
riding.  However, there were two surprising results.  A Parti 
Quebecois candidate won narrowly in the riding of 
Laurier-Dorion, which had been a Liberal base since 1981, and 
in Quebec City\'s Vanier riding Mario Dumont\'s Action 
Democratique du Quebec (ADQ) seized a fifth seat in the National 
Assembly from the Liberals.  End Summary. 
 
VANIER CONTEST 
 
3.  Young ADQ contender Sylvain Legare won handily in the Quebec 
City riding of Vanier with well over 4,000 votes and a 46.8% 
majority.  Liberal Michel Beaudoin came in second place at 
27.9%, and the PQ\'s Sylvain Levesque at 21.9%.  The ADQ lost 
badly in the three other ridings, coming in fourth place behind 
the new left-wing Union des Forces Progressistes (UFP).  Vanier 
is usually a bellweather, regularly voting for the party that 
will form the next government.  Leader Dumont\'s strategy to 
crusade in favor of local radio station CHOI-FM (see reftel) and 
against juvenile prostitution proved successful.  He will face 
his members at the ADQ party convention next weekend head high. 
 
4.  The PQ came in third in the Vanier contest, francophone and 
blue-collar, with only 20% of the vote, even though voter 
dissatisfaction traditionally leans toward the opposition. 
Opposition Leader Bernard Landry\'s leadership has been under 
close scrutiny and voters seem unconvinced that he is the right 
man to lead the PQ to a possible victory in 2007. 
 
MONTREAL RACES 
 
5. In Montreal, two of the three by-elections followed 
expectations:  Liberal Yolande James and the PQ\'s Nicolas Girard 
each easily won their parties\' respective strongholds of 
Nelligan and Gouin.  The lone upset occurred in Laurier-Dorion, 
where the Liberal candidate and Greek community representative, 
Voula Neofotisos, lost to the PQ\'s Elsie Lefebvre.  The 
multi-ethnic character of the Laurier-Dorion riding -- in which 
Greek-Canadians are the largest ethnic group - would have 
suggested that a sovereignist, pro-French language, PQ candidate 
could not win.  However, Elsie Lefebvre campaigned very 
actively, and apparently was able to get enough of her 
supporters to the polls to win by the relatively small margin of 
435 votes. 
 
6. The ethnic community vote is closely watched in Quebec as a 
harbinger of whether the appeal of sovereignty can extend beyond 
the province\'s Francophone population, and attract growing 
numbers of non-Francophone voters from more recent immigration 
waves, who mostly live in and around Montreal.  But most 
analysts are discounting the significance of this particular 
by-election result. Turnout was a very low 35 percent. (Voter 
participation rates in general provincial elections are usually 
between 70 and 80 percent.). 
 
NEW BLOOD IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
 
7. The four new members of the National Assembly distinguish 
themselves by their young age. Yolande James, a 26-year-old 
lawyer, will become the first black woman to sit in Quebec\'s 
National Assembly. Elsie Lefebvre, also 26, is completing a 
master\'s degree in international studies.  Nicolas Girard, 32, 
was the press attache and protege of former PQ Environment 
Minister Andre Boisclair (who has temporarily left politics to 
study at Harvard\'s Kennedy School of Government).  The ADQ\'s 
Sylvain Legare is 35. 
 
8. Comment:  Premier Charest came back from Ottawa with a health 
care agreement in his back pocket that was advertised as a 
precedent for provincial-federal negotiations.  The Premier\'s 
success at last week\'s health conference with PM Martin and the 
other Premiers did not go totally unnoticed, but it failed to 
dispel general dissatisfaction among voters or to incite Liberal 
voters to go to the polls. There is tangible dissatisfaction 
with the government and now, after 16 months in power and a 
dismal showing in the polls, Charest and his party will have to 
regroup.   However, by-elections are customarily fought on local 
issues and last night\'s results will likely have no long-term 
political impact.  The current standings in the National 
Assembly are:  Liberal 74, the Parti Quebecois 46, and ADQ 5, of 
a total 125 seats.  End Comment. 
 
 
STRUDWICK 
"
"21362","10/6/2004 18:59","04QUEBEC178","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04OTTAWA2560","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

061859Z Oct 04
","UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000178 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SENSITIVE 
WHA/CAN FOR TERRY BREESE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, CA 
SUBJECT: ASYMMETRIC FEDERALISM - A VIEW FROM QUEBEC 
 
REF: OTTAWA 2560 
 
(SBU) 1. Summary:  \"Asymmetric Federalism\" - the notion that not 
all Canadian provinces need be treated equally by the federal 
government  -- has received attention in the press following the 
federal-provincial summit on health (reftel), at which Quebec 
obtained special language in an agreement signed by all 
provinces.  In a conversation with the Consul-General, Quebec\'s 
minister responsible for its relations with the federal 
government, Benoit Pelletier, claimed to be surprised at the 
attention, and sought to downplay its significance.  But the 
concept offers a less-confrontational framework in which Quebec 
leaders can pursue Quebec goals, as well as hopes for improved 
standing with Quebec voters for federal and provincial Liberals. 
 End Summary. 
 
----------------- 
FINDING A FORMULA 
----------------- 
(SBU)  2. CG spoke with Quebec Minister for Canadian 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs Benoit Pelletier on 
September 28.  Pelletier is Charest\'s minister responsible for 
Quebec\'s relations with the federal government and was at the 
health summit.  Pelletier said he was frankly surprised by all 
of the attention \"asymmetric federalism\" is now getting.  It is 
not a new idea, he said, although it is a Quebec Liberal Party 
(PLQ) idea which Premier Charest has been pushing.  Pelletier, a 
constitutional lawyer, told us that in 2000 he chaired a PLQ 
special committee on the political and constitutional future of 
Quebec.  The final report of that committee (a slick, 147 page 
report entitled \"A Project for Quebec: Affirmation, Autonomy and 
Leadership\") addressed the concept of asymmetric federalism head 
on: \"Asymmetry is desirable within Canada. . .The federal 
formula does not rule out asymmetry in relations between the 
partners in the federation.\" 
 
(SBU) 3. Pelletier was clearly pleased that asymmetric 
federalism had found its place in the health summit and had 
received the backing of all of the Premiers. But he now seemed 
to want to dampen its significance.  Pelletier cautioned against 
trying to apply the concept at every turn and told CG that he 
saw \"absolutely no relevance for the term in the October 26 
Council of the Federation discussions with the federal 
government on equalization payments.\"  Quebec has proposed that 
this money be divided on the basis of provincial population. 
Until now, Atlantic Canada has been receiving more money from 
Ottawa because their residents are the poorest.  The battle over 
how to divide up federal money could disrupt the unity of the 
new Council of the Federation. 
 
--------------------------- 
FOREIGN POLICY IMPLICATIONS 
--------------------------- 
(SBU)  4. For decades, Quebec\'s approach to federal-provincial 
separation of powers is that the federal constitution denotes 
which areas fall within the purview of the provinces.  And if an 
area is within the purview of the province - be it health, 
education, or cultural issues - Quebec believes it should have 
full power, including at the international level, to treat these 
issues.  This logic, which has found favor with both PQ and PLQ 
governments, has emboldened Quebec to push much further than 
other provinces in seeking an international profile.  Pelletier 
said that the Council of the Federation has two committees 
engaged in working-level discussions with the federal government 
committees: one to consider the role of the provinces in 
international relations and another on the role of the provinces 
in Canada-US relations.  But Pelletier was dismissive of these 
committees because Quebec, in his view, is \"way ahead of other 
provinces in both areas.\"  He said that Quebec is far more 
interested in bilateral (Quebec-Ottawa) discussions on similar 
topics, and that conversations are already underway regarding 
Quebec\'s role in international fora such as UNESCO.  Federal 
Heritage Minister Liza Frulla, declared recently at a UNESCO 
meeting in Paris that her Quebec counterpart Lise Beauchamp 
could speak on behalf of both Quebec and Canada at international 
gatherings on cultural diversity when she is unable to attend 
meetings.  Frulla\'s remarks produced a commotion within Liberal 
ranks, and Martin\'s Quebec lieutenant Jean Lapierre and federal 
Intergovernmental Affairs Minister Lucienne Robillard firmly 
called her to order.  \"Canada,\" they said, \"must speak in one 
voice.\" 
 
(SBU) 5. Pelletier told me that if Quebec can get the federal 
government to agree to a special role for Quebec in 
international fora, \"then this really would be asymmetric 
federalism in action!\"  He said his priorities have been the 
health summit and the equalization payments summit.  But he 
expects that once these are out of the way (in November or 
December), he will be pushing much harder on the role of Quebec 
in international fora, especially at UNESCO.  Pelletier expects 
press attention to the matter at that time. 
 
(SBU) 6. The Quebec government, said Pelletier, also would love 
to have bilateral (not provincial multilateral) discussions with 
Ottawa on U.S.-Canada relations.  But he indicated that this is 
a long-way off. 
 
-------- 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
(SBU)  7. Most of the press buzz about the potential risks of 
\"asymmetric federalism\" appears to have been among the 
English-language media.  For these observers, this notion that 
emerged as Quebec\'s side deal took off (and was written as an 
option for all provinces), is no more than \"a la carte 
provincialism\" and is a huge blow to the federal structure of 
Canada.  But in Quebec itself, the health deal was generally 
framed in terms of Quebec\'s \"distinct\" identity and the Canadian 
constitutional framework that defines which areas fall within 
the purview of the provinces.  In a speech given at the 
University of Quebec-Montreal, and published last weekend in Le 
Devoir, Pelletier presented the concept, in effect, as an 
acceptable way of pursuing Quebec goals without the 
constitutional crises which hitherto resulted when its leaders 
invoked the province\'s \'exceptionalism.\' 
 
 (SBU)  8. Quebec Premier Jean Charest has chalked up points in 
Ottawa and at home, succeeding where others have failed, by 
convincing the other provincial premiers that the future of the 
country lies in asymmetrical federalism.  A majority of Quebec 
respondents (52%) polled after the health meeting felt the 
agreement represented \"an historic step for Quebec.\"  This is 
good news for the Charest government whose approval rating still 
stands at only 36%, just 2 points over its August numbers.  PM 
Martin is also apparently hopeful of improving his political 
footing in Quebec, where the federal Liberals lost 16 seats in 
the June election.   End Comment. 
 
 
 
 
FRIEDMAN 
"
"21574","10/13/2004 17:33","04QUEBEC184","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000184 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, SENV, MARR, CA, Environment, Missile Defense 
SUBJECT: NUNAVUT TERRITORY:  AMBASSADOR\'S OCT. 4-7 VISIT 
 
1. Summary:  During an October 4-7 visit to Iqaluit, the capital 
of Nunavut Territory, the Ambassador met with a range of 
federal, provincial and municipal officials, as well as with 
representatives of the Inuit community.  Climate change and 
restrictions on seal hunting topped the list of our 
interlocutors\' concerns, but missile defense also came up, 
favorably, as did control of the Northwest Passage through the 
Arctic.  On climate change, the Ambassador said the Kyoto 
Protocol is not a panacea and made the point that the U.S. is 
putting more money into responding to climate change than Europe 
and Japan combined.  On sealing, the Ambassador showed 
understanding of the adverse impact of the Marine Mammal 
Protection Act (MMPA) on traditional Inuit culture and 
encouraged the Inuit to work with the government of Canada to 
put this on the GOC\'s agenda.  End summary. 
 
Background 
-------------- 
 
2. Created in 1999, Nunavut is Canada\'s youngest territory.  The 
region\'s arctic climate, vastness and isolation, coupled with a 
bottoming out of the Inuit\'s traditional sealing and hunting 
economies, result in a Territory heavily dependent upon federal 
subsidies and plagued with social ills (e.g., the suicide rate 
is estimated at anywhere from one out of five to one out of 
eight of the adult population).  Nunavut officials are making 
trade-based education a priority.  Nunavut also is saddled with 
a complex set of overlapping bureaucracies:  the Government of 
Nunavut represents all of the people of Nunavut while Nunavut 
Tunngavik Incorporated (NTI), established under the 1993 Nunavut 
Land Claims Agreement (NLCA), defends Inuit interests and 
oversees the 1.14 billion dollars transferred by Ottawa under 
that Agreement.  Ironically, although Inuit comprise 85 percent 
of Nunavut\'s population of 28,000, they are clearly in a 
minority in the leadership of both NTI and the GON. 
 
Marine Mammal Protection Act 
-------------------------------------- 
 
3.  In every meeting, officials raised with the Ambassador the 
devastating effect of the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) on 
Inuit society and on the economy.  Deputy Premier Levinia Brown 
said that sealing is essential to the Inuit, who use all parts 
of the seal for food, clothing and heating oil.  She 
distinguished Nunavut sealing from the slaughter of baby seals 
in Newfoundland, decried throughout the world.  The Deputy 
Premier said the GON wants the MMPA amended, to recognize the 
unique situation of the Inuit people.  GON Minister of Education 
Ed Picco (a former Hudson Bay trader himself) told the 
Ambassador that Nunavut hunters used to be self-sustaining but 
that since the 1972 passage of the U.S. Marine Mammal Protection 
Act, sealing is no longer economically viable.  The dependence 
of Inuit hunters on government handouts has soared from about 20 
percent of the population thirty years ago to 80 percent today. 
According to the Minister, the difficulty for the Inuit in 
transitioning to a modern economy is reflected in a host of 
social problems in the region, from a high suicide rate, to 
alcoholism and domestic violence.  Picco said the GON has been 
working to promote Nunavut\'s sealskin products but that it was 
time to put the MMPA back on the table.  The Ambassador 
responded that it was important for decision makers in Congress 
to know all of the facts and that he would report to the State 
Department the GoN\'s concern.  He cautioned that it is difficult 
to change a law once it has been passed and that there are 
powerful lobbies backing the MMPA.  The Ambassador noted that, 
for the GoN to succeed, the GoC would need to make amending the 
MMPA a priority in its dealings in Washington.  NTI 
representatives thanked the Ambassador for his suggestions and 
said that the Nunavut Sealing Strategy would be coming out 
shortly and NTI would make sure that it is presented to federal 
Canadian authorities. 
 
Climate Change 
------------------- 
 
4.  Nunavut interlocutors also raised the impact of global 
warming on the arctic climate.  Minister of the Environment 
Akesuk told the Ambassador that Pangnirtung used to have ten 
months of winter and that this has shrunk to roughly three 
months.  There are major storms even in periods of warm weather. 
 Different animals are also now appearing in the region and 
hunting has been adversely affected.  Akesuk said that the GON 
has endorsed the climate change strategy under the Kyoto 
protocol but that climate change is a global issue that Nunavut 
cannot tackle alone.  For this reason, the GON is focusing less 
on halting climate change and more on readying itself for the 
future under changed climate conditions.  (The GON, for example, 
is looking at how it may need to approach building construction 
once the permafrost disappears.)  The Ambassador stressed the 
U.S.\'s leadership role on climate change.  The U.S. is spending 
more on addressing climate change than Europe and Japan 
combined, he said, and the administration wants to respond to 
global warming based upon sound science and the transformative 
power of technology. 
 
Missile Defense 
------------------- 
 
5.  In addition to climate change and the MMPA, NTI officials 
also raised missile defense.  NTI C.O.O. Richard Paton said NTI 
understands that the USG does not at this stage plan to use any 
region of Canada for missile defense but that this could change 
should missile defense move forward and Canada is asked to 
participate.  If Nunavut were to be used for missile defense, 
Paton wanted the U.S. to be aware that the Nunavut Land Claims 
Act provides for preferential treatment of Inuit contractors. 
Paton did not express opposition to missile defense but rather 
stressed that NTI would like to see a missile defense program 
that \"minimizes the environmental impact and maximizes the 
economic benefit to Nunavut.\"  They would want Nunavut/Inuit 
representatives in all phases of discussion.  NTI officials 
cited the Denmark and Greenland agreements on missile defense as 
positive models.  (Comment:  NTI\'s position on U.S. missile 
defense reflects the generally positive attitudes in Nunavut 
toward the U.S. military, which is remembered for having 
contributed extensively to Iqaluit\'s infrastructure, including 
construction of the Iqaluit airport in 1947.  End comment.) 
 
Northwest Passage 
---------------------- 
 
6.  NTI officials also asked whether the U.S. might change its 
position on the Northwest Passage through Arctic waters.  The 
Ambassador noted in his meeting with NTI officials (and later 
that day in a radio interview with a local CBC reporter) that if 
the Northwest Passage is considered to be international rather 
than Canadian waters, it becomes more difficult to check for 
terrorists.  The Ambassador said that he has made this point to 
Washington but that it was not clear at this point whether the 
U.S. would change its position and support Canadian control of 
the Northwest Passage based upon terrorist considerations.  NTI 
said that for the Inuit, the question is environmental, and they 
feel strongly about it. 
 
 
 
FRIEDMAN 
"
"22439","11/3/2004 17:36","04QUEBEC190","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031736Z Nov 04
","UNCLAS QUEBEC 000190 
 
SIPDIS 
 
State for WHA/CAN; WHA/PDA - Mary Dean Conners 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, PGOV, PREL, CA 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC CITY 400TH ANNIVERSARY 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  CG and Embassy Minister Counselor for Public 
Affairs met Oct 14-15 with federal, provincial and municipal 
representatives involved with planning Quebec\'s 400th 
Anniversary in 2008.  Quebec Mayor L\'Allier pushed for a visible 
U.S. legacy in the form of a genealogy center, while Provincial 
government representatives expressed strong reservations with 
the Mayor\'s proposal, pointing out that it would cost the 
Provincial government 40 million CND for infrastructure work 
alone.  CG and PAO indicated the limits of our ability to 
provide major funding for a large-scale legacy project but that 
we remained open to discussing ways in which we can support a 
genealogy project that makes connections between the U.S. and 
Quebec (and Canada more broadly).  End summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Quebec mayor Jean-Paul L\'Allier, who is hoping the 
U.S. will contribute to the creation of a genealogy center to 
mark the 400th anniversary of the founding of Quebec City in 
2008, came well-prepared to his Oct. 14 meeting with CG and PAO. 
 L\'Allier and his team handed us a project proposal complete 
with maps and floor plans for a Genealogy and Heritage Center 
that would be built in an 18th century building in Old Quebec 
known as \"The New Barracks.\"  L\'Allier underscored the 
importance and history of US-Canada and US-Quebec ties and noted 
that the 400th anniversary is an opportunity for the U.S. to 
establish a visible presence (a \"legacy\") in Quebec, which is 
currently lacking.  L\'Allier believes U.S. involvement is 
appropriate, given that up to 15 million Americans have origins 
in Quebec and that a large part of the U.S. is former New France 
territory. 
 
3.  The following day, L\'Allier organized a tour for us of the 
Barracks, which will need considerable infrastructure repair and 
renovation.  L\'Allier advisor Jacques Jobin, who accompanied us 
on the tour, indicated the municipal government is confident 
that the Provincial government will pay the 40 million CND cost 
of rebuilding the outside of the building, a project which would 
take about three years.  There was no direct discussion of who 
would cover the cost of the inside of the building, i.e., 
staffing, equipping and running the center itself, but it was 
clear the municipal government is looking for others to foot 
this part of the bill.  (Comment:  By the end of PAO\'s two-day 
visit, it became apparent that the municipal government is 
hoping the USG either covers these \"inside the building\" costs, 
or assumes the burden of finding donors to do so.  End Comment.) 
 
4.  (SBU) Our Oct. 15 meeting with Provincial government 
officials revealed a difference of opinion between L\'Allier\'s 
office and the Provincial government.  Sam Hamad, Charest\'s 
Minister responsible for the Quebec capital region (also 
Minister for Energy and Resources), and his team indicated to us 
they were not pleased L\'Allier was assuming the GoQ would 
contribute 40 million CND for renovation of the New Barracks. 
GoQ 400th anniversary Commissioner Raymond Lesage, who works for 
Hamad, said there is a limited amount of Provincial money for 
400th anniversary events.  Every time money is spent on a 
\"legacy\" project, it means less money for 400th anniversary 
festivities. 
 
5.  (SBU) Despite their irritation with L\'Allier, Provincial 
officials were careful not to flat out reject the genealogy 
center project.  They wanted to know how much the U.S. would be 
willing to invest.  PAO made clear that the USG does not have 
large sums of money to devote to \"legacy\" projects such as 
building a monument.  We would probably be able to assist along 
the lines of hosting a seminar or conference around the theme of 
the Quebec roots of Americans. 
 
Comment 
------------ 
 
6.  Throughout the visit, CG and PAO gently but clearly 
indicated the limits of our ability to provide major funding for 
a large-scale legacy project.  We also indicated that we remain 
very open to discussing ways in which we can support a genealogy 
project that makes connections between the U.S. and Quebec (and 
Canada more broadly) through our shared immigrant experience. 
We are similarly open to other ideas that would highlight our 
shared \"North American\" experience.  We will continue to explore 
possibilities for USG/Mission contributions to the 400th 
anniversary celebration through cultural and academic exchange 
programs.\" 
 
7.  L\'Allier\'s desire for a \"legacy\" investment from the USG is 
part of his quite understandable effort as mayor to seize the 
opportunity presented by the 400th to beautify his city.  (The 
\"New Barracks\" were to have been renovated several years ago to 
make room for a branch of Laval University, but that project 
fell through because of lack of funds.)  We note that for the 
300th anniversary, the only legacy project was the creation of 
the Plains of Abraham Park by the Government of Canada.  Foreign 
governments were asked to participate in festivities and the 
Vice President represented the U.S. at that celebration. 
"
"22612","11/8/2004 15:48","04QUEBEC193","Consulate Quebec","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

081548Z Nov 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUEBEC 000193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  11/4/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, CA, ECON, Parti Quebecois 
SUBJECT: CG MEETING WITH PQ LEADER LANDRY 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Abigail Friedman, CG, QUEBEC CITY, STATE. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Abigail Friedman, CG, QUEBEC CITY, STATE. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary:  CG met with Parti Quebecois (PQ) opposition 
leader Bernard Landry October 28 at his National Assembly office 
and received a crash course on Quebec history and the separatist 
movement in what was her first encounter with the former PQ 
Premier.  Despite intense internal wrangling within PQ ranks and 
challenges to Landry\'s leadership, the PQ leader appeared 
unfazed and confidently assured CG that Quebec would be an 
independent nation within five to ten years.  End summary. 
 
2.  (C) Landry, a 35-year PQ veteran who led Quebec as Premier 
from 2001-03, established his longstanding relationship with the 
Quebec City consulate and his party\'s commitment to Quebec-U.S. 
relations.  Landry said Quebec is the most pro-American of the 
ten Canadian provinces.  The U.S.-Canada free trade agreement, 
fiercely resisted by the Mulroney government in Ottawa at the 
time, would not have passed had the then-PQ Quebec government 
not taken a strong favorable position, he added.  Landry sees 
the trend for the Americas as being one of further economic 
integration along a European Union model.  He characterized 
Quebec as an economic powerhouse: The tenth-ranked economic 
force of the OECD, half of Canada\'s high technology products 
come from Quebec and one out of two books published in Canada 
are from Quebec. 
 
3.  (C) Taking an almost professorial tone, Landry told CG that 
\"understanding Quebec is both simple and complex\" but one thing 
all Quebecers fundamentally agree upon is that Quebec forms a 
\"nation.\"   The Quebec National Assembly unanimously recognized 
this fact in a motion presented before the legislature several 
months ago.  Landry said that over the last 10 years, 30 
countries had established their nationhood, including the 
Ukraine and other former Soviet and Balkan states.  He believes 
the Quebec sovereignty option is far from being a marginal 
movement and he sees Quebec as moving inexorably toward 
independence. 
 
4.  (C) Landry argued that Quebec independence would be a 
reality before long because of the mathematics of generational 
change.   According to him, 60 percent of young Quebecers 
support the option of sovereignty today.  Young voters who 
supported the PQ in the 1970s and 1980s are today\'s older 
voters, and they, too, continue to support sovereignty.  Landry 
pointed to a CROP-La Presse poll released October 28, which 
concluded that the PQ would have won Provincial government 
elections had they been called in October.  In that poll, 63 
percent of voters expressed dissatisfaction with the Charest 
government.  Support for sovereignty stood at 47 percent. 
 
5. (C) On the dynamics of federal-provincial relations, Bernard 
Landry said the sizeable presence of the Bloc Quebecois (BQ) in 
Ottawa -- Gilles Duceppe holds 54 of the 75 federal seats in the 
province -- ought to give it leverage with Martin\'s minority 
government.  But this was not happening.  Instead, the BQ has 
exasperated the rest of Canada, he said.  According to Landry, 
PM Martin knows his party cannot win Quebec in the next election 
and his best bet is to increase voter support in Ontario and 
Alberta. 
 
Comment 
---------- 
 
6. (C) The PQ is presently in disarray, and Landry himself 
conceded as much in his meeting with the CG.  He argued, 
however, that the PQ is merely digesting the loss of the last 
election and will come out of this period of political 
soul-searching stronger and ready to take power.  Whether Landry 
retains leadership of the party after this soul-searching 
remains to be seen.  The next party congress, where Landry\'s 
mandate is up for renewal, is scheduled for June, 2005.  Between 
now and then, Landry will be focused on fending off challenges 
to unseat him. 
 
 
 
FRIEDMAN 
"
"23065","11/19/2004 16:07","04QUEBEC202","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUEBEC 000202 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOC FOR JIM TERPSTRA 
USTR FOR SAGE CHANDLER 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAN AND EB/TPP/BTA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EIND, CA, US, Softwood lumber, Trade 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC LUMBER INDUSTRY ON SOFTWOOD STATE OF PLAY 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED -- PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary:  Post recently met with Quebec lumber 
officials who told us the Province\'s first priority is to head 
off a Lumber V and carve out a permanent solution to the 
bilateral dispute.  They argued that American industry is not 
benefiting from the U.S.-Canada softwood lumber dispute as Chile 
and other South American and European countries are \"coming in 
through the back door,\" occupying a share of the market 
previously held by Canadian companies.  Quebec lumber officials 
say Quebec Province is in agreement with other Canadian 
provinces on the overall principles of a resolution but there is 
still no consensus on a reengagement strategy.  Quebec lumber 
industry officials recently met with federal Trade Minister Jim 
Peterson and urged that softwood lumber be on the agenda when 
President Bush and PM Martin meet in Ottawa later this month. 
End Summary. 
 
2.  (U)  On November 17, Consul General checked in with Georges 
Courteau, President of the Quebec Forest Industry Council 
(QFIC), and Marc Boutin, Director of International Trade at the 
Council.  QFIC represents Quebec\'s 275 mills, which they say 
generate employment to 150,000 people in the province.   250 
Quebec communities depend almost entirely on the lumber sector 
and the social impact in the regions is enormous.  Lumber is the 
second largest contributor to the Quebec economy after energy. 
 
3.  (U)  The QFIC officials said we are at the terminal phase of 
the legal process, with ninety percent of WTO and NAFTA 
litigation now resolved.  The U.S. lost the first five cases and 
Boutin expected it would lose the sixth.  With this as a 
backdrop, Courteau and Boutin said Quebec\'s highest priority is 
to prevent a Lumber V.  The province wants a long-term and 
durable solution. Courteau and Boutin conceded that there is 
dissidence among the provinces on how next to proceed.  On one 
end the more cautious (read Quebec) prefer to wait for the 
results of ongoing litigation while others want to return to the 
negotiating table. 
 
4.  (U)  Courteau and Boutin stated that while the U.S. and 
Canada are fighting the softwood lumber battle, South American 
countries, notably Chile and Brazil, are taking over what was 
previously Canadian market share.  European countries such as 
Austria, Germany, Sweden, and now Russia, also have begun to 
move in.  \"The enemy is coming in through the back door,\" said 
Boutin.  He argued that, as a result, U.S. industry is far from 
benefiting from these circumstances.  Nowadays, forty percent of 
Quebec\'s volume is exported to the U.S., with the rest going 
mainly to the Canadian domestic market, according to the QFIC 
officials.  But before this latest round, they said, Quebec was 
exporting fifty percent of its volume to the U.S. 
 
5.   (U)  The QFIC officials expressed some concern about 
Montana Senator Max Baucus\' proposed bill that would have the 
$3.6 billion in lumber duties paid by Canadian companies handed 
over to American forest companies.  At the same time, they 
cautiously reckoned the bill would not be approved by Congress 
although they added, \"one must not presume anything.\" 
Responding to a question from the CG, Courteau said Quebec\'s 
share of the duties is somewhere between 22-23%, or $700-800 
million. 
 
6.  (SBU)  QFIC officials told us that their U.S. industry 
counterparts have told them that, on the U.S. side, the \"big 
guys\" want to settle because they are tired of the situation. 
The perception that Canada is using public forests and 
practicing unfair competition is exaggerated and U.S. industry 
knows this, they said.  Our interlocutors told us that anxiety 
is high on the American side and that everyone is waiting to see 
how the Administration will proceed, especially with the 
departure of Secretary Don Evans. 
 
7.  (SBU)  Courteau said Quebec lumber industry officials 
recently briefed federal Trade Minister Jim Peterson.  They 
pressed Peterson to put softwood lumber on the agenda when 
President Bush and PM Martin meet in Ottawa later this month. 
Martin is leading a minority government and as a result, the 
CFIF believes the PM will have to heed industry more than the 
federal government has in the past. 
 
 
 
 
FRIEDMAN 
"
"24003","12/13/2004 20:59","04QUEBEC215","Consulate Quebec","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000215 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PARIS UNESCO FOR JANET COWLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  12/13/2014 
TAGS: ETRD, SCUL, FR, CA, UNESCO, Trade 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC GOVERNMENT ON UNESCO CULTURAL DIVERSITY CONVENTION 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Abigail Friedman, CG, QUEBEC CITY, STATE. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
 
 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  Government of Quebec (GOQ) officials requested 
a meeting with CG Friedman to review the bidding on the draft 
UNESCO Cultural Diversity Convention in advance of the Dec. 
14-17 drafting group meeting in Paris, where Quebec will 
participate as an observer.  GOQ officials said Quebec is not 
anti-free trade but does want a convention that \"protects\" 
cultural diversity from rulings in other fora such as the WTO, 
which might one day force Quebec to change its present system of 
cultural subsidies and regulations.  Separately we note that 
Quebec\'s desire for a seat at the table at UNESCO is part of a 
broader trend of increased Quebec assertiveness on the 
international stage.  End summary. 
 
2.  (U) Quebec Ministry of Culture and Communications officials 
Andre Dorval and Gerard Grandmont, and International Relations 
Ministry officials Luc Bergeron and France Genest told CG that 
Quebec wants to see a cultural diversity convention in place not 
because of any present encroachment of Quebec\'s cultural 
subsidies and regulations, but because of their concern for the 
future.  Quebec fears that at some point a case could be 
successfully brought before the WTO or elsewhere, forcing Quebec 
to change its policies. 
 
3. (U) Our interlocutors stressed that the GOQ is not anti-free 
trade.  Bergeron noted that Quebec has been a leader in Canada 
on free trade, having pushed hard in favor of a Free Trade 
Agreement with the U.S. and NAFTA.  Nor does Quebec wish to 
exclude other cultures, he said.  As an example, he said Quebec 
has never objected to American English language television 
programs, because there is a healthy local francophone 
television industry in Quebec.   Quebec simply wants to insure 
that its products have a place sufficient to maintain Quebec\'s 
cultural identity, said Bergeron. 
 
Quebec Allies on Cultural Diversity 
 ---------------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Dorval told us that while France is a tactical ally for 
Quebec at UNESCO, the two governments face very different 
cultural diversity challenges.  Quebec has real problems with 
access to French markets for its cultural goods and wants 
greater market liberalization in France.  At the same time, 
French cultural products (especially books) could swamp the 
Quebec market, were it not for Quebec subsidies and regulations 
that support Quebec cultural industries like publishing. 
 
5.  (C) Without elaborating on China\'s position, our 
interlocutors told us that Quebec sees completely eye-to-eye 
with the Chinese on the matter of cultural diversity. 
International Relations Minister Monique Gagnon-Tremblay was in 
China for a meeting related to cultural diversity this fall, and 
according to the MRI she came back very upbeat about the Chinese 
position. 
 
Lobbying the U.S. Private Sector 
--------------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Dorval said the GOQ is exploring the idea of lobbying 
the U.S. private sector entertainment industry.  The GOQ 
believes the U.S. private sector has not been as opposed to a 
UNESCO convention as one might expect, perhaps because U.S. 
business understands that a convention could support 
intellectual property rights and help staunch copyright 
infringement.  (Note:  The Quebec logic seems to be that if 
countries are encouraged to protect and develop their own local 
cultural industries, then those countries would fight harder to 
stop intellectual property theft as these government will want 
their publics to buy local cultural products.  End note.) 
 
Comment 
----------- 
 
7.  (C) Quebec\'s assertiveness on cultural diversity reflects 
both the importance of the issue to Quebec and the widely shared 
belief here that if an area is within the purview of Canadian 
provinces - e.g., cultural and educational issues - then Quebec 
should have full power to engage on the issue, including on the 
international stage.  Quebec\'s desire for a seat at the UNESCO 
talks also is part of provincial Premier Charest\'s broader 
strategy of raising Quebec\'s international profile while 
remaining firmly within Canada.  Without taking a position on 
the question of Quebec\' role in international fora, the CG noted 
that Quebec\'s eagerness to be in the vanguard on cultural 
diversity coupled with its unfettered support for tactical 
allies could cost the GOQ in its reputation as a promoter of 
free-trade. 
 
 
FRIEDMAN 
"
"24257","12/17/2004 14:53","04QUEBEC224","Consulate Quebec","UNCLASSIFIED","04VANCOUVER1674","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171453Z Dec 04
","UNCLAS QUEBEC 000224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO USTR AND COMMERCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, CA, ECON, EAGR, Trade 
SUBJECT: QUEBEC FOREST INDUSTRY COUNCIL ANGERED BY COMMERCE LUMBER 
DECISION 
 
REF: VANCOUVER 1674 
 
(SBU)  In a terse Dec. 16 conversation with CG, Quebec Forest 
Industry Council Director for International Trade Marc Boutin 
said the outcome of the Department of Commerce\'s review of the 
AC/CVD orders on softwood lumber was a \"bad surprise\" and that 
Quebec industry was \"extremely disappointed.\"  Boutin said it 
was clear that the Commerce review began with a \"result in 
search of a methodology.\"  The methodology made no sense and was 
not legal, he charged.  The fact that the review was less severe 
toward Quebec than other provinces did nothing to change 
Quebec\'s discontent, he concluded. 
 
 
 
FRIEDMAN 
"
"24364","12/20/2004 16:26","04QUEBEC225","Consulate Quebec","CONFIDENTIAL","04MONTREAL1435","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN AND EB/ESC/IEC 
DOE FOR INTL AFFAIRS:  PUMPHREY, DEVITO, DEUTSCH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  12/20/2014 
TAGS: ENRG, PGOV, TRGY, CA, Energy 
SUBJECT: ENERGY ISSUES IN QUEBEC SEEN FROM JAMES BAY 
 
REF: MONTREAL 1435 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Abigail Friedman, CG, QUEBEC CITY, STATE. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  Hydro-Quebec (HQ) President for Production 
Thierry Vandal outlined his company\'s ambitious growth plans for 
hydroelectric power during a tour of James Bay Radisson 
generating plant.  He stressed HQ\'s growing energy capacity and 
need for diversification while emphasizing that the company 
consults with both aboriginal and environmental groups early on 
in the design phase so as to avoid controversial delays which 
have plagued previous project proposals.  With an eye fixed on 
the market and improved revenues for HQ, Vandal indicated their 
plans include boosting exports of this cheap, secure, and clean 
energy source to New England.  To do so, the Government of 
Quebec will need to win over a Quebec public increasingly 
sensitive to the environmental and social impact of energy 
development.  A senior Quebec Ministry of Energy official told 
CG the next day that January parliamentary hearings on Quebec\'s 
future energy development are the first step in getting there. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (U) DCM, CG Quebec City, ESTOFF and Pol/Econ Asst flew north 
with Thierry Vandal on December 15 to visit James Bay.   The La 
Grande Riviere hydroelectric project is located at Radisson in 
the James Bay Territory, which extends over some 350,000 square 
km between the 49th and 55th parallels and represents one fifth 
of the province of Quebec. This is mainly Cree territory and 
taiga, where the forest is sparse, composed mainly of 
century-old black spruce, jack pine and larch.  The boreal trees 
are too small in diameter for commercial lumbering. The complex 
is 1,000 km north of Montreal, a 16-hour drive away, but still 
only halfway to Quebec\'s northernmost point. 
 
3. (C) Total La Grande annual production is about 62.2 TWh (one 
billion kilowatt hours), or a bit less than half that in all 
Quebec.  At the Robert-Bourassa substation (one of eight 
installations along the La Grande river), the generating units 
provide the HQ power system with a total installed capacity of 
over 5,000 MW, about one-third of the La Grande complex\'s 
capacity and equivalent to the peak winter demand of around 
250,000 homes.  A dedicated 450 Kv (kilovolt) direct current 
line runs from the substation to Sandy Point, Massachusetts, 
with a capacity to supply 3,600 MW to the New England market. 
Vandal was confident that the HQ system can respond quickly and 
efficiently to both natural disasters and deliberate sabotage. 
 
4. (C) Vandal said HQ could deliver more electricity to the 
U.S., but two things are holding it back: (1) the need for the 
ten U.S. utilities in the northeast that might benefit from 
Quebec\'s hydro-energy to upgrade their transmission lines and 
(2) the need to send some of Radisson\'s electricity to Quebec 
consumers.  With respect to the latter, Vandal said HQ is 
looking for ways to increase production from other Quebec 
sources to free up electricity on the Radisson grid for delivery 
to the U.S.  HQ\'s interest in the export market is 
understandable: HQ makes more money selling to the U.S. than to 
Quebecers.  New York consumers pay 15 cents/KWh for electricity 
whereas Quebec prices are presently fixed at 2.79 cents/KWh (the 
result of the government-owned HQ\'s commitment to reconciling 
profitability with the public interest).  Quebecers\' electricity 
bills remain among the lowest in North America. 
 
5. (C)  Increased HQ production, according to Vandal, would come 
from a number of sources including:  a project at Toulnustouc, 
on Quebec\'s North Shore, scheduled to come on line next year; 
the commissioning of the SM3 (Ste Marguerite 3) dam located 90 
km north of Sept-Iles on the North Shore (originally scheduled 
for the spring of 2001 but put off several times due to problems 
of water seepage and turbine damage); a 1,000 MW wind power 
project in the Gaspi (a total of 660 wind mills representing 
$1.9 billion in investments, with an individual capacity of 1.5 
MW, in 8 different wind parks); and the possible refurbishing of 
the core of Quebec\'s only operating nuclear power plant, 
Gentilly 2. 
 
6. (C) Vandal argued in favor of both raising prices in Quebec 
and increasing production.  Low prices are encouraging 
over-consumption of electricity, he said.  In an earlier Dec. 7 
meeting, Vandal told CG that a consensus seemed to have been 
reached that the province would no longer be cutting cheap 
energy deals -that do not make economic sense - to industry 
(especially aluminum companies) in order to preserve jobs. 
Vandal expected provincial rates to go up 2.5% per annum until 
2007, after which a debate over pricing would have to take 
place.  (Comment:  Vandal is a protigi of Hydro-Quebec CEO Andre 
Cailli, who made a splash recently by calling for an increase of 
basic electricity rates to 7 cents/KWh.  Premier Charest swiftly 
rejected Cailli\'s position but the Quebec energy regulatory 
board (Regie de l\'energie) is considering HQ\'s third request for 
a hike since Charest was elected.  End Comment.) 
7. (C) Vandal made a strong pitch in defense of HQ\'s 
environmental policies.  He noted HQ efforts at La Grande to 
deal with environmental concerns and the lengths to which HQ 
goes to respect the native Cree and Inuit habitat and way of 
life.  He negatively cited the Chinese government\'s massive 
displacement of population around the Three Gorges Dam Project, 
saying that \"only in China\" could this be done.  HQ boasted that 
approximately 1 million caribou roam the James Bay area today, 
up from only several thousand in the 1950s.  (Comment:  Vandal 
did not mention the many environmental issues which have 
received wide publicity over the years and resonate with the 
Quebec public, including mercury poisoning of local populations 
and the drowning of 10,000 caribou in 1984 while trying to cross 
a swollen river during their migratory trek.  The gruesome 
front-page coverage of bloated carcasses atop one another along 
the river bank is still deeply engrained in the collective 
memory of Quebecers.  End comment.) 
 
8. (C)  Vandal said HQ learned from the Great Whale fiasco 
(reftel) to engage native communities and NGO\'s at the front 
end.  The Eastmain-1 (EM1) project, an extension of the James 
Bay project likely to be completed in 2007, is the result of an 
agreement reached between the Grand Council of the Crees and HQ 
back in 2002.  HQ has also told the Inuit in North Quebec who 
want to go forward with the Great Whale project that this simply 
will not happen since the Cree are not on board. 
 
Comment 
------------ 
 
9. (C) Vandal painted an ambitious energy future for Quebec.  He 
was confident that the Quebec government would be able to win 
public support for increased production, increased exports to 
the U.S. and at least a slight increase in the price charged to 
Quebec consumers.  Vandal\'s biggest concern, which he raised 
with us indirectly but unmistakably, is the possibility of 
environmental issues setting back HQ\'s agenda.  When CG asked 
Vandal what was the hardest part of his job, he answered, 
\"Getting Ottawa bureaucrats to sign off on our environmental 
impact statements.\"  What Vandal wants from the U.S. also 
touches on environmental issues:  He regretted that Renewable 
Portfolio Standards (RPS) applied in many U.S. states exclude 
large-scale hydroelectric plants. 
 
10. (C) Following the trip to James Bay, CG met separately with 
Assistant Deputy Minister for Energy Mario Bouchard.  Bouchard 
provided CG with an additional perspective on how the GOQ hopes 
to get the Quebec public on board the myriad decisions that will 
have to be made regarding Quebec\'s future energy direction.  The 
first step will be month-long parliamentary hearings on charting 
an energy course for Quebec for the next ten years.  The 
hearings begin January 28 and will involve interventions from 
over 300 interested parties.  After this, the GoQ will draft and 
submit for public comment a document on Quebec\'s energy 
orientation.  Bouchard hopes the policy document will be 
released in final by June.  We believe that, for the public to 
buy on to HQ\'s ambitious program, the government will have to 
convince Quebecers that increased production and energy export 
will not come at too high an environmental and social cost to 
Quebec - a tall, but not impossible, order. 
 
 
 
FRIEDMAN 
"