
"4187","11/4/2002 14:46","02FRANKFURT10187","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02FRANKFURT3580|02FRANKFURT5829|02FRANKFURT6207","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 FRANKFURT 010187 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/TNC - MIKE STEINITZ 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/EU - BOWMAN MILLER AND HENRY RECTOR 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/CT - PAUL BOYD AND STEPHANIE MOLNAR 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/OP/EUR 
 
FBI FOR INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS UNIT - SUE CURTIS 
FBI FOR COUNTERTERRORISM DIVISION - KEVIN FOUST 
 
JUSTICE FOR CRIMINAL DIVISION, OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND 
VIOLENT CRIMES - TERESA WALLBAUM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PINR, PGOV, AG, GM 
SUBJECT: FOURTH REPORT ON ISLAMIC TERRORISM TRIAL IN 
FRANKFURT - THE DEFENDANTS GIVE CONTRADICTORY STATEMENTS 
 
REF: A. FRANKFURT 3580 (NOTAL); B. FRANKFURT 5829; C. 
FRANKFURT 6207 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: This report summarizes the events at the 
Frankfurt terrorism trial from July to September 2002.  Four 
Algerian and one Moroccan (listed below) are accused of 
planning an attack on the Strasbourg Christmas market in 
December 2000 and bomb building materials were found in 
their Frankfurt apartments.  They were arrested in December 
2000 and their trial began in Frankfurt, April 2002.  The 
defendants have claimed that their intention was to bomb an 
empty Jewish synagogue and not to kill anyone.  The court is 
trying to determine a) what the intended target actually 
was; b) if there was any connection to other terrorists or 
terrorist organizations.  Two London contacts, presumed to 
be Islamic extremists, have been mentioned: Abu Doha and 
Noureddine.  Thus far, no firm Al Qaeda link has been found, 
although a witness, Sadikki, mentioned that defendant 
Beandali had contact with Abdul Rachman, described as \"a 
representative of Usama Bin Laden in London.\"  This report 
will focus on the testimonies of the defendants, Beandali, 
Boukari, Karimou, Maroni and Sabour and that of a witness, 
Sadikki.  End summary. 
 
The Defendants and Witnesses 
---------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) We are repeating here the names, dates of birth and 
known aliases of the defendants.  (Some variances in 
spelling have been seen in different sources.) 
 
Defendants: 
-    Aeurobui Beandali (also Deandali) DOB 12/10/1975; aka 
  Ben Ali; aka Mustapha Mestpha Kelouili DOB 11/19/1978; aka 
  Djilali Benali Correia DOB 7/15/1975; aka Djilali Adadi DOB 
  6/5/1975.  (Presumed Algerian.) 
 
-    Samir Karimou (also Krimou) aka Ibrahim Ahmed, DOB 
  12/18/1968. (Released from prison August 30, 2002. 
  Continues to attend trial.) Moroccan. 
 
-    Lamine Moroni, DOB 1/10/1970; aka Benard Pascale, DOB 
  7/25/1970. (Presumed Algerian.) 
 
-    Fouhad Sabour, DOB 2/13/1965; aka Hassene Benaimine DOB 
  12/08/1967; aka Samir Bouinoual DOB 8/9/1978; aka Alain 
  Dubois. (Born in France.) 
 
-    Salim Boukhari (also Boukari), DOB 8/8/1971; aka Hicham 
  El-Haddad, DOB 4/30 1980; aka Claude Aman, DOB 8/8/1971; aka 
  Karim Muscat DOB 8/8/1971; aka Messaoud (also Mesud) Zamali 
  (also Zemani) DOB 8/4/1966.  (Presumed Algerian.) 
 
Witnesses: 
-    Aknoush, in detention in France.  Beandali\'s attorney, 
  Diebrucks and Aknoush\'s attorney have been in touch. 
  Aknoush\'s written statements have been considered by the 
  Frankfurt court although Aknoush has not yet appeared for 
  questioning.  He is expected to testify in Frankfurt in the 
  coming weeks. 
 
- Mohammed Sadikki, was in prison along with Marino and 
  Beandali in two German prisons.  Beandali asked Sadikki 
  to deliver messages to a mosque in Frankfurt. 
 
Aeurobui Beandali: The Bomb Builder 
----------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Aeurobui Beandali was the first of the defendants 
to testify before the court.  Beandali admitted he was an 
expert in explosives and said it was his job to buy the bomb- 
building materials.  He said he was specially trained in 
Afghanistan in religion, light weapons, heavy weapons and 
explosives (dates of his training are disputed but he 
claimed about November 1999 - August 2000).  He explained 
that the bomb was to be placed in a large Pakistan-made 
steam pot, which he ordered in London.  He also bought large 
amounts of potassium permanganate, which he said he 
originally wanted to use for an attack in Algeria.  Beandali 
claimed surprise that the target might be in France and said 
he did not want to kill Europeans. 
 
Target: Christmas Market or Synagogue? 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Beandali claimed that Salim Boukhari, another 
defendant and member of the group, was receiving orders from 
London to attack a target in France.  According to Beandali, 
Boukhari reassured Beandali that the target would be an 
empty synagogue in Strasbourg.  Beandali ordered Boukhari 
and Sabour to drive to Strasbourg and film the synagogue 
both inside and outside so he could build the right size 
bomb for the target.  When the completed videotape showed 
the Christmas Market area instead of the synagogue, Beandali 
said he became very angry and ordered Boukhari and Sabour to 
try again a second time in Strasbourg, this time with a city 
map.  They were arrested before they could make a second 
trip.  (Note: The videotape was shown in court on August 27, 
2002 and clearly showed the Strasbourg Christmas market and 
surrounding area, panning the market and stalls several 
times.  Audio comments were heard on the tape referring to 
\"the enemies of God.\" There was no synagogue on the 
videotape. End Note.) 
 
Who is Noureddine and What Was His Role? 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Beandali said he had started to wonder if 
Boukari\'s plan to attack an empty synagogue was actually 
true when the videotape showed the Christmas market area 
near the cathedral.  Beandali said that when he learned that 
a man named Noureddine in London was behind the plan, he 
found it even more unlikely that the target was only an 
empty building.  \"A guy like Noureddine certainly had 
something more spectacular in mind, something where people 
could be hurt.\"  Beandali said he met Noureddine in 
Afghanistan and noted he did not follow Islamic washing 
rites.  He described Noureddine as an Algerian with a French 
passport living in London.  He also claimed that Noureddine 
was an undercover agent of French intelligence and that 
Noureddine had told Beandali that the French secret service 
had offered him money to inform on Algerians living in 
London and Afghanistan.  Beandali also said that Noureddine 
was flown out of the Balkans by the French government. 
Noureddine was also interested in a man named Hischam, 
Beandali claimed was wanted by the FBI.  Beandali said he 
helped Hischam escape from Afghanistan to London, then to 
Germany and Spain.  Eventually, Hischam was arrested in 
Algeria and Beandali believes Noureddine turned Hischam into 
authorities. 
 
Comment on Beandali\'s Statements 
-------------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Comment:  Beandali and Boukhari are in a mutual 
blame game to show that the other is a) the leader of the 
group; or b) in touch with a London contact giving the 
orders for the group.  Beandali accuses Boukhari of being 
the leader and knowing the \"real\" plan (i.e. to bomb the 
Christmas market and kill people).  Beandali claims that 
Boukhari hid this plan from Beandali.  So who is the leader, 
Beandali, Boukhari, or someone in London?  Maroni, in one of 
his rare statements, describes Beandali as the one giving 
the orders for the group.  Regarding the target, Beandali is 
the only one of the five defendants who openly questioned 
the claim of the others that the plan was to attack an empty 
synagogue.  The videotape showing only the Christmas market 
in Strasbourg is compelling evidence.  By claiming he played 
no part in selecting the \"real target,\" Beandali seeks to 
protect himself against charges of attempted murder. 
 
 
Salim Boukhari 
-------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The defendant Salim Boukhari appears to have been 
somewhat of a geographic outsider to the Frankfurt cell, 
with stronger connections to London.  He lived in London 
starting about 1995 and married there twice.  After his 
divorce in 1998, he stayed one or two months with Noureddine 
in London.  Boukhari said he originally wanted to donate 
money to the Algerian freedom struggle but instead used it 
to go to Afghanistan (September 1999 - early 2000, but dates 
unclear) where he trained in light and heavy weapons, 
electronics and religion.  He moved to Germany in mid- 
November 2000. 
 
Boukhari Tries to Implicate Beandali in Knowledge of Target 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Boukhari refused to answer questions from the 
prosecution and only responded to those from the judges. 
Boukhari\'s statements were often confusing and inconsistent. 
Boukhari said that he intended to return to London in 
December 2000 and it was uncertain whether he would be 
present at the time of the attack.  Boukhari admits he was 
the point of contact for Nourredine in London.  Boukhari 
claims, however, that Nourreddine did not give orders or 
designate a target but gave \"only ideas.\"  Boukhari\'s 
statements showed frequent inconsistencies in describing 
Beandali\'s role and advance knowledge of the target.  First 
Boukhari insisted Beandali knew about the bombing plans as 
early as November, 2000.  Beandali vigorously denied this. 
Then Boukhari changed this to say, \"Beandali knew about a 
phone call with Nourredine (in November).\"  Again, Beandali 
denied it, and seemed to want to distance himself from 
Noureddine, whom he apparently distrusted as an informant 
(see para 5). 
 
Was Boukhari the Leader?  He Admits Contact with London 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
9.  (SBU)  Boukhari contradicted Beandali on a question 
about the use of the Baden Baden apartment.  Beandali said 
the apartment was intended as a kind of \"storage place\" for 
the materials for the bomb that was to be built in 
Frankfurt.  Boukhari said he had intented actually to build 
the bomb in Baden Baden.  Aknoush, a witness in detention in 
Paris, stated that Boukhari was in contact with Abu Doha in 
London.  Boukhari said he had spoken with Abu Doha but only 
on the subject of renting rooms in Baden Baden.  Aknoush 
also said that Boukhari was the assigned leader of the 
Frankfurt cell. 
 
Sabour and Maroni: Maroni says Beandali was the Leader, 
Sabour says Beandali was in Touch with London 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
10.  (SBU)  Fouhad Sabour\'s statement came haltingly and was 
sometimes inconsistent with previous statements by the other 
defendants.  Sabour\'s role in the plot is unclear. 
Boukhari, in his statements, denied that Sabour had any 
detailed knowledge of the advance planning of the bombing. 
It seems Sabour was assigned some duties to help in carrying 
out the attack together with Boukhari or Beandali.  Sabour 
admitted having accompanied Boukhari on their trip to 
Strasbourg to videotape the target.  Sabour also stated that 
Beandali was assigned to participate in the attack together 
with him.  In response to the question of who planned the 
attack, Sabour delivered yet another version: the plan to 
attack the synagogue in Strasbourg was entirely the decision 
of the Frankfurt group.  But Sabour also mentioned that 
Beandali was in frequent phone contact with London. 
\"Beandali phoned London,\" was among Sabour\'s favorite 
phrases.  (Comment: Sabour seemed to regard Beandali as head 
of the cell, though he did not specifically say so.  End 
Comment.)  Maroni confirmed Sabour\'s statements and also 
indicated he viewed Beandali as the group\'s leader.  Lamine 
Maroni has not yet formally testified, though he announced 
he would do so in the near future. 
 
Busid Karimou Released, Continues to Attend Trial 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
11.  (SBU) Busid Karimou was released from detention on 
August 30, 2002.  The court could not find any evidence he 
was involved in the preparations for the bomb attack, thus 
he was only charged with membership in a terrorist 
organization.  This carries a one-to-ten year sentence. 
Since Karimou has already served 17 months in detention and 
the court apparently felt he would not get more than a two- 
year sentence, he was released.  (Note: It is common 
practice in the German legal system to release a well- 
behaved prisoner after two-thirds of his sentence is over. 
Further justification is required to keep Karimou for his 
full length of sentence.  End Note.)  Born in Morocco, 
Karimou went to Germany in February 1999, but later moved to 
London.  From there he went to Afghanistan for training, a 
fact that he denied in his previous statements.  He returned 
to London after only three months of training and from there 
moved to Frankfurt in July 2000.  Apparently his apartment 
there was used as a meeting point for the group.  Karimou 
refused to acknowledge any prior knowledge of the attack. 
 
Witness Mohammed Sadikki Claims Beandali had Al Qaeda 
Contact in London: Abdul Rachman 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Mohammed Sadikki, who was not very impressive in 
recalling details, was an inmate along with Maroni and 
Beandali in two German prisons.  His statement revealed  the 
rather lax conditions regarding contact between prisoners. 
In both Kassel and Weiterstadt prison he easily established 
contact with Maroni and Beandali, who both tried to win him 
over for their group.  They also asked Sadikki to deliver 
messages to contacts after his release.  Maroni told Sadikki 
that Maroni knew secrets he had not told police.  Maroni 
also admitted having participated in a number of terrorist 
operations in the U.K.  According to Sadikki, Beandali asked 
Sadikki to deliver a message to a mosque in Frankfurt and 
talked of the need to fight Christians and Jews.  Beandali 
mentioned a synagogue in Lille, France as a potential 
target.  Beandali also said that his group planned further 
attacks in Germany, France and Spain.  Beandali never 
mentioned the Strasbourg Christmas market to Sadikki, but 
Beandali said he would like to turn Rome, the cradle of 
Christianity, into ashes. 
 
13.  (SBU) Sadikki verified Beandali\'s role as bomb expert 
and indicated that Beandali and other members of the group 
coordinated their testimonies in prison before the trial 
started.  Sadikki mentioned Usama Bin Laden twice.  Beandali 
asked Sadikki to contact a man named Abdul Rachman in London 
after his release.  Beandali described Rachman as \"Usama bin 
Laden\'s representative\" in London, who had also promised to 
take hostages to force the release of the members of the 
Frankfurt cell from prison.  Beandali told Sadikki that the 
camp in Afghanistan at which he was trained was run by Usama 
bin Laden.  Sadikki said the Frankfurt group had 38 million 
Deutsche marks at their disposal (which caused the other 
defendants to laugh).  Sadikki also said that the group used 
forged and stolen credit cards. 
 
Comment: Beandali Against the Rest 
---------------------------------- 
 
14.  (SBU)  Several rounds of testimony have not resolved 
key questions of the prosecution: What was the structure of 
the group?  Who was the leader?  Was there an external (i.e. 
London-based) leader, who gave instructions?  Whose idea was 
the bombing plan and what exactly was its goal?  Did the 
group intend to kill people at the Christmas market or did 
they \"only\" want to bomb an empty synagogue?  This question 
is crucial for deciding their sentence.  What has indeed 
changed over the previous weeks is the strategy of the 
defendants and the defense.  After first appearing to be a 
concerted effort by the defendants, the trial now looks more 
like a game of \"Beandali against the rest.\"  Boukari, Maroni 
and Sabour (who apparently dislikes Beandali) state that 
Beandali was the group\'s leader.  It is relatively clear 
that Beandali and Boukari are the key responsible figures, 
though their exact roles are still shadowy. 
 
15. (SBU) Comment Continued: Another trend we noted in 
recent trial sessions is that Beandali\'s lawyer, Diebrucks, 
has developed into a leading voice for the defense.  He has 
played a very proactive role.  This was shown, for instance 
in the meeting between Diebrucks and the lawyer for Aknoush, 
another key witness now in detention in France.  (Note:  To 
add to the confusion, some journalists observing the trial 
believe Aknoush may have been the leader of the Frankfurt 
group.  End Note.) 
 
Comment Cont: Beandali\'s Statements May Help Prosecution 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
16.  (SBU) Comment Continued: Despite the confusing 
allegations by others, Beandali\'s statements were the most 
consistent.  Beandali claimed that Boukari planned the 
attack and that he himself was \"just the bomb builder.\" 
Beandali\'s is the only one who, in his statements, has cast 
doubt on the synagogue as the actual target.  His strategy 
may be to save his skin by discrediting the other 
defendants, which would also explain the opposition he faces 
from the other accused.  Beandali\'s early cooperation with 
the court could also work to his advantage.  In addition to 
the strong evidence of the videotape, the prosecution has 
found in Beandali\'s statements support for their case that 
the target was the Christmas market -- and human victims. 
After a rough start, the prosecution seems to be gaining 
ground, though they still have a long way to go to make 
their case.  The story of an attack on a synagogue has been 
used consistently by all other defendants and witnesses 
testifying thus far.  Aknoush\'s future testimony, and 
eventually Maroni\'s, may result in better evidence for the 
prosecution.  End comment. 
 
16.  (U) This message has been coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"4188","11/4/2002 14:46","02FRANKFURT10188","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 010188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: HESSE SPD CHOOSES GERHARD BOEKEL TO CHALLENGE 
MINISTER-PRESIDENT KOCH FOR FEBRUARY 2003 STATE ELECTIONS 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  The Hesse SPD voted overwhelmingly on 
October 19 for Gerhard Boekel to challenge Minister- 
President Roland Koch (CDU) in the February 2003 state 
elections.  Boekel, a 56-year-old lawyer and former Hesse 
Interior Minister, is admired for his integrity and his good 
management and team-building abilities.  Hesse state 
elections are important in Germany next year and could be a 
barometer for the national CDU\'s future chances in 2006 
elections.  (Minister President Koch is widely discussed as 
a CDU chancellor candidate for 2006.)  While polls rate 
Boekel more trustworthy and likeable than Koch, they also 
show Boekel is still a relative unknown to over half the 
voters in the state.  Chancellor Schroeder\'s failure to 
appear at the Hesse state SPD convention to support Boekel 
was viewed by many as a snub.  End Summary. 
 
 
Overwhelming Delegate Support for Boekel 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) At its October 19 convention in Wiesbaden, the Hesse 
SPD voted overwhelmingly for Gerhard Boekel to challenge 
Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU) in the February 
2, 2003 state elections.  After his 90-minute speech, 99 
percent of the delegates supported Boekel, the best result 
ever for an SPD candidate.  In his speech, Boekel described 
improving education and reduction of youth unemployment as 
key issues for his administration.  He expressed clear 
preference for an SPD-Green Party coalition.  (Frankfurt 
airport expansion is the only major controversial issue 
between the two parties).  The Hesse SPD electoral list was 
accepted without major changes.  It had been vetted in 
advance to balance the northern and southern districts of 
the party. 
 
3.  (SBU) The 56-year-old Boekel was a controversial choice 
at first but has managed to unite the party behind him in 
recent months.  Hesse SPD delegates emphasized to us 
Boekel\'s integrity and team-building ability.  They believe 
these qualities will help him against the incumbent.  (NOTE: 
In polls, Hesse M-P Koch, CDU, ranks low among German 
politicians in the area of trustworthiness and credibility. 
Koch has had to shake off a campaign finance scandal in the 
past.  But he is admired by many for his energy and 
strategic thinking and is frequently discussed as a CDU 
chancellor candidate for national elections in 2006.  END 
NOTE.)  Hesse SPD delegates were optimistic after a major 
poll (Infratest Dimap) showed that Boekel is considered more 
likeable than Koch and that Koch rates lower then previously 
assumed in several areas of competence.  Boekel\'s biggest 
obstacle is that he is still a relative unknown among the 
general population in Hesse: only four out of ten people are 
familiar with the former Interior Minister. 
 
4.  (SBU) One sour note at the Hesse SPD event was the 
failure of Chancellor Schroeder to appear.  The Chancellor 
cancelled his appearance at the convention at the last 
minute with a not-very-convincing excuse, much to the dismay 
of Hesse party officials.  His absence was seen by some as 
displeasure with Boekel\'s candidacy.  Schroeder had 
reportedly favored Offenbach Lord Mayor (Oberbuergermeister) 
Grandke but was unable to push his candidate through. 
Schroeder\'s failure to appear generated a lot of talk on the 
margins and tension among the party delegates.  It was 
viewed by many as a deliberate snub. 
 
Biographic Information on Boekel 
-------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) B1oekel studied law at the University of Giessen. 
In 1978, he was elected into the Hesse Landtag (state 
parliament) and remained a member until his election in 1985 
as county executive advisor (Landrat) of Lahn-Dill county. 
Boekel served in that position until 1994.  Boekel was 
appointed Hesse\'s Interior Minister in July 1994 and served 
until 1999.  In 2001 Boekel was also appointed Hesse SPD 
party chairman succeeding Hans Eichel (former Hesse Minister- 
President, now federal Finance Minister).  The center-right 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper has described Boe2 
kel as \"an active administrator with managerial qualities.\" 
Boe3kel characterizes himself as a pragmatic politician of 
the center.  His sympathies are generally considered to lie 
with the right wing of the SPD.  As county executive, he 
refused to enter into an SPD-Green Party coalition, 
preferring more conservative and independent voter groups. 
 
6.  (U) As Hesse Interior Minister, Boe4kel stoutly defended 
Hesse SPD policies by temporarily halting deportations of 
Kurdish asylum seekers.  He was also cautious regarding the 
return of Bosnian refugees.  His performance as minister 
enjoyed support from all parties and his centrist approach 
comes across well with unaffiliated voters too.  Since 
assuming a dominating role in the Hesse SPD, Boekel has 
begun a number of initiatives to sharpen his party\'s 
profile.  One example is his outspoken and early support to 
create a network of \"all day\" schools.  He also decided to 
abandon the months-long battle over the CDU state party 
financing scandal.  Boekel felt that the SPD was not gaining 
ground with the issue, Hesse politics had been brought to a 
near standstill by it, and that the focus needed to shift 
back to more substantive matters. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Roland Koch was barely known in Hesse when he was 
nominated to run against Hans Eichel in 1999.  This has 
given hope to the SPD, which has still not recovered from 
its election defeat in the last state elections.  The Hesse 
state elections are the most important in Germany next year. 
Not only might the CDU lose its majority in the Bundesrat if 
Boekel wins, but Koch\'s career may suffer a serious setback. 
For this reason, one might have expected  Chancellor 
Schroeder to show interest in giving Boekel a good show of 
support.  The Hesse SPD was certainly disappointed with 
Schroeder\'s failure to appear.  In any case, Boekel has a 
lot of heavy campaigning to do to build his image and ensure 
an election victory.  The Hesse SPD is fully behind him now. 
End comment. 
 
8.  This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
_______________________________ 
1 
2 
3 
4 
"
"4519","11/26/2002 16:24","02FRANKFURT10952","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 010952 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT:  BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG GREEN PARTY EXPRESSES 
FRUSTRATION WITH NATIONAL GREEN PARTY LEADERS AND THE SPD 
 
 
1. (U) Summary:  On November 23, the Baden-Wuerttemberg (B- 
W) Greens held their first state convention since the 
September national elections to discuss policy.  Leading B-W 
party leaders such as caucus chief Winfried Kretschmann and 
Freiburg Lord Mayor Dieter Salomon are concerned about the 
viability of the national SPD-Green Party coalition.  They 
cautioned the national leadership not to allow the party to 
be dragged down by the Social Democratic Party (SPD), which 
has been heavily criticized in the weeks since September\'s 
national elections for breaking campaign promises.  Some 
even called for forming a coalition with the Christian 
Democratic Union (CDU), but were not supported by the 
majority of the assembled delegates.  The overall mood was 
anger at the SPD, general frustration with Berlin leadership 
and the direction of the Green Party.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Kuhn Speaks of Severe Crisis 
---------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) The Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) Green Party met in 
Esslingen on November 23 to discuss policy.  It was the 
party\'s first meeting since its strong showing in last 
September\'s national elections.  In his keynote address the 
delegates, national chairman Fritz Kuhn admitted that the 
national government and the Green Party is in severe crisis. 
The proposed increase in pension contributions and the 
extension for the Obrigheim nuclear reactor (contrary to 
nuclear phase-out plans) are big setbacks in terms of Green 
Party policy priorities.  Kuhn urged the Greens\' federal- 
level coalition partner, the SPD, to tell voters the truth 
about public budget issues.  Half of Germany\'s 16 states 
have budgets in violation of state constitutional 
guidelines.  Kuhn suggested that extensive structural 
reforms of the pension and health system were needed, along 
with consolidation of the budget, a new program to assist 
start-up companies, and a continuation of the eco-tax. 
According to Kuhn, a broadening of the basis for assessing 
social contributions is an absolute necessity.  This 
expanded basis may include earnings from rents and other 
private income such as from investments. 
 
3.  (U) Unlike the SPD, the Green draws most of its support 
from small and medium-sized businesses, Kuhn continued.  The 
SPD, with support from large corporations, does not 
understand that bigger companies are much more capable of 
dealing with non-wage labor cost increases than companies 
with only a handful of employees.  Kuhn also insisted that 
the Green Party would not tolerate an increase in the value- 
added tax since this would be an additional blow to 
stumbling economic growth.  Kuhn sharply attacked the 
Christian Democrats for lacking in constructive alternative 
suggestions for economic reform.  He dismissed the CDU 
investigative committee on alleged election fraud by SPD- 
Greens as a \"waste of time.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Salomon Expects SPD/Green Government Will Fail 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
4. (U) Kuhn\'s speech received only moderate applause.  In 
the two-hour discussion that followed, leading B-W Greens 
voiced their frustration, anger and disappointment at the 
performance of the governing Party coalition.  Freiburg 
Green Lord Mayor Dieter Salomon delivered a rousing speech, 
urging the Berlin leadership to reverse disastrous recent 
developments.  He received a standing ovation.  He warned 
the party that good poll results did not mean support for 
Green policies but a reaction to SPD failings: the FDP did 
similarly well during the CDU donation scandal.  The SPD, 
according to Salomon, does not understand that, \"This is its 
last chance to achieve important reforms.  Instead, 
Schroeder is allowing labor unions to lead him around by the 
nose while the economy runs aground.\"  Salomon criticized 
Kuhn for not saying anything new.  The Green Party has the 
right ideas, but Berlin leaders are not implementing them, 
Salomon said. 
 
5.  (U) Salomon told the delegates that public mood is so 
bad that the 11 percent the Greens won in recent polls would 
\"melt like snow in the sun.\"  Salomon criticized the tax 
reform for being well-intentioned but ill-conceived and 
undermining the financial basis of the communities.  Using 
his own city as an example, Freiburg\'s budget deficit will 
reach 80 million Euro in 2003, which will mean the loss of 
several hundred jobs in the city administration.  In that 
context, Salomon blasted the chief of Ver.di (the service 
workers union) Frank Bzirske for demanding a three percent 
plus increase in wages.  \"The Chancellor is in nirvana and 
the Greens stick blindly to the coalition agreement.  The 
federal government will fail with these irresponsible 
economic policies.  It is better the Green Party leave the 
coalition now, than be dragged under by Social Democratic 
chaos.\" 
 
6.  (U) Eugen Schlachter, a close friend of the former Green 
Party financial expert Oswald Metzger, also called on the 
Green leadership in Berlin to change coalition partners 
rather than continue with damaging compromises.  Otherwise, 
the Green Party may go under with the SPD.  In a sharp stab 
at SPD Secretary General Olaf Scholz\'s statement that the 
SPD should control the policy discussion on children\'s 
education and upbringing Schlachter stated \"whoever talks 
such nonsense is unsuitable for a governing coalition.\" 
 
-------------------------------- 
CDU Needs to Make the First Step 
-------------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) Green Bundestag members did not welcome the 
suggestions by some rank and file members that the Green 
Party should change coalition partners.  B-W Caucus Chief 
Winfried Kretschmann pointed out that Greens and CDU have 
many things in common but said, \"The CDU is still too weak 
on environmental issues.\"  It is up to the CDU to make the 
first move to show it is taking environmental issues 
seriously.  Kretschmann said the national Green leadership 
in Berlin needed to remember its roots in the state party 
and improve communication.  He also said that the extension 
of the Obrigheim nuclear reactor\'s operating license should 
have never happened. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Comment: The recent convention shows that the 
Green Party rank and file in the party\'s southwest heartland 
is no longer willing to keep quiet.  Fear, anger and 
frustration are growing among the Greens that the crisis in 
the national government, in their view the fault of the SPD, 
will drag them down.  Green Party leaders in Berlin are seen 
as too eager to please the SPD and too willing to compromise 
on key issues.  The Green Party convention in Esslingen made 
clear that some in the party believe a change of coalition 
partner is necessary.  Green Party members at the convention 
also told us that interpersonal relationships between SPD 
and Green partners have been severely damaged in the past 
several weeks, further eroding cooperation. 
 
BODDE 
"
"4663","12/10/2002 13:51","02FRANKFURT11411","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 011411 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS AND INR/B 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, ETRD, BEXP, GM 
SUBJECT: SAARLAND MINISTER PRESIDENT OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE 
FUTURE OF THE STATE 
 
1.  (U) Summary: On December 4, Consul General Peter Bodde 
met with Saarland Minister-President Peter Mueller (CDU) in 
Saarbruecken.  Mueller is a moderate, up-and-coming CDU 
leader, and ally of Angela Merkel.  Mueller said the auto 
industry has replaced coal and steel as the most important 
industry in the state.  He regretted strains in the U.S- 
German relationship caused by Chancellor Schroeder.  Mueller 
is convinced that Hesse Minister-President Koch will win 
state elections in February, and pursue a chancellor 
candidacy for 2006.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Saarland\'s Economy: Still Steaming Ahead 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) In his first meeting with the Consul General, 
Saarland Minister-President Peter Mueller (CDU) warned 
against an overly negative view of the German economy.  \"The 
German economy is still stronger than the French and Spanish 
combined.\"  Mueller cited Saarland\'s economic development. 
The state\'s nominal GDP grew 3 percent this year and 
unemployment was reduced from 52,800 in 1998 to 45,000 in 
2001.  The state has also diversified its industrial base, 
focusing more on the auto industry.  According to Mueller, 
the auto industry is now the most important in Saarland. 
Coal mining, long a major employer in the state, has no 
future.  The restructuring of the steel industry, which 
Mueller supported in proactive public statements, is a 
success story in Saarland.  One example is Saarstahl, 
Saarland\'s largest, which reduced its workforce from 60,000 
in the 1970s to 10,000 today and changed its focus to high- 
quality specialty steel.  As a result, the company is now 
showing a profit. 
 
3. (SBU) France is Saarland\'s dominant trading partner but 
Mueller emphasized the importance of American investment as 
well.  He mentioned the Ford assembly plant in Saarlouis as 
a good example.  It employs 6800 people and is Ford\'s most 
productive plant in the world.  However, Mueller confided in 
us that the CEO of Ford Germany told him thirty of Ford\'s 
suppliers are in serious trouble. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
German-American Relations, Sister-State with Utah? 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
4.  (SBU) Mueller emphasized at the beginning of the meeting 
\"that not all Germans think about the U.S. as Chancellor 
Schroeder does.\"  Mueller criticized the policies of the 
Schroeder government.  \"What I don\'t see is a general 
concept, a strategy behind what the Schroeder government 
does,\" Mueller said.  He regrets recent tensions in the 
German-American relationship and wants to expand Saarland\'s 
ties to the United States.  His Minister of Economics, 
Hanspeter Georgi, was in the U.S. the day after the German 
elections.  In Chicago and Salt Lake City, he reassured 
German and American business representatives of the strength 
of German-American friendship.  Georgi sees Utah as a 
possible sister state for Saarland.  A memorandum of 
understanding between Saarland and Utah has already been 
signed. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Mueller\'s Political Outlook and his Relationship with Koch 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Mueller plays a prominent role in the CDU as an up- 
and-coming leader.  He is seen as a moderate and a 
counterweight to the more conservative Hesse M-P Roland 
Koch.  A close ally of Angela Merkel, he did not support 
Edmund Stoiber\'s chancellor candidacy until very late in the 
campaign.  Mueller was also head of the CDU \"immigration 
commission\" which was convened to draft a new immigration 
law for Germany.  When queried about the proposed 
immigration bill now before the Constitutional Court, 
Mueller predicted the Schroeder government\'s draft bill will 
be declared unconstitutional.  In the end \"Schily will get 
what he originally wanted: the Mueller bill.\" 
 
6.  (SBU) Mueller\'s relationship with Koch was described to 
us in a later meeting with the President of the State 
Parliament, Hans Ley.  Ley described Mueller as a close 
friend of Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch.  The two do 
\"very well together.\"  The leader of the state\'s Junge Union 
(JU or CDU youth wing), Alexander Funk, agreed that while 
there was no personal animosity between Mueller and Koch, 
the two had vastly different styles. Funk described Koch as 
a \"polarizing\" figure and Mueller as a \"bridge builder.\" 
However, he also acknowledged that Mueller\'s politics were 
probably \"too liberal\" for the national party and that Koch 
would most likely be the party\'s standard bearer in the 2006 
national elections. 
 
7. (SBU) Comment: This \"new\" friendship between Koch and 
Mueller (which hasn\'t been mentioned by our contacts in 
Hesse) may indicate that Mueller is fully aware of the 
growing influence Koch has in the CDU and is aligning 
himself with the rising star.  Mueller himself left no doubt 
that after Koch is re-elected as Minister President of Hesse 
in February 2003, he will pursue a chancellor candidacy in 
2006.  However, Mueller left his own preferences for a 
chancellor candidate unstated.  End Comment. 
 
BODDE 
"
"4786","12/19/2002 13:10","02FRANKFURT11732","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02BERLIN1141","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 011732 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, GM 
SUBJECT:  FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONAL COURT DECLARES IMMIGRATION 
LAW UNCONSTITUTIONAL 
 
REF: BERLIN 1141 
 
1.  (U) Summary: On December 18, the Federal Constitutional 
Court in Karlsruhe declared unconstitutional the 
government\'s immigration law, which had been passed by the 
Bundesrat in March 2002 under controversial circumstances. 
With this decision, the Court accepted the challenge to the 
law by six opposition (CDU or CSU)-led states.  The 
Karlsruhe decision is seen by many contacts as yet another 
blow for the Schroeder Government and as welcome news for 
Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU) in the final 
weeks of the Hesse state election campaign.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On March 22, 2002 the Bundesrat passed the 
immigration law over the objections of the CDU/CSU 
opposition (Reftel).  Bundesrat President Klaus Wowereit 
(SPD) decided that the law had the required number of votes 
by counting the split vote of the state of Brandenburg as 
valid.  (Brandenburg is governed by a grand coalition of SPD 
and CDU.)  While Minister President Manfred (SPD) voted with 
yes, his coalition partner, Interior Minister Joerg 
Schoenbohm (CDU), voted against it.  The six CDU and CSU 
governed states of Bavaria, Baden-Wuerttemberg, Hesse, 
Thuringa, Saxony and Saarland filed a lawsuit with the 
Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe, arguing that the 
Bundesrat procedure violated the German Constitution. 
 
3. (U) The eight judges of the Second Senate on December 18 
confirmed that the immigration law cannot go into effect on 
January 1, 2003.  They held that, since the state of 
Brandenburg did not vote unanimously, the vote was invalid. 
The judges reconfirmed the constitutional requirement that a 
state has to give a unanimous vote in the Bundesrat.  They 
also stated that after the split vote had been given, 
Bundesrat President Wowereit did not follow correct 
procedures.  Vice President Winfried Hassemer, who announced 
the verdict, stated that the decision was reached with a six- 
to-two majority.  Judges Osterloh and Luebbe-Wolf (both SPD) 
gave dissenting opinions. 
 
4. (SBU) The B-W CDU expressed satisfaction with the 
Karlsruhe decision.  Christoph Dahl, spokesperson of CDU 
caucus at the Stuttgart State Parliament, told us that the 
immigration law verdict is a heavy blow for the national 
government in Berlin.  In the upcoming negotiations with SPD 
and Greens, the CDU will try to modify the new immigration 
law to better suit its political objectives.  Specifically, 
the CDU/CSU will seek to limit and regulate immigration into 
Germany to a greater extent and to focus more on the 
integration of foreigners already resident in Germany.  Dahl 
said he expects the SPD to accommodate the CDU, which in 
turn might lead to increased tension between SPD and Greens. 
Dahl also expects that Hesse M-P Roland Koch will exploit 
the immigration issue for the final phase of his election 
campaign. 
 
5. (SBU) B-W Economics Minister Walter Doering (FDP) called 
on all politicians to clarify the immigration issue as soon 
as possible.  Immigration, according to Doering, is a 
crucial issue for the future of the country and should not 
become the subject of a political game.  For the B-W SPD, 
the Karlsruhe decision was not unexpected.  Andreas Reissig, 
press spokesman for the B-W SPD, told us that the SPD will 
respect the Karlsruhe verdict.  The SPD still feels that 
Germany needs a modern immigration law and will now start to 
work constructively with all political parties to secure a 
majority in the Bundesrat. 
 
6.  (SBU) Comment: The decision of the Federal Court in 
Karlsruhe did not come as a surprise.  For several weeks, 
all major media sources have reported rumors that Karlsruhe 
would declare the immigration law unconstitutional.  For the 
SPD-Greens coalition in Berlin the decision is not 
unexpected, but is nevertheless a heavy blow, particularly 
since the immigration law was considered a crowning SPD- 
Greens achievement during the last legislative period.  The 
best chance to bring a new immigration law through the CDU- 
dominated Bundesrat is for the SPD and Greens to seek a 
compromise with the CDU/CSU.  The media has already 
reported, however, that Federal Interior Minister Schily 
intends to introduce the same law to the Bundestag/Bundesrat 
early next year.  The CDU/CSU will not consider this a 
welcome move and could use the government\'s unwillingness to 
compromise as an additional issue in the upcoming February 
2, 2003 state elections in Hesse and Lower Saxony, something 
the government would like to avoid. 
 
7. (SBU) Comment Cont.: The SPD may prove to be more 
cooperative than its Greens coalition partners as the party 
would like to see immigration taken out of the state 
election campaigns.  Already facing growing voter discontent 
and poor poll numbers in Hesse and Lower Saxony, the SPD 
would not want to see an emotionally charged issue like 
immigration play a role in the elections.  A compromise with 
the CDU/CSU could do this.  What is uncertain is how much 
the Greens will be willing to compromise.  The CDU/CSU will 
push for limits on immigration - something the Greens would 
have problems with as this increases the chances, in their 
minds, that politically or religiously persecuted people 
could be denied entry to Germany.  If the SPD agrees to 
limits on immigration, there could be trouble in the 
coalition.  One thing is certain, Koch will use the court\'s 
decision to maximize his chances for reelection in Hesse. 
He did, after all, win the 1998 state elections on a 
campaign platform that called for limiting immigration.  End 
Comment. 
 
BODDE 
"
"4821","12/20/2002 15:23","02FRANKFURT11824","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 011824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS, EUR/ERA, AND EB 
USDOC FOR 4212/ITA/MAC/EUR/AGS 
DOE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 
DOE/NN30 MARK ROTH 
TREAS FOR OASIA: ROBERT HARLOW, CAROL CARNES 
DEPT FOR NP/SC WARREN STERN 
NRC FOR BETTY WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, ECON, SENV, PGOV, GM, EUN 
SUBJECT:  GERMANY\'S OLDEST POWER PLANT, OBRIGHEIM TO SHUT 
DOWN IN 2005: EXTENSION HARMED GREEN PARTY CREDIBILITY AND 
NUCLEAR PHASEOUT PLANS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
REF:  FRANKFURT 09759 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:   Federal Environment Minister Juergen 
Trittin and Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg (ENBW, Germany\'s 
third largest energy supplier), have come to an agreement 
for the shutdown of Germany\'s oldest nuclear reactor 
Obrigheim on November 15, 2005.  The 2003 shutdown of 
Obrigheim was part of the Green Party \"nuclear phaseout\" 
plan.  But in late September, the Greens were forced by 
Chancellor Schroeder (SPD) to accept a two-year, rather open- 
ended operating extension for Obrigheim, which harmed their 
credibility and cost them local political support in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg.  The B-W Greens are relieved at the new 
development and a firm date for final shutdown.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Originally, Obrigheim nuclear power plant, 
Germany\'s oldest, was scheduled for shutdown in early 2003 
as part of the SPD-Green coalitions \"nuclear phaseout\" plan. 
(The plant is located near Heidelberg.)  However, Chancellor 
Schroeder\'s promised Gerhard Goll, CEO of ENBW, a two-year, 
rather open-ended extension in late September, just a few 
days after winning national elections.  (Energy Baden- 
Wuerttemberg, ENBW, is Germany\'s third largest energy 
supplier.)  The operating extension for Obrigheim led to 
considerable strain in the SPD-Green Party national 
coalition in Berlin and created turmoil with the southwest 
Greens.  The B-W Greens had been fighting to shut down 
Obrigheim since the early 1980s.  ENBW had originally asked 
for a five-year extension until 2008.  The two-year 
compromise that was finally reached involved transferring 
5.5 terawatt hours from the Philippsburg I plant (near 
Karlsruhe) to Obrigheim.  The B-W Greens, however, never 
really accepted this compromise made at the national level. 
In several conversations with B-W Greens, we were told that 
there is considerable concern within the party that ENBW 
would try to push the extension, via various loopholes, 
beyond 2005.  (Note: At the latest B-W Greens convention in 
Esslingen, Greens caucus chief Winfried Kretschmann attacked 
former national party chief Fritz Kuhn for accepting the 
compromise.  \"You should have never agreed to the 
extension,\" Kretschmann said. End Note.) 
 
3.  (SBU) The B-W Greens are relieved, now that ENBW is 
accepting an official contract that determines November 15, 
2005 as the final shutdown date.  They feel now that a 
contract is signed, ENBW cannot exploit tricks and loopholes 
to push the extension beyond 2005.  Individual party members 
still criticized National Environment Minister Trittin for 
not pushing Goll for an earlier date.  Nevertheless, 
Obrigheim will be shutdown well before the next B-W state 
elections, in the spring of 2006.  B-W Minister of 
Economics, Walter Doering (FDP), criticized the planned 
shutdown of the reactor, stating that alternative employment 
opportunities will need to be found for the people affected. 
However, the news lifts a big burden from the B-W Greens. 
Already under attack for making too many compromises, the 
Green Party\'s chances in the 2006 B-W state elections could 
have been seriously harmed by Obrigheim\'s continued 
operation beyond 2005.  In addition, the Green rank and file 
remains angry with its national leadership for accepting the 
two-year extension in the first place.  Minister Trittin\'s 
surprise announcement will help to smooth ruffled feathers 
in the southwest. 
 
4. (U) This message has been coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"4834","12/23/2002 9:23","02FRANKFURT11843","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 011843 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: HESSE ELECTIONS COUNTDOWN: CDU CONFIDENT, BUT WILL 
FDP MAKE 5 PERCENT THRESHOLD? 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  Hesse state elections will take place 
February 2, 2003.  The current Christian Democratic Union 
(CDU)-Free Democratic Party (FDP) state coalition government 
is hoping the current voter mood against the national SPD- 
Green government will help it win votes.  The CDU is 
optimistic about its chances for victory and the dynamic 
Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch has been campaigning 
vigorously.  It is unlikely the CDU can win an absolute 
majority, however, so would still need the FDP to govern. 
The state FDP, like the national one, is somewhat weak and 
in disarray.  It just squeaked over the 5 percent threshold 
in 1999 with 5.1 percent, but is hoping that a protest vote 
against SPD-Green will help carry it this time.  The state 
Social Democratic Party (SPD) is counting on candidate 
Boekel\'s strong team and his image as a man of integrity who 
is \"close to the people.\"  Boekel has also been campaigning 
hard but the CDU-FDP still have a 9.4 percent lead over SPD- 
Green.  The Greens are campaigning on core party issues and 
opposition to Frankfurt airport expansion.  The election 
outcome is still too close to call.  Hesse is still a \"swing 
state.\"  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Hesse state elections will take place February 2, 
2003 and several conventions and strategy meetings have been 
held by the four state parties represented in parliament 
(CDU, SPD, FDP, Green Party).  The Hesse state parliament is 
elected for five years.  Currently, the CDU and FDP have a 
one-seat majority in the 110-member legislature (56:54). 
 
The Hesse CDU: Optimistic 
------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) The CDU, as demonstrated during its November 
convention in Fulda, is optimistic it will be the strongest 
party in the next state assembly.  Our CDU contacts across 
the board give us the same view, particularly in light of 
voter unhappiness with the SPD-Green government nationally. 
The Hesse CDU may, in fact, be overly confident that \"the 
election is already won.\"  Some of our CDU contacts do worry 
that the party\'s coalition partner, the FDP, may fail to 
make the 5 percent threshold to get into the state 
parliament -- the FDP only achieved 5.1 percent in 1999 - 
but do not see it as a serious danger.  Within the Hesse 
CDU, two campaign strategies are being debated.  One group 
prefers a campaign that is inclusive of the FDP and \"pulls 
it along\" in a battle for the second vote 
(\"Zweitstimmenkampagne\").  Another group, apparently gaining 
momentum, seeks to win an absolute CDU majority without 
carrying the FDP.  As insider from Koch\'s State Chancellery 
tell us this latter strategy may be implemented on short 
notice in January, if the polls show it could succeed.  A 
recent poll shows the CDU could win about 46 percent in 
Hesse. 
 
4. (SBU) We heard from CDU\'s Parliamentary Manager Stefan 
Gruettner and members of the caucus that the CDU expects its 
lead in the opinion polls created by \"the Berlin effect\" 
(i.e. dissatisfaction with Chancellor Schroeder) to continue 
at least until Christmas.  The biggest danger he sees to a 
CDU election victory in Hesse is U.S. action in Iraq before 
the February 2 elections.  In an effort to forestall 
possible voter backlash against the CDU for being too pro- 
U.S. and pro-war, Koch is heating up the rhetoric on the 
dangers of terrorism.  He and his Social Minister Silke 
Lautenschlaeger have been outspoken on the need to have 
vaccines prepared against potential biological weapons. 
\"Other nations are preparing smallpox vaccine.  Germany is 
doing nothing,\" Koch said.  Koch\'s Interior Ministry is 
repeating terrorism warnings, despite opposition from some 
party colleagues such as Frankfurt Lord Mayor Petra Roth. 
(Comment: As Koch and other CDU officials have told us, the 
CDU plans to push back against SPD-fostered pacifism, unlike 
during last September\'s national campaign, when Stoiber\'s 
cautious - indeed timid - response backfired. End Comment.) 
 
5. (SBU) In response to an FDP complaint that the CDU has 
given it too little room to maneuver, Gruettner said that 
the FDP misses opportunities.  The Hesse FDP Economics 
Minister Dieter Posch, for example, has said little, while M- 
P Koch has done most of the heavy lifting on economic 
issues. (Note: The FDP has two ministers in Hesse, Economics 
Minister Posch and Minister for Science and Arts Ruth 
Wagner, who is also Deputy Minister President.) 
Gruettner also strongly rejected media speculation that Koch 
would leave politics if he is defeated in February.  \"Anyone 
who knows the Minister-President knows this is nonsense,\" 
Gruettner said.  (Comment:  We agree.  Koch is only in his 
mid-40s, is energetic and ambitious, and has been involved 
in politics since he was 14 years old.  End Comment.) 
 
The SPD: Focus on the Team 
------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) The Hesse SPD\'s strategy is to highlight Boekel as 
a competent leader with a good shadow cabinet, rather than 
\"Koch bashing\" about the Hesse CDU\'s party financing 
scandal.  \"Our big advantage,\" says SPD Parliamentary 
Manager and shadow Interior Minister Manfred Schaub, \"is 
Koch\'s lack of popularity and the high marks Boekel gets for 
credibility.\"  The campaign will focus less directly on 
challenging the CDU slogan \"SPD-Green Needs Supervision\" 
than previously planned.  Instead it will highlight Boekel 
as close to the people and show the SPD\'s team of experts 
balanced between men and women. 
 
7. (SBU) The Hesse SPD is painfully aware of the voter anger 
with the federal government in Berlin that will surely have 
an impact on state elections both in Hesse and Lower Saxony. 
To distinguish himself Chancellor Schroeder and Finance 
Minister Eichel, Boekel has supported the re-introduction of 
a wealth tax that will have a greater impact on high-income 
households and be more socially equitable.  The Hesse SPD 
believes hopes that in the coming weeks, voter distress with 
Berlin will calm down and the FDP will fail to gain the 5 
percent necessary to enter parliament, making an SPD 
election victory in February  possible.  Privately, however, 
party members admit that they need the Green Party to win. 
They hope both the SPD and Green Party will improve on their 
1999 election results.  (Comment: The SPD\'s Boekel is still 
seen as a bit of a \"pale\" candidate in comparison with the 
dynamic Koch, although Boekel has appeared more frequently 
in recent weeks on talks shows and in the media to raise his 
profile.  Recent polls show the number of voters who 
recognize Boekel has risen from 27 percent in August to 51 
percent in November.  End Comment.) 
 
The Greens: Will Gain Votes, Oppose Frankfurt Airport 
Expansion 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
8. (SBU) Most observers across the political spectrum in 
Hesse believe the Greens will gain more votes than the 7.2 
percent they had in 1999.  A recent poll shows they could 
win as much as 10-11 percent in the state.  Under the 
leadership of its young and energetic Caucus Chairman Tarek 
Al Wazir, the party has kept up a relatively high profile. 
The Hesse Greens are expected to pick up votes in south 
Hesse protesting Frankfurt airport expansion, particularly 
in the absence of any other protest party running.  (The 
Hesse Green Party has been very outspoken against Frankfurt 
airport expansion.  Several communities around the airport 
along with environmental groups have filed complaints and 
lawsuits by the hundreds against the potential noise 
increase.  U.S. carriers are in favor of Frankfurt airport 
expansion.)  The Hesse Green party seems to be largely 
unaffected by the present problems of the Schroeder 
government. 
 
9. (SBU)  The Hesse Greens have emphasized core issues in 
the campaign: environmental and consumer health issues, 
civil rights and education.  The party is clearly committed 
to a coalition with the SPD.  With the exception of 
Frankfurt airport expansion, which parts of the SPD somewhat 
reluctantly support, the Greens have no major differences 
with the SPD.  The Hesse Greens feel they can turn the SPD 
around to oppose Frankfurt airport expansion.  As the 
party\'s manager, Dirk Langolf tells us, he is certain the 
SPD-Green coalition will find a way to \"smoothly phase out 
airport expansion plans, should we win a victory in 
February.\" 
 
FDP: In Trouble 
--------------- 
 
10. (SBU) The mood in the Hesse FDP is worse than it 
appears.  Though the Hesse FDP is not directly affected by 
the \"Moellemann factor\" it is clearly suffering.  The Hesse 
FDP tends to be right of center and has a strong pro-Jewish 
spin in Hesse.  The legacy of the late Chairman of the 
Jewish Council and FDP member Ignatz Bubis still carries a 
lot of weight.  The Hesse FDP just squeaked over the 
threshold with 5.1 percent in the 1999 state.  The FDP hopes 
that the current public mood against the national SPD-Green 
government will win it some protest votes in February.  A 
recent poll shows they could get 6 percent in the state. 
 
11. (SBU) The Hesse FDP is clearly disappointed with its CDU 
coalition partner.  It feels it never received credit for 
reviving Koch\'s political career in the wake of the Hesse 
CDU financing scandal.  (Koch nearly resigned in 2000 when 
the scandal was at its peak.)  The Hesse FDP tends not to 
recognize its own weaknesses.  Only the rebellious youth 
wing of the party has the courage to criticize Hesse 
Economics Minister Posch and Minister for Science and Arts 
Ruth Wagner for a poor public profile. 
 
Prediction: CDU and Greens Will Gain Votes in February, but 
Future Coalition Still Open 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
12. (SBU) At this time we predict there will be two parties 
gaining votes in Hesse on election day February 2: the CDU 
and the Greens.  Whether the Hesse government will be CDU- 
FDP or SPD-Green is still open.  We believe, however, than 
an absolute majority for the CDU is unlikely so the CDU 
still needs the FDP.  The FDP needs to get over the 5 
percent threshold for the coalition to succeed.  Hesse can 
still be considered a classic swing state.  We believe the 
current CDU-FDP coalition has a slight edge, especially if 
the prevailing mood of dissatisfaction with the Schroeder 
government continues.  A recent poll shows CDU-FDP has a 9.4 
percent lead over SPD-Green. 
 
13.  This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"5122","1/15/2003 9:14","03FRANKFURT392","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 000392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: CAN THE CDU WIN AN ABSOLUTE MAJORITY IN THE HESSE 
ELECTIONS? 
 
1.  The latest polls in Hesse, released January 8 and 9, put 
CDU Minister-President Koch ahead of his SPD challenger 
Gerhard Boekel by near 15 percentage points.  There is an 
increasing possibility that the CDU could win an absolute 
majority and not require any assistance from the FDP, who 
may have a hard time reaching the five percent threshold in 
its bid to return to parliament.  Berlin-based polling 
institutes FORSA and Infratest dimap (in brackets) give the 
following projections: 
 
CDU       47 (47) 
SPD       32 (33) 
Greens    12 (10) 
FDP        5 ( 5) 
 
2.  The parties are reacting cautiously to the latest polls. 
On January 9, Interior Minister Volker Bouffier (CDU) warned 
that despite the CDU\'s excellent chances of winning, it 
would be risky to bet on a CDU absolute majority.  \"But 
every voter should make the CDU as strong as possible,\" 
Bouffier said, and \"A vote for the FDP doesn\'t help us reach 
our goal.\"  SPD Shadow Interior Minister Manfred Schaub told 
us that last year\'s national elections proved that voter 
sentiment could change at the last minute.  He also said: 
\"Elections in Hesse have always been close.  One possible 
outcome is that so many CDU voters want an absolute majority 
that the FDP could fail to make the 5 percent threshold, 
thus giving the SPD-Greens a slight majority.\"  (Comment: 
This is certainly possible.  If the FDP lost enough votes to 
the CDU that the FDP did not reach the five percent mark, 
then the CDU could win a plurality, while still losing to 
the combined strength of the SPD and Greens. 
 
3.  Green Party caucus chief Tarek Al Wazir sees the 
weakness of the Hesse SPD as quite serious.  In addition, 
the Green Party\'s own polling data indicates the FDP\'s 
return to state parliament is still uncertain.  \"I consider 
the probability of the FDP\'s making the 5 percent threshold 
as less than 50 percent right now.  What is certain is that 
the number three position is ours.\"  In contrast, FDP caucus 
chairman Joerg-Uwe Hahn says that the FDP has no fear of 
getting less than 5 percent.  \"People will be surprised at 
our strong showing.  We saw strong gains in the national 
elections and we will see them in Hesse as well.\" 
 
4. This message has been coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"5128","1/15/2003 11:44","03FRANKFURT401","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 000401 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT:  FDP CHIEF WESTERWELLE FAILS TO LEAD PARTY OUT OF 
CRISIS AT NATIONAL MEETING IN STUTTGART 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: The Free Democratic Party\'s (FDP) 
traditional Three Kings gathering in Stuttgart (January 5-6) 
is one of the first major national political conventions in 
the new year and generates a lot of media interest. 
National Party Chief Guido Westerwelle was under pressure to 
deliver a speech guiding his party out of its current 
crisis.  Although he satisfied many delegates by presenting 
a clear list of policy themes, including a return to free 
market economic ideas, social welfare reform, and better 
education, Westerwelle disappointed many with an overly- 
idealistic view that the FDP should try to be a large \"party 
of the people\" like the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) or 
the Social Democratic Party (SPD).  FDP floor leader 
Wolfgang Gerhardt, generally thought of as a foreign policy 
expert, actually received the strongest response, 
occasioning speculation that he could potentially replace 
Westerwelle (though Gerhardt has repeatedly stated that he 
is not interested in being party chief).  Gerhardt blasted 
the SPD-Green government\'s incompetence in economic and 
foreign affairs, and stressed the relevance of FDP expertise 
in these areas.  Gerhardt also made several pro-U.S. 
statements.  End Summary 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Westerwelle Outlines Five Themes, But Disappoints 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. (SBU) Expectations were high on January 6 in Stuttgart. 
Over a thousand guests and party members at the Stuttgart 
opera house wanted to hear FDP National Party Chief Guido 
Westerwelle provide policy direction to lead the party out 
of its current doldrums.  The FDP party\'s traditional Three 
Kings gathering in Stuttgart (January 5-6) is one of the 
first major national political conventions in the new year 
and generates a lot of media interest.  The FDP has been 
hurt in recent months by a scandal related to North Rhine 
Wesphalia (NRW) party leader Juergen Moellemann\'s anti- 
Semitic flyer shortly before the September 2002 national 
elections.  A controversy over the brochure\'s financing, and 
Moellemann\'s quarrels with the Central Council of German 
Jews damaged the FDP\'s reputation.  A campaign initiated by 
Westerwelle and Moellemann, seen by many as based more on 
public relations antics than substance, irritated the 
party\'s traditional supporters particularly in the business 
sector. \"Project 18,\" the failed campaign to get 18 percent 
of the national vote in September 2002 elections also cost 
the party credibility.  The FDP managed a mere 1.4 percent 
gain in the 2002 national elections over its dismal 1998 
results. 
 
3. (SBU) In his one-hour address, Westerwelle missed a 
chance to reinvigorate the party.  Without mentioning 
\"Project 18,\" he spent much time defending the FDP as an 
alternative to the SPD and CDU.  Westerwelle said the FDP 
needed to become a party for all people since liberal ideas 
are \"good for Germany.\"  The FDP should be more broadly 
based as a party of the people and be at \"eye-level\" with 
the CDU and SPD.  Other party leaders and supporters have 
told us that they view this as unrealistic, and that it was 
thus deeply disappointing for many. 
 
4.  (SBU) Westerwelle described five core FDP policy themes: 
a renewal of free market economics; a reform of Germany\'s 
social welfare system -- with the recognition that things 
could become uncomfortable for awhile; a strengthening of 
education, including research and development; continuity 
and dependability in foreign affairs; and a healthy debate 
on traditional values in Germany (i.e. that traditional 
values are not old-fashioned, but relevant and essential 
today).  Westerwelle\'s speech failed, however, to address 
the FDP\'s lack of clear policy goals, something that has 
upset the party\'s traditional support base.  He seemed to be 
focusing on the ideal, rather than managing the party\'s 
current difficulties. 
 
5. (U) On economic issues, Westerwelle called for tax 
reductions to stimulate growth and a withdrawal of state 
involvement in the private sector.  He criticized the 
national government\'s holding of shares in over 400 private 
enterprises.  Westerwelle also demanded more flexibility in 
the labor market, restructuring of the social welfare 
system, and a more flexible tariff system.  He also stated 
the party should point out the positive impacts of 
globalization.  On state support, Westerwelle emphasized 
that whoever receives financial or educational support from 
the state should have to make a contribution back to the 
state, but did not outline specifics.  Westerwelle also 
suggested the reintroduction of demographic factors in the 
pension and healthcare systems to more accurately assess the 
impact of an aging population with fewer younger workers to 
support it. 
 
6. (U) On foreign policy, Westerwelle stressed the need to 
act as a reliable alliance partner.  He chastised Schroeder 
for using the misleading phrase \"German way.\"  Germany\'s 
foreign policy must be compatible with European foreign 
policy.  He also stated that there is not \"too much America 
in international politics but rather not enough Europe.\" 
Westerwelle received polite applause for his one-hour 
address. 
 
------------------------------------- 
The Resurrection of Wolfgang Gerhardt 
------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The best speech of the day was delivered by FDP 
Bundestag floor leader Wolfgang Gerhardt, who received a 
standing ovation.  In a rousing address, Gerhardt asserted 
the liberal principles the FDP should stand for.  The over- 
burdened social welfare systems must be cut back: they are 
the biggest obstacles to creating new jobs.  He demanded 
more individual responsibility, a renewal of free market 
economics, improvements in education, a reshaping of 
Germany\'s social systems, fair competition and international 
cooperation in foreign policy matters.  He pointed out that 
he agrees with Westerwelle that the FDP has to increase its 
membership, but without compromising the party\'s character 
or traditional principles. 
 
8. (SBU) Gerhardt sharply attacked the SPD-Green national 
government for allegedly hiding the extent of the country\'s 
budget deficits before the election.  He predicted that the 
next national budget is already out of balance since it is 
based on faulty economic predictions.  In reference to the 
upcoming state elections in Hesse and Lower Saxony, Gerhardt 
called out to the audience \"Vote yourself free on February 
2!\"  He described Schroeder as the most unprincipled 
Chancellor since the beginning of the Federal Republic. 
 
9. (SBU) Gerhardt also delivered several strong pro-U.S. 
statements.  He reminded the audience of the \"Speech of 
Hope,\" delivered by U.S. State Secretary James F. Byrnes on 
September 6, 1946 at the Stuttgart opera house which 
encouraged German citizens after the devastation of war. 
Gerhardt said that gratitude has to remain an aspect of 
foreign policy.  He chastised Schroeder and Foreign Minister 
Fischer for using anti-American rhetoric in their election 
campaign and damaging Germany\'s reputation abroad. 
\"American soldiers died to save us from the Nazis, and we 
must never forget that,\" he said, \"A former U.S. President, 
the first President Bush, supported our reunification when 
we needed help.\"  Concerning Iraq, Gerhardt noted that his 
party would support an intervention without a UN mandate but 
that differences of opinion with the U.S. could be managed 
in a friendlier atmosphere. 
 
--------------------- 
A Bad Day for Doering 
--------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) Along with Westerwelle, another leading FDP 
politician had a bad day.  On January 5, at the traditional 
Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) state party convention preceding 
the annual Three Kings Gathering, B-W State Chair and 
Economic Minister Walter Doering got a black eye from his 
rank and file in his bid to remain State Chair, receiving 
nearly 20 percent less support than in 2001.  Although he 
was reelected for another two years to lead the B-W FDP, 
Doering received only 77 percent of the votes and was 
visibly disappointed.  Contacts told us that many delegates 
are still upset over the B-W government coalition agreement 
reached with the CDU in which FDP issues are almost non- 
existent. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
11. (SBU) Comment: The 2003 Three Kings Meeting in Stuttgart 
was not the much awaited turning point for the FDP. 
Westerwelle could not - or did not want - to deliver a 
speech that would carve out big themes for the future. 
Instead, he seemed determined to continue with the strategy 
of turning the FDP into a \"people\'s party\" with a larger 
base like the CDU or SPD.  \"It is not the objective of the 
FDP to support one of the other two big parties.\"  In the 
wake of the failed \"18 percent\" campaign, this seems to many 
supporters overly optimistic.  However, with two important 
state elections (Hesse and Lower Saxony) on February 2, the 
assembled leadership of the FDP could do little else than 
demonstrate solidarity with Westerwelle. 
 
12. (SBU) Comment - Continued:  How long this solidarity 
will last will depend on the outcome of the February 2 state 
elections.  With his fiery and well-received speech in 
Stuttgart, Gerhardt has revived speculation that he may be 
an alternative to Westerwelle.  It was also noteworthy that 
several of the speakers mentioned the importance of the 
German-U.S. relationship and the need to improve 
transatlantic relations in the wake of Schroeder\'s damaging 
comments during the campaign last year.  End Comment 
 
13. (U) This message has been coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"5253","1/22/2003 9:24","03FRANKFURT550","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03FRANKFURT392","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 000550 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: HESSE MINISTER-PRESIDENT ROLAND KOCH: POLARIZING, 
INFLUENTIAL, AMBITIOUS, CHANCELLOR CANDIDATE FOR 2006? 
 
REF: A) 2002 FRANKFURT 11843; B) FRANKFURT 392 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: Hesse\'s Minister President Roland Koch 
(Christian Democratic Union - CDU), is the most prominent 
state politician in the CDU and is a strong leader of his 
party\'s conservative wing.  He is a potential CDU chancellor 
candidate in 2006.  If the CDU-FDP coalition wins state 
elections on February 2, and especially if his party wins an 
absolute majority, his influence will expand even more. 
Koch is ambitious, controversial and polarizing.  After 
surviving a major party financing scandal in 2000, he is now 
stronger than ever.  Koch is pro-U.S. and has been bold in 
speaking out on international issues.  His four years as 
Minister-President have been successful: he has focused on 
economic growth, crime reduction and improving education. 
Koch is a strategic thinker who will certainly leave his 
mark on CDU policy in the future.  End summary. 
 
Roland Koch - Conservative, Influential, Polarizing 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
2.  (SBU) Roland Koch is aggressive, confident, energetic 
and ambitious.  He is a gifted public speaker, who works 
tirelessly to promote the interests of the CDU, speaking 
around the state and nationally and appearing frequently in 
the media.  Many voters and the media also find him 
controversial and polarizing.  Other CDU contacts have 
described him as \"not likeable,\" \"arrogant,\" and \"a tough 
power player to the core.\"  German newspapers have described 
him as: \"The Shadow Chairman\" (Spiegel, July 2002); 
\"Hardliner without Humor\" (Rheinpfalz, January 2002); and a 
\"politician of extremes\" (Badische Zeitung, November 2002). 
At a press conference in 2000, Koch used the vernacular 
Hessian expression \"brutalstmoeglich\" (literally \"as brutal 
as possible,\" but meaning \"straightforward\"), which critics 
use to label him as ruthless, and admirers to show he is 
tough and aggressive.  His surprise victory in the Hesse 
state elections in 1999 was largely attributed to his 
party\'s campaign against dual citizenship.  Though it 
worked, many perceived Koch\'s actions as a callous 
exploitation of visceral anti-immigrant sentiment. 
 
3. (SBU) Even Koch\'s admirers say his power politics are 
harsh.  His early backing of CDU Chancellor candidate Edmund 
Stoiber over Angela Merkel for the September 2002 national 
elections was heavy handed and said to have caused frosty 
relations with Merkel for months.  A fellow Minister- 
President, quoted anonymously in the Stuttgarter Zeitung, 
described Roland Koch\'s role in the CDU: \"Merkel has the 
official power, but Koch pulls the strings.\"  Koch survived 
a major party financing scandal in 2000, though it brought 
him close to resignation.  His survival skills have earned 
him respect from the conservative wing of the CDU but the 
moniker \"Teflon man\" from critics. 
 
Koch and Hesse: Goals and Achievements 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) As a conservative, Roland Koch is a bit of an 
anomaly for Hesse, a traditionally liberal state led by 
Social Democrats for decades.  Koch claims that his biggest 
achievement has been making the political climate in Hesse 
more conservative.  Koch\'s mentor in politics was Alfred 
Dregger, who dominated Hesse\'s CDU in the 1970s and 80s. 
Dregger is credited with increasing CDU voter support in 
Hesse from 30 percent in the 1970s to above 40 percent 
today.  Koch\'s major themes and achievements as Minister- 
President reflect this conservative tradition: 
 
-    \"Competition and Excellence.\" (Koch encouraged 
   university reform, added 2900 new teachers to Hesse schools, 
   changed the curriculum to make subjects such as mathematics 
   and German obligatory, and helped create a new school for 
   gifted students.) 
 
-    \"Safety and Control.\" (Koch hired more policemen; 
   created a volunteer police force, the \"Hilfspolizisten\" who 
   receive six weeks\' training; presided over a reduction in 
   the crime rate; and facilitated the purchase of new police 
   vehicles.) 
 
-    \"A pragmatic economic policy.\" (Koch has been very 
   outspoken on economic issues, vigorously supported Frankfurt 
   airport expansion, supported biotechnology and nuclear 
   energy, and expanded the state\'s road infrastructure.) 
 
5. (SBU) Koch has indeed pushed hard to improve economic 
growth in Hesse and has a \"natural talent for economic 
policy\" according to his Chief of Staff.  He has used his 
influence on the board of Fraport (Frankfurt\'s Airport 
Authority) to promote Frankfurt airport expansion, adding a 
fourth runway and a new terminal.  He also made national 
headlines in 2001-2002 with social and labor market issues. 
His welfare reform initiative, inspired by Wisconsin\'s, was 
held up by the Bundesrat, though some of the ideas are now 
incorporated in the labor reform bill known as the \"Hartz 
Paper.\"  Koch is an idea man, and his State Chancellery has 
been described as a \"huge think tank\" exploring social and 
labor market reform, internal security and Frankfurt\'s role 
in a globalized world. 
 
Koch\'s Style: Energetic, Impatient, Detail-Oriented 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
6. (SBU) Koch has a keen mind, is detail-oriented, absorbs 
information quickly, and is said to \"devour files\" often 
until late in the evening.  In general, he is a strategic 
thinker, looking to the future and seeing the larger context 
for issues.  His former Chief of Staff Helmut Mueller told 
us that Koch often thinks like a \"lawyer with economics 
training,\" rejecting concepts that are not legally or 
economically sound.  He has a well-deserved reputation for 
structuring his work to keep the goal in sight.  He keeps 
himself well informed on a variety of issues including 
military affairs, economics and foreign policy, through his 
staff, his personal reading, and enthusiastic use of the 
Internet.  Koch surrounds himself with dedicated, hard 
working people, who must keep up with his long hours and 
hectic pace.  He is sometimes very spontaneous, getting an 
idea from a phone call, for example, then tasking his staff 
-- even on weekends -- to implement it.  Koch\'s Chief of 
Staff Thomas Schaefer and others tell us Koch has \"endless 
meetings\" to discuss issues and air views, sometimes putting 
his team members on the spot, pointing at them and asking 
them for an honest opinion.  Koch likes to hear as many 
opinions as possible before making a decision.  He does not 
like \"yes men.\"  Koch enjoys having well-educated people 
around him -- both his present and former Chiefs of Staff 
have PhDs -- and routinely consults subject matter experts. 
 
7. (SBU) Once Koch has made up his mind, he can be impatient 
for results and determined to push forward, reacting harshly 
to criticism or dissent.  Hesse FDP General Secretary Heino 
Swyter said Koch\'s strong personality tends to dominate 
state politics because \"almost nobody in the cabinet dares 
to oppose his views.\"  Swyter decribes FDP Chair and Science 
Minister Ruth Wagner as the only one \"who dares to criticize 
Koch during cabinet sessions.\"  Contacts in the Social 
Ministry are still frosted by the fact that Koch 
circumvented them in late 2001, grabbing the issue of family 
policy and making bold public announcements while ignoring 
Social Ministry experts.  Koch was apparently frustrated 
when told of the difficulties of transferring a U.S.-style 
welfare reform program such as \"Wisconsin Works\" into 
Germany\'s vastly different labor and social welfare 
structure. (The resignation of his Social Minister Marlies 
Mosiek-Urban in 2001 was partly attributed to this 
disagreement.)  In another example, Koch had the State 
Chancellery hire well-known social policy expert Judge 
Borchert to chair a reform commission.  Borchert submitted a 
report with recommendations, but Koch and Judge Borchert did 
not see eye-to-eye.  When Koch cherry-picked only the ideas 
he liked, Borchert told us he \"was disappointed with Koch 
and happy to go back to his old job.\" 
 
8. (SBU) Koch is energetic and dynamic and has an abundance 
of ideas, though when he sees that momentum for a project is 
lost or the strategic moment for it has passed, he will move 
on.  Some observers have viewed this as \"dropping most of 
his great ideas halfway to realization.\"  Others see it as 
Koch prioritizing for maximum positive impact of his policy 
initiatives.  Koch\'s dynamism is also shown in his mastery 
of material and ability to speak substantively and at length 
without notes.  He is impressive rhetorically and appears 
frequently in the media.  He has a lot of charisma, knows 
how to get applause, and loves the spotlight. 
 
Koch\'s Foreign Policy: Pro-U.S. 
------------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Koch is very pro-U.S. and has loudly criticized the 
damage done to the bilateral relationship by Chancellor 
Schroeder.  Koch has an active interest in U.S. politics and 
policies.  He traveled to the U.S. in 1992 on an 
International Visitors Program and in 1996 to observe the 
presidential election campaign.  He has also visited the 
U.S. several times privately.  Koch has been supportive of 
the U.S. military in Hesse and has helped the Consulate with 
the purchase of a large piece of property in Frankfurt. 
Koch considers himself a friend of HHS Secretary and former 
Wisconsin Governor Tommy Thompson and gave him one of the 
highest awards from the state.  He even had his staff call 
the Consulate in a frenzy one day to get Thompson\'s phone 
number to wish him a happy birthday. 
 
10. (SBU) Koch is candid with U.S. officials.  For example, 
Koch told the Consul General that the CDU faced a strategic 
choice on Iraq.  If the CDU were to appeal to those who are 
anti-war, it could win a few votes, but would harm the party 
in the long run and solidify Chancellor Schroeder\'s 
position.  The CDU must firmly support the U.S. position, he 
concluded, and has gone forward in all his campaign speeches 
with that line.  Koch has also gone further on Iraq than 
most other German politicians, stating he would support 
military action in Iraq even without the backing of a UN 
Security Council resolution.  On terrorism, Koch has 
repeatedly emphasized the need to prepare for a terrorist 
attack, and has held well-attended seminars on internal 
security and public safety. 
 
11. (SBU) Koch had spoken out against Turkey\'s entry into 
the EU.  Again, he goes further than most CDU politicians by 
not only pointing out Turkey\'s economic and human rights 
problems, but stating that Europe\'s Christian traditions 
would make Turkey the odd man out.  Koch has suggested 
Turkey needs a kind of \"Marshall Plan\" to build up its 
economic strength.  Koch has traveled to Asia and, like many 
German leaders, sees China as a vital, growing market for 
German goods and investment.  Koch also has a strong 
interest in Tibet and frequently visits websites of Tibetan 
exile groups. 
 
Other Biographic Information 
---------------------------- 
 
12. (SBU) Koch was born on March 3, 1958.  He is the son of 
former Hesse Justice Minister Karl-Heinz Koch (CDU) and, 
like his father, started his career as a lawyer in private 
practice in Eschborn after studying law in Frankfurt.  At 
the age of 14, Koch established a CDU youth group in his 
hometown of Eschborn.  He was elected to Eschborn city 
parliament in 1977, and then to the Main-Taunus county 
parliament.  From 1979 - 1990 he was District Chairman of 
the Main-Taunus CDU.  From 1983-87 he was also Deputy Party 
Chairman of the national \"Junge Union,\" the youth wing of 
the CDU.  In 1987, he was elected to the Hesse state 
parliament and in 1990 became CDU caucus chairman.  In 1998, 
he took over the state party chairmanship from his mentor, 
Manfred Kanther and was elected to the 40-member national 
CDU Executive Committee.   Koch speaks excellent English. 
True to his name (Koch means cook), he is a talented cook 
and enjoys Cajun cuisine.  Koch is married and has two 
children. 
 
COMMENT: Koch\'s Star will Rise 
------------------------------ 
 
13.  (SBU) Roland Koch is one of the most prominent state 
politicians in the CDU and a strong leader of his party\'s 
conservative wing.  Koch\'s closest aides and staff are 
unanimous about Koch\'s national ambitions and the media have 
described him at recent conventions as \"already rehearsing 
for Chancellor in 2006.\"  Speculation that Koch would leave 
politics if he lost the Hesse state elections on February 2 
is \"absolute nonsense,\" according to Hesse CDU Parliamentary 
Manager Stefan Gruettner.  Koch, already a force to reckon 
with in the CDU, will gain even more influence nationally if 
he wins an absolute majority for the CDU, which opinion 
polls say is within reach.  Koch may want to put more of his 
ideas in the CDU\'s national platform, in order to give it a 
\"dynamic conservative\" spin, as he likes to say.  Should 
Koch lose the state elections (if the CDU\'s coalition 
partner, the FDP, fails to gain the 5 percent necessary to 
enter parliament), it may slow Koch down, but certainly not 
end the career of a man involved in politics since the age 
of fourteen.  End 
comment. 
 
14. (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"5299","1/24/2003 14:38","03FRANKFURT682","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 000682 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: CDU LIKELY TO WIN HESSE ELECTIONS, PERHAPS WITH 
ABSOLUTE MAJORITY 
 
 
1.   (SBU) Summary:  Hesse will see a clear victory for 
Minister-President Roland Koch and the governing CDU-FDP 
coalition in state elections February 2.  All major opinion 
polls put the CDU ahead of the SPD by up to 18 percentage 
points.  The dramatic erosion of support for the SPD is 
attributed to continuing voter disillusion with the 
Schroeder government.  On the state level, the SPD\'s 
candidate Gerhard Boekel is seen as too colorless a 
personality to beat Minister-President Koch.  The Hesse SPD 
has started a petition against war in Iraq, led more by 
campaign managers than Boekel.  The Green Party will be a 
secondary winner, gaining four percent.  The FDP will most 
likely make it over the 5 percent threshold to remain in the 
State Parliament.  End summary. 
 
Opinion Polls Put CDU Significantly Ahead 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2.   (U) Recent opinion polls predict that the CDU will win, 
possibly with an absolute majority.  The CDU has never 
before won two consecutive elections in Hesse.  Compared to 
its 1999 result (43.4 percent) the CDU may gain three to 
seven percent.  The latter would mean an absolute majority, 
even with four parties represented in the State Parliament 
(Landtag).  This would be almost unprecedented in postwar 
German history.  The CDU could lose is if the FDP does not 
make it over the 5 percent threshold and the CDU fails to 
get an absolute majority.  Major polls by Infratest dimap, 
Forsa and Forschungsgruppe Wahlen predict the possibility of 
this scenario is shrinking. 
 
3.   (SBU) The SPD, which received 39.3 percent of the vote 
in 1999, is on a downward trend.  It may lose seven to eight 
percent according to polls.  This would be an unprecedented 
loss.  The Hesse SPD is still in bad shape: it never really 
recovered from its 1999 defeat.  Though its lead candidate 
Gerhard Boekel has increased in popularity, he is often 
described by the media as \"colorless\" in comparison with 
Koch and not viewed as a strong enough personality to beat 
the Minister-President.  The Greens may win three to four 
percent above their 1999 election result of 7.2 percent, 
largely on the issue of opposition to Frankfurt airport 
expansion.  All polls predict the Green party may get its 
best result ever.  (Note: The Hesse Greens are Foreign 
Minister Fischer\'s home party.)  The FDP will get five 
percent and may even gain one or two percent.  Up to a third 
of voters say they are still undecided, mostly previous SPD 
voters. 
 
The Iraq Issue 
-------------- 
 
4. (SBU) The Hesse SPD is using the waning days of the 
campaign to focus on Iraq.  Though Boekel hesitates to use 
the issue aggressively, campaign managers are pushing it. 
The Hesse SPD is collecting signatures at campaign stands, 
trying to copy Koch\'s successful petition campaign in 1999 
against dual citizenship.  The SPD in north Hesse claims to 
have collected 40,000 signatures in one day alone.  The CDU 
remains concerned about war in Iraq before February 2.  The 
Hesse CDU\'s election loss in 1991 is still widely attributed 
to the Gulf War starting shortly before election day and the 
subsequent protest vote against the Kohl administration\'s 
position.  Thus far, polls indicate that continuing voter 
unhappiness with the Schroeder administration outweighs 
concerns about Iraq in Hesse\'s upcoming elections. 
 
BODDE 
"
"5423","1/31/2003 9:54","03FRANKFURT926","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 000926 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT:  B-W CDU CAUCUS CHIEF EXPECTS M-P TEUFEL TO STEP 
DOWN IN THE SUMMER OF 2004 
 
1.  Summary: In a meeting with Consul General on January 29, 
Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) caucus chief Guenther Oettinger, 
the possible successor to B-W Minister President Erwin 
Teufel (CDU), spoke about the upcoming elections in Hesse 
and Lower Saxony and his own political future.  He also used 
the occasion to express his party\'s firm support of the U.S. 
Administration. Oettinger criticized the national government 
for straining the U.S.-German relationship for purely 
tactical reasons.  Concerning the upcoming state elections 
in Hesse and Lower Saxony, Oettinger is confident that the 
CDU will win both elections.  Via the Bundesrat, the CDU 
will increase the pressure on the national government to go 
ahead with fundamental reforms.  Concerning his own future, 
Oettinger stated that he expects Minister President (M-P) 
Teufel to step down in the middle of next year to give his 
successor a chance to start on the 2006-election campaign. 
Oettinger hinted that he would be ready to take over if the 
party supports him.  In any case, he will not be available 
as caucus chief in the next legislative period starting 
2006.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Oettinger expressed his deep regret over the tension 
that Chancellor Schroeder has brought into the German- 
American relationship. The B-W state government and in 
particular the state CDU are disappointed that 55 years of 
friendship with the U.S. are being jeopardized for tactical 
reasons.  However, Oettinger believes that the \"Iraq card\" 
will not work for the state elections in Hesse and Lower 
Saxony.  According to him, the voters want to hear about 
internal issues like unemployment, education or taxes. 
 
3. Oettinger was fairly confident that Hesse M-P Roland Koch 
will be re-elected. Christian Wulff, the CDU candidate 
running against Lower Saxony M-P Siegmar Gabriel (SPD) is in 
a slightly different situation in that he would not have a 
chance if the national SPD/Green coalition government wasn\'t 
as unpopular as it is.  Since the federal government has no 
new ideas and no clear plan for the nation, the electorate 
in the two states will take the opportunity to cast a 
protest vote.  He predicted that most of the frustration 
would hit the SPD.  The Greens are in a better position 
since they are not that close to the unions and thus in a 
better position to call for reforms. 
 
4.  Concerning the future of the liberal Free Democratic 
Party (FDP), Oettinger pointed out that the FDP is in a 
pretty comfortable situation in the southwest.  B-W is the 
political home of both the FDP and the Greens.  The Liberals 
are deeply rooted in the southwest and their prospects in B- 
W are good.  For the national party, he sees no quick 
solution to the Moellemann-Westerwelle conflict.  The FDP\'s 
\"18 percent\" strategy was not enough to convince voters, 
since it could not make up for the lack of a party platform 
with mass appeal.  Oettinger sees the FDP back in its 
traditional role of a kingmaker after the Hesse and Lower 
Saxony State elections.  In both states, the Liberals will 
be needed to secure a majority in parliament for either 
party - a role they have been playing for decades.  A CDU 
election victory in Hesse and Lower Saxony will not bring 
down the national government. However, it will bring the CDU 
into a position to exert even greater influence on national 
politics from the Bundesrat in which the opposition already 
enjoys a majority).  The CDU will try to speed up the reform 
process and will force the national government to make 
compromises.  An election victory in both states would 
increase the CDU majority in the Bundesrat in such a way 
that it could almost be considered a \"parallel government,\" 
Oettinger said. 
 
5.  When asked about possible CDU/Greens cooperation on 
state level, Oettinger noted that a CDU/Greens coalition 
will come whenever it helps to avoid SPD/PDS or SPD/Greens 
coalitions.  As an example, he cited the Saarland as 
possible model for the first CDU/Green coalition on a state 
level in 2004.  However, as long as the FDP is available as 
a coalition partner, there is no need for the CDU to 
consider cooperation with the Greens. 
 
6.  Concerning his own political future in the southwest, 
Oettinger stated that M-P Teufel would not run in the 2006 
election campaign.  Next year, the CDU will have to decide 
who is to succeed Teufel, Oettinger said.  He noted that it 
would be an important advantage for the party if the CDU can 
go into the 2006 election campaign with a new Minister 
President who has already assumed responsibility.  Oettinger 
also stated that in case the CDU does not decide in his 
favor, he would no longer be available for the position of 
caucus chief in the next legislative period. 
 
Bodde 
"
"5476","2/3/2003 13:21","03FRANKFURT986","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02FRANKFURT550|03FRANKFURT682","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 000986 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, EAIR, GM 
SUBJECT: KOCH AND CDU WIN ABSOLUTE MAJORITY IN HESSE 
 
REF: A) 2002 FRANKFURT 00550; B) FRANKFURT 00682 
 
1.  (U) The Hesse CDU, led by Minister President Roland Koch 
won the February 2 elections in Hesse with an absolute 
majority, a first in the state\'s postwar history.  The SPD 
recorded an unprecedented defeat, falling ten percent from 
its 1999 results.  The Green Party received more than 10 
percent, their second best result ever.  The FDP got more of 
the vote than it had for 30 years, but will no longer be a 
part of the state government.  The results are as follows, 
with the second number showing the change compared with 
1999: 
 
CDU:      48.8 percent (+5.4) 
SPD:      29.1 percent (-10.3) 
Greens:   10.1 percent (+2.9) 
FDP:       7.9 percent (+2.8) 
 
The CDU is Happy, But Nobody Else 
--------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The CDU now has 56 seats in the 110 seat state 
parliament, the slimmest possible absolute majority, but an 
absolute majority nonetheless.  CDU party followers 
attribute the unprecedented victory mainly to voter 
unhappiness with the national government, but also to 
Minister-President Roland Koch\'s strong performance both in 
the campaign and as state leader.  The new Koch 
administration will certainly use its mandate for bolder CDU 
policy initiatives including Frankfurt airport expansion, 
which Koch energetically promotes.  Some CDU members as well 
as Koch himself did not really want an absolute majority, 
preferring a coalition with the FDP instead.  Koch offered 
the possibility to form a coalition, but the FDP leadership 
refused, stating it would have no leverage under the current 
circumstances. 
 
3. (U) The FDP is now the smallest party in the state and 
the mood is mainly negative.  State FDP Chairperson and 
current Justice Minister Ruth Wagner said bitterly, \"We 
saved Roland Koch (referring to the CDU financing scandal in 
2000) but he reaps the reward.\"  The Green Party recorded 
its first state election gain in Germany in five years and 
their second best result ever in Hesse.  The Hesse Greens 
were strong opponents of Frankfurt airport expansion, but 
constituencies in the neighborhood of the airport saw only a 
slight increase in the Green vote. 
 
The Hesse SPD in Shambles 
------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) The impact of the defeat is enormous within the 
state SPD.  The party had never received less than 36 
percent of the vote in the state\'s postwar history.  Party 
Chairman and Caucus Chief Gerhard Boekel stepped down from 
both positions following the defeat.  The party now faces a 
serious power vacuum and infighting over its future 
direction.  The times are now gone when Hesse could be 
considered a swing state.  \"Hesse is black now,\" one SPD 
member said, referring to the CDU party\'s color.  The SPD 
won only two of 55 constituencies and lost in nearly all of 
their traditional strongholds.  The SPD results were called 
\"disastrous,\" \"catastrophic,\" and \"apocalyptic.\"  Most SPD 
supporters put the blame on Chancellor Schroeder.  One 
remarked cynically, \"We should go and put stickers on our 
campaign posters saying `Thank you Gerhard.\'\"  Some said 
Boekel did a good job, but his predecessors (Finance 
Minister Hans Eichel as State Party Chairman and Armin 
Clauss as Caucus Chief) stepped down too late, leaving 
Boekel only a year to campaign.  Chancellor Schroeder\'s 
lukewarm support for Boekel was also viewed as \"too little, 
too late.\"  At SPD caucus headquarters in Wiesbaden on 
election night, hard feelings towards \"those in Berlin\" were 
barely disguised. 
 
Iraq Did Not Play a Role 
------------------------ 
 
5.  (U) Despite the SPD\'s last minute scramble with 
petitions against a war in Iraq, most observers agree that 
the Iraq issue did not play any significant role in the 
state elections.  In exit polling, only one percent of the 
voters claimed to have been influenced by Iraq. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Koch\'s victory strengthens his position on both 
state and national levels.  The likelihood of his becoming a 
chancellor candidate in 2006 is now much stronger.  In 
contrast to CDU Party Chair Angela Merkel, Koch can now say 
he delivered Hesse for the CDU while Merkel has never won an 
election.  Koch\'s biggest obstacle will continue to be his 
polarizing personality.  (Hesse Broadcasting presented an 
exit poll on February 2 showing that Koch is the most 
polarizing politician since the late CSU leader and Bavarian 
Minister-President Franz Josef Strauss.)  Koch no longer has 
the FDP to tone down his image and balance his policies.  He 
will have to find ways to accomplish this on his own.  End 
comment. 
 
7. (U) This message has been coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"5497","2/4/2003 14:04","03FRANKFURT1051","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 001051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT:  BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG MINISTER OF INTERIOR THOMAS 
SCHAEUBLE CONCERNED OVER INCREASE IN VIOLENT CRIME 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: In a meeting with the Consul General on 
January 29, Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) Minister of Interior, 
Dr. Thomas Schaeuble (CDU) expressed his regret over anti- 
American statements in recent election campaigns.  On 
terrorism, Schaeuble is concerned about a lack of 
cooperation from the Muslim community in B-W.  The B-W 
police have seen a significant increase in violent crime 
committed by ethnic Germans.  Schaeuble complained about 
leaks of sensitive information, which hinders closer 
cooperation with foreign intelligence services.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Minister Schaeuble regretted the anti-American 
rhetoric in the Social Democratic Party\'s (SPD) election 
campaigns in Hesse and Lower Saxony.  He noted that there 
has always been a certain amount of anti-Americanism in 
Germany but that the national government should refrain from 
such statements.  Cooperation in southwest between the U.S. 
military and the B-W police has always been excellent, 
Schauble said. 
 
3.  (SBU) On internal security, Schaeuble sees an \"abstract 
threat potential\" in Germany.  Germany has a large Muslim 
community and some members are criminals.  There are about 
three million Muslims living in Germany, and three to four 
hundred thousand in B-W.  About 50 Muslims in B-W are 
considered dangerous.  According to Schaeuble, the lack of 
integration of the Muslim community into the German 
population creates tensions.  He described Turkish 
communities as a \"state within a state.\"  It is almost 
impossible for police authorities to penetrate and observe 
Muslim groups.  These communities provide excellent hiding 
spaces for potential terrorists.  He also regretted that the 
Muslim community has not provided any tips to police to help 
find and arrest potential terrorists.  Schaeuble noted that 
this reflects badly on law-abiding Muslims.  Most arrests 
have come from tips from allied intelligence and law 
enforcement services.  Schaeuble added that he wishes that 
U.S. intelligence agencies would be more willing to share 
information.  On the other hand, he admitted that frequent 
leaks from German authorities to the media are not helpful. 
 
4.  (SBU) Schaeuble also described ethnic Germans as a 
problem.  Drug trafficking and the increased brutality of 
crimes are his biggest concern.  However, there is no 
evidence of links between ethnic Germans and the Russian 
mafia. Schaeuble pointed out that similar to the Muslim 
communities, ethnic Germans and young people in particular, 
show limited interest in playing an active role in German 
communities. 
 
BODDE 
"
"5609","2/7/2003 14:26","03FRANKFURT1212","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","03BERLIN496","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 001212 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/TNC - MIKE STEINITZ 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/EU - BOWMAN MILLER AND SHIRLEY RUEDY 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/CT - PAUL BOYD AND STEPHANIE MOLNAR 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/OP/EUR 
 
FBI FOR INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS UNIT - SUE CURTIS 
FBI FOR COUNTERTERRORISM DIVISION - KEVIN FOUST 
 
JUSTICE FOR CRIMINAL DIVISION, OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND 
VIOLENT CRIMES - TERESA WALLBAUM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PINR, PGOV, AG, GM 
SUBJECT: FEDERAL PROSECUTOR NEHM DESCRIBES GERMANY\'S COUNTER- 
TERRORISM EFFORTS, EXPECTS ATTACK IN EUROPE 
 
REF: BERLIN 496 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: In a meeting with the Consul General on 
February 3, Federal Prosecutor Kay Nehm said that bilateral 
cooperation is good at the working level, despite recent 
tensions in overall German-American relations.  Nehm is 
confident that the Hamburg trial of Motassadeq will end soon 
and is pleased with the work of Chief Judge Mentz.  Nehm\'s 
office handles terrorism cases and he expressed concern 
about the current security situation in Germany, fearing 
suicide attacks in Europe or elsewhere in case of a war with 
Iraq.  His office has received better support from the new 
Federal Minister of Justice who took office last September 
and he is well staffed with new positions and resources. 
End Summary 
 
The Hamburg Trial 
----------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The Federal Public Prosecutor is responsible for 
prosecuting crimes which threaten domestic security, in 
particular terrorism cases.  The office also prosecutes 
crimes affecting external national security such as 
espionage or genocide.  In a productive meeting on February 
3 with the Consul General, Federal Prosecutor Kay Nehm, a 
central figure in Germany\'s counter-terrorism efforts, made 
the following observations.  Nehm stated that the Motassadeq 
trial in Hamburg is making progress despite the problems his 
office has encountered in recent weeks.  He noted that 
sometimes it is difficult for the prosecutor to provide 
convincing evidence against the accused.  While interviews 
from Binalshib could not be used as evidence, it would not 
have helped Motassadeq in any case.  The prosecutors have 
been able to contradict Motassadeq\'s claims point by point. 
In that context, Nehm mentioned that German-U.S. cooperation 
is excellent despite differences in the two legal systems. 
Nehm also indicated that the U.S. may be expecting a much 
harsher verdict than the Hamburg court will deliver: fifteen 
years is the maximum sentence that can be expected in 
Germany.  Nehm hopes that the trial will end soon: the oral 
verdict is expected February 19 (reftel).  Nehm thinks Chief 
Judge Albrecht Mentz is doing excellent job. 
 
Nehm\'s Concerns about Terrorism 
------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) According to Nehm, the Federal Prosecutor\'s Office 
is currently investigating approximately 60 cases, some of 
which are related to terrorism. (Note: Before German 
reunification, Nehm\'s office was investigating as many as 
300 espionage cases per year.  This number has declined 
dramatically.) In the case of Mamoun Darkazanli, a Hamburg 
merchant and alleged companion of Osama Bin Laden, suspected 
of laundering money, Nehm said that the law had prevented 
further pursuit of the case.  An investigation has been 
underway since last October, but with meager results and 
insufficient evidence to justify his continued detention. 
Nehm believes that Darkazanli was not a member of the 
Hamburg group. 
 
4.  (SBU) Nehm admitted that profiling efforts had not been 
very successful in counter-terrorism.  In battling the Red 
Army Faction (RAF), there were certain indicators, which 
helped locate the group\'s members (i.e. paying rent in 
cash).  Unfortunately, there are so many different types of 
Islamic extremists of different nationalities and with 
different goals, that they can find no similar set of 
behavior patterns to help locate suspects.  Nevertheless, 
police have put together a list of potentially dangerous 
persons.  The arrest of members of the Al-Tawhid group was 
the result of this. 
 
5. (SBU) The Federal Prosecutor expressed concern about the 
current security situation in Germany.  Although things seem 
quiet at the moment, he is certain an attack of some kind is 
being planned.  Therefore, every tip must be taken 
seriously.  Nehm mentioned the bureaucratic problem of the 
Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND) federal intelligence service. 
If the BND has information and passes it onto the police, 
the BND can no longer pursue the case.  The BND\'s function 
is limited to observation only, which has proven to be a 
significant disadvantage in counter-terrorism.  In case of 
an Iraq war, Nehm expects suicide attacks in Europe and 
other locations outside the Middle East.  He also expects 
that leftist extremists will try to undermine peace 
movements.  Nehm also voiced concern about a rise in violent 
crime perpetrated by ethnic Germans, and an increase in 
white-collar crime, especially corruption. 
 
6.  (SBU) Nehm was not shy in describing the relationship 
between him and his former boss, Federal Minister of Justice 
Herta Daeubler-Gmelin, as strained.  The relationship, he 
stated, had so deteriorated that he expected to be removed 
from his job.  (Note: Daeubler-Gmelin resigned the day after 
Germany\'s national elections on September 22, 2002 after 
making a controversial remark comparing President Bush to 
Hitler.)  Nehm described the Daeubler-Gmelin as \"not very 
helpful\" towards his organization.  Under the new Justice 
Minister, Brigitte Zypries (SPD) the atmosphere has improved 
significantly.  His office is managing the increased 
workload well and has 39 new positions.  In fact, he 
admitted that he now has the best resources of any ministry. 
 
German-American Relations 
------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Throughout the meeting, Nehm repeatedly expressed 
his regret over the present tensions between Germany and the 
U.S. and stressed the importance of the bilateral 
relationship.  According to the Federal Prosecutor, 
relations at the working level, however, have not been 
affected and are functioning efficiently. 
 
8.  (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"5840","2/20/2003 8:10","03FRANKFURT1549","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02FRANKFURT5496|02MANILA6579","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 001549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/TRA BYERLY, PARSONS, FINSTON, WALKLET 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
FAA FOR API-1, AEE-1, AIA-300 AND ASC 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, ECON, EFIN, PGOV, SENV, GM 
SUBJECT:  FRANKFURT AIRPORT EXPANSION: 2006 COMPLETION TOO 
OPTIMISTIC 
 
REF: A) 2002 FRANKFURT 5496; B) 2002 MANILA 6579; C) STATE 
29193 
 
1.   (U) Summary and Comment: The expansion of Frankfurt 
airport, Europe\'s second largest, is moving forward, though 
several obstacles may delay the new runway planned for 2006. 
Legal complaints, a chemical factory in the flight path of 
the planned northwest runway, a controversial night flight 
ban and the uncertain cost of expansion may all slow the 
timeline.  Frankfurt airport may not see its fourth runway 
constructed until 2007 or 2008.  The Hesse government is 
examining various noise abatement measures and studies, but 
has not yet integrated the EU directive on noise management 
in its plans.  The decisive election victory in February 
2003 of Hesse Minister-President Koch and the Christian 
Democratic Union ensures continued political support for 
expansion plans.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
Chronology of Expansion Plans 
----------------------------- 
 
2.   (U) Frankfurt airport is one of the world\'s leading 
international air transportation hubs.  It is Europe\'s 
largest cargo airport and ranks second in passenger traffic 
(50 million passengers in 2001) to London\'s Heathrow. 
Directly and indirectly, the airport supports 142,000 jobs 
in Hesse and 170,000 throughout Germany.  In 1997-98, 
Lufthansa CEO Juergen Weber proposed a new runway to meet 
growing demand.  Fraport, the Frankfurt airport\'s managing 
authority, agreed. 
 
3. (U) In what is referred to as the \"mediation process\" 
initiated by the previous state government, a panel of 
interested parties analyzed the expansion proposal for 
several years and made formal recommendations in January 
2000.  These included variations for a new, fourth runway 
(northwest, northeast and south).  The Hesse state 
parliament then proposed the northwest variant; only the 
Green Party caucus completely rejected the expansion 
proposal.  Following a regional planning review, the 
northwest runway option was selected in June 2002.  Volker 
Zintel, Fraport\'s Senior Vice President for Traffic and 
Retail, said that new runway construction will come first, 
followed by a new \"Terminal 3\" six-to-twelve months later. 
The expansion will increase the airport\'s capacity by 50 
percent to 75 million passengers per year. 
 
4. (U) The next stage of the approval process, the \"project 
planning and certification procedure,\" includes feasibility 
studies, noise and environmental impact studies, public 
comments, evaluation of a proposed 11 p.m. to 5 p.m. night 
flight ban, formal certification of expansion plans and 
amendment of the airport license.  A final decision, 
expected in 2005, will certainly face legal challenges. 
Numerous complaints have already been filed by expansion 
opponents (see below paragraphs 7-9). 
 
5. (SBU) Fraport had originally hoped for a 2006 completion 
date for the fourth runway to maintain Frankfurt\'s position 
in the face of strong competition from Paris and Amsterdam. 
In light of various obstacles outlined below, however, 
Zintel described 2006 as \"optimistic\" for runway completion 
and 2008 as more \"realistic.\"  Gerold Diecke, the 
commissioner for South Hesse (Regierungspraesident) who 
supervises the regional planning procedure, also says he 
expects at least a one year delay. 
 
CDU Election Victory Means Continued Support for Expansion 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
6. (SBU) The February 2, 2003 election gave the ruling 
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) an absolute majority in the 
Hesse state parliament, ensuring continued political support 
for expansion.  Incumbent CDU Minister-President Koch, who 
also sits on Fraport\'s supervisory board, strongly supports 
expansion plans as beneficial to the overall future economic 
growth of his state. 
 
Obstacle to Expansion: Lawsuits and Complaints 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
7. (SBU) Fraport and Hesse Economics Ministry officials are 
braced for strong opposition to the airport\'s expansion, but 
hope the battles can be confined to the courts.  The 
building of the airport\'s third runway in the 1980s inspired 
numerous protest actions including a bomb attack on a 
Fraport official\'s home (he was unharmed) and several 
violent demonstrations including one in 1986 in which two 
police officers were killed.  Dr. Manfred Schoelch, Deputy 
Chairman of the Fraport Executive Board, said that even if 
the planning process is free of violent protest, \"Once trees 
start being cut, things could change.\"  Fraport\'s major 
opponents this time, however, are not mainly environmental 
groups but the cities, counties and citizen groups that will 
be affected by expansion.  They have filed lawsuits on 
issues ranging from noise to administrative matters.  Three 
dozen communities have gathered 500 million Euros for court 
battles.  \"The lawyers will be busy,\" a Hesse Economics 
Ministry contact told us. 
 
8. (SBU) The city of Offenbach, southeast of Frankfurt, has 
been leading the fight against expansion.  The 116,000- 
inhabitant city has already devoted considerable resources 
to making its case in court.  Several lawsuits will run 
simultaneously with the certification process, while others, 
such as those related to compensation, cannot be filed until 
the process is completed in 2005 and its results made 
public. 
 
9. (SBU) Lothar Klemm (Social Democratic Party), former 
Hesse Economics Minister under a previous Social Democratic 
Party government and member of the Fraport supervisory 
board, said he views the legal battles as the most serious 
challenge to airport expansion.  \"If lawsuits make expansion 
timelines unreliable, then market forces may make the 
project obsolete.  Carriers will move their business 
elsewhere.\"  Fraport External Liaison Officer for the 
Executive Board Herbert Becker was more optimistic.  \"Most 
court decisions in the last three years have been friendly 
to airports,\" he said.  Due to a change in German 
legislation, Becker said, construction can start immediately 
after the Hesse Economics Minister approves expansion.  In 
the case the courts rule in favor of expansion opponents, 
compensation will be awarded and/or plans modified. 
 
Another Obstacle to Expansion: Ticona Chemical Plant 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
10. (U) Fraport\'s planned northwest runway will end less 
than two kilometers from the tall smokestacks of the Ticona 
chemical plant, considered obstacles under ICAO Annex 14. 
The plant, which employs 1,000 people, is home to the Ticona 
company\'s just completed 20 million Euro administrative 
building.  Relocation, estimated to cost around USD 1 
billion, is no longer under consideration.  Instead, 
according to Fraport External Relations Representative 
Christine Huppert, the approach altitude for landing flights 
will be raised.  Officials at Deutsche Flugsichering, the 
German air navigation services provider, said that a waiver 
would be required from the Federal Transportation Ministry 
to routinely overfly the smokestacks, and \"the issue is far 
from resolved.\" 
 
11. (SBU) In addition, Ticona also uses and produces harmful 
chemicals, posing the twin risks of harmful release of 
chemicals should a plane crash into the plant and damage to 
aircraft if an explosion occurs at the plant.  The matter 
may finally end up in the courts.  Former Economics Minister 
Klemm blamed the Koch government for not taking 
environmental problems such as Ticona seriously enough, 
running the risk of additional environmental studies and 
further legal challenges.  According to media reports, the 
Federal Ministry of Transportation has asked the Disaster 
Management Commission of the Federal Environment Ministry to 
investigate the Ticona issue. 
 
The Controversial Night Flight Ban 
---------------------------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Among the compromises resulting from the initial 
2000 review was a proposal for a 11 p.m. to 5 a.m. night 
flight ban on all traffic at Frankfurt once the runway is 
operational in order to win political and popular support 
for construction of the fourth runway.  Minister-President 
Koch has stated frequently in public that there will be an 
absolute night flight ban.  Fraport understands that the 
compromise is crucial to ensure the airport\'s growth and 
address local residents\' concerns. 
 
13. (SBU) Several cargo carriers, including Lufthansa Cargo, 
oppose the ban. Lufthansa wants a \"practical ban\" that 
allows exceptions.  Becker said Lufthansa cargo flights with 
destinations in North America, Hong Kong and South Africa 
will be most affected.  He felt processing of point-to-point 
cargo traffic (60 percent of total) could be relocated to 
Hahn airport, 110 kilometers to the west, but transit cargo, 
which has to be reloaded onto other planes would be a 
problem.  About 150 flights in total would be affected by a 
ban, although Fraport official Schoelch maintains that all 
but a handful could be moved to daytime operations without 
too much trouble. 
 
14. (SBU) FedEx is also \"not happy\" with Koch\'s insistence 
on the ban, but acknowledges there are \"political realities\" 
involved with expansion.  FedEx has ten flights per week 
landing between 11 p.m. and 1 a.m. that would be affected by 
the ban.  Fedex\'s Senior Manager for Operations Axel Hoock, 
when asked whether his flights could be moved forward, said 
he imagines the competition for slots shortly before 11 p.m. 
would become very intense.  The larger problem, Hoock said, 
is that the night flight ban would \"take away the 
possibility for FedEx to expand its express cargo operations 
in Frankfurt in the future.\"  DHL Airport Affairs Manager 
for Germany and Eastern Europe Markus Otto, said that the 
night flight ban also \"represents a clear competitive 
disadvantage for Frankfurt airport, for business in and 
around Frankfurt and for Germany in general.  It also 
constitutes a dangerous precedent for airports in Europe.\" 
 
Frankfurt-Hahn Airport System? 
------------------------------ 
 
15. (SBU) In 1998, Fraport purchased a 64 percent majority 
share of Hahn airport, a former U.S. military airbase 
located in neighboring Rhineland-Palatinate (R-P), 110 
kilometers from Frankfurt airport.  Hahn is useful for 
charter flights and point-to-point traffic, according to 
Fraport, and is one of the continental European bases of the 
low-cost Irish carrier RyanAir.  The Hesse government hopes 
that some charter and cargo flights that need to operate 
during future night flight ban hours will move from 
Frankfurt to Hahn Airport.  In anticipation of Hahn\'s new 
importance, the state government of R-P is investing almost 
one billion Euros in improvements, including expanding its 
runway to accommodate intercontinental flights.  It can 
already handle Boeing 747 cargo flights.  Improved road 
connections should be completed in two years and a rail link 
in 5-10 years.  The Hesse state government is also 
contributing 20 million Euros for the expansion of Hahn, a 
move criticized by Hesse taxpayers. 
 
16. (SBU) Anticipating Frankfurt\'s expansion and the night 
flight ban, the governments of Hesse and R-P have applied to 
the Federal Ministry of Transport to link Frankfurt and Hahn 
as an airport system under EU law, similar to 
London/Heathrow/Gatwick/Stanstead and Paris-De Gaulle/Orly. 
Such a designation would allow Fraport to transfer all night 
flights from Frankfurt to Hahn.  As the next step, the 
Federal Ministry must now forward the application to the 
Commission for its review as well as that of the member 
states.  The great distance between the airports will be a 
significant hurdle to overcome to secure the designation. 
Additionally, Fraport and Hesse officials have indicated 
that charter, cargo, and express-package flights would be 
shifted to Hahn.  This plan may be inconsistent with EU 
market access requirements. 
 
17. (SBU) Most cargo carriers find Hahn very problematic. 
Deutsche Post (German Mail) threatens to move its hub to 
another location.  FedEx complains that its distance from 
Frankfurt and other large cities would make overnight 
express service from Hahn impractical.  FedEx\'s Axel Hoock 
says Hahn is \"not an option.\"  Lufthansa rejects the 
Frankfurt-Hahn system idea, because the distance is too 
great to maintain a maximum passenger transfer time of 45 
minutes. 
 
Costs: Lots of Uncertainty 
-------------------------- 
 
18. (SBU) By current estimates, expansion may cost up to 3.3 
billion Euros and could increase due to compensation claims. 
Some claims, such as for loss of property value, cannot even 
be filed until the certification process is completed. 
Thomas Norgall, a spokesman for environmental NGOs opposing 
the new runway, said candidly that their strategy is to 
\"make expansion unaffordable.\"  Fraport\'s financial 
situation has already been hurt recently by problems with 
its 400 million Euro investment in Manila airport (Reftel 
B).  Fraport officials say the investment has already lost 
at least 200 million Euros. 
 
EU Directive on Noise Management 
-------------------------------- 
 
19. (SBU) The EU Directive on Noise Management must be 
transposed into national legislation by September 2003 
(Reftel C).  Germany has made little progress thus far. 
Draft legislation has yet to be finalized by the Federal 
Transport Ministry.  Hesse Economics Ministry officials 
admitted they had not really taken the EU directive into 
consideration in their review of noise management issues 
related to expansion.  The Ministry is implementing -- from 
summer 2002 to winter 2005/6 -- a noise quota system, with 
points assigned to seven different categories of aircraft. 
When a carrier has used up its quota, it can no longer land 
its aircraft in Frankfurt.  Looking to the future runway, 
monitoring stations are measuring noise, and various studies 
on noise impact are underway as part of the certification 
process.  Noise barriers and passive noise protection 
measures are being considered for the 13,000 homes that will 
be most affected by airport noise. 
 
20. (U) This message has been coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
DAVIS 
"
"6010","2/28/2003 9:17","03FRANKFURT1785","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 001785 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, ECON, SCUL, GM 
SUBJECT: NEW HESSE CABINET: KOCH PICKS THREE NEW MINISTERS, 
ADDS NEW MINISTRY 
 
 
1. Summary: (SBU) After winning an absolute majority in 
February 2 state elections, Hesse Minister-President Roland 
Koch (Christian Democratic Union - CDU) announced three new 
ministers for his state cabinet on February 24.  Two of 
them, Stefan Gruettner (Minister of the State Chancellery) 
and Udo Corts (Minister for Culture, Higher Education and 
Science), were expected.  The new Economics Minister, Alois 
Rhiel, currently the Lord Mayor of Fulda, was a surprise. 
Jochen Riebel will no longer be chief of the State 
Chancellery.  Despite taxpayer criticism, Koch increased the 
number of ministries from nine to ten in response to 
internal party pressure to better balance the cabinet 
geographically.  Koch was also criticized by the CDU women\'s 
caucus and the media for not naming a third female minister. 
End Summary. 
 
Short Bios of New CDU Ministers 
------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Alois Rhiel, the new Hesse Minister for Economics, 
Transport and Development is Lord Mayor of Fulda.  Before 
that, he was a manager for the Tegut grocery store chain. 
His previous position in government was as Commissioner for 
the town of Giessen in 1991.  Rhiel is a good contact of the 
Consulate and has supported various U.S.-German initiatives 
in Fulda.  The new minister is a moderate CDU politician, 
has an economics background, and is open to new ideas in 
environmental policy.  Rhiel is from eastern Hesse and 
claims to represent north Hesse in the cabinet.  By 
replacing former Economics Minister Posch (a true north 
Hessian) with Rhiel, Koch has increased the influence of 
eastern Hesse while preserving north Hesse\'s standing in the 
Cabinet, at least on paper.  Some in the north Hesse CDU 
complain they had hoped for a bigger reward for delivering a 
strong CDU election victory in a traditionally Social 
Democratic Party (SPD) region. 
 
3. (SBU) Udo Corts, Minister for Culture, Higher Education 
and Science, replaces outgoing minister Ruth Wagner (FDP). 
By winning his constituency in Frankfurt, Corts guaranteed 
himself a place in the Cabinet.  However, his nomination as 
Minister for Higher Education came as a surprise.  While 
acknowledged as a talented administrator, Corts has no 
background in the area of education policy.  Previously 
State Secretary in the Interior Ministry, Corts is seen as a 
potential successor to Koch as Minister-President of Hesse. 
Corts is also Chairman of the Frankfurt CDU and was 
Commissioner for Construction in Frankfurt before joining 
the Interior Ministry.  He is a Consulate International 
Visitor candidate this year. 
 
4. (SBU) Stefan Gruettner, Minister of the State 
Chancellery, is one of ConGen Frankfurt\'s best contacts in 
the Hesse CDU parliamentary group and a successful state 
parliamentary caucus manager.  His promotion to the State 
Chancellery is no surprise.  Gruettner is from the more 
conservative side of the party and his relations with the 
new parliamentary group chairman Franz Josef Jung are known 
to be rocky.  Had Gruettner stayed on as parliamentary 
caucus manager, Jung would have asked for his resignation. 
Gruettner will become Koch\'s \"right hand\" in this new 
position.  Gruettner was the CDU chairman of the CDU 
donation scandal investigation committee and did a good job 
helping restore respectability to the party.  Though 
competent in several policy areas, his background is mainly 
in social policy.  Gruettner is originally from Offenbach, 
and was Offenbach Commissioner for Social Affairs from 1991- 
1995. 
 
New State Secretary 
------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Oda Scheidelhuber\'s appointment to State Secretary 
in the Interior Ministry, is another concession to the north 
Hesse region, where Koch received a great deal of voter 
support in recent elections.  Koch was criticized, however, 
for not promoting a woman to a minister position. 
Scheidelhuber is considered by some to be one of two token 
women in the cabinet.  As Regierungspraesidentin in Kassel, 
Scheidelhuber is known for making the north Hesse district 
administration more service-oriented. 
 
Other Changes in the Hesse Cabinet 
---------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Jochen Riebel is now Minister for Federal 
(Bundesrat) and European Affairs and becomes the state\'s 
representative in Berlin, but has lost the State Chancellery 
to Gruettner (see above para 4).  (Note: By splitting these 
two functions, Koch has created a new ministry.  End Note.) 
Koch has stated publicly that this change is not an 
expression of any lack of confidence in the minister and 
that Riebel\'s portfolio will be strengthened according to 
the Bavarian model.  Many doubt this.  Riebel is seen as 
lackluster, overwhelmed by his work and without much of a 
political future.  His new role will be more representative 
than substantive. 
 
7. (U) Successors for Stefan Gruettner and Oda Scheidelhuber 
have not been announced yet.  The following positions remain 
unchanged (all are CDU): 
 
Karin Wolf, Minister for Education and new Deputy Minister 
President. 
 
Volker Bouffier, Interior Minister. 
Christean Wagner, Justice Minister. 
 
Wilhelm Dietzel, Agriculture and Environment Minister. 
 
Karlheinz Weimar, Finance Minister. 
 
Silke Lautenschlaeger, Social Minister. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (SBU) Koch was apparently driven by internal party 
pressure to change the geographic balance of the cabinet. 
Frankfurt, Fulda and north Hesse felt under-represented in 
the previous Koch administration.  The overall number of 
ministries has been increased to ten, a move criticized by 
the League of Taxpayers.  The number of female ministers was 
reduced by one, despite the Cabinet\'s expansion and lobbying 
by the CDU women\'s caucus.  The new cabinet has more 
representatives from cities, Gruettner, Corts, Rhiel and 
Scheidelhuber.  Koch was also criticized previously for not 
having adequate representation of the more liberal wing of 
the Hesse CDU, now also corrected with Corts, Rhiel and 
Scheidelhuber.  Despite winning an absolute majority in 
February elections, Koch may have a difficult five years 
ahead of him.  Fifty-three of the new state parliament 
members won their constituencies directly.  Koch will thus 
have many \"little kings\" to deal with. 
 
9. (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"6339","3/13/2003 16:02","03FRANKFURT2231","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03FRANKFURT550","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 002231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: MINISTER-PRESIDENT KOCH\'S VISIT TO WASHINGTON MAY 
13-15 
 
REF: FRANKFURT 550 
 
1. (SBU) Hesse Minister-President Koch will have an official 
visit Washington May 13-15.  Koch would like to focus on 
international affairs, the U.S.-German relationship, 
potential U.S. military base closings in Germany, Iraq, US- 
EU issues, and counter-terrorism and security issues and 
will be seeking appropriate appointments through official 
channels.  Koch also has an interest in Asia, particularly 
in increasing market access in China for German companies, 
and in the Tibet issue. 
 
2. (SBU) Minister-President Koch is a likely challenger for 
chancellor candidate to Christian Democratic Union (CDU) 
chairman Angela Merkel in 2006, and has a strong interest in 
foreign affairs and the United States in particular.  (See 
reftel bio cable on Koch for more details.)  He and his 
party won an absolute majority in Hesse state elections on 
February 2, 2003, increasing his standing and influence in 
the CDU nationally.  The request for the visit has already 
gone through the German Foreign Ministry, which will 
coordinate with the German Embassy.  We believe it is 
important that Koch obtain substantive meetings at the 
highest appropriate level at the Department, on the Hill and 
at the Department of Defense.  Koch announced his visit 
during CDU Chairman Angela Merkel\'s visit and is in 
competition with Merkel for influence in the CDU.  He will 
likely want a good deal of press attention for his visit. 
Koch may also wish to visit Wisconsin during this trip, 
which has a sister-state relationship with Hesse.  Koch is 
also a personal friend of HHS Secretary Tommy Thompson, whom 
he knows from his days as Governor of Wisconsin. 
 
3. (U) Pol/Econ Chief Ruth M. Hall will be point of contact 
at the Consulate for any follow up questions or 
coordination, along with Pol/Econ FSN Specialist Christian 
O. Goebel. 
 
4. (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"6371","3/14/2003 14:11","03FRANKFURT2252","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 002252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, ECON, GM 
SUBJECT:  RHINELAND-PFALZ OFFICIALS CALL FOR DRASTIC 
ECONOMIC REFORMS 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: In meetings with the Consul General on 
March 11 and 12, Rhineland-Pfalz Minister for Economics, 
Transportation, Agriculture and Viniculture, Hans-Artur 
Bauckhage (FDP) and State Secretary Karl-Heinz Klaer (SPD), 
Representative of the State in Berlin and Brussels, called 
for comprehensive and speedy economic reform in Germany. 
Both politicians agreed Germany needs reform but doubted 
whether Chancellor Schroeder had the political will to do 
battle with the unions and the left wing of the SPD. 
Bauckhage indicated that the support for the national 
coalition could erode even further if unemployment remains 
close to five million by the end of the year.  Klaer and 
Bauckhage regretted the ongoing tensions in German-American 
relations.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Rhineland-Pfalz Minister for Economics, 
Transportation, Agriculture and Viniculture, Hans-Artur 
Bauckhage (FDP) and State Secretary Karl-Heinz Klaer (SPD), 
Representative of the State in Berlin and Brussels, met with 
the Consul General on March 11 and 12.  Klaer stated that 
the CDU majority in the Bundesrat creates a difficult 
environment for the SPD-Green Party government.  If 
Schroeder had a cabinet as good as Roosevelt\'s, he could 
push forward regardless, but he does not.  Negotiating 
compromises on legislation costs valuable time.  According 
to Klaer, Schroeder should copy Clinton\'s strategy and co- 
opt some of the opposition\'s ideas.  He noted that for 
Schroeder this would mean loss of the support of the SPD 
caucus, however. 
 
3. (SBU) Much will depend on Schroeder\'s major policy speech 
on Friday, March 14.  Expectations were raised too high, 
Klaer said, making them too hard to meet.  Recalling his 
experience as speechwriter to former chancellor Willy 
Brandt, the proven strategy is to lower expectations 
beforehand, giving the policy speech more room to succeed. 
He also emphasized that Rhineland-Pfalz Minister President 
Kurt Beck (SPD) made clear to Schroeder that the current 
economic situation is truly dire.  Klaer said that Schroeder 
must announce drastic reform measures, even if it means a 
further loss of electoral support.  Schroeder\'s problem will 
be with the SPD Bundestag caucus, however, not with the SPD 
party, which he described as \"virtually dead.\"  Klaer was 
also very critical of the 2000 tax reform.  A reform of the 
federal-state revenue sharing system was needed along with 
it: tax reforms alone are useless. 
 
4. (SBU) Klaer regretted the tensions in German-American 
relations and stated that Minister-President Beck would 
personally insist on ensuring that the U.S. military will be 
able to perform its missions from Germany during a possible 
Iraq war.  Security measures to protect American 
installations will be further enhanced in case of a military 
conflict. 
 
5. (SBU) Klaer, who is also the state\'s representative in 
Brussels, is satisfied with the progress of the European 
Convention.  A result can be presented at the end of 2003, 
which then has to be passed by the EU member states. The EU 
expansion candidates are also represented in the convention. 
He reported that in the beginning Great Britain tried to 
dominate the Convention but failed.  The Convention is 
following the 200-year-old American constitutional example. 
 
6. (SBU) Economics Minister Bauckhage expressed similar 
concerns about the state of the German economy. Germany\'s 
social system and its bureaucratic apparatus need a complete 
overhaul.  Bauckhage stated that Minister-President Beck 
also considers drastic reforms essential and unavoidable. 
Unlike Klaer, however, he could not assess the degree of 
Beck\'s influence on the national SPD leadership.  Bauckhage 
felt Germany was in danger of sliding into the same 
situation as Japan.  \"The door to deflation has been 
opened,\" he said.  People have lost faith in the government, 
they are saving their money and consumption is collapsing. 
He also criticized the planned investment program of the SPD- 
Green government as ineffective: he doubts that Schroeder 
has the political will to push through reform.  He predicted 
that the national government might sail into heavy weather 
if unemployment is still close to five million by the end of 
2003, but admitted that the problems date back to the late 
years of Chancellor Helmut Kohl\'s administration.  The FDP 
should have left the national coalition when the CDU failed 
to implement tax reform.  Bauckhage also called for a 
simplification of the German tax system.  \"Everyone in the 
Chancellery should take Economics 101,\" he said. 
 
7. (SBU) Bauckhage also emphasized the need for an 
effective, rational immigration law.  Immigration is an 
emotional issue and should be handled with care by all 
parties.  There are certain taboos in Germany, which should 
not be touched by politicians, referring to Moellemann\'s 
controversial campaign brochure, viewed as anti-Semitic, 
which Bauckhage felt cost the FDP and the CDU the election 
victory last fall. 
 
8. (SBU) Bauckhage also criticized Schroeder\'s strategy of 
playing the Iraq card during national and state election 
campaigns.  Schroeder\'s foreign policy has already created 
problems in diplomatic circles and might lead Germany into 
international isolation.  He said the strained bilateral 
relationship will have a negative impact on U.S. military 
installations in Ramstein and Spangdahlen, which are of 
considerable economic importance to the state.  Bauckhage 
worried that troops now deployed in Iraq may not return to 
Germany. 
 
9.  (SBU) Comment: The SPD-FDP coalition in Rheinland-Pfalz 
is unique in Germany.  Both coalition partners agree that 
drastic reforms are needed at the national level 
immediately.  There is palpable concern, however, in both 
the Rheinland-Pfalz SPD and FDP, that resistance to change 
in unions and the SPD Bundestag caucus is too great. 
Schroeder might fail in his efforts to move the country 
forward.  The Rheinland-Pfalz SPD hopes that Minister- 
President Beck, who supports reform, can use his influence 
at the national level to help move things in the right 
direction.  There is also real concern in the state about 
tensions in the German-American relationship.  With two 
large U.S. military bases in economically weak regions, 
thousands of jobs could be lost if bases downsize or close. 
In addition to the already desolate economic situation, 
leading politicians in the state are afraid that U.S. troops 
might leave Rheinland-Pfalz.  End Comment. 
 
10. (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"6581","3/20/2003 11:51","03FRANKFURT2405","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","02FRANKFURT10187|02FRANKFURT3580|02FRANKFURT5829|02FRANKFURT6207","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 FRANKFURT 002405 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/TNC - MIKE STEINITZ 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/EU - BOWMAN MILLER AND HENRY RECTOR 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/CT - PAUL BOYD AND STEPHANIE MOLNAR 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/OP/EUR 
 
FBI FOR INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS UNIT - SUE CURTIS 
FBI FOR COUNTERTERRORISM DIVISION - KEVIN FOUST 
 
JUSTICE FOR CRIMINAL DIVISION, OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND 
VIOLENT CRIMES - TERESA WALLBAUM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PINR, PGOV, AG, GM 
SUBJECT:  VERDICT IN FRANKFURT TERRORISM TRIAL - WHAT WE 
LEARNED ABOUT THE FRANKFURT CELL\'S METHODS AND CONTACTS 
 
REF: A. 2002 FRANKFURT 3580 (NOTAL); B. 2002 FRANKFURT 5829; 
C. 2002 FRANKFURT 6207; D. 2002 FRANKFURT 10187 
 
1. (U) Background and summary: This cable is a wrap up of 
the Frankfurt terrorism trial. It is based on observations 
by U.S. officials at the trial, but is not to be taken as a 
verbatim transcript of the proceedings.  When the written 
verdict is published, post will provide it to Department. 
 
2.  (U)  Summary continued: Four Algerians and one Moroccan, 
part of a group commonly referred to as the \"Frankfurt cell\" 
or the \"Meliani Group\", were arrested in December 2000. 
Bomb-making materials and weapons were found in their 
Frankfurt apartments.  On March 10, 2003, four of the five 
defendants were sentenced to 10-12 years of prison (the 
possible maximum being 15) for plotting to bomb the 
Christmas market in Strasbourg, France.  One defendant, 
Busid Karimou, had his case severed from the rest of the 
group.  He was charged with membership in a terrorist group 
and was released from detention on August 30, 2002.  All the 
defendants trained in camps in Afghanistan.  The trial 
provided insight into the activities of a group of 
terrorists, who trained in Afghanistan, and operated in 
western Europe against a European target.  This cable 
compiles what was learned during the trial about the 
backgrounds of the terrorists and suspected terrorists, 
their movements and operations, and their connections to 
other terrorists in Europe.  End background and summary. 
 
 
Defendants Trained in Afghanistan, But Court Could Not Prove 
Al Qaeda Connection 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
3. (U) The group was arrested in December 2000 and their 
trial began in Frankfurt on April 2002, at the Higher State 
Court (Oberlandesgericht), convened by the Special Panel for 
State Security Cases (Staatsschutzsenat).  Four of the five 
defendants, Aerubi Beandali, Lamine Maroni, Fuhad Sabour and 
Salim Boukhari, were charged with forming a terrorist 
organization, planning an explosion, plotting to commit 
murder, falsifying documents, and possession of weapons. 
They were sentenced to 10-12 years in prison and have only a 
week to appeal, although their basis for appeals under 
German law is limited to procedural irregularities.  The 
theoretical maximum sentence was 15 years.  A formal written 
verdict is expected before the end of March. 
 
4. (SBU) Defendants Beandali, Boukhari and Karimou admitted 
to training in terrorist camps in Afghanistan (Jalalabad, 
Khost and Khaldan).  Boukhari also mentioned learning 
electronics in Turkum, which he described as a \"Kurdish 
camp\" (presumably in Turkum, Pakistan).  Sabour said he had 
a year\'s training in \"Islamic studies\" in Afghanistan 
(presumably also at a terrorist camp) where he met Beandali 
and Boukhari.  A witness, Hassan Aknoush, said that Maroni 
also trained with terrorists in Afghanistan.  The court 
never successfully determined who planned or ordered the 
attack, although Chief Judge Zeiher said it probably 
originated with a man called Abu Doha in London.  Due to the 
complications of getting witnesses from other countries, the 
prosecution dropped the charge of \"membership in a terrorist 
organization\" on January 15, 2003.  The prosecution 
determined that proving the defendants were linked with 
known terrorist organizations would have dragged out the 
trial (it had already lasted nearly a year) without 
increasing the severity of the ultimate sentences.  There 
were some indications the group was affiliated with the 
Algerian GSPC or Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, 
and their Afghanistan training suggests an Al Qaeda 
connection, but the court was unable to verify these 
connections. 
 
 
The Defendants: Multiple Aliases 
-------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) The following are the known names/aliases and dates 
of birth of the defendants.  (Some variances in spelling 
have been seen in different sources.) 
 
A. Aeurobui Beandali (also Deandali) DOB 12/10/1975; aka Ben 
Ali; aka Mustapha Mestpha Kelouili DOB 11/19/1978; aka 
Djilali Benali Correia DOB 7/15/1975; aka Djilali Adadi DOB 
6/5/1975.  Presumed Algerian. 
 
B. Lamine Moroni, DOB 1/10/1970; aka Benard Pascale, DOB 
7/25/1970. Presumed Algerian. 
 
C. Salim Boukhari (also Boukari), DOB 8/8/1971; aka Hicham 
El-Haddad, DOB 4/30 1980; aka Claude Aman, DOB 8/8/1971; aka 
Karim Muscat DOB 8/8/1971; aka Messaoud (also Mesud) Zamali 
(also Zemani) DOB 8/4/1966; aka Mihdi; aka Malsara; aka 
Kamal.  Presumed Algerian. 
 
D. Fouhad Sabour, DOB 2/13/1965; aka Hassene Benaimine DOB 
12/08/1967; aka Samir Bouinoual DOB 8/9/1978; aka Alain 
Dubois; aka Morira. French or Algerian. 
 
E. Samir Karimou (also Krimou) aka Ibrahim Ahmed, DOB 
12/18/1968; aka Abdel Kader. (Released from prison August 
30, 2002, continued attending trial.) Born in Rabat, 
Morocco. 
 
 
The Evidence: Bomb-Making Materials, Weapons, Forged 
Passports, Videotape of Strasbourg Christmas Market 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The evidence presented in the case included a 
surveillance videotape of the Strasbourg Christmas market 
and surrounding area, the weapons and the bomb-making 
materials found in the apartments, and police recordings of 
defendants\' phone conversations.  Two apartments and a 
rental car were searched by the Bundeskriminalamt or BKA 
(similar to the FBI).  An apartment in Roederbergweg was 
searched on December 23 and 26, 2000.  Another apartment on 
Sigmund Freud Strasse was searched on December 25-26, 2000. 
Items found included various passports and identification 
papers (some of them fraudulent); weapons, including two 
mini-machine pistols; 2 semi-automatic weapons; a revolver 
and ammunition; a hand grenade; 20 kg of potassium 
permanganate; various electrical components and wires; 
chemicals and a detonator; batteries; acetone peroxide 
(TATP); mobile phones; cannabis or hashish; nails; and cash 
in various currencies (German marks, British pounds, French 
francs.)  (Note: the cannabis or hashish was apparently seen 
on the initial search on December 23, 2000, but were missing 
when the items were seized on December 26.)  Various notes 
and letters were also found.  Forged passports were also 
found in one of the defendant\'s rental cars.  Defendant 
Beandali stated the weapons were eventually to be shipped to 
Algeria. 
 
 
The Defendants, Background, Statements, Observations 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
Defendant, Aeurobui Beandali: The Bomb Builder 
 
7.  (SBU) Aeurobui Beandali was the first of the defendants 
to testify before the court.  Beandali expressed regret for 
his actions, stating that the events of September 11 had 
changed his views on terrorism as a means of political 
change.  Of the five defendants, Beandali seems to have been 
in Germany the longest but had the strongest connection to 
Algeria.  He said his original motivation was anger over 
human rights abuses committed by the Algerian military 
government.  Beandali said he has been a member of the 
Islamic Salvation Front political party (outlawed in 1992). 
Beandali fled Algeria in 1992 at the age of 16 and applied 
for political asylum in Germany.  After committing several 
criminal offences, including theft and aggravated assault, 
Beandali\'s German asylum application was rejected and he was 
ordered deported in April 1992.  He went into hiding to 
avoid deportation, supporting himself by petty crime and 
drug trafficking.  He also spent some time in France, 
although the dates are unclear, where he apparently also 
committed robbery and drug-related crimes. 
 
8. (SBU) Beandali gave contradictory statements about his 
whereabouts in 1999-2000.  In one statement he said from 
March 1999 until spring 2000 he lived in an apartment on 
Leonardsgasse 7 in Frankfurt.  In another, he claimed he 
went to Afghanistan from about November 1999 - August 2000. 
Beandali said he paid his own way to train in a camp in 
Afghanistan, spending about $15,000 of his own money. 
Beandali claimed he had to pay for his own ammunition - $150 
for 750 rounds of ammunition.  He described his training in 
Afghanistan as specializing in religion, light weapons, 
heavy weapons and explosives.  Beandali said he met another 
defendant, Karimou, at a camp near the Afghan town of 
Khaldan, although Karimou stated he met Beandali in Khost. 
 
9. (SBU) Beandali said he was an expert in explosives and 
that it was his job to buy the bomb-building materials for 
the Frankfurt cell. He explained that the bomb was to be 
placed in a large, aluminum, Pakistani steam pot, which he 
ordered in London.  (Note: The fact that this would have 
produced deadly splinter fragments was used as evidence that 
the targets were people and not an empty synagogue as the 
other defendants claimed.  End Note.)  He also bought large 
amounts of potassium permanganate.  Found among the evidence 
seized in the Frankfurt apartment was a letter, purportedly 
from a company, attempting to place an order for 115 
kilograms of potassium permanganate.  Beandali admitted that 
he and Boukhari had written the letter using a fabricated 
company name and person (Barakhat).  Given the large amount 
of potassium permanganate, the prosecutors asked if the 
group planned multiple attacks.  Beandali stated that 
several attacks in Algeria were planned after Strasbourg, 
hence the large amount of bomb materials. 
 
10. (SBU) The BKA testified on what was found in Beandali\'s 
rental car, which was in very bad shape.  Found inside were 
a backpack, several false passports, various papers and 
passport photos.  One of the passports was connected with 
Aknoush and Aknoush\'s fingerprints were found on the 
backpack.  (Note: Aknoush, an associate of the Frankfurt 
cell, is in custody in France.)  They also found a mobile 
phone, whose number matched with one being monitored by the 
BKA. 
 
11. (SBU) Despite Beandali\'s sometimes contradictory 
statements and previous criminal record, he was actually the 
most open with the court, helped moved the proceedings 
along, and expressed regret for his actions and a desire to 
turn away from Islamic extremism.  He received the lightest 
sentence, ten years, due to his cooperation with the court. 
Beandali accepted the sentence and said he would not appeal. 
 
 
Defendant, Lamine Maroni: The Disruptive, Absurd One 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
12. (SBU) Beandali had stated that Lamine Maroni\'s only job 
was to help him mix the chemicals to make explosives and 
that he was not involved in planning the attack.  Maroni did 
not formally testify but confirmed some statements by 
defendant Sabour.  Maroni said Beandali was the leader of 
the Frankfurt cell and he openly displayed hostility to 
Beandali.  Maroni\'s role in the group was unclear, but the 
other defendants seemed to be a bit afraid of him.  Maroni 
seems to have been in England before coming to Frankfurt 
with Boukhari sometime in late 2000.  Maroni did not 
cooperated with his lawyers, then complained he was 
uninformed.  A witness, Hassan Aknoush, has stated that 
Maroni also trained with terrorists in Afghanistan. 
 
13. (SBU) Maroni was disruptive from the start.  On the 
first day of the trial he shouted, \"Everyone here is a Jew!\" 
He said that non-believers are dirt, that he did not want a 
lawyer, and that he only had contact with God.  He continued 
to disrupt proceedings on subsequent trial days and was 
absent for the fourth trial session on May 7, 2002, after 
being found in prison with a razor blade which he used to 
cut up his clothing.  He later rejoined the trial, having 
missed several sessions.  Maroni enjoyed engaging in 
distracting behavior, especially when it seemed sensitive 
information was about to be revealed by a defendant or 
witness.  He yelled out things to the other defendants such 
as, \"Sometimes they lie to you to get you talking.\"  He 
demanded sandwiches, chocolate, made absurd statements, 
criticized the judges and prosecuting attorneys, and 
complained loudly about his handcuffs. 
 
14. (SBU) Maroni received a sentence of eleven years, one 
year higher than the prosecution had requested, for his lack 
of cooperation and repeated hostile statements.  His 
outbursts demonstrated his hatred and ruthlessness, the 
court concluded. 
 
 
Defendant Salim Boukhari: The London Connection 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
15. (SBU) The defendant Salim Boukhari appears to have had 
the strongest connections to London. The Algerian Embassy 
questioned him on October 30, 2002 with his lawyers present. 
The Algerian Embassy confirmed that Boukhari was Algerian, 
but cast doubt on the accuracy of the name and Algerian 
address he had given.  When Judge Zeiher read Boukhari\'s 
Algerian address from a letter Boukhari had written (50 
Boulevard Mohammed V, Algiers, 1016 Algeria), Boukhari 
declined to confirm it, but asked the judge not to reveal it 
to the Algerian Embassy, apparently afraid the Algerian 
government might harm his family.  The judge responded that 
the address was not a secret. 
 
16. (SBU) According to his own statement, Boukhari wanted to 
study in France but failed to get a residence permit.  He 
went to London but was deported, though the dates are 
unclear.  Somehow he returned, and according to his own 
statements, lived in London starting from about 1995.  He 
married Tina Nash and lived with her at 79 Blesbury Road in 
London.  He worked for a security company called Mitas 
Security and then later moved to the Layton Stone district. 
He met a man named Noureddine in 1995, who got him 
interested in religion.  After Boukhari\'s divorce in 1998, 
he moved in with Noureddine, who recruited him for Islamic 
causes, showing him videos of Algeria, Chechnya and 
Palestine.  Boukhari said he thought of donating money to 
the Algerian freedom struggle but instead used his life 
savings of 3000 British pounds to go to Afghanistan via 
Pakistan. 
 
17. (SBU) He arrived in Peshawar in early 2000.  He was 
welcomed by Hassan Aknoush and other Algerians, including a 
man named Jaffa.  Boukhari trained for five months in 
Afghanistan in light and heavy weapons, electronics and 
religion.  He became ill with malaria and typhoid fever and 
returned to Pakistan where he stayed with Jaffa.  In 
Pakistan, Boukhari got to know Beandali.  When Jaffa was 
forced to flee, pursued by Pakistani intelligence services, 
Boukhari obtained a forged British passport and returned to 
London on September 16, 2000.  He remarried in October 2000 
and had a son on June 19, 2001.  He met Noureddine again, 
who asked him if he was willing to go to Frankfurt to pick 
up some weapons from Aknoush.  Boukhari went to Frankfurt in 
early November 2000 for a few days.  Later in November 2000, 
he returned to Frankfurt, accompanied by Maroni, and stayed 
with Beandali. 
 
18. (SBU) Boukhari\'s statements to the court were often 
confusing and inconsistent.  Regarding his involvement in 
the attack in Strasbourg, Boukhari said that the planning 
began in early December 2000, and claimed he agreed to 
participate if no one would be hurt.  He also claimed he 
intended to return to London in December 2000, and therefore 
would not be present at the time of the attack.  Boukhari 
admits he was the point of contact for Nourredine in London. 
Boukhari claims, however, that Nourreddine did not give 
orders or designate a target but gave \"only ideas.\" 
Boukhari admitted buying chemicals at different locations in 
Germany with the help of Sabour.  Boukhari also admitted 
making the comment on the surveillance videotape of the 
Strasbourg Christmas market, \"These are the enemies of God. 
They dance and are happy, God willing they will stew in 
hell.\" 
 
19. (SBU) Aknoush stated that Boukhari was in contact with 
Abu Doha in London.  Boukhari said he had spoken with Abu 
Doha but only on the subject of renting rooms in Baden 
Baden.  Aknoush, in a statement from detention in France, 
also said that Boukhari was the assigned leader of the 
Frankfurt cell.  Boukhari stated that the attack was planned 
for the end of January or beginning of February 2001, 
perhaps, again to distract from the Christmas market as 
target and the charge of attempted murder. 
 
20. (SBU) Boukhari received the longest sentence of the four 
defendants, twelve years in prison.  Judge Zeiher concluded 
he was the \"driving force\" behind the Frankfurt cell who 
obtained money for the operation, purchased the largest 
amount of bomb-making materials, and handled logistics.  He 
cooperated only reluctantly with the court, and frequently 
expressed hatred of Jews and western culture. 
 
 
Defendant, Fouhad Sabour 
------------------------ 
 
21. (SBU) Fouhad Sabour said that he became involved with 
Islamic extremists in London in 1995.  In 1996, he was 
arrested in France for membership in a terrorist 
organization.  He admitted being a member of Algeria\'s GIA 
or Armed Islamic Front.  He said that he spent a year in 
Afghanistan (May 1999 - May 2000) for \"Islamic legal 
studies.\"  (Note: Presumably, Sabour was also at a terrorist 
training camp, though he did not specify where.)  There he 
met Beandali and Boukhari.  It is not clear when Sabour came 
to Germany, but he said he met and moved in with Maroni in 
the Sigmund Freud Strasse apartment in Frankfurt.  Sabour 
admitted possessing three fraudulent passports and other 
forged documents and using aliases. 
 
22. (SBU) Sabour\'s role in the plot was unclear.  Boukhari, 
in his statements, denied that Sabour had any detailed 
knowledge of the bombing plans.  It seems Sabour was 
assigned some duties (specifics unclear) to help in carrying 
out the attack together with Boukhari or Beandali.  Boukhari 
said he and Sabour bought chemicals at different locations 
in Germany.  Sabour also admitted driving the car to 
Strasbourg, accompanying Boukhari to videotape the target. 
 
23. (SBU) Sabour received the second highest sentence of 
eleven and a half years.  The judges agreed with the 
prosecution that Sabour\'s participation in videotaping the 
Christmas market made him a willing accomplice in the 
attack. 
 
 
Defendant, Busid Karimou 
------------------------ 
 
23. (SBU) Busid Karimou was released from detention on 
August 30, 2002.  The court could not find any evidence he 
was involved in the preparations for the bomb attack, thus 
he was only charged with membership in a criminal group, 
which carries a one-to-ten year sentence.  The judge ordered 
Karimou released from custody after he was incarcerated for 
17 months, noting that continued detention was unreasonable, 
considering that a prisoner can be eligible for an early 
release, based on good behavior, after having served two 
thirds of the sentence.  The judge noted that Karimou had 
lied repeatedly, given a false name, and at first denied 
that he had trained in Afghanistan, and thus was not 
innocent. 
 
25. (SBU) According to his own statement, Karimou was born 
in Rabat, Morocco.  He moved to Algeria, then to Germany in 
February 1999.  He applied for asylum in Germany on February 
23, 1999 and fell in with hashish dealers while the decision 
was pending.  He felt he was being pursued by police and 
fled to London, where he hoped to get a job and a residence 
permit.  He began visiting the Finsbury Park mosque in 
London and became interested in religion and politics.  In 
January 2000, he joined a Tunisian friend named Amar and 
went to Afghanistan for training.  First he stayed with 
Jaffa in Peshawar, then went to a camp in Jalalabad.  There 
he met Boukhari, who had just ended his training.  He was 
required to turn in his forged French passport.  He met 
Beandali at a second camp in Khost.  The training was harder 
than he expected; Karimou said he argued constantly with his 
group leader and the other participants.  After only three 
months of training, he returned to Pakistan, where Jaffa 
accused him of being a traitor.  Karimou said he got his 
forged French passport back only after repeated attempts. 
 
26. (SBU) Karimou returned to London in May 2000 and met an 
old friend from Frankfurt, Abdel Hadid.  Unable to find a 
job in London, Karimou moved to Frankfurt in July 2000.  At 
first he had no place to stay, but then managed to throw 
Aknoush out of his apartment in Sporstrasse 61.  (The 
landlord was angry because Aknoush had not paid his rent.) 
Apparently this apartment was used as a meeting point for 
the group, and Beandali and Boukhari were frequent visitors. 
Karimou said he had no knowledge of the Strasbourg attack 
and was never a member of the group.  Beandali, in his 
statement, also said Karimou was innocent and not involved 
in the plot but only arrested because they were friends. 
According to Beandali, Karimou was merely in the wrong place 
at the wrong time when arrests were made. 
 
Witnesses, Contacts and Others Connected to the Frankfurt 
Cell 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
27. (SBU) Mohammed Afane, witness. Born in Algeria, age 26, 
arrived in Frankfurt in April 2000 after transiting Spain 
and France.  Afane said he had met Karimou in Frankfurt, and 
knew Karimou\'s brothers in Algeria.  Afane also testified 
that he met Boukhari (known to him as Hitscham) in 
Weiterstadt prison near Darmstadt.  Boukhari asked Afane to 
take a letter for him, which Afane declined to do after 
reading it.  He said the letter mentioned \"saving money for 
weapons to support our friends\" and a man named Suleiman who 
was not arrested and \"hopefully could make it before he also 
gets arrested.\"  Afane assumed Suleiman was a dangerous 
terrorist.  (Note: Suleiman may be Slimane Khalfaoui or 
Slimane Mutamna, see below.) 
 
28. (SBU) Hassan Aknoush (aka Jassin; aka Moheme; aka 
Aknouche), witness.  In detention in France.  He apparently 
met Boukhari in Pakistan.  Aknoush\'s written statements were 
read by the Frankfurt court.  A backpack with Aknoush\'s 
fingerprints was found in Beandali\'s rental car.  Beandali 
has stated that the weapons seized in the Frankfurt 
apartment belonged to Aknoush, although Beandali denied 
Aknoush was connected to the bomb plot.  Beandali said he 
had known Aknoush since 1999.  Aknoush said, in statements 
to French authorities cited by the court in Frankfurt, that 
Abu Doha was the head of the Frankfurt cell and Boukhari was 
his closest contact.  Aknoush said that according to a phone 
call he had with Abu Doha, Abu Doha \"picked Boukhari to be 
in charge of the attack in Strasbourg.\"  Aknoush stated, as 
reported in French police documents, that Boukhari and 
Maroni underwent training with Abu Kahba, an expert in bombs 
and chemical weapons connected to Al Qaeda, in Afganistan. 
 
29. (SBU) Abu Doha (aka Dr. Rashid), contact.  Suspected 
Algerian terrorist leader, in custody in England awaiting 
extradition to the United States based on his connection 
with the plot to bomb Los Angeles International Airport 
during the Millenium.  He has been described by the media as 
the man who supervised Algerian terrorists in Europe once 
they had finished their training in Afghanistan.  Abu Doha 
was a contact of Boukhari\'s in London.  His role in the 
planned Strasbourg attack is unclear.  Defendant Beandali 
has denied Abu Doha was the leader of the Frankfurt cell. 
Defendant Boukhari has admitted to telephone conversations 
with Abu Doha, but said he has never met him.  Boukhari 
stated that Abu Doha had instructed the Frankfurt cell, 
presumably in December 2000, to rent another apartment \"for 
a longer time,\" but Boukhari said that Abu Doha had nothing 
to do with the Strasbourg attack and was not the leader of 
the Frankfurt cell.  However, according to the BKA, British 
intelligence reported a telephone conversation between 
Boukhari (in Frankfurt) and Abu Doha (in London) on December 
24, 2000 in which the attack was discussed and Boukhari asks 
Abu Doha for more money for the rooms rented in Frankfurt. 
 
30. (SBU) Mohammed Sadikki (aka Mohammed Bitchu), witness. 
Got to know Maroni and Beandali in two German prisons. 
Sadikki provided the most extensive testimony of any 
witness.  According to Sadikki, Maroni admitted to 
participation in a number of terrorist operations in the 
U.K.  Sadikki said Beandali asked him to deliver a message 
to a mosque in Frankfurt and talked of the need to fight 
Christians and Jews.  Beandali mentioned a synagogue in 
Lille, France as a potential target.  Beandali also told 
Sadikki the group planned further attacks in Germany, France 
and Spain.  Beandali never mentioned the Strasbourg 
Christmas market to Sadikki, but Beandali said he would like 
to turn Rome, the cradle of Christianity, into ashes. 
Sadikki verified Beandali\'s role as bomb expert and 
indicated that Beandali and other members of the group 
coordinated their testimonies in prison before the trial 
started. 
 
31. (SBU) Sadikki mentioned Usama bin Laden twice.  Sadikki 
reported that Beandali asked him to contact a man named 
Abdul Rachman in London after his release.  Beandali 
described Rachman as \"Usama bin Laden\'s representative\" in 
London, who had also promised to take hostages to force the 
release of the members of the Frankfurt cell.  Sadikki also 
testified that Beandali told him that the camp in 
Afghanistan at which he was trained was run by Usama bin 
Laden.  Sadikki also said that the group used forged 
documents and stolen credit cards. Sadikki\'s testimony was 
sharply challenged by Beandali\'s attorney.  Sadikki also did 
not always strike observers as a credible witness since much 
of his testimony consisted of merely confirming statements 
he had given earlier to the police.  He also seemed to be 
exaggerating at times.  For example, at one point, he said 
the Frankfurt cell had 38 million German marks at their 
disposal, which caused the defendants to laugh. 
 
32. (SBU) Slimane Khalfaoui, (aka Azzedine; aka Slimane 
Amena; aka Sedine; aka \"Tourist\"), contact.  Was arrested in 
an eastern suburb of Paris, France on November 25, 2002 in 
connection with the Strasbourg bombing plot.  Slimane 
Khalfaoui is described by a New York Times report as \"an 
important member of the Al Qaeda network in Europe,\" a 27- 
year-old with French-Algerian nationality, who fought in 
Bosnia and Afghanistan and has been on wanted lists since 
1996.  Beandali admitted knowing Slimane Khalfaoui.  The 
police have a recording of a phone conversation between 
Slimani Kalfaoui and Beandali from December 25, 2000.  They 
discussed the whereabouts of Noureddine and Slimane 
Kalfaoui\'s expected arrival in Frankfurt.  Slimane Khalfaoui 
may have lived in Lyon for a time, providing the Frankfurt 
cell with information on Jewish communities.  Beandali 
stated that Slimane Khalfaoui \"sometimes resided in Germany, 
but also in France and Britain.\" 
 
33. (SBU) Abdul Rachman, alleged contact.  Described by the 
witness Sadikki (see above) as \"Usama bin Laden\'s 
representative\" in London, who had also promised to take 
hostages to force the release of the members of the 
Frankfurt cell.  Sadikki, in his testimony, stated that 
defendant Beandali had asked Sadikki to contact a man named 
Abdul Rachman in London after Sadikki\'s release. 
 
34. (SBU) Meliani, aka Mohamed Bensakhiria, alleged contact. 
Currently in French custody.  According to an Italian police 
report filed with a court in Milan, the Frankfurt cell is 
connected to Mohamed Bensakhiria in Italy.  Meliani has also 
been described as a leader of the Frankfurt cell and the BKA 
has investigated other Meliani contacts in Berlin.  The 
Frankfurt cell\'s connection to Meliani was never pursued by 
the Frankfurt court. 
 
35. (SBU) Lazahr ben Mohamad Tlilli, alleged contact.  A 33- 
year old Tunisian man was arrested in Marseille in mid- 
October 2000.  According to the media, Lazahr ben Mohamad 
Tlilli was in possession of false documents and telephone 
numbers of people suspected of terrorist involvement in 
Italy, Germany, Belgium, England and France.  Lazahr ben 
Mohamad Tlilli is alleged to have connections with at least 
one member of the Frankfurt cell.  The Frankfurt court did 
not pursue this connection. 
 
36. (SBU) Mounir Shuhaib, contact.  Another suspected 
terrorist and alias of the person who rented the apartment 
in Sigmund Freud Strasse according to BKA testimony. 
 
37. (SBU) Hassan Atap, contact.  According to Beandali, he 
is an opposition leader in Algeria and was his contact for 
planning attacks in Algeria. 
 
38. (SBU) Jaffa, contact. For a time based in Peshawar, 
described by Boukhari as a member of the Takfiri group, more 
extremist than the Taliban.  Karimou also mentioned Jaffa in 
Peshawar.  Karimou said Jaffa accused him of being a traitor 
when Karimou gave up after only three months of training in 
Afghanistan.  Jaffa was reluctant to return to Karimou his 
forged French passport.  (Note: Perhaps this is the Abu 
Jaffar mentioned by Ahmed Ressam, the millennium bomber in 
his 2001 testimony, as \"in charge of the Algerian cells\" 
training in Afghanistan.  Abu Jaffar was also described by 
Ressam as being a camp leader, and training recruits in the 
use of TNT and C4 explosives.) 
 
39. (SBU) Djoumakh, alleged contact.  In detention in 
France, presumed Algerian.  Mentioned in the November 23, 
2002 trial session by Judge Zeiher as a friend of Slimane 
Mutamna.  Prosecutor Brinkmann said that Djoumakh had 
testified on contacts Maroni, Boukhari and Sabour had with 
Abu Doha and Slimane Mutamna in London. 
 
40. (SBU) Salime (also Slimane) Mutamna, contact.  Boukhari 
said he, Salime Mutamna and Sabour were all together in 
Frankfurt in November 2000, where they attempted to purchase 
weapons for Algeria. 
 
 
Motivation, Connection to Al Qaeda? 
----------------------------------- 
 
41. (SBU) The defendants gave various and contradictory 
explanations of their motivation for a terrorist attack. 
Beandali, the most active in Algerian causes, claimed anger 
at human rights abuses in Algeria or \"fighting the dangerous 
regime\" in Algeria a motivation.  Beandali stated the 
weapons seized by authorities were intended for Algeria. 
Boukhari and Sabour also cited solidarity with the \"struggle 
of the Palestinian people\" as a reason.  A desire to disrupt 
relations between France and Israel was also mentioned.  All 
defendants seem to share a general hatred of Jews and 
Christians as shown in statements such as, \"Non-believers 
don\'t deserve to breathe.  They are the enemies of God....\" 
The court did not establish any clear motivation for the 
attack by the Frankfurt cell -- or any of its members -- or 
why Strasbourg in particular was selected as a target, 
though clearly the Strasbourg cathedral and market are 
heavily symbolic.  The defendants have given contradictory 
statements about whose idea the attack was.  Sabour stated 
it was the idea of the Frankfurt cell alone, while Beandali 
said that Boukhari received orders for the attack from 
London.  Defendants are vigorous in denying any connection 
to Al Qaeda, though their training in Afghanistan camps and 
contact with other known Al Qaeda network members make this 
claim somewhat doubtful.  The court abandoned attempts to 
prove an Al Qaeda connection by dropping membership in a 
terrorit organization charges in January, 2003. 
 
 
What was the London Connection?  What was the role of Abu 
Doha and Noureddine? 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
42. (SBU) Abu Doha: The London connection to the Frankfurt 
cell is unclear.  According to the BKA, British intelligence 
reported a phone call between Boukhari (in Frankfurt) and 
Abu Doha (in London) on December 24, 2000, in which a 
terrorist attack is discussed and Boukhari asks Abu Doha for 
more German money to pay for two rooms rented in Frankfurt. 
Boukhari admitted to having phone conversations with Abu 
Doha, but denied Abu Doha was the leader of the group. The 
criminal complaint filed in the Southern District of New 
York alleges that Abu Doha facilitated the travel of 
trainees into Al-Qaeda-affiliated training camps and was 
responsible for establishing communication among various 
cells in the training camps (see par. 8).  In addition, in 
press statements, the prosecutors described Abu Doha as a 
key figure in Al Qaeda. 
 
43. (SBU) Noureddine (never further identified), Beandali\'s 
View: Noureddine was another London contact frequently 
mentioned.  Beandali said he distrusted Noureddine.  He said 
he met him in Afghanistan and noted he did not follow 
Islamic washing rites.  He described Noureddine as an 
Algerian with a French passport living in London.  He stated 
that Noureddine was an undercover agent of French 
intelligence and that Noureddine had told Beandali that the 
French secret service had offered him money to inform on 
Algerians living in London and Afghanistan.  Beandali also 
heard from a man known as \"the Emir\" that Noureddine was an 
informer.  Beandali also said that Noureddine was flown out 
of the Balkans by the French government.  Noureddine was 
also interested in a man named Hisham, whom Beandali claimed 
was wanted by the FBI.  Beandali said he helped Hisham 
escape from Afghanistan to London, then to Germany and 
Spain.  Eventually, Hisham was arrested in Algeria and 
Beandali believes Noureddine turned Hisham into the 
authorities.  Thus for several reasons, Beandali felt 
Noureddine was an informer.  In a somewhat contradictory 
statement, however, Beandali suspected Noureddine of 
directing the attack in Strasbourg (Comment: This seems 
strange for a French intelligence agent.  End comment) and 
giving orders to Boukhari from London.  Beandali told Judge 
Zeiher, when he \"heard Noureddine in London was behind the 
plan,\" he \"found it unlikely that the target was an empty 
building.  A guy like Noureddine certainly had something 
more spectacular in mind, something where people could be 
hurt.\" 
 
44. (SBU) Noureddine, Boukhari\'s View: In contrast, Boukhari 
appears to have been a rather close friend of Noureddine. 
Boukhari stayed with Noureddine at his London apartment at 
various times and between his marriages.  Noureddine 
apparently nudged Boukhari in the direction of Islamic 
extremism, inspiring him to train in Afghanistan.  Boukhari 
also said that the Frankfurt cell had 20,000 German marks at 
their disposal, which Noureddine had brought from London. 
Boukhari has been vague about Noureddine\'s role in the 
Strasbourg attack, but has stated that Noureddine only gave 
\"ideas, not orders.\" 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS AND COMMENT 
----------------------- 
 
45. (SBU) The defendants, all of Algerian or Moroccan 
origin, spent time in western Europe (especially France, 
England and Germany), and were involved in terrorist and/or 
criminal activity for several years.  They moved easily in 
and out of Germany and around western Europe.  Four of the 
five (all but Maroni) have admitted to training in 
Afghanistan.  Three of the five (Beandali, Boukhari, 
Karimou) admitted to training in terrorist camps there.  A 
witness, Hassan Aknoush, has stated that Maroni also trained 
with terrorists in Afghanistan.  Thus if Aknoush is correct, 
all five defendants trained in Afghanistan.  The Frankfurt 
cell was planning some type of bomb attack in Strasbourg and 
had gathered significant bomb-making materials for the job. 
The Frankfurt cell had definite connections to others 
assumed to be terrorists or Islamic extremists in England 
and France.  Although the court could not prove an Al Qaeda 
connection, defendants admitted contact with Slimane 
Khalfaoui (in France, alleged member of Al Qaeda network), 
Abu Doha (in London, alleged member of Al Qaeda network); 
and Noureddine (in London, affiliation unknown.)  In reading 
the sentences, Judge Zeiher said that the arrest of the 
defendants had \"prevented a bloodbath.\" 
 
46. (U) This message has been coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"6632","3/21/2003 13:46","03FRANKFURT2451","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 002451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST GERMANY ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL NEWS 
 
1.   (U) Summary: This is the first in a series of monthly 
cables planned to summarize political and economic events in 
ConGen Frankfurt\'s consular district.  End summary. 
 
Political News 
-------------- 
 
2. New Hesse Cabinet: Corts and Gruettner on the Rise 
 
(SBU) Roland Koch named the ministers of his new cabinet on 
February 24.  The number of ministries inreased from nine to 
ten by dividing portfolios previously under one minister. 
Three of the ministers are new.  The Lord Mayor of Fulda 
Alois Rhiel will be the new Economics Minister.  The very 
popular local politician has an economic background and 
belongs to the progressive wing of the CDU known for 
creative ideas and reaching out to non-traditional partners 
such as environmental groups.  His main issue will be 
Frankfurt airport expansion, planned for 2006.  Minister of 
Higher Education, Science and Culture, and Frankfurt CDU 
chief Udo Corts replaces outgoing FDP chairwoman Ruth 
Wagner.  Corts is seen as a potential successor to Minister- 
President Koch.  Former CDU parliamentary manager Stefan 
Gruetter represents the Hesse CDU\'s conservative wing. 
Gruettner takes over the State Chancellery from Jochen 
Riebel, and has the important task of coordinating Koch\'s 
policies among the other ministries. 
 
3. Upcoming Visits to Washington by German Officials 
 
(SBU) Hesse Minister-President Koch (CDU) plans a visit to 
Washington D.C. May 13-15, and if his schedule permits, will 
also travel to Hesse\'s partner State Wisconsin.  Koch has 
requested Consulate assistance in setting up meetings.  He 
plans to focus on international issues.  Koch is positioning 
himself as a national CDU player in his ambition to be CDU 
chancellor candidate in 2006.  Interestingly, he announced 
his visit while Angela Merkel was in Washington. 
 
Baden- Wuerttemberg Economics Minister Dr. Walter Doering 
will also visit the U.S. this year.  We are gathering 
details. 
 
4. Alexander von Stahl Joins Baden-Wuerttemberg FDP 
 
(SBU) Alexander von Stahl, the former Federal Prosecutor, 
who was released from office in 1993, has joined the B-W 
FDP.  Von Stahl is a controversial figure.  He moved from 
Berlin to Ettlingen, a small community south of Karlsruhe 
and is now a member of the Ettlingen FDP chapter.  The 
Chairman of the Ettlingen FDP is Rudolf Doering, the brother 
of FDP State Chairman and Economics Minister Walter Doering. 
Von Stahl has already established contact with Stefan Havlik 
and Dietmar-Dominik Hennig, two members of the Ulm FDP who 
made headlines last year by publicly supporting Juergen 
Moellemann\'s criticism of Jewish leaders.  Von Stahl is also 
in touch with Hans-Manfred Roth, the former ultra- 
conservative chairman of the Bad Cannstatt FDP who caused a 
stir by inviting Austria\'s  Joerg Haider to speak in 
Stuttgart. 
 
5. Stuttgart Islamic Experts Group Concerned About Islamic 
Fundamentalist Links to German Extremist Groups 
 
(SBU) The Stuttgart \"Islamic Experts Group\" of the Baden- 
Wuerttemberg State Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution, founded in 1997, has gained more importance 
since 9/11.  The unit consists of 35 experts who are fluent 
in several Arab languages, screen Internet pages, Arab 
papers and Arab TV programs.  Landolin Mueller, chief of the 
group, states that Internet messages are difficult to 
interpret when dialects come into play.  Hidden messages 
contain intense hatred against Israel and the U.S.  Hatred 
and attacks against the U.S. are in most cases legitimized 
with quotes from the Koran.  Mueller notes the number of 
militant Islamic fundamentalists is increasing but 
infiltration of fundamentalist circles is extremely 
difficult.  Mueller is concerned about the Internet linkage 
between different militant groups and the fact that these 
circles seek loose ties with right and left wing extremist 
groups in Germany.  Their hatred of the U.S. binds them. 
 
Economic News 
------------- 
 
6.  Paris Overtakes Frankfurt Airport in Number of 
Passengers 
 
(U) Paris Charles de Gaulle overtook Frankfurt Airport in 
2002 with the largest number of passengers in continental 
Europe.  According to figures released by the Board of 
Airlines in Germany (BARIG) on March 20, Paris had 48.4 
million passengers, while Frankfurt had 48.2 million. 
Frankfurt is still Europe\'s number one cargo airport.  1.5 
billion tons of freight were transported through Frankfurt, 
but Amsterdam and London-Heathrow are catching up.  The 
announcement renewed calls by Frankfurt Airport Executives 
for the speedy construction of a new runway at Frankfurt 
Airport. 
7. Regional Airports in Southwest Germany Losing Passengers 
 
(U) The Stuttgart Airport owns over 60 percent of the 
regional Baden Airport in Soellingen (between Karlsruhe and 
Baden-Baden), a former military airport.  In order to keep 
the status of \"regional airport,\" investments up to 200 
million Euro will be necessary.  Georg Fundel, Managing 
Director of the Stuttgart Airport, is under pressure from 
the B-W State Government to make such a financial commitment 
despite declining passenger numbers at smaller regional 
airports. During a meeting with Consul General, Fundel made 
clear that he has no intentions to invest the 200 million 
Euro and called the Soellingen airport \"a stillborn child\". 
Given a choice, Fundel would rather close the airport than 
invest the money.  In light of the current downturn in the 
airline industry, all civilian airports in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg are reporting lower numbers.  In 2002, the 
Stuttgart airport, for example, lost 900,000 passengers, a 
drop of 10 percent compared to the peak year of 2000. 
 
8. Saarland Has Low Unemployment, New Focus on Automotive 
Sector 
 
(U) Saarland, the smallest German state, has the lowest 
unemployment.  In 1999, Saarland was number eleven in 
Germany, today it is number five with 9.9 percent. 
Unemployment rose 4.7 percent in January compared with 
December. (The national average was 10 percent.)  Saarland 
also showed the biggest jump in growth in Germany with 1.2 
percent (Germany average: 0.2 percent).  The growth is 
attributed to successful economic development initiatives 
and a shift away from steel and coal towards automotive 
supply industries. 
 
9.  German Customs Catch Tax Evaders at Swiss Border 
 
(U) In 2002, customs officers of the Singen customs office 
have confiscated 1 billion Euro during random checks of 
vehicles at the German-Swiss border.  According to German 
customs officials Germans from all professions bring cash 
over the 283-kilometer-long border to Switzerland to avoid 
German taxes.  47 million travelers and 20 million cars pass 
through the 24 border checkpoints each year.  The Stuttgart 
IRS office alone was able to collect an additional 9.3 
million Euro in 2002 due to the findings of the customs 
officials. 
 
10.  IBM Germany Has New CEO 
 
(U) Walter Raizner is the new CEO of IBM Germany.  He 
succeeds Erwin Staudt who was appointed Chairman of the 
Supervisory Board.  Raizner expects a difficult year for IBM 
Germany, with IT markets shrinking by 1.7 percent. 
 
11. Zeiss Loses Money, Lays Off Workers 
 
(U) The Optics Company Carl Zeiss announced that it will 
have to cut 200 jobs at its headquarters in Oberkochen, a 
sharp decline from its 2002 growth, which created 500 new 
jobs.  During the first four months of the new business year 
(which started October 1, 2002), turnover dropped by nine 
percent. 
 
12. DaimlerChrysler\'s Profits Improve 
 
(U) DaimlerChrysler reported a 6.8 billion Euro operating 
profit for the year 2002.  The Mercedes Car Group 
contributed the largest growth, with an operating profit of 
3.02 billion Euro and the Chrysler Group with 1.3 billion 
Euro.  DaimlerChrysler\'s problem division is trucks and 
vans, with a loss of 343 million Euro.  For the year 2003, 
DaimlerChrysler CEO Juergen Schrempp is worried about 
profits.  The global economic situation and international 
tensions may have a negative impact on growth. 
DaimlerChrysler is in 100 countries. 
 
BODDE 
"
"7896","5/7/2003 15:04","03FRANKFURT3665","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03FRANKFURT1785","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 003665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, ECON, GM 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR MINISTER-PRESIDENT KOCH\'S VISIT TO 
WASHINGTON MAY 13-15 
 
REF: A) FRANKFURT 550; B) FRANKFURT 001785 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Hesse Minister President and Hesse CDU 
chairman Roland Koch will visit Washington for meetings with 
senior USG officials on May 13-15.  Koch is widely discussed 
as a CDU Chancellor candidate in 2006 and is in competition 
with CDU Chairperson Angela Merkel for influence in the 
party.   During his Washington visit, Koch will focus on 
international affairs, the U.S.-German relationship, 
potential U.S. military base closings in Germany, the 
aftermath of the Iraq war, U.S.-EU issues, counter-terrorism 
and security issues.  Koch also has an interest in Asia, 
particularly in increasing market access in China for German 
companies, and in the Tibet issue.  Koch\'s staff tells us 
his main aim for the visit is to \"promote transatlantic 
partnership.\" End Summary. 
 
A National Player and Possible Future Chancellor Candidate 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Koch was re-elected with an absolute majority on 
February 2, 2003, which strengthened his position in the CDU 
nationally.  Koch has frequently been discussed as a  CDU 
chancellor candidate in 2006 and is in competition with CDU 
Chairman Angela Merkel and Bavarian Minister-President 
Edmund Stoiber for influence in the party.  Relations 
between Koch and Merkel are seen as frosty, as Koch clearly 
supported Stoiber over Merkel early on in the 2000 election 
campaign.  Koch is aggressive, confident, energetic and 
ambitious.  Following a major financing scandal in the Hesse 
state CDU in 1999, he has generally done poorly in polls in 
the area of personal integrity and credibility.  That said, 
he is a gifted public speaker, telegenic and knows how to 
please a crowd on many issues.  He has recently begun to 
play down his polarizing image by seeking a more mediating 
role in national politics.  For example, he surprised many 
observers by announcing a reform plan jointly with 
Northrhine-Westphalia Minister President Peer Steinbrueck 
(SPD) with an across the board ten percent cut in public 
subsidies, though the initiative was heavily criticized from 
within his own party. 
 
Koch Interest in Economic Growth 
-------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Koch has been active in the commercial and economic 
development of Hesse.  He has supported Frankfurt airport 
expansion, new biotechnology centers, and enhanced 
cooperation between universities and corporations on 
research such as between the Opel auto plant in Ruesselsheim 
and the Technical University of Darmstadt.  He seeks to make 
Frankfurt a more inviting destination for foreign investment 
and has put forward welfare, social and labor market reform 
proposals.  Koch has also been a strong supporter of nuclear 
energy and has improved the state\'s road infrastructure.  In 
light of deteriorating finances --Hesse slipped from being 
the number one growth state in Germany to number six -- Koch 
will want to speak with U.S. interlocutors about economic 
growth incentives and stimulus packages. 
 
Counter-Terrorism and Security 
------------------------------ 
 
4. (SBU) Koch has been active on counter-terrorism issues 
and encouraged good bilateral cooperation between law 
enforcement agencies.  (Note: The headquarters of the 
Bundeskriminalamt -- BKA -- the FBI equivalent is in 
Wiesbaden, Hesse\'s capital.)  He has been active in 
improving the police force in Hesse and in crime reduction 
measures such as video surveillance of main shopping areas. 
Koch was very supportive of enhanced police protection of 
U.S. installations in Hesse after September 11 and has 
spoken of the need for Germany to increase counter-measures 
against bioterrorism, such as acquiring more smallpox 
vaccine.  He expressed interest in discussing counter- 
terrorism policies in the U.S. and the role of the Office of 
Homeland Security. 
 
Koch and the U.S. 
---------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Koch is an outspoken, pro-American politician.  He 
has been very supportive of the American Chamber of 
Commerce, which has its headquarters in Frankfurt, and gave 
AmCham President Fred Irwin the state\'s highest honor. 
Before the Iraq war, he took a position that was supported 
the U.S. position, despite some opposition within his own 
party.  Koch has also been consistently supportive of 
American troops in Hesse, often hosting or appearing at 
events honoring the U.S. military.  Hesse has approximately 
13,000 U.S. troops stationed mainly in Giessen, Friedberg, 
Wiesbaden, Hanau, and Darmstadt.  The U.S. military in Hesse 
employs 2,544 Germans directly and an indeterminate number 
indirectly.  Koch has said he is unhappy about Round 30 
closures in coming years (2005-2008), finds it a loss for 
the U.S. German partnership and has expressed concern about 
the hundreds of German jobs that will disappear.  In an 
article on May 2 in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Koch 
especially regretted the reduction of the U.S. military 
presence in Giessen, which already has a high rate of 
unemployment.  Koch has also stated in the past that he 
understands and respects our decision and will not fight it, 
but he finds the loss of contact between the U.S. military 
population and German citizens in central Hesse to be 
regrettable in a larger sense.  Koch wants to discuss the 
future of U.S. military basing with interlocutors in 
Washington.  He may also wish to discuss the role of Europe 
in rebuilding Iraq. 
 
6. (SBU) Koch also supported the U.S. Consulate Frankfurt\'s 
acquiring of a property for the new Consulate building and 
has boasted of the Consulate\'s future expansion in Hesse as 
a positive story for the state.  He is very candid in 
meetings with U.S. officials and concerned about the 
transatlantic relationship.  After Schroeder\'s anti-U.S. 
election stance in late 2000, Koch was vocal in describing 
the shortsightedness of the Chancellor\'s statements and the 
tremendous bilateral damage they had done.  Generally, Koch 
can be considered one of the best experts on U.S. society 
and politics among German politicians and has a keen 
interest in U.S. Congressional politics.  Koch traveled to 
the U.S. in 1996 to observe the presidential election 
campaign and again in 1997 on the International Visitors 
Program.  He has also visited the U.S. numerous times 
privately.  Koch\'s English is excellent.  He has not used 
interpreters in past meetings with U.S. officials and is 
comfortable addressing large groups in English. 
 
BODDE 
"
"8078","5/15/2003 13:32","03FRANKFURT3946","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 003946 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, ECON, GM 
SUBJECT: SAARLAND SPD LEADER CRITICIZES CHANCELLOR SCHROEDER 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: During his April 30 trip to Saarland, the 
Consul General met 34-year-old Saarland opposition leader 
Heiko Maas in Saarbruecken.  The Consul General and Maas, 
who is the state SPD chairman and Landtag caucus leader, 
spoke about economic issues, including Agenda 2010 and the 
upcoming Saarland state elections.  Later, four members of 
parliament joined for a discussion on Iraq.  Maas was 
critical of Schroeder\'s approach on social reform and 
faulted the chancellor for \"breaking his promise\" on Iraq. 
Maas has gained visibility in recent months by taking an 
active role in the discussion of the Agenda 2010 reform 
plan.  He will challenge Saarland Minister-President Peter 
Mueller (CDU) in the fall 2004 state elections.  End 
summary. 
 
Maas: Saarland Successfully Achieves Structural Change 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
2.  (U) Heiko Maas, Saarland\'s SPD leader, is one of the 
\"young Turks\" in the SPD national presidium.  In an April 30 
meeting with the Consul General in Saarbruecken, he 
described the economic structural reforms in Saarland as 
successful.  When questioned by the Consul General about 
economic prospects in the state, he said that many of the 
infrastructure projects that are now paying off, had their 
origins in the previous SPD administration.  Maas mentioned 
the Ford plant in Saarlouis, the cornerstone for a growing 
automotive sector in the Saarland, as a prime example. 
According to Maas, the automotive sector employs about 
40,000 people in Saarland.  Nobody in the SPD, said Maas, 
disputes the necessity of phasing out the coal industry.  He 
mentioned renewable energy, nanotechnology and steel as 
future growth industries in Saarland. 
 
Critical of Agenda 2010 and Iraq policy 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Saarland has a majority CDU government, and Maas 
said if the state elections were held today, the SPD would 
lose to popular Minister-President Peter Mueller.  It is not 
enough for the SPD to simply press for reform of the social 
welfare system.  Maas cited the U.S.\'s successful economic 
reform measures.  The Bush administration\'s policies gave 
money back to the consumers and created investment.  When 
the Consul General pressed for more details, Maas suggested 
lower taxes for middle and low incomes, while delaying tax 
reductions for the wealthy.  Maas cautioned that Schroeder 
is skeptical of this.  Measures to increase investment are 
necessary, but conflict with the Maastricht criteria, Maas 
admitted.  Maas said that the money saved because of the 
Koch-Steinbrueck proposal (which advocates cutting public 
subsidies by ten percent) should not only be used for debt 
reduction, but could be redirected in part to promote growth 
industries.  Referring to the Agenda 2010 social reform 
plan, Maas declared early retirement (and thus earlier 
pensions) as the biggest problem in the social welfare 
system.  People rarely stop working after they \"retire.\"  To 
reduce unemployment benefits across the board would be a 
mistake.  Maas would prefer cuts that take the age of the 
recipient into consideration. 
 
4.  (SBU) The Consul General closed the discussion by asking 
for Maas\' thoughts on Chancellor Schroeder\'s political 
performance thus far.  In a critique of Chancellor 
Schroeder, Maas said it was necessary for the government to 
keep its promises.  Maas, who abstained on the Agenda 2010 
vote in the SPD presidium, said he had experienced 
Schroeder\'s broken promises all too often.  He mentioned the 
promise not to raise taxes as an example.  On Iraq, Maas 
said: \"Schroeder\'s position was not consistent.  To promise 
the U.S. administration support on Iraq and later change 
that line without notification was a mistake.\"  Maas and the 
other SPD parliamentarians emphasized to us that it was 
important to distinguish the political realities of German 
politics from personal relationships that made up the U.S.- 
German partnership.  Maas agreed with Consul General\'s 
assessment that U.S.-German relations are still solid and 
broad.  All politicians were keen to \"built a common bridge\" 
between Germans and Americans. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5. (SBU) Since the SPD lost power in Saarland in 1999, Heiko 
Maas has been trying to overcome the legacy of his 
predecessor Oskar Lafontaine and give the Saarland SPD a new 
image.  Maas, who is on the left wing of his party but a 
pragmatic Social Democrat, has consolidated his power base 
and is now the undisputed leader of the Saarland SPD.  He 
will challenge Minister-President Peter Mueller (CDU) in the 
2004 state elections.  Because of his reaction to the Agenda 
2010 reform plan, Maas has gained national recognition.  He 
is one of the most outspoken opponents of the plan, but 
tries to mediate between supporters and critics.  His 
reaction was very reserved when we mentioned Lafontaine and 
Ottmar Schreiner, a member of the left wing in the Bundestag 
caucus.  To win the 2004 elections, Maas will have to 
energize his party without alienating the many Lafontaine 
supporters.  He intends to use the former Minister-President 
in the election campaign to help reach out to these 
Lafontainistas.  In return, Lafontaine has promised not to 
run for public office again.  When assessing the viability 
of this electoral strategy, one must bear in mind 
Lafontaine\'s reliability (or lack thereof.)  End comment. 
 
BODDE 
"
"8080","5/15/2003 14:03","03FRANKFURT3948","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 003948 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, ECON, ELAB, SCUL, GM 
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST SPD SPLIT ON SCHROEDER\'S AGENDA 2010 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Many in the Social Democratic Party (SPD) 
in Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W), Hesse, Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) 
and Saarland are fiercely opposed to Chancellor Schroeder\'s 
Agenda 2010 reform plan.  In B-W and R-P, the SPD leadership 
generally approves the Schroeder plan but the rank-and-file 
does not.  In Hesse and the Saarland, SPD party leaders are 
determined to water down the proposed reforms.  Saarland\'s 
SPD chairman Maas is in the lead in opposing Agenda 2010, 
grabbing it as an early campaign theme for 2004 state 
elections.  (See also septel.)  End Summary. 
 
New Hesse SPD leader Aligns with Unions - Party Split 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
2. (SBU) New Hesse SPD Chairperson Andrea Ypsilanti, elected 
in March 2003, has vowed to resist reform proposals that 
would lessen the clout of Germany\'s strong trade unions. 
She has been particularly vocal in favor of maintaining 
Germany\'s generous legal protections against the dismissal 
of employees.  She has said on national television that 
Agenda 2010 needs to be more socially equitable.  To the 
annoyance of her predecessor, former Hesse Minister 
President and current Federal Finance Minister Hans Eichel, 
she has continued to emphasize these themes.  (Eichel finds 
Ypsilanti\'s approach too extreme.)  Together with Saarland\'s 
SPD Chairman Heiko Maas, Ypsilanti is one of the most 
outspoken critics among SPD state leaders of the Agenda 2010 
reform plan. 
 
3. (SBU) In a conversation with the Consulate, Ypsilanti 
proposed the following changes to Agenda 2010: 
 
  -    Re-introduction of a wealth tax and reform of the 
     inheritance tax. (She refers to a verdict of the 
     constitutional court next year and expects that the 
     inheritance tax will need to be reformed anyway.) 
 
  -    A citizens\' health insurance (\"Buergerversicherung\"). 
     (Basic insurance for all, all must contribute, premium could 
     be privately insured.) 
 
  -    The definite withholding tax has no majority in the 
     party. \"It is dead,\" Ypsilanti said. 
 
  -    A tax on companies that do not offer apprenticeship 
     positions (Ausbildungsplatzabgabe).  Ypsilanti thinks 
     Schroeder will have to act on that soon. 
 
  -    Changes to the reform of unemployment benefits. 
     Ypsilanti wants to use the model worked out by the 
     \"Bertelsmann Foundation\" that says unemployment benefits 
     should be 10 percent above welfare. 
 
4. (SBU) Ypsilanti held a joint press conference with Hesse 
German Trade Union Federation (DGB) chairman Stefan Koerzell 
on Agenda 2010 to show public support for the unions, but 
her views are not uniformly supported in the party.  Newly- 
elected Hesse SPD Caucus Leader Juergen Walter has 
criticized the unions for being backward-looking.  \"It 
cannot be in the best interest of the unions to drive the 
social security system over the brink,\" Walter said.  North 
Hesse party chairman Manfred Schaub, number three in the 
Hesse SPD, criticized Ypsilanti and other rebels in the SPD 
for using a membership poll (Mitgliederbegehren) to pressure 
the party leadership.  \"There is no alternative to the 
Agenda 2010,\" Schaub said.  He is proposing to make the 
program more socially equitable and have more tax-based 
elements to include groups do not currently participate, 
such as the self-employed and public servants. 
 
Saarland\'s Heiko Maas - A Mediator Among the Opponents 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
5.  (SBU) The Saarland SPD has been more united than Hesse 
in its opposition to the Agenda 2010 reforms (see septel). 
State Chairman Heiko Maas gathered moderate opponents of 
Agenda 2010 presenting a paper May 4.  Maas told us he 
expects Agenda 2010 will achieve a majority at the SPD party 
convention June 1, but he still hopes to make changes.  He 
proposes a more differentiated model of unemployment 
benefits in favor of older employees.  In addition, he would 
like to see the planned 2004 lowering of the top income tax 
delayed and replaced with accelerated tax cuts for low-to- 
middle incomes.  Maas also rejects the definite withholding 
tax and wishes to introduce more tax-based elements into the 
social security system to broaden its financial base.  To 
maintain social equity, Maas would like to reintroduce the 
wealth tax and a reform of the inheritance tax.  He suggests 
private elements in the pension system \"systematically 
strengthened.\" 
 
6.  (SBU) Maas\' political problem is that he feels strong 
pressure from the left, namely from former SPD chairman 
Oskar Lafontaine and Ottmar Schreiner, leader of the twelve 
\"Agenda 2010 rebels\" in the Bundestag.  While Maas has not 
permitted Lafontaine to play a major political role, Maas 
has less influence over Schreiner, who is respected in the 
Saarland SPD for his thoughtful, critical views.  Maas 
countered this threat to his authority (as party insiders 
describe it) by working out a six-point position paper that 
will be voted on a party convention May 15.  The paper seeks 
to build a common ground with other critics of the Agenda 
2010, for example, in Hesse. 
B-W Leadership Surprised by Growing Opposition 
--------------------------------------------- - 
7.  (SBU) Baden-Wuerttenberg (B-W) SPD Chairperson Ute Vogt 
admitted in a recent interview that she had underestimated 
the growing unease in the party over Schroeder\'s Agenda 
2010.  She criticized the unions for attempting to turn the 
SPD into a pawn.  \"I almost threw my Ver.di-membership book 
away,\" Vogt said.  According to Vogt, there are problems 
with Schroeder\'s merger of unemployment and welfare 
benefits.  Unhappiness with Agenda 2010 has not resulted in 
a significant loss of SPD membership, however.  Between 
January and March, 129 members left the party, not an 
extraordinarily high number.  Vogt defended Schroeder\'s plan 
as an absolute necessity.  Wolfgang Drexler, SPD caucus 
chief, supports her as most of the members of the SPD caucus 
in the B-W State Parliament do. 
 
8.  (SBU) One of the first prominent SPD members openly 
opposing Agenda 2010 was Rainer Bliesener, the B-W Chief of 
the German Trade Union Federation (DGB).  Bliesener called 
for a special convention in B-W to discuss the reform. 
Bliesener criticized in particular the reduction of 
employment benefits and the proposed changes to German labor 
law. Along with Bliesener, several SPD sub-organizations in 
B-W with a considerable share of union members have voiced 
their distress at the Chancellor\'s plan.  The SPD rank-and- 
file is critical of Vogt\'s unwavering support of Schroeder. 
 
9.  (SBU) The tensions within the B-W SPD have grown 
steadily in recent weeks.  Members of the SPD\'s left wing, 
led by Ulrich Maurer, former State Chairman and mentor of 
Ute Vogt, and Hilde Mattheis, the SPD\'s deputy party leader, 
are organizing under the logo \"BWL\" (Baden-Wuerttemberg 
Left) to protest Agenda 2010.  Maurer and Mattheis are also 
the most prominent Social Democrats thus far to sign a 
manifest entitled \"reforms are necessary.\"  The four-page 
paper explains in detail why Schroeder\'s proposals are not 
feasible. 
 
Rheinland-Pfalz SPD stands firmly behind Agenda 2010 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
10.  (SBU) Leadership as well as rank-and-file members of 
the Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) SPD stand behind Schroeder\'s 
reform plans.  Minister-President Kurt Beck, who represents 
the moderate wing of the SPD, has clearly spoken out in 
favor of Agenda 2010.  According to Beck, Agenda 2010 is an 
absolute necessity and there is no turning back. In 
conversations with SPD contacts we were told that Andrea 
Nahles, the former national chief of the SPD youth 
organization JUSOS critical of the Schroeder plan, is not 
representative of R-P SPD.  In addition, Dietmar Muscheid, 
the DGB chief for Rheinland-Pfalz has also taken a rather 
moderate position.  The SPD leadership is aware of the fact 
that Agenda 2010 can only be a first step and that much 
deeper cuts will be needed in the future, particularly in 
the health-care and pension system. 
 
11.  (SBU) There is also agreement within the R-P SPD that 
some measures of Agenda 2010 have to be discussed in more 
depth.  For example, Schroeder\'s proposal to limit the 
length of unemployment benefits for employees 55 years and 
older to eighteen months does not consider the fact that 
this segment of the population may never find work and 
cannot just be left out in the cold.  Malu Dreyer, R-P 
Social Minister, admits that Germany\'s social welfare system 
needs a complete overhaul.  Clinging to old measures will 
not help to bring the desired relief, Dreyer said. 
Nevertheless, the changes in the system should be socially 
balanced.  Dreyer also criticized Schroeder for combining 
approval of his agenda with yet another vote of confidence. 
This is the third time he has resorted to this strategy and 
it is wearing thin, Dreyer said. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
12. (SBU) Opposition to Agenda 2010 is strongest in the left- 
leaning Hesse and Saarland SPD.  While Saarland SPD chairman 
Heiko Maas has managed to unite his party behind a critical 
position paper, the Hesse SPD remains split.  This has 
partly due to with the still relatively weak leadership of 
Andrea Ypsilanti, but also with a traditional shift between 
the more left leaning south and the more moderate north 
(Hans Eichel\'s home).  Maas has much to lose at home with 
state elections coming up in fall 2004.  Saarland is the 
first state the SPD has a realistic chance of winning back 
from the CDU next year.  This will only succeed if Maas can 
prove he is independent of the old guard.  In the state, 
which is the most highly unionized in Germany, Maas has 
little choice but to oppose major points of Agenda 2010. 
13.  (SBU) In Rheinland-Pfalz, the SPD stands firmly behind 
the Chancellor\'s concept.  The party leadership and grass 
roots members accept the overall plan.  There is widespread 
recognition within the party that clinging to old concepts 
will endanger the whole social system and that there is no 
alternative to the Schroeder plan.  In B-W, things are not 
as simple.  Although the majority of the leadership stands 
behind Agenda 2010, there is a small but strong opposition 
toward the reform plan that has joined forces under the logo 
\"BWL\" (Baden-Wuerttemberg Left).  Nevertheless, we expect B- 
W state leader Ute Vogt to keep the opponents of the Agenda 
under control.  End Comment. 
 
BODDE 
"
"9082","7/1/2003 8:38","03FRANKFURT5345","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005345 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB BAY, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR IMI HARLOW, AUSTIN 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: ECB\'s Next President Trichet:  No Obstacles 
Foreseen 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-36 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not 
for Internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary:  European Central Bank (ECB) senior 
officials do not foresee any obstacles to Jean-Claude 
Trichet becoming the next President of the European 
Central Bank.  Finance Ministers are scheduled to make 
their official recommendation at the Ecofin meeting on 
July 15.  The ECB Governing Council and Parliament will 
then be consulted and give their opinions.  Final 
approval by heads of state should take place at the 
European Council on October 16-17.  Trichet is expected 
to be in office by the end of October, early November. 
End Summary 
 
Thessaloniki Council Jumps the Gun 
 
2. (SBU)  The Presidency\'s conclusions of European 
Council meeting of June 19-20 in Thessaloniki  states 
that the Heads of State or Government \"have decided on 
the candidacy of Jean-Claude Trichet for the presidency 
of the European Central Bank.\"  They went on to \"invite 
the Council (ECOFIN),\" at its next session, to initiate 
the necessary procedures under the Treaty. 
 
3. (SBU)  While this was a clear political signal, a 
senior ECB official points out that the Council got a 
bit ahead of itself.  Under the Treaty the ECOFIN has 
the responsibility to take the initiative for 
recommending a new ECB president.  The Council\'s 
conclusions have no binding effect. 
 
Appointment Process and Schedule 
 
4. (SBU)  According to the ECB official, at the July 15 
Ecofin meeting Finance Ministers should make their 
recommendation for Trichet to become the next ECB 
President.  Under Article 11 of the ECB\'s statutes, 
before this recommendation goes to the Heads of State 
or Government for a decision, the Governing Council of 
the ECB and the European Parliament have to be 
consulted.  Both issue non-binding opinions. 
 
5. (SBU) There had been some discussion that the 
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee (EMAC) of the 
Parliament would hold a special hearing in July, 
according to the ECB official.  However, he reports 
that EMAC decided that no special session was necessary 
and will hold its hearing in the second half of 
September (Note: EMAC has sessions scheduled for 
September 10 and 30).  The hearing will afford an 
opportunity for committee members to pose questions to 
Trichet. 
 
6. (SBU) Given the timing of the anticipated Ecofin 
recommendation and the EMAC hearing, the Governing 
Council of the ECB would render its opinion either at 
its meeting on July 31 or its August 21 session.  Heads 
of State or Government at the October 16-17 European 
Council meeting could then give their formal 
endorsement. 
 
7. (SBU)  According to this ECB official, Trichet 
should be able to be in the ECB\'s President\'s office in 
late October, early November.  He said, \"No obstacles 
are foreseen in this process.\" 
 
8. (U)  This cable was coordinated with US Embassy 
Berlin and USEU. 
 
(U) POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49- 
(69)-7535-2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"9239","7/8/2003 13:15","03FRANKFURT5570","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03FRANKFURT392","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005570 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, ECON, EAIR, GM 
SUBJECT: TOP HESSE CDU PLAYERS KOCH AND ROTH TUSSLE 
 
REF: A) 2002 FRANKFURT 11843; B) FRANKFURT 392 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: Hesse\'s two most powerful Christian 
Democratic (CDU) politicians, Hesse\'s Minister President 
Roland Koch and Frankfurt Lord Mayor Petra Roth have public 
disagreements and competing national ambitions.  Roth was 
elected in May 2003 as president of the German Council of 
Cities.  Koch was reelected in February 2003 as Minister- 
President of Hesse with an absolute majority.  They disagree 
on major issues such as the expansion of Frankfurt airport 
and regional reform.  Though Roth is losing support in the 
Hesse state CDU, she remains very popular in Frankfurt.  Her 
public opposition to Koch\'s initiatives could create 
problems for the Hesse Minister-President for the remainder 
of his second term.  End summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) The media have reported a serious rift between 
Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch and Frankfurt Lord 
Mayor Petra Roth (both CDU).  The Frankfurter Neue Presse, a 
left-of-center newspaper, quotes CDU politicians\' 
description of icy relations between the two influential 
Hesse leaders that date back to Roth\'s re-election as Mayor 
of Frankfurt two years ago.  Roth had distanced herself from 
Koch, who was then entangled in a party financing scandal. 
Roth denies allegations of tensions, stating that, \"There 
are several politicians in Wiesbaden who want to fabricate a 
rift that does not exist.\"  She does admit that she tends to 
compensate with her outspoken views for what she perceives 
as Frankfurt\'s insufficient representation in the state 
parliament.  \"Frankfurt is Hesse\'s most important urban 
center,\" says Roth\'s assistant, \"But we only have twelve 
deputies in state parliament (out of 100).  Frankfurt lacks 
a strong lobby.\" 
 
3. (SBU) Roth and Koch, publicly clash on: 
 
  -    Frankfurt airport expansion.  Koch supports it, Roth 
     rejects the selected variant, because due to the potential 
     increase in noise for residents near Frankfurt; 
-    Regional reform. Roth would like more responsibility 
for a regional (multi-state) body led by Frankfurt to 
facilitate administrative, economic and cultural 
cooperation.  Koch intends to limit Frankfurt\'s influence; 
-    Privatization of the Frankfurt Trade Fair, a huge 
exhibition center in downtown Frankfurt.  Koch supports 
selling Hesse\'s 40 percent share.  Roth is against selling 
the city of Frankfurt\'s 60 percent share. 
 
4. (SBU) Since Lord Mayor Petra Roth was elected head of the 
German Council of Cities May 15, 2003, she has been de facto 
Hesse\'s second most powerful politician.  Roth\'s 
relationship with the Chairman of the Frankfurt CDU, Udo 
Corts is especially problematic.  Udo Corts is Hesse 
Minister of Higher Education and former state Interior 
Minister.  He is a rising star in Koch\'s cabinet, and a 
favorite of the Minister-President.  In a meeting with the 
Consul General in June, Corts openly expressed his dislike 
of Roth.  Corts said that Roth is losing support in the 
state CDU due to her reputation for unreliability and open 
resistance to Koch\'s initiatives.  Corts said not only Koch, 
but other cabinet members, are wondering what Roth\'s goals 
really are.  Corts also said it was, \"far from certain that 
Roth will be re-nominated by the state CDU, if her track 
record does not improve.\" (Note: Roth was re-elected for a 
six-year term in 2001.) 
 
5.  (SBU) Comment: Koch and Roth are both ambitious 
politicians who have set their sights on national office: 
Koch for Chancellor (2006), Roth for Federal President 
(2004).  Both know that it would be virtually impossible for 
two Hesse politicians to hold these offices at the same time 
and the competition adds to the tension between them. 
(Note: Despite her ambitions, most observers put Roth\'s 
chances of becoming Federal President at close to zero.) 
Koch\'s drive to redesign the administrative structure of the 
region is perceived as a threat by Roth and others across 
the Frankfurt political party spectrum.  The tension between 
Hesse\'s competitive Minister-President Roland Koch and 
Frankfurt\'s vocal Lord Mayor Petra Roth could make Koch\'s 
second term more difficult than his absolute majority might 
indicate.  End comment. 
 
BODDE 
"
"9310","7/10/2003 14:33","03FRANKFURT5668","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","03REFTEL:2002FRANKFURT11411","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 005668 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, ECON, ELAB, GM 
SUBJECT: SAARLAND\'S POPULAR MINISTER-PRESIDENT PETER 
MUELLER: A CENTER-LEFT \"REBEL\" 
 
REFTEL: 2002 FRANKFURT 11411 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: Saarland Minister-President Peter Mueller 
represents the center-left membership of the Christian 
Democratic Union (CDU).  Known for his unorthodox, 
provocative political style, he one of the most outspoken 
CDU Minister-Presidents.  He faces state elections in summer 
2004 and currently has the lead in opinion polls.  Mueller 
plans to visit the U.S. in September 2003 and seeks to 
expand U.S. investment in Saarland.  End summary. 
 
Unorthodox Conservative 
----------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Saarland Minister-President Peter Mueller broke the 
15-year reign of the Social Democratic Party (SPD) in 
Saarland in 1999 by winning an absolute majority for the 
CDU.  He was re-elected Saarland CDU state chairman in May 
2003 with 99.5 percent of the vote and has become the most 
popular Saarland politician since Oskar Lafontaine (the 
former Minister-President and SPD national chairman who left 
office in 1999).  Mueller is outspoken and likes putting 
forth unconventional ideas.  Though he represents a small 
state (population one million), he is one of the most vocal 
of the CDU Minister-Presidents.  He has several nicknames 
including \"black Peter\" (a reference to a card game that 
indicates \"the one who gets all the blame.\")  This stems 
from 1998, when Mueller was the first to call for Chancellor 
Kohl\'s resignation and was accused of being disloyal, though 
many in the party privately shared the same viewpoint. 
 
3. (SBU) One of Mueller\'s closest aides, Joachim 
Kiefaber, is the head of the Foreign Trade Division in 
the Ministry of Economics and a former Free Democratic 
Party (FDP) caucus member of the Saarland parliament, a 
holdover from the former CDU-FDP coalition.  He 
describes Mueller as religious and socially minded, 
noting Mueller\'s Social Democratic family and 
upbringing, often reflected in his left-of-center CDU 
policies.  On economic policy, Mueller is a vigorous 
advocate of new technologies and has pushed strongly for 
structural change in the steel and coal industry in 
Saarland.  Another area which interests Mueller is 
social reform and the Herzog Kommission, the CDU 
counterpart to the Ruerup commission.  Mueller tends to 
be a mediator.  This is reflected in his cabinet, with 
its healthy mix of conservatives and centrists.  His 
bridge-building skills are reflected in the opinion 
polls: 70 percent of Saarland\'s voters respect Mueller 
as a leader. 
 
4. (SBU) Mueller was a judge with an outstanding 
reputation before entering politics.  On legal issues, 
Mueller is considered one of Germany\'s brightest minds. 
Mueller does not back away from criticizing his own 
party.  In 1991 for example, he publicly demanded that 
Chancellor Kohl step down because of a broken promise on 
taxes.  In 2002, Mueller admitted that the CDU\'s outrage 
in the Bundesrat after the immigration bill vote that 
approved the law (but which was ultimately overturned by 
the Federal Constitutional Court) was staged.  The press 
speculated as to why he \"unmasked\" his CDU colleagues, 
particularly Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch.  His 
staff told us that Mueller\'s decision reflected both his 
satiric humor and general frustration with political 
gamesmanship on the immigration issue, which he feels 
strongly about.  Mueller\'s own views on immigration 
reform are, in fact, not far distant from many of the 
points in the government\'s proposals. 
 
5. (SBU) Mueller\'s unorthodox style is reflected in his 
dislike of hierarchy.  He is often seen in the corridors of 
the Chancellery visiting his staff, in contrast to his two 
more formal predecessors.  Many on Mueller\'s team come from 
the CDU\'s youth wing.  He was the first Minister-President 
to introduce paperless cabinet meetings.  Everyone in his 
cabinet must take computer training and carries a laptop. 
In decision making, Mueller likes the motto, \"exactness 
before quickness.\"  Despite this, contacts say that he tends 
to change his opinion suddenly. 
 
6. (SBU) Mueller became a national figure when he assumed 
chairmanship of the CDU immigration commission in 2000.  He 
had a personal and legal interest in the subject, not least 
due to the fact that Saarland shares borders with France and 
Luxembourg.  He essentially agreed with Interior Minister 
Otto Schily on a draft immigration bill.  Mueller blames the 
Green Party for blocking a compromise, but FDP contacts 
close to Mueller say that he was under enormous pressure by 
the CDU presidium and finally caved in.  Mueller\'s aide 
Kiefaber said, \"With his backing down on the immigration 
issue, Mueller made one change of direction too many. 
Another will cause him lost credibility and thus diminish 
his influence in the national CDU.\"  Mueller\'s close 
relationship with CDU Chairperson Angela Merkel was also 
seriously damaged by his backing of Stoiber.  Mueller said 
that he had had a one-on-one meeting with Merkel beforehand 
to explain his reasoning, but Merkel leaked it to the press, 
making him appear disloyal.  Since then, the relationship 
has been cool. 
 
Pro-American, Friend of France, Seeks to Expand U.S. 
Investment in Saarland 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
7. (SBU) Mueller has a strong interest in foreign policy. 
This year he became representative in the Bundesrat for 
German-French cultural affairs, an important political 
position based on the Elysee Treaty.  A good relationship 
with France is the cornerstone of Mueller\'s foreign policy. 
Mueller also seeks closer contact with neighbors Luxembourg 
and Belgium.  Mueller is generally pro-American, but on the 
Iraq issue he sympathized with the French position and 
criticized the U.S. for allegedly disregarding international 
law.  Mueller hopes to expand Saarland-U.S. relations and 
U.S. investment in Saarland and will visit the U.S. 
(Washington D.C. and Pennsylvania) in September 2003. 
 
Facing State Elections in Summer 2004 
------------------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Mueller faces his first test at the polling booth 
as Minister-President in summer 2004.  Despite a clear lead 
in the opinion polls (the CDU has between 48 and 50 percent) 
the SPD has a realistic chance to win back Saarland for the 
SPD, especially if the Green Party makes it over the five 
percent threshold into state parliament.  If the SPD gains 
in strength sufficiently to win back the reins of power, the 
composition of the Bundesrat, Germany\'s second house of 
parliament would change (although not significantly enough 
to overturn the current CDU/CSU-FDP majority).  Mueller and 
his staff do not believe that Oskar Lafontaine will run for 
office in Saarland again.  Mueller\'s assistant Rabel said: 
\"Election campaigning is hard work.  Lafontaine is not up 
for it.\"  Mueller will campaign with the themes of 
Saarland\'s success: high growth, low unemployment, effective 
restructuring of the steel industry.  The opposition will 
point to Saarland\'s large deficit and the fact that much of 
the reduction in unemployment can be attributed to 
demographic factors. 
 
Other Biographic Information 
---------------------------- 
 
9. (U) Born l955 in Illingen, Saarland, Peter Mueller 
studied law and political science and was appointed 
judge at the Saarbruecken State Court in 1986.  In l990, 
he was elected into the Saarbruecken State Parliament 
(Landtag) and served as the CDU caucus\' parliamentary 
manager until l994.  Mueller went to the U.S. on an 
International Visitor Program in 1992.  He became 
Saarland CDU party chairman in the summer of l995, 
succeeding former National Minister Klaus Toepfer, his 
mentor.  In September 1999, he was elected Minister- 
President, winning unexpectedly by a small margin.  (Due 
to the absence of smaller parties in the Landtag the CDU 
achieved an absolute majority.)  Mueller ended 15 years 
of SPD rule in Saarland, succeeding Minister-President 
Reinhard Klimmt (SPD).  Mueller spoke out early in favor 
of a new immigration law.  In 2000, he took over the 
chairmanship of the CDU immigration commission, a 
position of national prominence. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10. (SBU) Popular Minister-President Mueller seems 
omnipresent in the small state of Saarland: his role as 
\"state father\" suits him.  Though an academic and a judge, 
he maintains contact with the man in the street.  Mueller 
seeks to make his party \"the CSU of Saarland\" reaching far 
into the centrist electorate.  The Saarland CDU is indeed 
much more like the CSU in Bavaria, with no natural 
connections to the liberal FDP and a good relationship with 
the trade unions.  If Mueller strengthens the CDU in 
Saarland in the 2004 elections, his position in the national 
CDU will also grow.  Mueller will continue to play an 
important role in CDU and is one of few visibly representing 
its center-left membership.  End comment. 
 
BODDE 
"
"9311","7/10/2003 14:38","03FRANKFURT5670","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 FRANKFURT 005670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB BAY, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR IMI HARLOW, AUSTIN 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Economic Forecast for Germany: Slow Growth and 
High Government Deficits Continue; Deflation Outside 
Risk; Building Confidence is Key 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-37 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not 
for Internet distribution. 
 
REF: Berlin 2415 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary: Our forecast for Germany for this 
year and next is for continued slow growth with a 
modest pick up in 2004 driven by net exports.  While 
1.3% real growth in 2004 might be deemed a \"recovery\" 
after 0.1% growth in 2003 it is mostly closing a part 
of the output gap that has opened during three years of 
stagnation.  Unemployment will remain in the 10.7% 
range and the government deficit will remain above 3% 
of GDP.  This forecast incorporates possible effects of 
structural reforms announced in the agenda 2010 package 
(reftel), but these are likely to cause a drag on 
growth in their first year of implementation, with 
positive effects following in 2005 and later.  End 
Summary 
 
2. (SBU)  Risks to this forecast are principally on the 
downside - that is the balance of risks suggest that 
the actual situation is more likely to worsen than 
improve.  The absence of robust bank lending, weaker 
external demand, faster appreciation of the euro 
against the USD are some of the risks.  Deflation is 
another, which we give only an outside chance of 
materializing next year. 
 
3. (SBU)  This forecast incorporates budget data from 
the Government\'s recently released 2004 budget, 
including bringing income tax cuts a year forward from 
January 2005 to January 2004.  We have not yet 
estimated the possible effects on growth, although 
other estimates range from 0.3 to 0.6 percentage points 
of higher growth.  Stimulus from income tax cuts could 
help offset some of the drag from structural reforms 
but carry other risks, e.g. higher deficits and debt 
service. 
 
4. (SBU)  Taking a broader view, investment will be a 
key to turning over Germany\'s growth engine.  Declining 
investment has been a contributing factor to Germany\'s 
lackluster growth performance in the 1990\'s. 
Investment growth could be supported by relatively 
lower price and wage increases in Germanythan in its 
euro area partners and lower non-wage labor costs 
promised by structural reforms. Combined with income 
tax reductions, the announcement effect of such a 
comprehensive program on investors as well as consumers 
could be positive.  This, then, would be the upside 
risks to the forecast. 
 
Growth Prospects for 2003 and 2004: Slow Growth, Modest 
Recovery 
 
 
5. (SBU) Seasonally adjusted real GDP is likely to grow 
slower than previously forecast:  0.1% in 2003, down 
from 0.7% and 1.3% in 2004 down from 1.8%.  The first 
quarter\'s unexpected   0.2% decline compared to the 
fourth quarter last year has made even modest growth 
improbable for 2003. 
 
6. (SBU) After years of flat growth a modest pick up in 
net exports in 2004 should spark growth of 1.3%, hardly 
a recovery as the economy has been stagnating and the 
output gap between actual performance and potential has 
widen.  2004 growth on a non-seasonally adjusted basis 
should improve to 1.8% due to four more working days in 
the calendar year. 
 
Indicators and Sentiment Show No Sign of Recovery 
 
7. (SBU)  Business climate indicators do not signal any 
significant upswing.  The ZEW indicator has flattened 
after rising for six months and is still will below its 
historical average.  The ifo index rise in May, the 
first up tick since January, was weak, driven by 
expectations. But the assessment of current economic 
conditions remains poor.  The economic sentiment 
indicator (ESI) for Germany from the EU Business and 
Consumer Survey shows stagnation at a very low level. 
Expectations concerning production, unemployment and 
the general economic situation over next 12 months have 
deteriorated, underpinning our forecast for continued 
stagnation in 2003. 
 
Is there evidence that something will trigger a change 
in current trends? At the moment we do not see any. 
 
8.  (SBU)  The increase in private consumption  in  the 
first  quarter was unique and will not continue in  the 
next  three  quarters (see below).  One factor  driving 
weak  private consumption is a lack of confidence in  a 
better   outlook.   New  paper  reports  suggest   that 
consumers are wary and anxious about high unemployment, 
climbing  social taxes, financial difficulties  of  the 
Government   and   states  and  that  the   operational 
effectiveness of economic politics has declined. 
 
9. (SBU)  Recapturing the population\'s trust will not 
be easy.  The controversy over economic reforms that 
began last September shows no sign of abating.   Clear 
outcomes that could contribute to more confidence , as 
well as a conviction that a comprehensive economic 
program is being put into place, could help restore 
consumers\' trust and interest. 
 
10.  (SBU)  On the business side the sentiment  is  not 
any  better.  Entrepreneurs have been coping with  high 
non-wage labour costs and structural restraints. Agenda 
2010   reforms  should  help  somewhat,  provided   the 
promised  reforms are put into place.   Heated  debates 
over  the reforms, and rumors of possible tax hikes  to 
ease the government budget deficit, put into doubt what 
the government will actually end up doing, contributing 
to  uncertainty  and  delays in  investment  decisions. 
Enterprises  place their hope, once again,  on  foreign 
demand.  Such demand will be only slightly affected  by 
the  euro appreciation as most German exports go to the 
euro area; imports should pick up, leaving a small  net 
trade  surplus to drive recovery in 2003 and  a  larger 
one in 2004. 
 
First Quarter of 2003: False Start - Domestic Demand 
Not Sustainable 
 
11. (SBU)  Analysts note that despite the first quarter 
decline, the composition of demand was encouraging. 
Domestic demand grew while net exports declined, a 
potential sign that Germany could begin to grow its own 
way of economic stagnation rather than relying on a 
revival of external demand.  We are not so optimistic. 
 
12. (SBU)  First quarter dynamics were attributable  to 
one-off factors that will reverse in the course of  the 
year.   The savings rate was drawn down from  10.6%  to 
10.4% and net disposable incomes were higher due  to  a 
raise  in  entrepreneurial and  interest  income.   Net 
income actually shrank by 0.4% compared to the previous 
quarter  due  to January\'s increases in  payroll  taxes 
(higher pension contributions (from 19.1% to 19.5%) and 
health insurance (from 14.1% to 14.4%) and higher taxes 
on  petroleum, electricity, (i.e. the next step of  the 
\"Eco-tax\" reform) and tobacco. 
 
Other elements of domestic demand provide little 
comfort. 
 
13. (SBU)  Investment declined significantly by 1.7% in 
the   first  quarter  due  to  a  tremendous  fall   in 
construction  investment. Taking into account  capacity 
utilization,  production and order entries,  investment 
is   unlikely   to  advance  in  the  second   quarter. 
Manufacturing capacity utilization is still  under  its 
long-term average, although the trend is up. 
 
14.  (SBU)  Construction decreased in the first quarter 
by  3.3%  due  in part to the extremely  cold  weather. 
Even  though  the  sector continues  to  work  off  its 
overcapacity, a gleam of hope in the first quarter  was 
an  increase  in  building permits. This  rise  may  be 
attributed  to  the heated political  discussion  about 
cutting housing subsidies, provoking an unusual  amount 
of  applications  for  permits.   Those  with  building 
permits  would be entitled to the subsidy. Low interest 
rates  provide an incentive for immediate  construction 
even  though  the  building permit is  valid  for  five 
years.  Thus, construction in the housing sector should 
rise  in  the  second and third quarters.  Nonetheless, 
continued  reduction  in overall  capacity  will  still 
result in a drag on GDP growth. 
 
Government  consumption, constrained by  rising  budget 
deficits, will remain modest. 
 
The Story is Still External Led Growth 
 
15. (SBU)  The base scenario of the forecast remains 
for net exports to drive a gradual recovery in 2004: 
the rest of Euro area - taking 54.7% of German exports 
-- will grow faster than Germany.  Thus, German exports 
are insulated to a significant extent from much of the 
effects of the euro\'s appreciation.  In nominal terms, 
the euro is up 16.5% against the USD during the first 
half of 2003.  A revival of foreign demand in 2004 both 
inside and outside the euro area should help override 
some of the price effects of more dear euro outside the 
euro area as German exports compete in high-end, 
quality and custom markets and between related firms 
where product substitution is difficult. 
 
Fiscal Deficit: Over Maastricht Threshold 
 
16. (SBU)  The Government deficit will climb to 3.9% of 
GDP in 2003.  Revenue is likely to decline as suggested 
by the results of the May tax estimate and our new GDP 
forecast. The result: a fiscal deficit of euro 41 
billion. For 2004 the deficit will continue to be 
driven by revenue losses and draws by social insurance 
programs.  The planned 2004 budget contains euro 15.9 
billion in measures to reduce the deficit to around 
euro 26 billion.  However, bringing forward the income 
tax cut would add another euro 7 billion to the Federal 
deficit and the same amount to the state deficits and 
around euro 2.5 billion deficit at the local levels. 
Thus, the overall government deficit will stay around 
3.8% of GDP.  Germany would neither meet its political 
commitment to reduce the nominal deficit below 3% in 
2003 nor in 2004, the year in which Germany\'s excessive 
deficit is to be corrected under the rules of the EU 
Stability and Growth Pact. 
 
CPI: Practically Price Stability 
 
17. (SBU)  Consumer price increases will remain 
subdued, even declining on a quarterly basis for some 
of the year due to the euro appreciation and lower oil 
prices, but rising overall at an annual average rate of 
0.8% in 2003 and 0.9% in 2004 as demand begins to rise. 
 
18.  (SBU)   Consumer prices rose in the first  quarter 
2003  by  0.7% over the previous quarter  and  by  1.1% 
compared  to  a year ago.  In April and in  May  prices 
declined  slightly  on a monthly basis  due  to  strong 
price  declines  in  heating oil and  gas  (oil  prices 
decreased  immediately after the end of the  Iraq  war; 
the price decline was reinforced by Euro appreciation). 
These  effects will continue throughout the year (basis 
effects), partially offset by rises in services prices. 
 
Unemployment: No Cause for Joy 
 
19. (SBU)  The number of unemployed will increase by 
9.8% in 2003 and decline by 1.6% in 2004 as economic 
growth picks up.   The unemployment rate will remain 
around 10.7%. 
 
Forecast Risks:  On the Downside 
 
20. (SBU)  Risks remain as in the previous forecast, 
principally on the down side: lack of robust bank 
lending, weaker external demand, faster and higher 
appreciation of the euro/USD exchange rate. 
 
21. (SBU)  The lack of clear, fully agreed government 
fiscal and reform policies or actions with attendant 
political uncertainties weighs on consumer confidence - 
a factor that could continue into 2004.  Deflation is 
not a feature in our forecast but is an outside risk 
toward the latter part of the forecast horizon, 
particularly if the anticipated upswing does not take 
hold. 
 
A Broader View: Growth, Deflation and Fiscal Expansion 
 
22. (SBU)  This forecast has been composed in a period 
of fluidity: the government has announced a major 
structural reform initiative, subsidy cuts, and 
significant tax reductions by bringing forward to 2004 
income tax cuts scheduled for 2005.  This section takes 
a step back and seeks to discern a line of logic in 
these measures that could give a basis for a more 
optimistic scenario than we have assumed. One way to 
look at what is going on is that relatively low 
inflation and structural reforms with tax cuts could 
help counter act the weak investment performance that 
has plagued Germany for nearly a decade. Both these 
mechanisms, structural reforms and relative price 
adjustments, are the \"tools\" now available to Germany 
in the monetary union to adapt to \"shocks\" it has 
suffered during reunification. 
 
Why Weak Growth? 
 
23. (SBU)  The European Commisson\'s 2002 \"Review of 
Germany\'s Growth Performance\" points to several factors 
that account for Germany\'s prolonged low growth and 
vulnerabilities to external developments.  Low growth 
stems from weak domestic demand: weak consumption and 
investment, including in the construction sector. 
 
24. (SBU)  Large financial transfers to the new states, 
around 4% of GDP annually, initially financed by larger 
deficits, now are financed by higher taxes diverting 
funds from social funds.  These funds, in turn, have 
had to increase their contribution rates.  Higher taxes 
and social charges crowd out private investment as 
expected profits are reduced and adversely effect 
employment, in the Commission\'s assessment.  Low 
construction investment is the product of working off 
excess capacity in both the new States and the West 
from the heady early 1990 days of reunification and 
high immigration. 
 
25. (SBU)  The recently released Bank for International 
Settlements\' Annual Report also highlights the decline 
in investment as \"the strongest sign (if not cause) of 
the underperformance of the German economy.\"  The BIS 
believes that while partially cyclical, the low 
propensity to invest is due to fundamental or 
structural factors such as low rates of return, low 
corporate profits, and product and labor market 
rigidities. 
 
26. (SBU)  A study by Goldman Sachs suggests that the 
massive cost shock from higher wages in the new states 
and the West associated with reunification encouraged 
firms to substitute capital for labor. Lower 
profitability reduced the incentive to invest. The BIS 
notes that since the early 1990\'s net investment in 
Germany has fallen sharply.  Goldman Sachs points out 
that compared to 1991 the real level of investment is 
only 6.5% higher in Germany while in the rest of the 
euro area it is 23% higher. In 2001 and 2002 investment 
continued to decline, as we forecast it will this year. 
 
27. (SBU)  Lower inflation in Germany relative to that 
in its main European trading partners suggests that its 
external competitiveness will increase, supporting 
exports and growth. This relative price adjustment is 
one way regions experiencing relatively slower economic 
activity in a monetary union can adjust.  Thus, 
relatively lower inflation could benefit Germany. 
However, it also raises the risk of deflation. 
 
The \"D\" Word 
 
28. (SBU)  While we have not found any economists to 
declare that deflation is occurring in Germany, most 
all will admit that there are risks, even the usually 
reserved Bundesbank.  This is playing it safe.  There 
is a general suspicion that, as the BIS explains, \"a 
seemingly benign low-inflation environment can turn 
into one with disruptive deflation.\" Deflation can be 
there before you know it.  Moreover, the costs are 
high, more disruptive than inflation.  Many of these 
adverse effects bear directly on investment. 
 
29. (SBU)  One definition of deflation is a decline in 
the general price level on a sustained basis that 
reduces demand.  This definition would rule out the 
more benevolent form of price decreases due to supply 
shocks, like new sources of supply or higher 
productivity, that can drive down prices but contribute 
to faster economic growth. Deflation that is pernicious 
constricts investment: firms hold off investment as the 
real cost of credits increase and profits are squeezed 
because consumers hold off purchases and nominal wages 
are \"sticky,\" keeping production costs higher than 
otherwise. 
 
30. (SBU)  It takes more than low inflation to move to 
deflation, but Germany has a number of those other 
necessary attributes.  A growing output gap, weak 
credit growth, and soft equity prices are fertile 
ground in Germany for deflation, according to a recent 
IMF staff assessment. Nonetheless, the IMF paper 
concluded that \"mild deflation is likely to take hold\" 
but that \"the risks of pernicious deflation are low.\" 
 
31. (SBU)  Deutsche Bank research developed its own 
\"scoreboard\" of 10 indicators that gave Germany a 0.5 
compared to 0.7 in Japan where deflation has taken hold 
and 0.4 in the US.  While they see some negative 
inflation during the year, they give a 20-30% 
probability that deflation could last for more than a 
year, and a lower probability to dangerous deflation 
taking hold.  This would require continued stagnation 
in economic growth, continued low credit growth, a 
substantial further appreciation of the euro to around 
1.40/usd, inflation expectations would have to fall (no 
signs yet that consumers expect lower prices - just 
stable prices) and inflation in the euro area would 
have to fall below 1%. 
 
32. (SBU)  This last point is worth noting.  The 
European Central Bank asserts that price developments 
in Germany cannot be considered in isolation from price 
developments in the rest of the EMU.  The ECB considers 
average euro area inflation and pitches its monetary 
policy for price stability, i.e. price increases of 2% 
or less, but still close to 2% to protect against 
possible deflation (this latter point is an important 
clarification recently issued by the ECB).  With Euro 
area inflation still running around 2% and Germany\'s 
inflation at 0.7%, that means other countries are 
running substantially higher inflation than Germany. 
As noted above, this should improve Germany\'s 
competitive position within the euro area. 
 
33. (SBU)  Deutsche Bank research provides an 
illustrative example.  The posit that if euro area 
inflation were to remain around 2% (the ECB\'s 
definition of price stability), Germany, with a weight 
of 30% of the monetary union, would have to have 
negative 1% inflation and the rest of the Euro area 
would average 3.5% inflation - a gap of 4.5 percentage 
points.  At such a spread there should be opportunities 
for pricing arbitrage for tradable goods, raising 
demand in Germany. 
 
Role of Fiscal Policy and Reforms 
 
34. (SBU)  Another way to counter the price shocks 
adversely affecting investment could be reductions in 
taxes and non-wage labor costs that have restrained 
demand for labor and investment.  The Finance Minister 
has politically linked advancing the income tax 
reductions to adoption of structural reforms and a 
trimmed 2004 deficit that is less than planned 
investment.  In addition, some short-term stimulus to 
economic growth from the tax reductions, estimated to 
range from 0.3-0.6 percentage points, could help offset 
the drag on growth from the early stages of structural 
reforms. 
 
35. (SBU)  At a time when there is a risk of deflation 
and confidence is fragile, the Government appears to be 
seeking to take economic matters into its own hands. 
This, Finance Ministry officials agree, should help 
instill confidence in consumers and investors. 
 
36. (SBU)  The BIS suggests in its annual report that a 
counter cyclical fiscal policy combined with an 
expansionary monetary policy and other reforms would 
provide a \"more potent cocktail\" of stimulus to deter 
the threat of deflation.  However, in Germany a recent 
survey (Infratest) suggests, that still 81% of 
respondents were less satisfied or not at all satisfied 
with the government\'s economic policies.  81% of the 
respondents opposed taking on new debt to pay for 
bringing forward the income tax cuts. This suggests 
that rather than spending the savings from tax 
reductions, many might save them in anticipation of 
higher taxes in the future to help  reduce the debt. 
 
                   Forecast- Germany 
     (Percent Increases - Unless Noted Otherwise) 
 
 
 
 
                    2002         2003        2004 
               ACTUAL     FORECAST  FORECAST 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
GDP :                0.2         0.1       1.8 
 
CONSUMPTION:        -0.6         0.5       0.9 
 
GOV. CONSUMPTION:    1.5         0.6       1.2 
 
INVESTMENT:         -6.7        -2.0       1.0 
 
- MACH. & EQUIP.:   -9.4        -0.3       2.7 
 
- CONSTRUCTION:     -5.9        -3.7      -0.9 
- OTHER INVEST.:     2.5         2.2       6.3 
NET EXPORTS:        51.1        -6.5       8.6 
 
- EXPORTS:           2.6         3.0       5.9 
 
- IMPORTS:          -2.1         4.5       5.6 
 
NOM. GDP:      2108.2      2127.2    2174.0 
(Euro Bill) 
 
CURRT. ACCT.        48.9        44        59 
(Euro Bill) 
 
PRICES:              1.3          0.8        0.9 
 
EMPLOYMENT           38,689      38,156     38,300 
(Thousands) 
 
UNEMPLOYMENT         4,071       4,470      4,400 
(nat. definition) 
(Thousands) 
 
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE     9.8         10.7       10.6 
(Pct; nat. def.) 
 
TOTAL FISCAL BALANCE:  -3.8        -3.9      -3.8 
(Pct. GDP) 
 
 
BODDE 
"
"9550","7/21/2003 13:50","03FRANKFURT5937","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 005937 
 
SIPDIS 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, SOCI, PGOV, PREF, PHUM, GM 
SUBJECT: \"RUSSIAN-GERMANS\": IMMIGRATION AND INTEGRATION 
PROBLEMS IN SOUTHWEST GERMANY 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: The immigration and integration of ethnic 
Germans and their families from the former Soviet Union 
(Aussiedler) is a major social problem in Germany. 
Newcomers\' lack of German language skills makes them 
unemployable and drug-related crimes and ghettoization are 
endemic among Aussiedler youth.  Government efforts at 
promoting Aussiedler well-being and integration focus on 
programs intended to help them improve their German language 
skills.  Although the number of Aussiedler has steadily 
diminished since the early 1990s, the Aussiedler already in 
Germany remain a festering social problem for which no 
comprehensive solution has been implemented by the federal 
or state governments. End summary. 
 
Who are the \"Aussiedler?\" 
------------------------ 
 
2. (U) Aussiedler are descendents of Germans who were 
immigrated to Russia beginning in the 18th century when 
Czarina Catherine the Great, born into the German 
aristocracy, invited Germans to settle in Russia.  There was 
continuous migration of Germans to Russian lands up until 
the beginning of the Soviet Union.  When Nazi Germany 
invaded the Soviet Union, Stalin had the Aussiedler deported 
to Soviet Central Asia.  The 1949 Constitution of the 
Federal Republic of Germany re-codified the longstanding 
ethnic concept of German nationality; ethnic Germans were 
guaranteed the right to German residence and citizenship. 
 
3. (SBU) Following the fall of the Iron Curtain, ethnic 
Germans from the Soviet Union were in a position to take 
advantage of the citizenship law as well.  Beginning in the 
1990s, whole communities left the former Soviet Union to 
settle in Germany.  In addition to those who could prove 
German ethnicity, family members including non-German 
spouses and children were allowed to immigrate as well.  In 
response to the sudden surge in immigrants, the FRG set a 
cap of 220,000 Aussiedler immigrants per year in 1993, and 
in the same year enacted a new regulation requiring ethnic 
German principals to pass a German language competency test. 
Approximately 30 percent of applicants fail the test, which 
supplements genealogical data to establish the applicants\' 
ethnic German bona fides.  The annual number of Aussiedler 
moving to Germany has decreased steadily and the cap has 
never actually been met.  In 2002, 91,000 Aussiedler 
immigrated to Germany.  Germany had targeted aid to 
Aussiedler communities abroad to improve local conditions 
and stem the flow, for example to ethnic German families in 
Kazakhstan who were interested in resettlement in Siberia or 
the Volga region of Russia.  Such resettlement in Russia has 
proved much less attractive to most of Centra Asia\'s ethnic 
Germans than the possibility of starting a new life in 
Germany. 
 
The Aussiedler in Southwest Germany 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Aussiedler were settled in Germany according to a 
fixed formula in order to avoid what government officials 
called in the mid-1990s \"bunching.\"  Hesse accepted 7.2 
percent of all Aussiedler immigrants and Baden-Wuerttemberg 
(B-W) 12.4 percent.  (In B-W, this meant 11,245 persons in 
2002; 12,093 in 2001; and 11,749 in 2000.)  Almost 95 
percent comes from the former Soviet Union (statistics do 
not distinguish between Russia and the central Asian 
republics, but German government officials believe that 
former Russian and Kazakh nationals dominate this group.) 
Many Germans do not perceive Aussiedler as Germans and 
normally refer to them as \"Russians\" regardless of their 
actual ethnicity.  Only 25 percent of the Aussiedler are 
actually ethnic Germans.  The remaining 75 percent are 
spouses and family members, often with no German background 
or German language skills at all. 
 
5. (SBU) Many Germans associate Aussiedler, particularly the 
youth, with drugs and crime.  Media reporting, sometimes 
exaggerated, perpetuates this view.  Aussiedler are 
frequently mentioned in connection with organized crime. 
The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung reported three cases of 
human trafficking involving ethnic Germans from Russia in 
recent months.  Papers in the Frankfurt area attribute the 
emergence of a new and stronger form of heroin to Aussiedler 
drug gangs.  The Associated Press reported that in July 2002 
four Aussiedler were caught attacking an Iranian woman and 
her son near Frankfurt.  The article spoke of a \"new breed 
of right-wing extremism\" growing among the Aussiedler 
against other foreigners in Germany. 
 
6. (SBU) The \"drugs and crime\" stereotype contains some 
truth: Aussiedler youth tend to be more involved in criminal 
activity.  According to a 2002 police survey, every tenth 
German juvenile offender was of ethnic Russian origin. 
However, a spokesperson for the Frankfurt police cautioned 
us not to view Aussiedler as more criminal than Germans. 
 
The Drug Problem 
---------------- 
 
7. (SBU) Particularly worrying to local officials is an 
increase in drug abuse and drug-related crimes among young 
Aussiedler.  Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) statistics document that 
in urban areas with a high percentage of Aussiedler -- such 
as the industrial city of Ludwigshafen home to the 
multinational giant BASF -- every fourth person involved in 
drugs is an Aussiedler.  The police in R-P and other states 
have also noticed an increase in violent crimes and a 
growing number of HIV and tuberculosis among incarcerated 
Aussiedler.  One expert, Irene Troester, from Hohenheim 
University near Stuttgart, states that there is a 
misconception that young Aussiedler \"imported\" the drug 
problem to Germany.  She is the author of a comprehensive 
study on Aussiedler and says that almost all these young 
immigrants become involved with drugs after they arrive in 
Germany.  Troester, who immigrated from Kazakhstan at the 
age of seven, says that young Aussiedler are under great 
social and economic pressure.  Already steeped in social 
customs of heavy drinking, they turn to alcohol at age 14 or 
15 and are then easily lured to drugs. 
 
Social Isolation 
---------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Many Aussiedler perceive an unwelcoming attitude 
among native Germans, which probably contributes to the 
social isolation of the community.  Most Aussiedler are 
settled in groups of over 100 in dedicated, often 
geographically isolated apartment complexes.  Cities 
received subsidies for taking in Aussiedler in the 1990s and 
built large housing complexes as the most economic means of 
accommodation, and some were placed in renovated former 
military facilities.  According to Troester, politicians 
often preferred to concentrate Aussiedler in one area in 
order to avoid social problems they feared would be 
associated with contact between native Germans and the 
immigrants.  \"Then only one neighborhood goes bad,\" said 
Troester. 
 
9. (SBU) Some Germans look upon the government\'s support of 
Aussiedler with frustration and anger.  Aussiedler receive 
more housing assistance than many Germans or other 
immigrants.  Immigrants with large families, are entitled to 
bigger homes.  This creates the perception that an 
Aussiedler family with poor German and few marketable skills 
receives preferential treatment while other Germans and non- 
German immigrants receive less.  There is also a widespread 
perception that many Aussiedler have fraudulently claimed 
German ethnicity.  The problems of crime and drug abuse have 
further increased calls for an end to the \"coddling\" of 
Aussiedler and their families. 
 
Language As Key for Integration 
------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Government experts agree that acquiring language 
skills is considered key for successful integration into 
German society.  According to Herbert Rech (CDU), the B-W 
commissioner for Aussiedler, young immigrants do not feel 
sufficiently compelled to learn German.  The B-W Social 
Democratic (SPD) Caucus Chief Wolfgang Drexler welcomed 
Rech\'s comments saying, \"The CDU is finally facing reality 
concerning the Aussiedler community.\"  To improve the 
integration of Aussiedler, B-W is running a model project 
known as the \"integration guide.\"  Newly arrived Aussiedler 
sign a contract that lists their rights and obligations.  A 
social worker then acts as an advisor for the immigrant and 
assists in the integration effort.  B-W spends 4.4 million 
Euro annually for integrating Aussiedler and is thus a 
leader in southwest Germany. 
 
11. (SBU) Hesse has no comprehensive Aussiedler policy, but 
spends 655,000 Euro to support so called \"expellee 
organizations\" (Vertriebenenverbaende). (NOTE: The name 
dates back to the ethnic Germans who were expelled from 
Eastern Europe in the immediate postwar period and 
subsequently formed support groups.)  Many Aussiedler do not 
consider the associations helpful, however.  \"They only care 
for people, who fled after the war, not those coming today,\" 
Troester said. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
12. (SBU) The Aussiedler problem points up weaknesses in 
German immigration policy.  The Constitutional requirement 
and political pressures that led to Germany\'s acceptance of 
large numbers of Aussiedler in the early 1990s marked the 
first time in Germany\'s history that the government had to 
develop a management plan for large-scale immigration and 
integration.  As efforts to reform Germany\'s immigration law 
continue, there is a tendency for experts as well as 
politicians to call on approaches used to deal with 
Aussiedler in handling other immigrants.  However, the 
Aussiedler actually represent a very special type of 
immigrant, quite different from the skilled workers that 
German immigration experts increasingly point to as the 
future of German immigration and, indeed, of the German 
population.  Unlike economic migrants under a Canadian 
immigration model, Aussiedler lack concrete reasons to learn 
German and adapt to German society; they are both coddled 
and isolated by the German government.  Although the number 
of Aussiedler settling in Germany continues to decline, the 
large number already living in Southwest German remain a 
festering social problem.  There are indications that this 
problem might be exacerbated by the Southwest\'s increasing 
role as a preferred residence for Aussiedler originally 
settled in Eastern states, whose native populations have 
reputations for being especially unwelcoming.  End Comment. 
 
13. (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
DUSHANBE MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
BODDE 
"
"9572","7/22/2003 11:24","03FRANKFURT5976","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005976 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR: DS/DSS/IP, DS/IP/EUR, DS/DSS,ITA, 
DS/ICI/PII, S/CT, DS/ICI/CI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, PTER 
SUBJECT: THREAT LETTER AGAINST US EMBASSY ACCRA AND MARINE 
CORPS CANTONMENTS 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  On July 22, 2003 RSO Frankfurt received an 
unsigned letter, in broken German, warning of Arab planned 
attacks against Marine Corps Cantonment areas and the US 
Embassy housing area in the capital of Ghana.  The timing and 
method of attack(s) is not specified.  The letter was 
received through the German Postal Service and was 
generically addressed to \"General Konsulat USA\".  The German 
0,55 Euro stamp is postmarked by Briefzentrum 50.  RSO has 
passed the original letter to local authorities. 
 
2.  (SBU)  Below is the German Text of the letter: 
 
General Konsulat USA 
Siesmayerstrasse 21 
60323 Frankfurt 
 
 
Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
 
Warnung vor dem Anschlag gegen US Marines in Cantonments 
 
Arabische Menschen planen einen Anschlag auf Marine Corps 
Angehoerige in der Ghana Haupstadt Accra. In Teil von Accra 
genannt Cantonments wohnen Marine Corps Angehoerige. Das ist 
ein teil von der Zusammenarbeit zwischen Ghana Armed Forces 
und USA. Auf diese wird ein Anschlag gemacht. Eine Idee ist 
auch gleiche Zeit ein Anschlag auf Residence von Stab von US 
Embassy. Das ist aber nicht leicht und noch nicht klar. 
Ghanaische Menschen sind nicht die die planen und 
organizieren. Ein Mann in Nima ist kein Ghanaer aber von 
Burkina Faso. Diese Menschen sind Araber. Ghanaische Menschen 
sind nur mit Geld gekauft um Informationen zu geben. Watchmen 
als Beispiel und arm bezahlte Angerhoerige von Ghana Armed 
Forces (GAF). Aber auch anderen Kontact mit Land. Alle die 
planen kenne ich nicht. Raoul Abou Chedid ist einer und hat 
eine Polystyrene Fabrik in Accra. Sogar nicht alle sind 
Muslim. Aber die Muslim sind halten starken Kontact zwischen 
Trioli/Lebananon und Accra. Es ist Tripoli/Lebanon und nicht 
Tripoli/Libya. Name auch Tarabulus Ash Sham. Befehle kommen 
von Tripoli. Mehr Lebanese Menschen von Tripoli sind ein 
Teil. Wohnen aber als Businessmen in Ghana. Simon Saoud ist 
kein Muslim aber Maronite. Er plant auch nicht aber verteilt 
Hilfe wegen starke Business Beziehung mit Muslim Partner. Er 
ist Sawmiller, Exporter und noch mehr. Am Tema Hafen gibt es 
Gewerbe Coldstore der auch Lebanese gehoert mit Shops und 
Buero. Auch dort sind Treffen. Auch bei andere Orte. 
 
3. (SBU)  Below is a rough English translation of the text: 
 
Warning of attack against US Marines in Cantonments 
 
Arab people are planning an attack on Marine Corps 
families/friends in Accra, capitol of Ghana. In an area of 
Accra called Cantonments, live Marine Corps families/friends. 
That is a part of the working together between Ghana armed 
forces and USA. On this there will be an attack. One idea is 
that at the same time an attack of the housing area of the US 
Embassy. That is not easy and not yet clear. Ghanaian people 
are not the ones planning and organizing. A man in Nima is 
not Ghanaian but from Burkina Faso. The people are Arabs. 
Ghanaian people are only bought with money to give 
information. For example Watchmen and poorly paid members of 
the Ghanaian armed forces. But also other contact with land 
(country). All the plans I do not know. Raoul Abou Chedid is 
one and has a polystyrene factory in Accra. Even not all are 
Muslim. But all Muslim are having strong contact between 
Tripoli/Lebanon and Accra. It is Tripoli/Lebanon and not 
Tripoli/Libya. Name also Tarabulus Ash Sam. Orders come from 
Tripoli. More Lebanese people from Tripoli are a part. But 
live as businessmen in Ghana. Simon Saoud is not Muslim but a 
Maronite. He (does) not plan but gives help because of a 
strong business relationship with Muslim partner. He is saw 
miller, exporter and much more. On the Tema port there are 
cold store businesses (refrigeration) belonging to Lebanese 
people along with shops and offices. Also here are meetings. 
Also at other places. 
BODDE 
"
"9871","8/4/2003 13:47","03FRANKFURT6409","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 FRANKFURT 006409 
 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON FOR HADDA 
TREASURY FOR OASIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Stability and Growth Pact: Listerine Syndrome; 
Striving to Do Good, Good Enough? Key Word - 
Flexibility 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0040 
 
 
  1.   Summary:  \"The taste people hate, twice a day.\" 
     Wretchedly-tasking Listerine\'s old advertising slogan 
     is akin to the criticism of the EU Stability and Growth 
     Pact (SGP): we don\'t like these rules, but we need 
     rules at least twice a year when budget results are 
     issued.  When Europe was growing, budgets were not 
     under strain.  The rules were tolerable.  Slow growth 
     has changed all that.  Calls for the SGP to be 
     suspended or modified, however, are likely to go 
     unheeded.  Where does that leave this debate? 
 
  2.   One way to approach the debate would be to 
     distinguish between the \"letter\" of the SGP and its 
     \"spirit.\"  The letter of the Pact is popularly 
     distilled into one number, the reference value that 
     deficits exceeding 3% of GDP are \"excessive.\"  If an 
     excessive deficit were not corrected in the year after 
     which it was identified, the member state concerned 
     could be subject to sanctions.  The spirit of the Pact 
     essentially is that governments should work hard to 
     avoid any excessive deficit and, once it occurs, work 
     hard to get it back under control.  Economies and 
     budgets, being less than clock-work like in their 
     predictability, often incur surprises or \"exceptional\" 
     or \"special circumstances.\" Bad things happen. 
 
  3.   At this writing, the outlook seems rather clear 
     that Portugal, Germany and France will not abide by 
     Ecofin\'s recommendations to bring their budgets under 
     3% value (for Germany and France in 2004) or keep them 
     there (Portugal in 2003).  Sanctions, however, are not 
     automatic.  Instead, a question EU Finance Ministers 
     will collectively decide is whether the member state 
     concerned is failing to take necessary corrective 
     action. This, necessarily, is a political as well as an 
     economic question. 
 
  4.   Flexibility is the word of the day in the SGP 
     debate.  Flexibility exists in the rules.  Exercising 
     this flexibility responsibility will be a challenge for 
     the European Commission and Ecofin.  Being flexible by 
     ignoring the rules is one thing.  Being flexible by 
     taking into account measurable efforts to get the 
     structural deficit under control, including through 
     structural reforms, would be quite another.  Such 
     efforts could mean brighter growth and budget 
     performance.  That, after all, is the point of the SGP. 
     End Summary 
 
  SGP:  Storm and Drang Amounting to Very Little 
 
  5.   The SGP is getting its share of hits in the press. 
     As the euro area slogs through its third year of 
     sluggish economic growth, government budget deficits 
     are rising.  Goldman Sachs estimates that for the euro 
     area these deficits will increase from 2.2% of GDP in 
     2002 to 2.7% in 2003.  Portugal, Germany and France 
     have been found to have \"excessive deficits,\" well 
     above the 3% of GDP reference value of the Treaty. 
     Ecofin has issued all three recommendations to reduce 
     their deficits below 3% and keep them there.  Pro- 
     cyclical budget policy seems counter-intuitive. 
     Wouldn\'t tightening fiscal policy risk slowing an 
     already crawling economy?  Calls for suspending the 
     SGP, revising it, or abolishing it seem to be a steady 
     diet of some financial journalists.  They are likely to 
     amount to nothing. 
 
  SGP Rules: The Basics, Revisited 
 
  6.   Many economists of the euro area agree that fiscal 
     rules are necessary for the European Monetary Union. 
     The basic argument is to contain the \"spillover\" 
     effects from a country with a high deficit and growing 
     debt on interest rates and, consequently, on the 
     financing costs of other countries in the union. 
     Higher interest rates could put pressure on the 
     European Central Bank (ECB) to lower rates, potentially 
     conflicting with its primary objective of maintaining 
     price stability.  A framework of rules to coordinate 
     and discipline 12 national fiscal policies with a 
     single monetary policy is designed to avoid such 
     spillover effects. 
  7.   Even Belgian economist Paul De Grauwe, often a 
     critic of the EMU, admits that some rules are 
     necessary.  Nonetheless, in his \"Economics of Monetary 
     Union\" published in 2000 he criticized the SGP as being 
     \"unbalanced\" imposing strict rules at the expense of 
     flexibility.  He points out that during the 1991-93 
     recession six EU countries had government deficits of 
     over 3% of GDP.  So why impose such a strict rule if it 
     is bound to be broken? To do so risks breaking the 
     rules and diminishing the value of the pact. 
  8.   Such criticism is, at least to date, misplaced. 
     This is the first time the excessive deficit procedures 
     (EDP) have been invoked.  It is difficult to know 
     beforehand how they will be applied, particularly 
     during this period of prolonged economic slowdown. 
     Commented a senior Finance Ministry official who 
     participated in the drafting of the SGP, the authors 
     did not foresee such a long period of stagnation. 
 
  Why 3%? 
 
  9.   3% of GDP reference value seems to be a bit of a 
     rough rule.  Yet it does have its logic. If trend real 
     economic growth were 3% (the high side of the euro 
     area\'s growth potential), inflation were 2% (the 
     European Central Bank\'s definition of price stability) 
     this would imply nominal growth trend of 5% per year 
     (which was the average nominal growth rate for the Eu- 
     15 during 1991-2000).  If the stock of Euro area debt 
     were 60% of GDP (which it was for the Euro area 11 
     years ago when the basic rules were being written), 
     then a 3% of GDP government deficit would imply no 
     increase in the debt relative to GDP.  That is, a 
     steady state. 
 
  10.  The rough rule is even a bit rougher in reality. 
     As of 2002 the Euro 12 have a debt stock of 69% of GDP. 
     Nominal growth has been trending below 4%, likely to be 
     closer to 3% this year.  The higher debt stock and 
     lower growth imply a deficit of around 2.7% to avoid a 
     further increase in debt as a share of GDP.  For 
     countries with higher than average debt (Italy) and 
     average or below average growth (German), surpluses 
     would be in order to reach a sustainable level.  Not 
     doing so can put pressure on interest rates and strain 
     on monetary policy, as noted above.  No wonder small 
     countries that have moved close to budget surplus 
     during the cyclical upswing are displeased with the 
     larger countries that did not (France, Germany) or who 
     did not bring down their overall debt levels (Italy). 
     France is a special case: debt level around 60% and 
     growth rates around average. 
 
  11.  The 3% reference value also is attractive because 
     it is relatively easy to explain and as transparent as 
     Eurostat can make it.  More sophisticated measurements 
     of cyclically adjusted numbers are used by the 
     Commission to monitor trends.  These lack clarity 
     (assumptions could vary) and simplicity. 
 
  12.  The rules are unlikely to change.  The recent 
     draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe 
     incorporated the SGP rules, without substantive change. 
     Similarly, in its May 2003 Concluding Statement of its 
     Article IV consultations on the Euro Area Policies, the 
     IMF mission stated that the 3% limit \"is and must 
     remain one of the key references values of the monetary 
     union.\"  \"An Agenda for a Growing Europe\" issued by an 
     Independent High-Level Study Group chaired by Belgian 
     economist Andre Sapir in July 2003, argued that the 3% 
     of GDP upper limit should be kept to \"steer fiscal 
     discipline.\" Nonetheless, there is another way to 
     approach the issue, namely, flexibly. 
 
  Need for Flexibility 
 
  13.  De Grauwe\'s view on flexibility has become the 
     keyword of the day.  Sapir\'s High Level Study Group 
     pleas for more differentiation in applying the SGP, 
     taking into account a country\'s debt level, and for 
     more flexibility in the case of severe cyclical 
     downturns.  For the latter, the High Level Study Group 
     recommended changing the definition of the term 
     \"exceptional circumstances\" to be defined as simply a 
     negative annual growth rate rather than a 2 percent 
     decline.  This would require a change in the Treaty. 
     Others, such as the ECB, argue that the SGP already has 
     sufficient flexibility.  Which is correct? 
 
  Rules of the Game:  Economists As Wanna-be Lawyers 
 
  14.  To understand the debate, familiarity with the 
     rules of the game is helpful.  This can be a chore. 
     The SGP is not one tidy document, but is composed of 
     Treaty Articles and Protocols and Council Regulations 
     and Resolutions.  Article 104(2) of the Treaty states 
     that the Commission is to monitor member states\' 
     budgetary situation and whether they comply with the 3% 
     reference value unless the excess over 3% is declining 
     close toward 3% or is \"only exceptional and temporary.\" 
     Article 2(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 
     (\"the Council Regulation\") defines \"exceptional and 
     temporary\" as resulting from an unusual event outside 
     the control of the member state concerned and which has 
     a major impact on the financial position of the general 
     government or when resulting from a severe economic 
     downturn.  A severe economic downturn is exceptional 
     only if there is an annual fall of real GDP of at least 
     2%, according to Article 2(2). 
 
  15.  Article 2(3) refines the point by allowing the 
     Commission to examine \"other supporting evidence\" that 
     would suggest an exceptional circumstance, even if the 
     decline is less than 2%.  Such evidence includes the 
     abruptness of the downturn or the accumulated loss of 
     output relative to past trends.  The Resolution of the 
     European Council on the SGP (\"the Council Resolution\") 
     further commits member states not to invoke the 
     benefits of Article 2(3) unless they are in a \"severe 
     recession,\" further defined as an annual fall in real 
     GDP of at least 0.75%. 
 
  16.  For Portugal, Germany and France, the Commission 
     considered whether exceptional circumstances were at 
     play and, at the time it was preparing its report, 
     decided in the negative.  Thus, it issued a report that 
     these countries\' deficits were excessive.  Ecofin 
     agreed and issued recommendations to each of these 
     countries to \"bring the situation to an end.\"  As 
     provided for under the Council Regulation, Ecofin gave 
     the Member country concerned four months to take 
     effective action.  Article 3(4) of the Council 
     Regulation states that the deadline for the correction 
     of the excessive deficit \"should be completed in the 
     year following its identification unless there are 
     special circumstances.\"  Under the Council Resolution, 
     member states have committed themselves to this action. 
     The phrase \"special circumstances\" is not defined 
     either in the Council Regulation or Council Resolution. 
 
  17.  What happens if the deficit is not corrected? 
     Article 104(9) of the Treaty states that: \"If a Member 
     State persists in failing to put into practice the 
     recommendations of the Council, the Council may decide 
     to give notice to the Member State to take, within a 
     specified time-limit, measures for the deficit 
     reduction which is judged necessary by the Council in 
     order to remedy the situation.\"  If the Member State is 
     not implementing the recommendations or the measures 
     are inadequate, Ecofin is to take action, on the basis 
     of a recommendation from the Commission, either under 
     Article 104(9), that is give a (or another) notice or 
     under Article 104(11), resort to sanctions.  Or if the 
     excessive deficit has not been corrected within the 
     time limits specified either in the initial EDP or a 
     notice issued under 104(9), Ecofin can again issue 
     another notice under 104(9) or move to sanctions. 
 
  18.  Sanctions can be invoked \"as long as a Member 
     State fails to comply with a decision taken in 
     accordance with\" 104(9).  Thus, a Member State would 
     have to \"fail to put into practice the recommendations\" 
     of Ecofin and would have to fail to comply with 
     recommendations in any follow-up notice.  In short, be 
     incorrigible. 
  Sanctions:  Deterrent or Admission of Failure? 
 
  19.  For the record, sanctions themselves are also a 
     drawn out affair.  When Ecofin takes a decision under 
     104(11) a non-interest-bearing deposit is to be 
     required.  This would consist of a 0.2% of GDP fixed 
     component and a variable component of one-tenth of the 
     difference between the deficit as a percentage of GDP 
     and the 3% reference value.  The total deposit cannot 
     exceed 0.5% of GDP. 
 
  20.  The deposit is converted into a fine if two years 
     after the deposit was required the excessive deficit 
     had not been corrected. A German Finance Ministry 
     official admitted that just how the fine would be 
     imposed has not been thought through.  \"You see, when 
     we drafted these provisions, they were not meant to be 
     used, but to serve as a deterrent. \" 
 
  21.  Article 104(11) includes other possible measures: 
     require the member state concerned to publish 
     additional information before issuing bonds and 
     securities or invite the European Investment Bank to 
     reconsider its lending policy to the Member State 
     concerned. 
 
  Now we turn to the application of the rules to the 
  \"live cases\" of Portugal, Germany and France. 
 
  Portugal: Brightness Before the Burn Out? 
 
  22.  In November 2002, Ecofin decided that Portugal\'s 
     2001 deficit of 4.1% was excessive.  The Council\'s 
     recommendation called for (a) putting an end to the 
     excessive deficit as rapidly as possible (i.e. the year 
     following its identification, 2002); (b) implementing 
     budget plans for 2002 that would bring the deficit down 
     to 2.8%; and (c) implementing necessary measures to 
     ensure the 2003 budget is below 3%. 
 
  23.  The GOP went through hell and high water to meet 
     (a) and (b).  In the event, the deficit came in at 
     2.8%.  In March 2003, however, the Council did not 
     \"abrogate\" their excessive deficit decision.  Rather, 
     they wanted to assess the sustainability of the deficit 
     remaining below 3%.  According to Commission officials, 
     prospects are not good. 
 
  24.  Portugal\'s economy is contracting and the deficit 
     may well shoot up to 5% of GDP, according to Commission 
     experts. UBS Warburg suggests part of the contraction 
     was due to budget consolidation, between 0.7% to 1.3%. 
     In September Eurostat will give its assessment of the 
     budget outlook for 2003.  The Commission is likely to 
     make an assessment either in September or shortly after 
     the final 2003 budget numbers are published in March 
     2004.  The Commission is likely to make a report with 
     recommendations to Ecofin. 
 
  25.  How might this case be handled by the Commission 
     and Ecofin?  Under the \"letter\" of the rules, the 
     Commission is considering whether, in fact, there are 
     \"special circumstances\" given the decline in GDP.  As 
     noted above, the phrase \"special circumstances\" under 
     the Council Regulation regarding the correction of the 
     deficit (Article 3(4)) is not defined. This contrasts 
     with the phrase \"exceptional\" under Article 2(3) of the 
     Council Regulation when the Commission makes its 
     initial assessment of whether a deficit is excessive. 
 
  26.  With regard to the \"spirit\" of the rules, the GOP 
     probably can make a good case that they have complied 
     as much as possible with the Ecofin recommendations. 
     They pushed the deficit below 3% in 2002, as 
     recommended, and are committed to achieve a sustainable 
     deficit under the 3% reference value.  Ecofin noted 
     that the GOP is moving to improve the collection and 
     processing of government data, reinforce mechanisms to 
     coordinate budgetary policy, and implement policies to 
     foster growth, employment and competitiveness. 
     Whatever the Commission and Ecofin do on Portugal will 
     set a precedent for the German and French cases to 
     follow. 
  Germany:  Miss America on Your Arm or Egg in Your 
  Face 
 
  27.  In January 2003 Ecofin determined that Germany had 
     an excessive deficit.  They recommended that the German 
     government (a) put an end to the excessive deficit as 
     rapidly as possible in accordance with Council 
     Regulation Article 3(4) (i.e. the year after the 
     deficit was identified, 2004); and (b) implement their 
     budget plans for 2003 which, on the basis of German GDP 
     growth projections of 1.5% in 2003, aim at reducing the 
     deficit in 2003 to 2.75% of GDP by adopting budgetary 
     measures of 1% of GDP.   Ecofin \"noted\" the commitment 
     of German authorities to implement structural reforms 
     and to reduce the underlying budgetary deficit by more 
     that 0.5% of GDP per year, with the exception of 2005 
     due to the introduction of income tax reforms. 
 
  28.  The German government\'s budget plan for 2003 
     achieves a budget deficit reduction of almost 1%, in 
     structural terms, at least on paper.  This plan passed 
     muster in the four month review of German budget 
     performance in May.  However, the decline in growth, 
     probably close to zero this year, will help push the 
     deficit close to 4% in 2003.  Under the \"letter\" of the 
     rules, the deficit need not be corrected until 2004. 
 
  29.  Unfortunately, 2004 doesn\'t look much better. 
     Germany has announced that it will bring forward the 
     income tax cut scheduled for 2005 to January 2004, and 
     implement income tax cuts that had been postponed from 
     January 2003.  Combined this would amount to a revenue 
     loss of around 1.3% of GDP,  only part of which would 
     be financed through reduced expenditures.  Goldman 
     Sachs estimates that the deficit will linger around 4%. 
 
  30.  The German Finance Ministry differs.  It hopes 
     that income tax cuts combined with structural reforms 
     and structural budget consolidation through subsidy 
     reductions will give a boost to economic growth to 
     around the Finance Ministry\'s assumption of 2%.  This 
     should help push the deficit toward the 3% level. 
 
  31.  This strategy is risky, in the view of a senior 
     ECB official.  The income tax cuts may be pocketed by 
     politicians without making the important structural 
     reforms and subsidy cuts.  Finance Ministry officials 
     admit that there are risks.  It is a package deal - no 
     structural reforms or subsidy cuts - then no income tax 
     cuts in 2004.  Success would be a \"great step forward.\" 
     Failure would be \"catastrophic,\" in the words of a 
     senior Finance Ministry official.  Miss America on your 
     arm or egg on your face. 
 
  32.  Under the SGP rules, German Finance Ministry 
     officials say they will argue \"letter\" and \"spirit.\" 
     Like the case of the Portuguese, they will argue that 
     not realizing their assumed growth projections and the 
     prolonged economic stagnation are  \"special 
     circumstances\" that have prevented correction of the 
     deficit by 2004.  As noted above, this phrase is 
     undefined.  German Finance Ministry officials hope the 
     Commission will exercise some discretion.  German 
     Finance Ministry officials explain that they will keep 
     to the commitment of an average annual reduction of its 
     structural deficit of 0.5%, with a pause in 2004, due 
     to the income tax cuts, rather than in 2005 when these 
     cuts were originally scheduled to be implemented. 
 
  33.  With respect to \"spirit,\" Ministry officials say 
     they will point out that the government followed 
     Ecofin\'s recommendation to stick to their 2003 
     reduction plan, e.g. reduction of the structural 
     deficit by nearly 1%.  Rather than boosting confidence, 
     as the Commission and ECB had suggested it might, 
     confidence languished.  The announced program of 
     structural reforms and bringing forward the tax cuts 
     has provided the sweetener to push through subsidy cuts 
     envisaged in the budget consolidation program.  The 
     idea of advancing the income tax cuts, they will argue, 
     is to bolster confidence while keeping their 
     commitments to Ecofin to cut the deficit over time and 
     undertake structural reforms.  After all, getting below 
     the 3% reference value depends as much on the 
     denominator as the numerator, that is, on growth as 
     much as the absolute size of the deficit. 
 
  34.  Commission officials privately are not convinced 
     by the \"special circumstances\" arguments.  In a speech 
     in Berlin on July 1 European Commissioner Solbes was 
     \"quite clear\": \"the Commission expects that Germany 
     will respect the EMU policy framework.  A general 
     government deficit above 3% of GDP in 2004, for the 
     third year in a row, would be incompatible with our 
     common budgetary rules.\" 
  35.  At the conclusion of the Fund\'s Article IV 
     Consultation with German authorities, the Fund mission 
     expressed support for the strategy of packaging 
     structural reforms, budget consolidation through 
     reduced expenditures, and advancing income tax cuts. 
     The mission conceded, however, that advancing the 
     income tax cuts \"will make the fiscal arithmetic for 
     2004 difficult,\" and that getting below the 3% 
     reference value will \"be a challenge\" in 2004.  But 
     overall, the mission sensed that \"the prospect for 
     meaningful structural change is finally in the air. If 
     proposed reforms are implemented and fiscal 
     consolidation put on firmer ground, we are optimistic 
     that Germany\'s economy can put a long period of weak 
     performance behind it.\"  Testimony on behalf of 
     Germany. 
 
  36.  The first indications of the budget for 2004 will 
     be in the budget plan to be agreed by the end of this 
     year in Germany.  If the budget plan has a deficit of 
     3% for 2004, perhaps with the help of \"aggressive 
     assumptions\" on growth and revenues, the first real 
     evidence of actual results will appear only in 
     September 2004 when Eurostat publishes its preliminary 
     estimates.  Final figures for 2004 will be available 
     only in March 2005.  On each of these dates, the 
     Commission could launch a report with recommendations 
     to Ecofin. 
 
  France:  Unique, naturalement 
 
  37.  In June Ecofin determined that France had an 
     excessive deficit.  They recommended that the French 
     authorities (a) put an end to the excessive deficit as 
     rapidly as possible and by \"2004 at the latest;\" (b) 
     achieve a \"significantly larger improvement in the 
     cyclically adjusted deficit in 2003 than currently 
     planned,\" and (c) implement measures to ensure that the 
     cumulative improvement in 2003-2004 is enough to bring 
     the nominal deficit \"below 3% in 2004 at the latest.\" 
     Ecofin noted the commitment of French authorities to 
     ensure tighter control of expenditures and to achieve 
     pension reform. 
 
  38.  As reported septel, this decision was not 
     supported unanimously, the Dutch and the Danes 
     dissenting.  Ecofin had issued an \"early warning\" to 
     the French in January calling for \"at least 0.5 
     percentage point of GDP\" improvement in its cyclically- 
     adjusted budgetary position.  In March the French 
     government\'s official forecast showed only a 0.1 
     percentage point improvement.  It seemed that the 
     French had not taken to heart Ecofin\'s earlier 
     recommendation. 
 
  39.  Reiterating the call for a 0.5 percentage point 
     cut in June when half the budget year was over seemed 
     unrealistic, according to Commission experts.  Thus, 
     the formula was agreed that there should be an average 
     reduction of 0.5 percentage points annually over the 
     two years, 2003-2004.  This suggests a one percentage 
     point cut in 2004. Moreover, Commission experts expect 
     the French deficit to be close to 4% of GDP in 2003. 
     Thus, a percentage point reduction in the deficit would 
     be necessary in 2004 in any case.  Commission staff 
     consider such a deep cut problematic.  German Finance 
     officials consider it the maximum possible. 
 
  40.  The next step for France will come on October 3. 
     Under the SGP rules, this will be the four month 
     deadline by which time French authorities must explain 
     the measures they will take to comply with Ecofin\'s 
     recommendations.  This will be a time of testing of 
     whether France is serious about respecting the SGP, at 
     least on paper. 
 
  41.  German Finance Ministry officials, while quick to 
     emphasize their wonderful working relationship with 
     France, just as quickly distinguish their position on 
     the SGP from France\'s.  They assert that they are 
     sticking by the rules, if not the letter at least the 
     spirit.  In their view, France is doing neither. 
 
  42.  The IMF also has supported the French Government\'s 
     basic economic strategy, in particular \"the structural 
     orientation of policies and the intention to resume 
     fiscal adjustment.\" In its Article IV Consultation 
     Concluding Statement issued in June, the IMF mission 
     praised the legislation of the \"key and difficult 
     milestone\" of pension reform.  The Fund notes that the 
     2003 deficit will be more than one percentage point 
     higher than planned and supports the objective of 
     reducing the underlying general government budget 
     deficit by 0.5 percentage points in 2004.  Such a 
     modest reduction would not be in line with Ecofin\'s 
     recommendation. 
 
  43.  The Fund mission goes on to point out that the 
     \"credibility of the government\'s fiscal and economic 
     policy strategy hinges crucially on its ability to 
     reduce the share of public spending in GDP.\"  Notably, 
     it points out that priority structural areas identified 
     by the government for reform (pension, health care, 
     reform of the state, and decentralization) will help 
     reduce expenditures as a share of GDP and \"illustrate 
     the synergies between budgetary reform and possible 
     increases in potential growth.\"  Here, as in the case 
     of Germany and Portugal, is the connection between 
     fiscal discipline, structural reforms and growth.  An 
     argument that France is operating within the \"spirit\" 
     of the SGP.  Moreover, France could argue that its past 
     growth rates and debt position suggest that its deficit 
     is sustainable - at least for a while - and not putting 
     pressure on the euro system. 
 
  Growth and the SGP 
 
  44.  The stated objective of the SGP is \"sound 
     government finances as a means of strengthening the 
     conditions for price stability and for strong 
     sustainable growth conducive to employment creation.\" 
     This suggests that discretionary fiscal policies should 
     be avoided so as not to burden monetary policy, and 
     foster low interest rates that are conducive to long- 
     term planning and investment.  For most EU countries 
     this means cutting expenditures to achieve a more 
     sustainable level of debt or to avoid increased in debt 
     in order to ensure its sustainability when increased 
     expenditures become unavoidable due to aging 
     populations. 
 
  45.  In its June 2003 report on \"Public Finances in the 
     EMU,\" the Commission notes that budgetary consolidation 
     \"often acts as a catalyst for structural reforms.\" 
     Structural reforms can boost growth and growth 
     potential.  As the Commission notes in that report, 
     \"the effect of budgetary consolidation on output could 
     be reinforced, and even positive, in the short-run if 
     fiscal consolidation is combined with structural reform 
     of factor and product markets and accompanied with an 
     accommodating monetary stance.\" 
 
  46.  So that\'s the deal for growth: budget 
     consolidation, structural reform, accommodative 
     monetary policy.  Interest rates are at record lows. 
     Pressure has grown for structural reforms due to budget 
     pressures.  It would be more than a pity to relieve 
     that pressure now.   No wonder Dutch Finance Minister 
     Zalm, noted for his tough stance on deficits, has 
     called for fines for France and Germany if they fail to 
     get their finances in order next year. 
 
  47.  How could flexibility be applied without 
     sacrificing the rules? One point is that when Ecofin 
     made its recommendations for all three countries, the 
     Commission\'s and ECB\'s forecast was for much more 
     robust growth than has occurred.  Thus, the rising 
     deficits could be due, in part, to cyclical factors. 
     In November 2002 the European Commission agreed to give 
     importance to cyclically adjusted budget balances in 
     its surveillance and ensure a cyclically-adjusted 
     budget position of at least 0.5% of GDP and more 
     emphasis on the quality of public expenditures that are 
     conducive to growth and employment. 
 
  48.  The IMF Mission on Euro Area policies has praised 
     these measures.  Specifically the Fund staff liked the 
     notion that countries with excessive deficits make 
     adjustments of at least 0.5% of GDP per year in 
     cyclically adjusted terms and that multi-year 
     consolidation plans should aim at curbing expenditures. 
     The Fund staff admits, however, that these steps will 
     not ensure deficits drop immediately below 3%. 
     Nonetheless, they argue that those countries that 
     follow these guidelines of \"0.5 percent high quality 
     multi-year adjustment\" should be \"considered on a 
     sustainable path toward compliance with the Pact.\" 
     Striving to do good should be good enough. 
 
  49.  Maintaining a judicious balance between enforcing 
     the letter of the SGP while safeguarding the spirit 
     will be the next challenge for the Commission and 
     Ecofin.  No one said that coordinating 12 national 
     budgets during a prolonged economic downturn would be 
     easy. 
 
 
  50.  This cable coordinated with Embassies Berlin, 
     Lisbon, Paris, Rome, the Hague and USEU Brussels. 
 
(U) POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49- 
(69)-7535-2238. 
 
  Herrman 
"
"10310","8/26/2003 11:52","03FRANKFURT7034","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 FRANKFURT 007034 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Accession Countries And The Euro: Convergence 
Criteria Cause Dilemmas 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0041 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary:  EU member states and acceding 
countries (ACs) are beginning to face the dilemmas that 
EU economic rules are likely to present them both as 
soon as accession occurs in May 2004.  EU rules require 
ACs to adopt the euro as soon as they fulfill the 
convergence criteria on inflation, public finances, 
exchange rate stability and long-term interest rates. 
 
2. (SBU) Meeting these criteria, however, could be 
problematic for ACs:  Catching up to per capita income 
levels in other EU countries is likely to generate 
relatively higher inflation; forcing inflation down 
could slow down growth; increasing government 
expenditures for infrastructure can bolster long-term 
growth, but they could generate higher annual deficits 
than permitted by the EU rules; and two-year- 
participation in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II) 
could be a useful \"waiting period\" to find an 
appropriate equilibrium rate, but also could subject 
AC\'s to speculative currency attacks and deprive ACs 
flexibility to adapt exchange rates in response to 
structural changes and economic shocks. 
 
3. (SBU)  These dilemmas might be resolved by watering 
down the rules, allowing a broad interpretation, or by 
postponing participation in EMU.  The ACs generally 
prefer the second option; the current EU member states 
the third.  These alternatives have provoked intense 
political discussion and speculation. 
 
4.  (SBU)  A first clear signal of which way the 
official line is headed should be when the European 
Central Bank (ECB) and the European Commission present 
their first convergence reports for the ACs, most 
likely in the fall 2004.  We expect that the rules will 
remain the touchstone of the process, but also note 
that the final decisions on joining the euro are taken 
at the political level.  As the decision was for 
several of the current members of the Euro Group, 
pragmatism is likely to rule the day.  While EU Finance 
Ministers want ACs to have a \"solid foundation\" for 
their economies that will lend confidence to the euro, 
they also probably wouldn\'t like to see economic fires 
raging in their neighborhood either.  End summary. 
 
ACs to EMU: No Opting Out 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
5. (SBU)  After signature of the Accession Treaty in 
April 2003 for ten new member states to join the EU on 
May 1, 2004, attention is now turning to the next big 
step: entry of the Accession Countries (ACs) into 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).   When the ACs join 
the EU in 2004, they will become \"member states with a 
derogation\" concerning their participation in EMU. 
This means that they are expected to adopt the euro as 
soon as they fulfill the convergence criteria.  They 
will not have the right to \"opt out\" as the UK and 
Denmark did through separate protocols. 
 
Nominal Convergence: By the Rule Book 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
6. (SBU)  In order to join the EMU, ACs need to fulfill 
the convergence criteria set out in the Treaty on 
European Union.  This is referred to as \"nominal 
convergence.\"  The criteria are: 
 
--Achievement of a high degree of price stability, 
apparent from an inflation rate close to that of, at 
most, the three best performing member states; 
 
--Sustainability of government finances apparent by the 
absence of an excessive deficit in accordance with 
Article 106(4) of the Treaty; 
 
--Observance of the normal fluctuation margins provided 
for by the exchange rate mechanism of the European 
Monetary System (EMS) for at least two years with no 
devaluation against the currency of any other member 
state; and 
 
--Durability of convergence achieved by the member 
state and of its participation in the exchange-rate 
mechanism of the EMS being reflected in the long-term 
interest rate levels. 
7. (SBU)  The European Commission and the ECB will 
assess each AC\'s performance in terms of these criteria 
in so-called convergence reports.  Commission officials 
report that they are \"leaning toward\" doing the regular 
convergence reports for Sweden before May 2004, then 
prepare convergence reports for the ACs in the fall, 
after they have become EU members.  These officials 
admit that these reports will \"have to be clear\" on the 
criteria the Commission expects ACs to fulfill to adopt 
the euro.  If the ACs were to join ERM II towards the 
middle or end of 2004, the criteria could be met in 
2006 at the earliest, with data from 2005 and 2006 used 
as a reference year.  Thus, the first ACs could join 
EMU in 2007 or early 2008. 
 
Exchange Rates: A Tricky Business 
--------------------------------- 
8. (SBU)  Interpretation of the exchange rate criterion 
is tricky business.  The Treaty refers to normal 
fluctuations of the EMS.  Protocol No.6 on convergence 
criteria further specifies that the \"normal fluctuation 
margins\" must be respected \"without severe tensions.\" 
The EMS had a fluctuation band of +/-2.25% that was 
widened to +/- 15% in August 1993.  In 1998 the EMS was 
replaced by ERM II which has a band of +/-15%. 
9. (SBU) The European Monetary Institute\'s (EMI, the 
predecessor of the ECB) 1998 Convergence Reports 
provides some insight on its interpretation of these 
provisions.  The EMI noted that the widening of the 
band makes interpretation of \"normal fluctuation\" \"less 
than straightforward.\"  But, it decided to \"put 
emphasis\" on exchange rates being \"close to the central 
rates.\"  Similarly, \"severe tensions\" was considered by 
examining deviations from the central parities and 
using indicators of exchange rate volatility and short- 
term interest rate differentials. 
9. (SBU) An ECB official stated that he interprets the 
Treaty as referring to the narrower band of the 
original EMS.  Similarly, a Bundesbank official told us 
that in his view it would not be sufficient for ACs\' 
currencies to fluctuate in the wider band of ERM II, 
but should remain more or less within the +/-2.25% 
band.  He also admitted that appreciation over the band 
would be less of a problem than depreciation.  While 
the Commission has not been very clear about its 
interpretation of the Treaty, in May Commissioner 
Solbes let slip that the narrower band is also what he 
would expect from ACs.  Privately Commission experts 
admit that this has been their guiding rule to date. 
 
10. (SBU) Getting the equilibrium exchange rate right 
between the ACs national currency and the euro is 
important for ACs and the ECB.  For the ACs it is a 
question of price competitiveness and long-term growth 
prospects.  For the ECB it could be a question of 
inflation.  Once in the ERM II, intervention at the 
margin to keep a currency in its band is, in principle, 
automatic and unlimited.  Thus, the rate better be 
right for the sake of the ECB the national central 
banks that would be drawn into such intervention or its 
financing potentially increasing money supply The ECB, 
however, can suspend such intervention if it were to 
conflict with its primary objective of price stability. 
Doing so would likely be perceived as a vote of no 
confidence in the exchange rate.  Therefore it is no 
surprise that ECB officials reportedly are working with 
AC central bankers to ascertain the appropriate 
exchange rate at which to fix their currency against 
the euro. 
 
Inflation:  A Question of Catching Up or Being Too 
Tight? 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
11. (SBU) The inflation criteria present another set of 
problems.  Upward pressure on the price levels in ACs 
is likely to come from macroeconomic factors such as 
higher productivity growth and the associated Balassa- 
Samuelson effect (relatively higher productivity and 
wage growth in tradable goods contributing to upward 
price pressures on non-tradable goods and services and 
their associated wages) as well as from price 
liberalization and deregulation.  These factors lead to 
inflation rates that are likely to temporarily remain 
above the EU average.  Inappropriate macroeconomic and 
wage policies combined with structural weaknesses in 
the ACs economies also exert upward pressure on price 
levels.  Divergent inflation rates between EU member 
countries and ACs can be expected to remain a problem 
until real convergence has been achieved. 
12. (SBU) Given the current very low inflation rates in 
some euro zone members, the inflation criterion would 
require ACs to achieve inflation rates well below 2%. 
The European Commission\'s spring forecast, for example, 
projects average annual inflation of 1.7% for the euro 
area in 2003 compared to 2.7% in the ACs.  The average 
inflation rate of the \"three best performing member 
states\" would be 1.1%.  According to the Commission\'s 
forecast, only Lithuania and Poland would meet that 
target in 2003.  Tight monetary policies needed in the 
other ACs to achieve the inflation target could have a 
negative effect on the ACs\' economic growth. 
13. (SBU) The convergence criteria were designed for 
developed, i.e. largely converged countries, and not 
for transition economies.  As ACs have generally 
experienced real currency appreciations of 2-3% 
annually there is a conflict between the inflation 
criterion and the exchange rate stability required in 
ERM II.  Real appreciation takes place either through a 
nominal appreciation of the currency or via relatively 
higher inflation than in the country\'s main trading 
partners. The convergence criteria do not allow the ACs 
either.  More generally, with full capital mobility and 
only one instrument (interest rates), the central bank 
cannot target the inflation rate and the exchange rate 
simultaneously. 
14. (SBU)  Commission officials point out that 
persistent differences in inflation rates between 
countries are a risk for fixed exchange rate systems. 
They argue that keeping flexible exchange rates for the 
ACs could limit the risk of overheating through the 
option of a nominal appreciation and interest rates 
that are in line with the national economic situation. 
 
Long-Term Interest Rates: Market Expectations 
--------------------------------------------- 
15. (SBU)  ACs have already experienced convergence of 
long-term interest rates towards the levels of EMU 
members.  This may partly be due to market expectations 
that these countries will join EMU soon, resulting in 
investments in ACs bond markets (the so-called 
\"convergence play\").  However, the drop in interest 
rates is also the result of a considerable volume of 
foreign direct investment, the gradual stabilization of 
domestic price levels and slowing economic growth. 
 
The Fiscal Side:  SGP Rules 
--------------------------- 
 
16. (SBU)  The absence of an excessive deficit 
according to Article 106(4) of the Treaty is defined as 
a general government deficit of no more than 3% of GDP 
and a debt level of no more than 60% of GDP.  These are 
the reference values in the Treaty and the associated 
provisions referred to as the Stability and Growth 
Pact. Most ACs have debt levels below the 60% of GDP 
threshold of the Maastricht Treaty 
 
17. (SBU)  The average general government deficit in 
ACs, however, was 5.3% in 2002, according to Commission 
statistics.  Only Estonia, Lithuania, and Slovenia have 
deficits below the 3% reference value.  In several ACs, 
significant fiscal consolidation would be needed (Czech 
Republic, Hungary, Malta, and Slovakia all had deficits 
over 6% in 2002).  The convergence reports will 
identify most ACs has having \"excessive deficits.\" 
Unlike for EU member states, no sanctions can be 
imposed for having an excessive deficit.  However, it 
also means the ACs can\'t join the EMU. 
 
18. (SBU)  Fiscal consolidation in order to meet the 
convergence criteria as soon as possible could result 
in lower public investment, particularly in 
infrastructure, which could adversely effect long-term 
growth.  At the same time, reducing deficits might 
become even harder in the near future: requirements 
resulting from EU and NATO membership will lead to 
considerable pressure on spending in the coming years. 
The World Bank quotes estimates that put the overall 
costs of EU entry to the ACs, not exclusively but 
mostly budgetary, at as much as 3.5% of GDP for the 
first three years. 
 
ERM II 
--------- 
18 (SBU)  Growing appreciation that the exchange rate 
requirement might make the road towards adoption of the 
euro rather bumpy has sparked off criticism from market 
participants, academics and policy-makers in the ACs. 
19.  (SBU)  Daniel Gros of the Center for European 
Policy Studies in Brussels calls ERM II \"the most 
dangerous exchange rate regime that one can imagine.\" 
Fixed but adjustable exchange rate regimes are a 
tempting target for speculators, in particular when the 
underlying economic fundamentals are shifting, in his 
opinion.  Originally, capital inflows into the 
accession countries were mainly direct investments, 
either privatization or green-field investment. 
Gradually, portfolio investments are becoming more 
important, e.g. the \"convergence play.\"  These 
investments are short-term and can quickly flow out. 
This increases the risk of exchange rate volatility. 
20. (SBU)  Hungary\'s recent episode illustrates the 
problem.  The Hungarian forint significantly 
appreciated over the last year due to strong capital 
inflows. The stronger forint hurt exports and, 
consequently, employment.  In January, the National 
Bank of Hungary (NBH) cut interest rates to prevent too 
much portfolio investment and to protect the exchange 
rate.   However, on June 4, the NBH weakened the 
central parity exchange rate by 2.26%.  According to 
ECB officials, this was the result of a deal between 
the Government, which wanted a weaker exchange rate to 
stimulate exports, and the Central Bank, that wanted 
the government to fulfill the deficit convergence 
criteria quickly. 
21. (SBU) The move was poorly communicated and 
misunderstood in the market that was spooked.  The 
considerable depreciation of the forint prompted the 
NBH to increase interest rates again in the course of 
June in order to regain credibility for its anti- 
inflationary stance.  These seesaw changes appear to 
have damaged the NBH\'s reputation.  The episode also 
illustrates that a central bank only has one instrument 
(interest rates) to aim at two targets: exchange rate 
and inflation. 
 
Debate Regarding Early Adoption of the Euro: 
To Be In or Not To Be In. 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
22. (SBU) Positions in the debate on early or later 
adoption of the euro are on predictable lines: ACs 
think sooner is better; member states advise to take 
time and do it right.  From the ACs\' perspective, 
capital movements present a potentially destabilizing 
force that could disrupt growth.  This, in their view, 
could be avoided by early adoption of the euro, i.e. 
scraping the requirement of a two-year participation in 
ERM II.  Advocates of early euro adoption generally 
also believe that the costs of a fixed exchange rate 
are low for the ACs.  They are mostly small open 
economies and cannot really conduct an independent 
monetary policy anyway.  Entering EMU would give them a 
say in monetary policy decisions. 
 
23. (SBU)  The Euro Group (finance ministers of the EMU 
member countries) takes a very different view.  At its 
March 2003 meeting the Group discussed and reconfirmed 
its position that ACs are expected to first participate 
in ERM II for two years before being able to adopt the 
euro.  At the April 15 informal Ecofin Council, 
ministers confirmed that they would neither accept 
early membership of ACs in ERM II, nor early exit from 
ERM II.  According to the Ecofin approach, a certain 
\"waiting period\" before the adoption of the euro would 
allow ACs to cope with the shock of full integration 
into the single market and to achieve a high degree of 
nominal convergence. 
24. (SBU) Commission research economists support the 
Euro Group\'s view for somewhat different reasons.  They 
believe that ACs should wait to join ERM II to avoid an 
influx of capital and lower interest rates that do not 
reflect fundamentals.  Lower interest rates could lead 
to unproductive investments and asset bubbles that 
would adversely affect the longer-term growth 
performance of the ACs. 
25. (SBU) ECB chief economist Otmar Issing argues that 
as an intermediate regime, ERM II provides an anchor to 
expectations, while countries retain the flexibility to 
adjust the parity in case of asymmetric shocks and 
exchange rate pressures.  He concedes, however, this 
option leaves countries exposed to changing conditions 
in global capital markets. 
26. (SBU)  Issing stresses that any decision to join 
ERM II must be consistent with an adequate level of 
nominal and real convergence with the euro area.  This 
would reduce the risk of choosing an inappropriate 
parity for the exchange rate.  In his view, the optimal 
timing of euro adoption may vary considerably between 
ACs.  Moreover, Issing argues that two years\' 
participation in the ERM is a minimum and a longer stay 
would permit ACs exchange rates to adapt to differences 
in productivity gains, wage growth and inflation 
relative to the euro area.  Once in EMU, these 
differences would translate in costly changes in 
competitiveness and economic activity, in his view. 
27. (SBU)  Interestingly, the IMF has tiptoed into this 
debate.  In its Article IV consultation on Hungary the 
IMF staff stated that it \"sees considerable merit in 
early adoption of the euro, provided fiscal discipline 
and wage restraint are vigorously pursued.\"  The report 
went on to state that \"for Hungary, a small economy 
already highly integrated with the EU, adopting the 
common European currency has clear medium-term 
benefits.  This is particularly true given the 
important role in Hungary of FDI and foreign-owned 
enterprises, and their orientation mainly toward EU 
markets.  The commitment to early EU accession and 
adoption of the euro not only hardens the authorities\' 
resolve to deliver the necessary fiscal discipline and 
structural reforms, but it can also serve to strengthen 
the credibility of the disinflation path and, by doing 
so, can also help to minimize short-run costs that 
might arise.\" 
 
Real convergence: Growth and economic structures 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
28. (SBU) The Commission and the ECB have been publicly 
discouraging the ACs from entering EMU very quickly, 
recommending that they should first concentrate on 
raising per capita incomes closer to the EU average and 
moving towards comparable economic structures, e.g. 
real convergence. Commissioner Solbes has stressed that 
there are also significant risks associated with a 
premature EMU entry while the process of structural 
change, catching up and fiscal consolidation is not yet 
finished. 
29. (SBU)  Economic theory suggests that an important 
criterion for deciding whether to join a monetary union 
is whether economic cycles in the participating 
countries are pretty much in sync.  This reduces the 
likelihood of asymmetric shocks hitting one or a few 
countries. Those subject to such shocks would have to 
absorb them without using monetary policy or exchange 
rates. 
30. (SBU)  How serious these limitations are for the 
ACs depends on the type of shocks, the degree of 
asymmetry of shocks compared to the euro area, and on 
the speed at which economies adjust to shocks.  Polish 
and Hungarian central bank economists claim that 
economic cycles of the euro area and the ACs are 
basically aligned.  An IMF staff study finds that there 
are still differences in the shocks and the subsequent 
adjustment processes between the euro area and the 
CEECs.  However, several individual CEECs exhibit 
shocks and shock adjustment processes that are fairly 
similar to some euro area countries.  For instance, 
Hungary, Estonia, and Latvia are not significantly 
different from Greece. 
31. (SBU)  An ECB official reports that their research 
continues to show a low correlation between cyclical 
developments in e.g. Poland and the euro area 
countries.  Accordingly, he argued that an independent 
monetary policy would be good for a country like 
Poland. A Bundesbank official took the same view, 
stressing that the ACs recently had much stronger 
growth performance than the EU members, i.e. there is 
no sufficient degrees of cyclical synchronization.  He 
also pointed out that even if this were the case, there 
would be an ongoing need for structural changes in 
relative prices during the catching-up process. 
33. (SBU)  ECB Executive Board Member Padoa-Schioppa 
pointed out that the convergence progress seems to be 
rather slow in most ACs when looking at per capita 
income levels.  On average, per capita income stands at 
about 40% of the EU average as measured using 
purchasing power parities.  However, according to Padoa- 
Schioppa, the most relevant concept of real convergence 
is assessing whether economic structures are in line 
with those of the euro area and whether new entrants 
have set up appropriate institutions and adopted 
international best practices and standards.  He finds 
remarkable progress in that respect in the ACs. 
 
ACs\' views 
------------- 
34. (SBU)  Benefits from adoption of the euro entail 
the elimination of exchange rate risk, reduction of 
transaction costs in cross-border business, increased 
trade, lower interest rates due to imported credibility 
and lower vulnerability to external shocks.  For ACs 
with high debt levels and interest rates, such as 
Hungary, euro adoption would imply fiscal savings once 
interest rates are down to the euro zone level. 
Moreover, a commitment to enter the EMU by a time 
certain would intensify pressure on the government to 
pursue sound fiscal policies, signaling investors that 
public finances will be consolidated. 
 
35. (SBU) The Slovenian central bank and government 
have stated that they aim at joining ERM II at the 
beginning of 2005.  Thus the earliest date for the 
adoption of the euro would be 2007.  It would still 
have to bring down its inflation rate (7.5% in 2002), 
but otherwise is not expected to have any problems with 
the convergence criteria. Meeting the criteria should 
be completely unproblematic for the three Baltic states 
(2002 general government deficit and inflation figures, 
respectively were: Estonia, 1.3%, 3.6%; Lativa, 2.5%, 
1.9%; and Lithuania, 1.8% and 0.3%). 
36. (SBU) The NBH and the Hungarian government have 
declared that they intend to adopt the euro as of 
January 1, 2008.  Hungary plans to join ERM II soon 
after accession in 2004.  Observers, however, doubt 
that Hungary will be able to meet the deficit (9.5% in 
2002 projected by the Commission to fall to 4.9% in 
2003) and inflation (5.3% in 2002; new forecast by NBH 
projects it to be 6.5% in 2004) criteria in time for 
the planned entry date.  Poland (deficit 4.2%; 
inflation 1.9% in 2002) is aiming to adopt the euro by 
2008 or 2009. Slovakia (deficit 7.7%; inflation 3.3% in 
2002) has announced that it wants to join EMU as soon 
as possible. 
37. (SBU)  The Czechs (deficit 6.5%; inflation 1.4% in 
2002) have been the only country to indicate that they 
are not in a hurry to join ERM II.  They want to make 
sure that they will be able to meet the other criteria 
after two years of participation.  However, should 
Poland and Hungary move quickly, the Czechs do not want 
to be seen as lagging.  A strategy for the adoption of 
the euro will be established by the end of September 
2003.  The Czech finance ministry and central bank 
prefer to be prepared to adopt the euro by 2007, as 
they believe that financial markets might punish those 
ACs that are not ready when the other countries join 
EMU.  The IMF staff shared that view in its Article IV 
Consultation with Czech authorities.  The Prime 
Minister thinks that 2010 would be more appropriate. 
 
The Politics: Rules as Pretext or Guideposts? 
--------------------------------------------- 
38. (SBU) While it is clear that the EU rules will be 
the touchstone to determine an ACs eligibility to adopt 
the euro, one senior  AC central bank official claimed 
that strict adherence to the rules can be a pretext for 
other reasons against early adoption of the euro.  He 
believes that the ECB is against early entry of the ACs 
because it would make monetary policy as well as ECB 
decision-making on other issues more difficult.  \"They 
are just not ready for us.\" 
39. (SBU) An unspoken concern is that the entry of 
catching-up countries into EMU would result in a looser 
monetary stance.  Although the GDP-weight of the ACs is 
negligible (6% of total euro area)under the new 
rotation system for ECB voting, the ACs weight in 
voting would be proportionately higher than their GDP. 
They could thus have a more significant influence on 
monetary policy decisions (even though the ECB has so 
far reached decisions by consensus and never taken a 
vote).  In theory, however, ECB Council members should 
be guided by considerations regarding the entire euro 
area and not by national interests. 
40. (SBU)  On the other hand, the rules are not 
ironclad, rather serving a guideposts.  ECB 
representatives have hinted that the Treaty leaves some 
scope for political decisions on EMU entry. \"We just 
prepare the convergence report: it\'s just a report.\" 
Finance Ministers, after discussion the convergence 
reports, would direct the Commission to prepare a 
proposal for a decision by Heads of State or 
Government. 
41. (SBU)  In the application of the rules the 
Commission has stressed that (1) each country will be 
considered on its individual merits; and (2) each 
country will be treated equally.  With respect to the 
first point, a Bundesbank expert doubted whether a 
country-by-country decision on EMU entry would take 
place.  Rather he expects that there may be a group of 
more advanced countries, mainly the Baltics, joining 
early and another group following later.  He also 
expects that political pressures will be exerted by the 
ACs to gain immediate entry into ERM II.  To some ACs 
this would be the beginning of a two-year process 
leading directly to adoption of the euro. 
42. (SBU)  On the second point of equal treatment, 
neither Finland nor Italy spent two full years in ERM 
II before they joined EMU.  Moreover, while the UK has 
never agreed to join the ERM II, there is speculation 
that it would nevertheless be admitted to EMU if it 
wished to enter.  Sweden is a more immediate case in 
point.  The Commission stated in its bi-annual report 
on Sweden that \"exchange rate stability during a period 
of nonparticipation before entering the ERM II can be 
taken into account\".  Thus, previous experience 
suggests there is some leeway for ACs to be admitted to 
EMU without participating in ERM for full two years. 
43. (SBU) Similarly, Italy and Belgium did not meet the 
debt criteria before being allowed entry and some 
others may have used \"creative accounting\" to get their 
books in shape to meet the entry criteria. All these 
examples of interpreting rules are likely to be well- 
known to ACs. 
 
Comment 
------- 
44. (SBU)  The potential gains of adopting the euro 
will be weighed against the potential risks, in 
particular of a real appreciation, which could put a 
brake on growth.  The ACs themselves seem to understand 
that monetary, exchange-rate and fiscal discipline 
imposed by EMU can involve serious constraints, 
impeding growth. 
45. (SBU) At the end of the day, the decision on EMU 
participation will be based on the rules and numbers, 
with a healthy dose of political considerations. 
However, watering down the convergence criteria for the 
ACs could harm the euro\'s reputation as a stable 
currency and would do the ACs no justice.  Abiding by 
the rules and risking currency troubles that could be 
attributable, at least in part, to those rules also 
would not be a good advertisement for the euro.  As in 
the past, some pragmatism could be used to reward those 
ACs that have demonstrated a commitment to move 
aggressively toward, if not actually meet, the Treaty 
criteria. End comment. 
46. (U) This cable coordinated with Embassies Berlin, 
Budapest, Warsaw, Prague, Ljubljana, and USEU Brussels. 
 
47. (U)POC: Claudia Ohly, Treasury Office, e-mail 
  OhlyC@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2367, fax 49-(69)- 
  7535-2238. 
 
Bodde 
"
"10315","8/26/2003 13:01","03FRANKFURT7038","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 FRANKFURT 007038 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB BAY, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC FOR CLOUD 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR IMI HARLOW, AUSTIN 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Securities Exchanges, Clearing and Settlement: 
Alliances Made and Broken; Poker or Chess? 
T-IA-F-03-0042 
 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
  1.     (SBU) Introduction:  The European world of clearing 
     and settlement is not as boring as these dreary back-office 
     chores imply.  Intense rivalry in the market place has 
     become even more so - spreading beyond the continent, across 
     the channel and across the Atlantic.    Deutsche Borse lost 
     its bid for the London Stock Exchange three years ago and is 
     ending its joint venture with the Chicago Board of Trade 
     (CBOT) only to find the French-based Euronext team striking 
     up alliances with the British and the CBOT. 
 
  2.     (SBU) Policy wonks have also been busy.  The European 
     System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the Committee of European 
     Securities Regulators (CESR) issued a consultation paper 
     proposing standards for clearing and settlement. Among the 
     interesting features of these proposals is the notion that 
     clearing and settlement systems should be open to investment 
     firms, but such firms from third countries could be denied 
     access if their home market supervision was not considered 
     \"adequate.\"  The European Parliament adopted a report to hem 
     in competition between custodians and clearing and 
     settlement organizations.  In April the Giovannini Group 
     presented a critical pathway for liberalization of Europe\'s 
     clearing and settlement structure.  Lots of good ideas and 
     intentions. 
 
  3.     (SBU) Enter the European Commission.  .  This fall 
     the Commission is scheduled to release a second 
     communication and, depending on reactions, might issue draft 
     legislative proposals in December.  To date, Commission 
     officials assert that they are content to let the market 
     sort itself out before taking legislative action.  Observed 
     one specialist, market pressures are generating solutions 
     that the Commission could never legislate - so best leave 
     the sector alone. 
  4.     (SBU) The rough and tumble world of clearing and 
     settlement is more like poker than chess - bluffs, calls and 
     raising the stakes.   The Commission, congenitally condemned 
     to initiate but not enact legislation, must confine its game 
     to chess.  End Summary. 
 
  Setting the Scene: The Players and the Pot 
  ------------------------------------------ 
 
  5.     (SBU) The European players in the clearing and 
     settlement game are very different from those in the United 
     States.  Herein lie a strength and a weakness.  The strength 
     is that the largest European players are part of an 
     \"exchange complex,\" that combines clearing and settlement 
     activities with cash listing and trading (equities) (the so- 
     called \"vertical silo\" approach) and derivatives trading. 
     This allows revenues to be generated from different business 
     lines generally resulting in resilience in the bottom line 
     when one business line experiences weakness, e.g. lower 
     equities trading as is the case at present. 
 
  6.     (SBU) The largest of these complexes in Europe are 
     the Euronext group and Deutsche Borse.  Smaller, but 
     similarly structured complexes, exist in Italy, Spain and 
     Sweden. According to the MSMOW study published in June 2003, 
     Deutsche Borse received 15% of its revenues from cash 
     listing and trading, 23% from derivates trading and 
     clearing, 43% from clearing and settlement, and 19% from 
     information products and systems.  Euronext was similarly 
     diversified: 26% from cash listing and trading, 34% from 
     derivatives trading, 20% from clearing and settlement, and 
     17% from information products.  Why is this interesting? 
     One German expert explained that since many of its 
     activities are similar, investing one time in software 
     development can generate uses across its product line; 
     increasing the load on those systems drives down marginal 
     costs, increasing profitability. 
 
  7.     (SBU) Compare this diversity with that of the London 
     Stock Exchange, New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq, all with 
     the bulk of their revenues coming from cash listing and 
     trading (LSE 55%; NYSE, 74%, Nasdaq 71%). This \"horizontal\" 
     approach allows investors to move from different systems for 
     each aspect of securities execution, i.e. trading, clearing 
     and settling.  As these exchanges are heavily dependent on 
     one or two business lines, in present market conditions, 
     lower listing and trading activities mean a lower total 
     bottom line. 
 
  8.     (SBU) The weakness in Europe is that there is no one 
     institution that clears and settles - implying heavy 
     investments by the clearing and settlement industry and 
     potential risks to investors.  In the US the Depository 
     Trust Clearing Corporation clears and settles all equity 
     securities in the US.  The Options Clearing Corporation does 
     so for equity options.  Futures are somewhat different, 
     being able to be cleared and settled in the system where 
     they are traded. 
 
  9.     (SBU) What is the competition in Europe about?  The 
     MSMOW study estimates that European exchange complexes took 
     in revenues of euro 5.2 billion in 2002.  Profit margins 
     were roughly 26%. Worth a good scuffle for a part of that 
     pie. 
 
  10.  (SBU) Competition, however, should be viewed on a 
     broader scale, that is, by considering the larger pot of 
     where the investor \"spends\" money in capital markets 
     transactions in Europe.  The MSMOW study estimates that 
     total to be euro 40 billion.  Of that amount, exchanges and 
     centralized depositories (institutions holding securities 
     that enables securities transactions to be processed by book 
     entries) took in euro 3.5 billion, custodians (entities that 
     safe keep securities for customers) euro 4.5 billion, data 
     system providers 2.5 billion, and a hefty euro 29.5 billion 
     went to commissions and spreads.  Now that is a value chain 
     worthy of an all out fight - exchanges want to cut out the 
     middle man, custodians want to restrain exchanges, and 
     middle men want to keep business in house (internalize 
     transactions) or at least away from an order book open to 
     all on an electronic exchange (hear the mouse click away 
     their revenues?). 
 
  Action:  Market Players 
  ----------------------- 
 
  11.    (SBU) Three years ago Deutsche Borse was going for 
     the \"golden ring.\"  A merger with the London Stock Exchange 
     was rumored in the press and its \"vertical\" processing of 
     trading, clearing and settlement (straight through 
     processing) was envied, copied, and attacked as 
     anticompetitive.  Deutsche Borse struck up a joint venture 
     in the derivatives market with the CBOT in the United 
     States. Life seemed beautiful; but it still was life.  The 
     merger didn\'t happen, other exchange complexes have 
     developed or are planning their own straight through 
     processing systems, Commission competition authorities have 
     opened an investigation, and the joint venture with the CBOT 
     will be dissolved at the end of 2003. 
 
  12.    (SBU) Instead of Deutsche Borse domination, there 
     seems to have been a shift to what one analyst terms the 
     \"ABW Strategy,\" or an \"anybody but Werner strategy,\" 
     referring to the head of Deutsche Borse who has been 
     referred to as \"visionary,\" \"opinionated,\" or \"abrasive.\". 
     Highlights include: 
 
       -    Merger of CrestCo with Euroclear (the settlement 
            operations for the London Stock Exchange and Euronext, 
            respectively); 
       -    Proposed merger of the London Clearing House and 
            Clearnet (the clearing operations for the LSE and Euronex 
            respectively) 
       -    The CBOT replacing its trading platform under license 
            from Eurex, the Deutsche Borse derivatives operation, wit 
            new contract with LIFFE Connect, designed and built by 
            Euronext.liffe (over a year ago Euronext had purchased th 
            London International Financial Futures Exchange) 
       -    Nasdaq Europe has announced it will close down its 
            exchange in Brussels at the beginning of 2004 and will cl 
            Nasdaq Germany by the end of August. 
  13.    (SBU) Deutsche Borse, however, has managed a few 
     surprises of its own.  DB has introduced a system to help 
     brokers/dealers to internalize transactions (if they can\'t 
     beat\'em, join\'em - or at least made some money out of the 
     deal) and has announced that it will: 
 
       -    seek to establish its own licensed exchange in the US 
            to compete in the derivatives market; 
       -    open its system to investors from other systems, 
            forsaking the \"silo approach\" if others (read Euronext) d 
            the same; 
       -    implement an automated daytime bridge between 
            Clearstream International (its settlement bank) and 
            Euroclear Bank to allow same-day bridge transactions; 
       -    attract Dutch brokers and dealers displeased with their 
            Euronext association (fees went up this year for the firs 
            time) (the LSE also seeking to pick up some of the busine 
            from the disgruntled Dutch traders). 
     Kinda leaves you breathless, waiting for the next move. 
 
  Action: Policy Wonks 
  -------------------- 
 
  14.    (SBU) European policy officials also have ventured 
     into the clearing and settlement terrain. 
 
       -    The European Commission is collecting comments on its 
            May 2002 Communication on clearing and settlement and is 
            expected to publish another communication in September; 
       -    The European Commission\'s November 2002 proposal for 
            the revision of the Investment Services Directive would 
            require member states to ensure investment firms from oth 
            member states have access to central counter party and 
            clearing and settlement systems in their territory and th 
            stock exchanges allow participants to designate the syste 
            for the settlement of transactions; 
       -    European Parliament adopted a report in December 2002 
            on clearing and settlement proposing that core settlement 
            services should be managed as a user-owned service govern 
            by rule of a non-profit entity and that central securitie 
            depositories perform only settlement services and not \"va 
            added\" services; 
       -    European Commission competition authorities opened an 
            infringement proceeding in March against Deutsche Borse\'s 
            Clearstream Banking AG for refusing Euroclear Bank\'s acce 
            to the settlement platform for more than two years and fo 
            charging higher transaction prices to Euroclear than to 
            other national central securities depositories outside 
            Germany. 
       -    Giovaninni Group\'s Second Report on Clearing and 
            Settlement issued in April presented a program and schedu 
            for removing barriers to clearing and settlement within t 
            EU. 
       -    ESCB/CESR\'s Consultative Report on Standards for 
            Securities and Clearing Settlements in the European Union 
            issued at the end of July proposed standards to sustain 
            integration in the EU by having one single set of standar 
            for a regulatory framework. 
     The ESCB/CESR work deserves special mention. 
 
  ESCB/CESR: Softer than a Law but Harder than a 
  Recommendation 
  --------------------------------------------- -- 
 
  15.    (SBU) The ESCB/CESR Consultative Paper was prepared 
     by a ESCB-CESR Working Group comprised of representatives of 
     15 national banks of the EU and representatives of CESR. 
     The Working Group has proposed 19 standards for clearing and 
     settlement systems covering such topics as legal framework, 
     settlement cycles, central counter parties, central 
     securities depositories, delivery versus payment, risk 
     controls, operational reliability, governance, access, 
     transparency, and regulation, supervision and oversight, and 
     risks in cross-system links.  Comments on the paper are due 
     by October 31.  A public hearing will be held on October 2 
     in Paris. 
 
  16.    (SBU) The paper reflects the Giovaninni Group\'s 
     Second Report, the Group of Thirty\'s 20 recommendations on 
     clearing and settlement systems released in January, and the 
     Recommendations for Securities and Settlements Systems 
     issued by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems 
     (CPSS) and the Technical Committee of the International 
     Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in November 
     2001. 
 
  17.    (SBU) The standards aim to provide a consistent basis 
     for regulation, supervision and oversight of securities 
     clearing and settlement systems, enhance the safety, 
     soundness and efficiency of such systems, protect investors, 
     promote competitive EU markets, and avoid systemic risks. 
 
  18.    (SBU) These standards are unique in several aspects. 
     The first, is that they are \"standards.\"  They are not 
     recommendations to take or leave.  Neither are they 
     mandatory since they would not have Community law status. 
     Rather, the ECB/CESR Group believes that standards will be 
     of a more binding nature than recommendations and that 
     regulators will implement them on a \"best-endeavor\" basis. 
     This has worked for the ECB in its standards for securities 
     settlement systems in credit operations in the ESCB. 
     However, the ESCB/CESR proposed standards on clearing and 
     settlement go well beyond ESCB activities. 
 
  19.    (SBU) A second interesting feature is the proposal to 
     apply many of the standards to major custodians, including 
     custodian banks, some of which clear and settle in-house 
     rather than going to local clearing and settlement systems. 
     Some of these banks have significant operations and would be 
     considered \"systemically important custodians.\"  The 
     ECB/CESR has proposed four criteria to identify such 
     institutions: (1) magnitude of activities (e.g. 5% of EU 
     market or 25% of a domestic market); (2) number of systems; 
     (3) nature and number of clients; and (4) the possibility of 
     being replaced in the event of failure.  Banks that have a 
     large presence in the custodian business in Europe include 
     BNP Paribas and Citigroup. 
 
  20.    (SBU) Finally, the standards go well beyond the 
     competence of national banks and securities supervisors to 
     cover tax, accounting and other legal issues.  To ensure 
     consistent implementation and compliance, the Group notes 
     the importance of cooperation and information exchange among 
     competent authorities.  To ensure such cooperation is done 
     in a regular and structured manner, the Group volunteers to 
     take on a monitoring role to organize and co-ordinate 
     assessments of implementation. 
 
  Some Observations: Connecting the Dots 
  -------------------------------------- 
 
  21.    (SBU) Actions by market participants and policy wonks 
     have been, to some degree, symbiotic.  Here are some 
     examples. 
 
             (a)  Cross-Border Activities: Increased cross-border 
                activities in clearing and settlement presaged by the 
                Crestco and Euroclear merger or anticipated merger be 
                LCH and Clearnet suggests that standardization of rul 
                not only needed to integrate the EU market, but to en 
                that integration at the company level works at the 
                operations level, bringing promised efficiencies to 
                investors while protecting them from increased risks 
                cross-border transactions.  Thus, the ESCB/CESR stand 
                have some urgency from a supervisory point of view. 
                is some time, however.  According to a London-based e 
                not much has changed in the actual operations of Cres 
                Euroclear, for example, so the continental and UK sys 
                still run separately. 
 
             (b)  Access:  Deutsche Borse\'s willingness to open its 
                system to investors that trade on other platforms ref 
                the pressure from the ISD proposal, the Commission\'s 
                competition policy investigation, and, to some extent 
                ESCB/CESR standard on access.  Access is not to be ab 
                The ESCB/CESR standard would require objective and pu 
                disclosed criteria that permit \"fair and open access\" 
                still being able to control risk.  Access could be de 
                a clearing and settlement system if it posed risks th 
                could not be effectively controlled.  What about acce 
                investment firms from other countries?  Access could 
                denied, according to ESCB/CESR if there is a lack of 
                \"adequate supervision\" and doubts about the enforceab 
                of the legal powers of the service provider in the ho 
                country. 
             (c)  Governance:  The ESCB/CESR standard on governance c 
                for arrangements designed to fulfill public interest 
                requirements and to promote the objectives of owners 
                users.  This reflects, in part, the views in the Euro 
                Parliament report proposing to require settlement sys 
                be managed as a user-owned non-profit organization. 
                European Parliament\'s view is also supported by a gro 
                called \"Fair and Clear,\" composed of large custodian 
                including such big players as BNP Paribas and Citigro 
 
             (d)  Value Added Services:  The ESCB/CESR proposed stand 
                on risk controls implies that clearing and settlement 
                systems could extend credits, thus competing with ban 
                The ESCB/CESR proposed standard states that operators 
                systemically important systems should not run credit 
                but where they extend credit they should fully collat 
                such exposures.  Should such systems extend credits t 
                support the orderly functioning of the market, they c 
                offer uncollateralized credit but only to institution 
                high credit standing.  The European Parliament report 
                proposed that settlement systems not be permitted to 
                such credits, a view shared by \"Fair and Clear.\"  Her 
                concerns coincide: concerns about risks to settlement 
                systems from credit lending and concerns about compet 
                to custodian banks from settlement systems offering c 
                services to their clients.  A German expert points ou 
                is a false issue, in that settlement systems are lice 
                banks anyway.  Moreover, investment firms enjoy the 
                competition afforded by several players in the 
                settlement/custodian business, keeping costs lower an 
                service better than otherwise might be the case. 
 
  Where will Competition Drive the Market? 
  ---------------------------------------- 
 
  22.    (SBU) Allowing the market to find \"solutions\" to 
     efficient trading, clearing and settlement systems sounds 
     nice.  But what does it mean?  Where will the market take 
     the trading and post-trading infrastructure?  Not being 
     experts ourselves, we listen to what our betters have to 
     say. 
 
  23.    (SBU) The MSMOW study presents there views on how 
     several key areas may develop: 
 
                 (1)  Silo versus horizontal approach:  The vertical 
                    \"silo\" structure of exchange complexes that offer 
                    clearing and settling and straight through proces 
                    been criticized as anti-competitive. A horizontal 
                    allows investors access to the trading, or cleari 
                    settling systems.  The study suggests that this d 
                    burn out as market participants and regulators lo 
                    expensive costs and adopt pragmatic solutions.  V 
                    structures will become \"interoperable\" over time 
                    exchange complexes will be able to fulfill their 
                    providing market infrastructure and making a prof 
                    provided they continue to deliver lower all-in tr 
                    costs.  So far, this seems to be the trend. 
 
                 (2)  Separation of Depository from Banking Services: 
                    Settlement systems will have a tough time competi 
                    banks by offering value added services, in the MS 
                    view.  Settlement banks, while banks, don\'t offer 
                    range of banking services.  When the market picks 
                    study expect exchanges will stick to their core b 
 
                 (3)  Centralized clearing systems:  The study \"stron 
                    believes\" that centralized clearing will receive 
                    from Basle II.  Central counter party mechanisms 
                    manage risk and reduce systemic risks.  Banks wil 
                    such mechanisms to reduce risks and corresponding 
                    charges.  The ESCB/CESR standard on central count 
                    goes in the same direction.  It states that where 
                    benefits of using a central counter party outweig 
                    costs, market participants should either use the 
                    an existing one or establish one of their own. 
 
                 (4)  Internalization versus on Exchange Trading:  Th 
                    suggests that continental exchanges that use elec 
                    trading and a central order book for equity tradi 
                    continue to capture a large market share - betwee 
                    trading.  In the UK, where two-thirds of trades a 
                    \"facilitated\" rather than placed directly on an o 
                    book, the study expects little change.  In its op 
                    customers and the size of orders will dictate the 
                    exchange trading and internalization in each mark 
                    provided regulation doesn\'t favor one or the othe 
 
  Policy: The Wild Card 
  --------------------- 
 
  24.    (SBU) The dynamics of the market place are like a 
     game of poker: increasing investment stakes in high tech 
     infrastructure, improving the hand by striking up more 
     alliances or products, and bluffing about the strategy for 
     improved business.  Needs a strong constitution.  But the 
     winner\'s take could be considerable. 
 
  25.    (SBU) Enter the European Commission.  To date, the 
     Commission officials assert that they have been content in 
     allowing market forces to drive changes in the clearing and 
     settlement market.  Moreover, others are trying to do some 
     spadework to prepare the terrain.  The Giovannini Report and 
     now the ESCB/CESR standards point to the need for member 
     states to take action to bring down legal, regulatory and 
     tax barriers.  The ESCB/CESR use of \"standards\" puts more 
     pressure on supervisors to take action.  This is still short 
     of legislation.  Nonetheless, it could be a not so subtle 
     threat that if the market doesn\'t move itself, momentum 
     could build for some type of legislative action. 
     Parliament\'s report favors legislation, as does the \"Fair 
     and Clear\" group and others, such as the London Stock 
     Exchange, that believe that clearing or clearing and 
     settlement, should be regulated as a public utility. 
 
  26.    (SBU) The role for specific legislation is not clear. 
     With so many pieces of legislation pending under the 
     Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) that will have a 
     significant impact on the financial market place 
     (implementation of the prospectuses, market abuse and 
     financial conglomerates directives and the accounting 
     regulation; potential passage of the transparency and 
     investment services directives) the Commission will be 
     forgiven if not blessed, for letting these and related 
     market-driven changes in clearing and settlement systems run 
     their course.  Implementing enacted FSAP legislation as well 
     as the ESCB/CESR standards should be a priority before 
     assessing what, if anything needs to be done through 
     Community law. 
 
  27.    (SBU) Such an approach is not at all certain.  The 
     MSMOW study regards regulation as a \"wildcard.\"  It observes 
     that \"one should never underestimate the unpredictable 
     nature of lawmaking in Brussels or nationally and potential 
     unintended consequences of legislation.\"  Amen to that. 
     While the market is playing poker, the Commission must and 
     should be thinking chess. 
 
  28.    (SBU) The report was coordinated with Embassies 
     Berlin and London and USEU Brussels. 
 
(U)  POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
     wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49- 
     (69)-7535-2238. 
 
Bodde 
"
"10388","8/29/2003 5:30","03FRANKFURT7111","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 007111 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB BAY, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC FOR CLOUD 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR IMI HARLOW, AUSTIN 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Investment Services Directive Moving Toward 
Compromise 
 
T-IA-F-03-0043 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
Ref: (A) 02 Frankfurt  11356 ; (B) Frankfurt 2629; (C) USEU 
2629 
 
  1.   (SBU) Summary:  Negotiations on the controversial pre- 
     trade transparency provisions of the proposed revision to 
     the Investment Services Directive appear to be moving toward 
     a compromise. Compromise amendments circulated in the 
     European Parliament and texts being discussed in the Council 
     Working Group point in a similar direction: to maintain pre- 
     trade transparency, but make the provisions more workable 
     for investment firms.  Investment bankers, recognizing they 
     have lost the battle for deleting any pre-trade transparency 
     requirements, hope and pray the compromise texts will be 
     accepted.  Nothing is certain. 
 
  2.   (SBU) The fact that the Italians and the Dutch, both 
     reportedly having favored a strong pre-trade transparency 
     text, now have drafted compromise language gives reason for 
     optimism that the directive can be finalized in the next few 
     months.  Their new position doesn\'t necessarily represent a 
     change of heart, but rather a change of point of view.  The 
     Italians now have the EU Presidency, meaning they now have 
     the lead on ISD drafting and have pledged to get it done. 
     The Dutch position is driven by the Finance Ministry, 
     according to an investment banker, which takes a different 
     view of the issue than the securities regulators who had 
     shaped their earlier position. Thus, the text could be 
     finalized this fall. Given its history and the number of 
     technical issues, risks remain for slippage.  Notably, the 
     ECB has weighed in favoring pre-trade transparency not only 
     for shares, but also debt instruments.  While one bond 
     expert regards the ECB position as out of touch, a Brussels 
     lobbyist reports that the Italians are willing to consider 
     such an extension.  End Summary 
 
Pre-Trade Transparency in the ISD: Questions with No Clear 
Answers 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
  3.   (SBU) The London Investment Bankers Association (LIBA) 
     and the US Securities Industry Association (SIA), 
     representing European and US investment firms, were sorely 
     displeased when the European Commission modified its 
     proposal for revising the ISD at the last minute by 
     including a requirement for these firms to provide pre-trade 
     transparency (ref A).  They had argued that publishing 
     prices before executing a trade provides little information 
     to the market place not captured by post-trade reporting. 
     Investors would be protected from being fleeced by 
     subjecting investment firms to \"best execution\" obligations. 
     Moreover, pre-trade transparency could drive market prices 
     down, resulting in lower prices for investors.  Such 
     requirement would also require changes to the way investment 
     firms do business, requiring investment in new mechanisms. 
     All arguments that Commission staff had accepted, but the 
     Commissioners did not. 
 
  4.   (SBU) Investment firms took a hard line position that 
     the pre-trade transparency provisions were unworkable and 
     should be deleted.  The lead manager for the legislation in 
     the European Parliament, Theresa Villiers took a similar 
     view in her initial report on the ISD (ref B).  In her view, 
     the best solution would be to drop the offending article. 
     Privately, however, she knew that a compromise would be 
     necessary. 
 
  5.   (SBU) Investment firms complained about the details of 
     the proposed pre-trade transparency requirements.  Under the 
     Commission\'s proposal, investment firms are to \"make public\" 
     a \"firm bid and offer price\" for transactions of a \"size 
     customarily undertaken by a retail investor\" and to trade 
     with \"other investment firms and eligible counter parties at 
     the advertised prices.\"  How were they to make such 
     information public?  Would a firm price mean that they would 
     not be able to offer price improvements, even as market 
     conditions changed? What is a transaction size that is 
     customary for retail investors?  Forcing investment firms to 
     deal with all potential investors, regardless of their 
     credit rating or relationship with the firm, could subject 
     them to higher credit risks.  Too many questions with no 
     clear answers.  Some investment bankers had the distinct 
     feeling that these provisions were designed to increase 
     costs to investment firms and deprive them of their 
     competitive advantage over stock exchanges. 
 
Compromise Possibilities:  Italians and Dutch Try Their 
Hands 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
  6.   (SBU) At the end of June and early July, the Dutch and 
     Italians took their hands at fashioning possible compromise 
     texts in the Council Working Group.  The role of both is 
     notable.  The Dutch financial market regulator had 
     criticized \"internalization,\" e.g. where an investment firm 
     can match trades in-house.  Italian interests reportedly 
     were among those that had moved the College of Commissioners 
     to adopt a pre-trade transparency requirement last November. 
     According to one investment banker, the Dutch position has 
     shifted as the Finance Ministry has taken the lead on the 
     issue and has a different view.  The Italians, now in the 
     Presidency, feel the pressure to deliver results on the ISD. 
     The Italian Finance Minister has pledged that the ISD will 
     be completed under the Italian Presidency. 
 
  7.   (SBU) The Dutch took the view that some transparency is 
     needed to benefit price formation but that competition 
     between different trade execution venues was also 
     beneficial.  To cover both points they proposed that the pre- 
     trade transparency obligation apply only to retail trade. 
     Pre-trade disclosure of large trades could result in the 
     market moving against the firm publishing the quote, a view 
     shared by investment firms, which could dry up market 
     liquidity. 
 
  8.   (SBU) Further, the Dutch reasoned that only firms 
     active in the retail market that internalize would be 
     subject to pre-trade transparency requirements.  Such 
     \"internalizers\" would be defined as those who regularly 
     execute retail client orders in shares by dealing on its own 
     account.  Just trading in-house against a firm\'s propriety 
     book would not count as internalization.  A firm should also 
     be able to improve or change the price depending on market 
     conditions, in the Dutch view.  Finally, investment firms 
     should be able to control with whom they do business, e.g. 
     they would offer their services to their own retail clients 
     but not have to trade with all comers. 
 
  9.   (SBU) These same points have been picked up in a 
     Council Working Group text drafted by the Italians based on 
     a Group meeting on July 7.  In this Italian version 
     investment firms are to publish firm prices for shares for 
     which they are \"systematic internalizers,\" i.e. 
     systematically dealing on its own account in transactions of 
     a \"standard size\" of shares admitted to trading on a stock 
     exchange.  Such internalizers would be able to withdraw 
     prices in accordance with market conditions.  Prices and the 
     sizes of trades are to be made public in a manner that is 
     easily accessible to the firms\' clients and to market 
     participants on a \"reasonable commercial basis.\" Finally, 
     systematic internalizers would be allowed to decide, in a 
     non-discriminatory way, the persons they accept as clients. 
 
Parliament in Sync 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
  10.  (SBU) Whether by coincidence or design, the compromise 
     amendments offered by Villiers on July 10 look very similar 
     to the new Italian text.  Investment firms which practice 
     systematic internalization are to publish firm \"quotes\" (not 
     prices) for transactions of a \"standard market size\" for 
     shares admitted to trading on a stock exchange.  Systematic 
     internalizers would have to deal with their \"clients\" at a 
     price equal to or better than the quote. Thus, they would 
     not have to trade with all comers and they could improve the 
     price based on market conditions.  Finally, the compromise 
     text would require the prices to be accessible to other 
     market participants on \"reasonable commercial terms.\" 
 
Principle Established, A Question of Price 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
  11.  (SBU) Investment firms experts are generally pleased 
     with the direction of these ideas.  Their preference still 
     is not to have any pre-trade transparency provision.  Not 
     winning the principle, their next objective is to make the 
     provisions as tolerable and as inexpensive as possible. 
 
  12.  (SBU) Even if the compromises being discussed were to 
     be accepted, important details would remain to be 
     elaborated.  Both the Italian and Villiers text would have 
     the European Commission together with the Committee of 
     European Securities Regulators (CESR) specify the size of a 
     transaction that would constitute a \"standard market size,\" 
     in implementing measures.  A standard market size could vary 
     from market to market.  Thus, the scope of the provision 
     will remain unknown until such measures are adopted. 
 
Chance for Success? 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
  13.  (SBU) According to a representative of an investment 
     firm, the Villiers and Italian text have a chance of being 
     adopted.  The Villiers text is scheduled to be voted on in 
     the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee on September 10. 
     The compromise text is to be the basis for that vote. 
     However, according to this representative, EMAC members 
     agreed to vote as long as all respected a \"cease fire\" 
     during the summer recess not to seek changes to the text. 
 
  14.  (SBU) Whether the Italians can pull their text through 
     the Council Working Group is also unknown at this point. 
     The Italians, however, have been working on the text in 
     August - but the August vacation period has slowed their own 
     internal efforts.  European Parliament staffers have pointed 
     out that if the Council does not send a text to EMAC by 
     November, legislative mechanics alone could preclude final 
     adoption of the directive before the Parliament\'s scheduled 
     April adjournment. 
 
European Central Bank Takes A Hand:  Nave or Just Out of 
the Picture? 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
  15.  (SBU) On June 12 the European Central Bank (ECB) issued 
     an opinion on the proposed revision of the ISD.  The ECB 
     \"welcomed\" the Commission\'s proposed rules on pre-trade 
     transparency as \"advancing the fundamental goal of allowing 
     investors to choose the more efficient trading venues.\"  The 
     ECB also opined that there is a \"strong case for 
     consolidating price information at the EU or euro area 
     level\" and thought that public authorities could \"act as 
     catalysts\" to the private sector to undertake such an 
     effort. 
 
  16.  (SBU) The ECB goes on to criticize the Commission\'s 
     proposal for limiting transparency to shares.  Rather, the 
     ECB \"recommends that the Commission reconsiders the scope of 
     the transparency rules and extends them to debt securities.\" 
     If it is not possible to do so, then the Commission should 
     report in two years on the possibility to extend the 
     provisions to debt securities, rather than in four years as 
     provided in the Commission\'s initial proposal. 
 
  17.  (SBU) The \"Financial Services Newsletter\" of Brussels- 
     based Houston Consulting reports that the Italian Presidency 
     is will to consider the extension of the Article 25 
     reporting requirement to bond.  The Italian July draft, 
     however, does not extend pre-trade transparency provisions 
     to debt instruments, but does incorporate the idea of a 
     Commission report in two rather than four years. 
  18.  (SBU) According to several bond experts, the notion of 
     transparency in debt security prices is rather unique. They 
     point out that the bond market is composed of many bonds 
     that have many different features and are much more 
     heterogeneous than equities.  Thus, comparisons between bond 
     prices are very difficult.  Moreover, once bonds are placed, 
     generally they are not traded but held by investors. 
     Accordingly, these experts note that the market for a 
     specific bond may not be very liquid after the initial 
     placement.  One bond expert believed that the ECB was rather 
     nave in its approach.  Pre-trade transparency for bonds 
     sounds fine in theory, but in practice irrelevant, in his 
     view. 
 
 
  19.  This cable coordinated with Embassies Berlin, Rome, The 
     Hague and USEU Brussels. 
 
  (U)     POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e- 
     mail wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 
     49-(69)-7535-2238. 
 
Bodde 
"
"10443","9/2/2003 13:33","03FRANKFURT7208","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 FRANKFURT 007208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Prospectus Directive:  Final Adoption is Milestone 
- Important Details to Follow: Possible Requirement for US 
Firms to Use IAS a Huge Issue 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0045 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
Ref: A) Brussels 3470; B) Frankfurt 2582 
 
1.(SBU)  Summary:  Adoption of the Prospectus Directive in 
July by the European Parliament (ref A) and Ecofin Council 
is a milestone event in the EU\'s Financial Services Action 
Plan. The text was much improved over the European 
Commission\'s initial proposal and solved the major question 
of \"issuer choice\" to the satisfaction of the banking and 
primary dealer community.  A host of other issues, however, 
are still to be solved in the implementation process.  The 
Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) has 
produced its final advice to the Commission on the minimum 
information requirements for a prospectus.  This was also 
not an easy process, as CESR\'s initial proposal was heavily 
criticized as too cumbersome and detailed. 
 
2.(SBU)  A major issue for non-EU issuers will be whether 
home country accounting standards, such as US GAAP, can be 
used instead of International Accounting Standards (IAS), as 
endorsed by the EU, as required for EU firms listed on stock 
exchanges.  Such a requirement, or even requiring 
reconciliation of US GAAP to IAS could be very expensive and 
could drive some US issuers out of the European markets in 
which they currently list or offer their securities for 
sale.  Now that would not be in keeping with the EU\'s 
objective of creating a strong European capital market, 
would it?  US officials have raised the issue with DG 
Internal Market officials who concede that such a policy 
would be like shooting themselves in the foot.  In a new 
consultation paper, CESR states that the question is still 
open, but proposes that large, wholesale debt issuers may 
not have to use IAS or reconcile their accounts. End Summary 
 
Adoption of the Prospectus Directive: A Long and Windy Road 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
3.(SBU)  Following behind the scenes negotiations among key 
officials of the European Commission, European Parliament 
and member state Finance Ministries, the European Parliament 
on July 2 adopted the proposed Prospectus Directive (ref A). 
The Council adopted the directive on July 15.  The directive 
represents the end result of a hared-fought and contentious 
effort to introduce a introduce a \"single passport\" for 
issuers of securities, allowing them to use a prospectus 
approved by one member state competent authority in all 
other member states.  Member States have 18 months to 
transpose the directive into national legislation. 
 
4.(SBU)  Commissioner Bolkestein hailed the agreement as 
demonstrating that the Commission, Council and Parliament 
can overcome initial differences of views \"through a 
constructive spirit of compromise.\"  Not known for his 
mastery of the understatement, this one is a beauty.  The 
Commission\'s initial proposal of May 2001 was thoroughly 
trashed as a terrible example of legislative drafting. 
Rather than consulting with market experts, a senior DG 
Internal Market official plead that time was pressing and 
they needed to issue a draft quickly.  (In retrospect, he 
conceded that the document was poorly drafted and submitted 
in haste to make progress on the Financial Services Action 
Plan.) 
 
5.(SBU)  Parliament proposed over 65 amendments, essentially 
re-writing the text.  The Commission \"modified\" its proposal 
in August 2002, incorporating many of Parliament\'s changes. 
The Council also had a difficult time wrestling with issues 
of language, application to sovereign issues and whether 
authority to approve prospectuses could be delegated to 
exchanges. 
 
6.(SBU)  One major issue for investment firms and issuers of 
non-equity securities in particular was whether issuers they 
could chose the competent authority to approve their 
prospectus.  In the current euro bond market, issuers of 
debt securities can have their issue approved in London or 
Luxembourg, markets where they intend to offer the debit 
issue for sale, rather than in their home market.  Several 
member states opposed such \"issuer\" choice.  In the end, the 
final text will permit issuers of non-equity securities in 
denominations of at least euro 1,000, to be able to choose 
the competent authority to review and approve their 
prospectus. 
 
7.(SBU)  In a joint statement, the Banking Federation of the 
European Union (FBE) and the International Primary Market 
Association (IPMA) declared that finalization of the 
directive \"marks the success of a tremendous effort by the 
financial services industry to make its voice matter in the 
political process of structuring a \"passporting\" system.\" 
They went on to state that \"the financial services industry 
notes with satisfaction that issuers of more than 90% of all 
bonds will have the right to determine where to file their 
prospectus, as they do today, and that debt issuance 
programs, or Medium Term Notes (MTNs), a structure which is 
now used by 90% of international debt issues, will continue 
to operate.\" 
 
8.(SBU)  All is not well, however.  FBE/IMPA still has \"some 
substantive concerns.\"  Among these is that convertible 
bonds will be categorized as equity and subject to more 
stringent requirements than at present, that the definition 
of qualified investor (e.g. professional investor) is not 
clear; and high translation costs for cross-border issues 
(the summary may have to be translated into the host 
country\'s language).  They note that some securitized 
derivatives will have to be discontinued.  Several 
investment bankers complained about information requirements 
imposed on non-equity issues, since a lighter information 
regime would apply only to issues in denominations of euro 
50,000 or more.  Such changes will alter the present 
operations of the euro bond market, in their opinion. 
 
9.(SBU)  The compromises, however, were hard fought. 
Indeed, up to the last day in the plenary a German Finance 
Ministry official thought that an aggressive push in 
Parliament to give all issuers investor choice could allow 
the French to re-open the entire issue rather than fixing on 
a compromise.  Commented a Parliamentary staffer: \"We got 
what we could, but couldn\'t get everything.\" 
 
Important Details: Enter CESR 
------------------------------ 
 
10.(SBU)  Passage of the directive provides \"framework\" 
legislation that needs to be filled in with details by the 
European Commission based on advice from CESR.  This is 
tough, technical slogging.  CESR began to develop details 
already in March 2002 when the Commission gave it its first 
mandate on the prospectus directive.  The text of the 
directive has changed since then, giving CESR somewhat of a 
moving target. 
 
11.(SBU)  CESR\'s first a consultation document was a flop 
(ref B).  It demanded many details, many of which were 
considered inappropriate, particularly for bond issues.  The 
format for documentation was considered cumbersome and 
overly rigid for a market place in which new financial 
instruments can be engineered overnight. 
 
12.(SBU)  To its credit, CESR took these criticisms to 
heart.  It held public hearings and listened to industry 
representatives.  On July 31 CESR issued its advice to the 
European Commission on (a) disclosure obligations (e.g. for 
equity securities, retail and wholesale debt, asset-backed 
securities, etc.); (b) incorporation by reference of 
previously published information (e.g. annual reports); and 
(c) publication of a prospectus (availability, contents of a 
notice, methods of publication (e.g. email).  CESR noted 
that it had reduced information requirements, particularly 
for debt issues, and used existing IOSCO standards, which 
had been developed without much public consultation, as a 
benchmark rather than as minimal standards.  One bond expert 
who had participated in consultations with CESR reported 
that the initial sessions were highly confrontational.  By 
the time of the last consultation in June he said it was \"a 
love feast.\"  This is not to say there has been complete 
satisfaction with all details.  But CESR work has improved 
as a result of its consultation process. 
 
13.(SBU)  Bond representatives might have won that skirmish. 
But a major potential battle looms. 
 
Accounting and Auditing Standards: Content of a Prospectus 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
14.(SBU)  An issue that arose in the first round of 
consultations with CESR was the use of accounting and 
auditing standards.  Under the EU Regulation on 
international accounting standards, all EU companies listed 
on exchanges will have to have their accounts prepared 
according to IAS, as endorsed by the European Commission, as 
of financial year 2005.  CESR\'s initial consultation 
document implied that accounts would have to be prepared 
using IAS and International Standards of Audit (ISA), but 
was not clear. 
 
15.(SBU)  CESR issued a new consultation document at the end 
of July that is more explicit.  It proposes including \"two 
years of audited historic financial information prepared and 
presented in accordance with the accounting standards which 
will be adopted in the issuer\'s next annual financial 
statements.\"  That would mean re-stating two years of 
information according to IAS.  CESR considered and rejected 
other options: re-statement of three years of accounts; 
reconciliation between local Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP) and IAS, and no restatement or 
reconciliation.  CESR has invited comments on this 
consultation document by October 30 and will hold hearings 
on October 9 in Paris.  It will provide its final advice to 
the Commission by 31 December. 
 
16.(SBU)  On auditing standards CESR acknowledges that the 
absence of comprehensive rules at the EU level could result 
in differing levels of audit scrutiny of accounts.  CESR 
declared, however, that it shares the European Commission\'s 
objective to implement International Standards of Audit 
(ISA) as of 2005. 
 
Issuers from Third Countries:  The Meaning of Equivalence 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
17.(SBU)  Issuers from third countries were among the most 
outspoken critics of CESR\'s initial consultation paper.  One 
such critic was the American Financial Services Association 
(AFSA).  AFSA is a trade association that represents 400 
firms involved in the financial services industry including 
Ford Motor Credit Company, GMAC Financial Services, CIT 
Group Inc., Household International and Toyota Motor Credit. 
AFSA states that these borrowers have debt outstanding 
totaling approximately $224 billion listed in the EU.  These 
companies issued $37 billion of corporate securities listed 
on an EU exchange in 2002, and $71 billion in 2001. 
 
18.(SBU)  AFSA argues that US GAAP should be considered to 
be international accounting standards since they are 
prevalent in the international market place and require 
comparable disclosure as EU rules.  Therefore, U.S. GAAP 
accounts \"should be acceptable under the Directive.\" 
\"Requiring issuers to restate US GAAP numbers to a different 
international accounting standard on an ongoing basis would 
impose costs so prohibitively high as to drive many issuers 
out of the European debt capital market.\"  AFSA made the 
same case for the use of auditing standards and \"invited\" 
CESR and the Commission \"to make clear that U.S. audit 
standards represent equivalent standards\" to those in the 
EU. 
 
  19.(SBU)  In July CESR issued a new consultation paper in 
  July regarding (a) minimum information requirements for 
  sovereign government securities issues, should 
  authorities decide to issue one (non-equity issues and 
  guarantees by such governments are not required to draw 
  up a prospectus); (b) historical financial information of 
  EU and non-EU issuers to be included in a prospectus; and 
  (c) advertising.  With respect to (b) CESR proposes that 
  non-EU issuers be subject to the same minimum information 
  requirements as EU issuers.  Non-EU issuers that prepare 
  financial statements according to a GAAP \"equivalent\" to 
  IAS Regulation need not submit additional information. 
 
  20.(SBU)  CESR acknowledges that their proposal raises 
  the question of \"equivalence.\"  Article 20 of the 
  Prospectus Directive specifies that a competent authority 
  in a member state may approve a prospectus from a third 
  country issuer provided that the prospectus has been 
  drawn up in accordance with international standards (e.g. 
  IOSCO Disclosure Standards) and the information 
  requirements, including information of a financial 
  nature, are \"equivalent\" to the requirements under this 
  Directive.  The Commission is authorized to adopt 
  implementing measures stating that a third country 
  ensures such equivalence. 
 
  21.(SBU)  CESR states in its July consultation document 
  that it is working with the European Commission in order 
  to devise the best procedure to \"manage the question of 
  equivalence.\"  A German securities official suggests that 
  EU securities regulators tend to believe that accounts 
  prepared under U.S. GAAP should be considered equivalent 
  to IAS accounts.  This official points out that all major 
  European exchanges do so now.  The European Commission, 
  according to this official, is in a dilemma: they want 
  companies to abide by the new regulation on international 
  accounting standards rather than use US GAAP, as some 
  firms now do.  Resolution of this issue is not a 
  technical matter but a political one, in official\'s 
  opinion. 
 
  22.(SBU)  DG Internal Market officials have not made a 
  clear public statement on this issue.  They have declared 
  that an overall goal should be to achieve convergence 
  between U.S. GAAP and IAS.  They would like EU issuers to 
  be able to use accounts prepared using IAS for listing in 
  the United States. USG officials have raised the use of 
  accounts prepared under U.S. GAAP in the informal US-EU 
  financial market dialogue.  In response, DG Internal 
  Market officials conceded that not accepting US GAAP 
  would damage the EU capital market should US issuers 
  leave. \"We would shoot ourselves in the foot,\" quipped 
  one.  They reportedly made the same comment to 
  representatives of AFSA. 
 
  23.(SBU)  Some members of the finance industry, however, 
  believe that the Commission is using this issue as a 
  bargaining lever to extract concessions from the US, such 
  as on implementation of Sarbanes-Oxley legislation or 
  placement of European trading screens in the United 
  States, a \"tit-for-tat\" approach to regulation. 
 
  The Power of an Exemption 
  ------------------------- 
 
  24.(SBU)  In its July consultation paper CESR proposes 
  some exemptions for wholesale issuers from having to meet 
  an \"equivalence\" standard.  CESR reasons that the 
  different nature of the investors concerned justifies 
  different treatment.  This exemption would apply to both 
  accounting and auditing standards for wholesale debt 
  issues and issuers of high denomination asset backed 
  securities or depository receipts (e.g. issues having 
  denominations of at least euro 50,000). 
 
  25.(SBU)  Specifically CESR proposes that issuers are to 
  use accounts prepared under IAS or a non-Member state 
  local GAAP equivalent to IAS, \"otherwise\" the following 
  information shall be included in the registration 
  document: (a) \"a prominent statement that the financial 
  information included in the registration document has not 
  been prepared in accordance with IAS Regulations and that 
  there may be material differences in the financial 
  information had IAS Regulation been applied to the 
  historical financial information; (b) immediately 
  following the historical financial information a 
  narrative description of the differences between IAS 
  Regulation and the accounting principles adopted by the 
  issuer in preparing its annual financial statements. 
  Similarly, if different auditing standards were used than 
  those applicable in a member state, information shall be 
  included would be (a) a prominent statement disclosing 
  which auditing standards have been applied; and (b) an 
  explanation of any significant departures from ISA. 
 
  CESR Information Gathering 
  -------------------------- 
 
  26.(SBU)  In January the Commission gave CESR a mandate 
  to provide factual information and legislative and 
  practices of Member States regarding the treatment of 
  third county issuers with respect to drawing up and 
  approval of prospectuses.  This information is due to the 
  Commission at the same time CESR provides its advice on 
  the July consultation document, that is, 31 December.  On 
  the basis of the information gathered the Commission will 
  decide whether an additional mandate asking CESR to 
  provide technical advice on possible draft implementing 
  rules will be granted in the future. 
 
  An Observation 
  --------------- 
 
  27.(SBU)  Accounts prepared under U.S. GAAP were once 
  considered the world standard.  EU firms listed on US 
  exchanges had to use U.S. GAAP accounts or reconcile them 
  to it.  Even EU firms listed on US exchanges could use 
  their U.S. GAAP accounts to satisfy home country 
  requirements.  The EU Regulation on international 
  accounting standards is changing all that.  By forcing 
  uniformity of accounting standards for all 7,000 EU 
  listed firms, it raises the prevalence of IAS usage. 
  This has the potential to divide the world in two: IAS 
  and U.S. GAAP.  In August the Swiss Stock Exchange 
  announced that as of 2005 only IAS or U.S. GAAP accounts 
  would be accepted for Swiss listed firms on its exchange: 
  Swiss GAAP will no longer be accepted. In July the German 
  Accounting Standards Board made cooperation with the 
  International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) its 
  primary objective. 
 
  28.(SBU)  Bringing these two accounting standards worlds 
  together is noble aim of the  convergence project of the 
  U.S. Financial Accounting Standards Board and the 
  International Accounting Standards Board.  Former SEC 
  Chairman Pitt stated that if there were sufficient 
  progress in convergence and a process for consistent 
  interpretation and enforcement of IAS, then it may be 
  appropriate for the SEC to reconsider the need for 
  private issuers from the EU firms to continue to 
  reconcile from IAS to U.S. GAAP. A Commission statement 
  to the same effect would go a long way toward relieving 
  market uncertainties its current ambiguous position is 
  creating. 
 
  29.(SBU)  By keeping the issue vague of whether US firms 
  can continue to use U.S. GAAP in Europe, the Commission 
  thinks it keeps up the pressure for firms in the EU to 
  use Commission-endorsed IAS and convergence, the latter 
  seen as an ultimate objective by Commissioner Bolkestein. 
  There are other views of the Commission\'s objectives. 
  One is that it would like to assert the primacy of EU 
  standards world wide - a counterweight to the role of the 
  U.S. SEC.  Another is that, as noted above, the 
  Commission wants to use the acceptance of U.S. GAAP 
  accounts as leverage for other concessions. 
 
  30.(SBU)  If convergence truly were the Commission\'s 
  goal, it could enlist the firms represented by AFSA to 
  push for such convergence.  Such convergence would unite 
  two major capital markets.  If the other two views more 
  accurately reflect reality, then the outcome depends on 
  politics. This may or may not be at all helpful for 
  financial markets.  What is less uncertain, is that by 
  maintaining uncertainty, the Commission is needlessly 
  creating uncertainties for non-EU global firms that may 
  take their business elsewhere.  It wouldn\'t be the first 
  time that financial markets, provoked by policy changes, 
  created new instruments and markets were none had existed 
  before. 
 
  31.(U)  This cable coordinated with Embassies Berlin, 
  Rome, The Hague and USEU Brussels. 
 
  32.(U)  POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e- 
     mail wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 
     49-(69)-7535-2238. 
 
Bodde 
"
"10840","9/18/2003 14:41","03FRANKFURT7786","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 007786 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: Protests Follow Hesse/Koch Austerity Plan of Less 
Money, Longer Working Hours 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  Hesse Minister-President (M-P) Roland Koch\'s 
announcement of austerity measures, including a one-billion 
Euro cut in the Hesse state budget, longer working hours 
for public employees, cuts in wages and subsidies, and the 
sale of state assets resulted in demonstrations by public 
sector unions as well as allegations that Koch bought this 
year\'s election on credit.  On the heels of a period of 
free spending in the run-up to Hesse elections in February 
that resulted in record debt, Koch (CDU, Christian 
Democratic Union) is keen to demonstrate fiscal discipline 
while attacking the Schroeder government on economic 
policy.  A tenacious politician with national political 
ambitions, Koch must see the austerity measures through to 
prove himself a credible candidate for chancellor and in 
view of Hesse\'s serious budget gap.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Budget Cuts Hit Public Employees and Social Spending 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
2.  On September 2, Hesse M-P Koch announced \"Operation 
Safe Future,\" including Hesse\'s largest ever budget cut of 
one billion Euros.  After three years of increased spending 
and the prospect of a third unconstitutional budget, Koch\'s 
announcement   will affect both public servants and 
citizens.  In its defense, Koch said painful steps were 
necessary to save Hesse\'s future: 
 
-- Public servants (Beamte) will have to work up to 42 
hours (currently 38.5) per week.  Hesse will cancel and 
renegotiate wage agreements for other employees 
(Angestellte).  Bonuses will be cut, and no new personnel 
will be hired. 
 
-- Hesse will cut subsidies by one-third (mainly by 
reducing payments to social institutions). 
 
-- Hesse will sell state property, mainly housing and its 
stake in the Frankfurt Trade Fair (the City of Frankfurt 
must agree). 
 
3.  In a letter to public employees, Koch said that Hesse 
faces a  \"disastrous\" fiscal situation where only extreme 
measures can avert layoffs.  As in the private sector, 
public employees must start working longer hours.  Koch 
says 2004 growth is likely to be only one percent, not two 
percent as claimed by the SPD-Green government. 
 
Hesse Opposition:  Koch Made His Own Bed ... 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  Hesse Greens chairman Matthias Berninger blamed Koch 
for the \"biggest election fraud in Hesse\'s history\" for 
announcing drastic cuts after having overspent prior to 
this year\'s election.  Tarek al Wazir (Hesse Greens caucus 
leader) said that cutting 127 million Euros in social 
spending will mean job losses and fewer programs for AIDS 
prevention, consumer protection, and childcare.  SPD reps 
called for the resignation of Hesse Finance Minister 
Karlheinz Weimar.  Even representatives of Koch\'s former 
coalition partner FDP said that Hesse has no long-term 
strategy for reducing public debt and called on Koch to 
stop opposing the Schroeder government\'s tax reform 
package. 
 
5. The pubic employees\' association (Beamtenbund) condemned 
the Koch announcement and staged the first protests within 
24 hours of Koch\'s announcement.  The Verdi trade union 
(which represents public workers) continues to reject any 
renegotiation of wage agreements.  This labor-management 
standoff likely will continue and could become embroiled in 
party politics. 
 
Koch Must Dig Out of Hole Before National Elections 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
6. COMMENT:  The austerity plan is a drastic change of 
course for potential chancellor candidate Koch and for 
Hesse (which recorded the biggest budget and debt increase 
of all west German states last year), but it comes as no 
surprise.  Koch knows he must fix Hesse\'s public sector and 
change his image, as even Bavarian CDU premier Edmund 
Stoiber (and former contender for chancellor) publicly 
admonished Koch to \"put his own house in order\" before 
preaching on national politics.  With a new CDU majority in 
the Hesse legislature, Koch now has the legislative muscle 
to trim the spending excesses of his former coalition 
government (CDU-FDP) and to see this austerity plan 
through. 
 
7. The austerity measures angered  Hesse\'s civil servants, 
and cuts in social spending will give Hesse\'s voters a 
visible reminder of hard times.  Koch told CG earlier this 
year that he will see the budget cuts through at all costs. 
Koch knows that he must mop up Hesse\'s red ink in time for 
an economic recovery if he is to become a credible 
candidate for chancellor in 2006.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"10930","9/23/2003 14:10","03FRANKFURT7909","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 007909 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, GM 
SUBJECT: CDU Stumbles on Welfare Reform as Saarland Jumps 
Ship to Endorse Schroeder Govt Plan 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. The CDU-led Saarland government has rejected a Christian 
Democratic proposal for paying unemployment benefits at the 
local level.  Together with poorer CDU-led states in 
eastern Germany, Saarland could give the Schroeder 
government a Bundesrat majority on welfare reform -- and 
hand a defeat to national CDU leadership.  END SUMMARY. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
2. Currently, the national government pays for the first 12 
months of unemployment benefits, and local governments pay 
for unemployment and social benefits thereafter.  The 
Schroeder government will alter the second tier of 
unemployment benefits (Arbeitslosengeld II) so that after 
12 months, unemployed individuals would receive reduced 
benefits (at the same lower level as \"Sozialhilfe\" social 
welfare payments) paid by the federal labor office.  The 
national CDU leadership criticized the SPD-Green proposal 
as a power grab by the national government, and Hesse 
Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU) introduced a plan 
under which local governments will administer (and pay for) 
the new second-tier unemployment benefits. 
 
NEW DEVELOPMENTS 
---------------- 
 
3. Saarland\'s State Secretary for Social Affairs Josef 
Hecken (CDU) has rejected the CDU/Koch reform plan, calling 
it an unfair burden to Saarland and other poorer German 
states, particularly in East Germany.  Hecken\'s office told 
us that enactment of the \"Koch/Merkel plan\" (his quote) 
would mean Saarland would lose over 100 million euros 
annually versus under the current federal revenue sharing 
scheme (Laenderfinanzausgleich).  In defense of its 
position, the Saar government cites a study by Georgetown 
University lecturer Bernd Reissert showing that who pays 
Arbeitslosengeld II is, in fact, very important.  Reissert 
describes unemployment benefits as part of a \"hidden 
revenue compensation scheme\" channeling funds (EUR 4 
billion net transfer per year) from strong states to those 
with lower tax revenue and higher unemployment.  Paying 
benefits at the local level would potentially eliminate 
this regional transfer payment. 
 
4. Hecken recently told Saarland press that the CDU model 
represents the \"survival of the fittest,\" a threat to 
solidarity and to the public finances and social policies 
of Saarland and similar areas.  He also criticized a CDU 
proposal to alter a similar redistribution scheme among 
health insurers (Risikostrukturausgleich Krankenkassen). 
Hecken opines that the Schroeder government model likely 
will receive a Bundesrat majority (suggesting Saarland will 
not/not vote the CDU line on welfare reform). 
 
GIVING SCHROEDER AN ISSUE MAJORITY IN BUNDESRAT 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
5. COMMENT. Reorganizing and reducing welfare payments is a 
key element of economic reform.  Hecken\'s announcement, 
which was vetted by Saarland M-P Peter Mueller (CDU), is a 
wake-up call for the CDU party leadership.  Saarland\'s 
rejection of the CDU/Koch proposal has political 
significance beyond the issue of welfare reform: 
 
-- It means that Schroeder government likely will obtain a 
Bundesrat majority on this issue despite opposition from 
the national CDU.  While the national CDU leadership 
rejected additional talks on the government\'s reform 
agenda, Saxony M-P Georg Milbradt (CDU) said he would 
welcome a summit with Schroeder if it would help his state. 
The SPD-Green government potentially can use regional 
transfer payments to prevail on other economic issues. 
 
-- Welfare reform could become a significant defeat for CDU 
chairperson Angela Merkel and for aspiring chancellor- 
candidate Koch.  Saarland\'s leadership is angry that Hesse 
and Baden-Wuerttemberg dominated CDU policy-making on this 
issue.  The breakdown of party unity on welfare reform 
shows CDU\'s vulnerability as it tries to govern in both 
rich areas (Hesse, Baden-Wuerttemberg) and relatively poor 
(Saarland, the new states). 
 
PASI 
"
"10933","9/23/2003 14:43","03FRANKFURT7910","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 007910 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EIND, ECON, ETRD, ELTN, GM 
SUBJECT: GM\'s Opel Chief Sees More Job Cuts Despite Company 
Turnaround, Pent-Up Consumer Demand 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) Opel (GM) Chairman Carl-Peter Forster is 
optimistic that the automaker can keep its market share 
growing but pessimistic about overall demand, profits, and 
the future of the German auto industry.  Forster expects 
that Opel will be forced to announce another round of 
layoffs at its facility in Bochum (North Rhine-Westphalia). 
Germany will remain a leading auto producer, but many jobs 
will move to countries where labor cost is lower, 
particularly Eastern Europe.  The Opel chairman faulted the 
German government and opposition for not offering a 
coherent economic vision that boosts consumer confidence. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU) The CG met GM-Opel Chairman/CEO Carl-Peter Forster 
at Opel\'s headquarters in Ruesselsheim in the lead-up to 
the IAA show in Frankfurt (the world\'s largest auto show). 
Forster, who engineered Opel\'s remarkable turnaround 
starting in 2001 (increasing its market share from nine to 
10.9 percent), fears a setback in the second half of 2003. 
The European car market has contracted three to four 
percent in the last four years and sales volume has fallen 
for all manufacturers.  Opel now faces a strong Euro and 
the expensive launch of the new Astra model.  Less volume 
and higher costs will likely translate into more layoffs, 
particularly at the Bochum plant in North Rhine-Westphalia. 
Worried about the economic situation, consumers continue to 
delay purchases and buy more basic cars (smaller engines 
and fewer accessories), reducing the profit margin per 
vehicle.  Forster is \"frustrated by the lack of political 
leadership .... There is so little on Schroeder\'s 
achievement list and the opposition makes it worse by 
creating greater confusion\".  Still, he expects the German 
car market to grow by five percent in 2004 because of pent- 
up demand (average vehicle age in Germany is now over seven 
years). 
 
3. (SBU) Opel depends on European markets because it cannot 
export to the US in competition with parent GM.  Forster 
rejects speculation that Opel would enter the US market: 
\"GM\'s problem is not too few, but too many brands.\" 
Currently more decentralized than other producers, GM will 
more closely coordinate its brands in the future.  Forster 
said GM never managed to create synergy between the US and 
German markets, adding that competitor Daimler-Chrysler\'s 
merger is not working well either because of the very 
different product lines.  CG raised the issue of diesel 
engine technology; Forster said diesel passenger vehicles 
have a future in the US and could make a major contribution 
to reducing carbon-dioxide emissions.  Opel made a 
strategic mistake in moving its diesel competence center to 
Japan and now lags behind competitors in Europe\'s diesel 
boom.  GM/Opel are counting on their co-development/co- 
production with Fiat (the \"Powertrain\" alliance) to reduce 
costs and further expand market share in Europe. 
 
4. (SBU) The drive to lower costs will mean that auto- 
sector jobs continue to migrate out of Germany.  Forster 
noted that while Ford saves perhaps 20 percent by having a 
supplier park on its compound in Saarlouis (SW Germany), 
suppliers in Eastern Europe are up to 80 percent cheaper. 
Forster wondered why a public outcry ensued when Opel cut a 
few hundred jobs in Ruesselsheim, but the fact that 
suppliers have moved thousands of jobs to Eastern Europe 
attracts little attention.  Forster praised Opel\'s German 
workforce who identify with Opel and seldom strike.  \"I 
prefer the sophisticated and well-educated workforce here 
who know what is going on in the company\" through their 
participation (Mitbestimmung on Opel\'s supervisory board). 
Forster predicted, however, that labor has a tough road 
ahead because of EU integration and globalization.  The 
brand identity and core competence for technology will 
remain German, but most value-added will migrate out of 
Germany.  \"Assembly will always remain where the markets 
are ... but assembly alone can be done by 300 employees,\" 
for instance at the new Porsche factory in Leipzig. 
 
5. (SBU)  COMMENT:  For Opel\'s 40,000 employees in Germany 
-- and for the millions of Germans who depend on the 
nation\'s auto production for their livelihood -- the future 
looks difficult despite the expected rebound in German 
demand for cars.  END COMMENT. 
 
PASI 
"
"11195","10/6/2003 5:48","03FRANKFURT8257","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 008257 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Economic Forecast for Germany: Waiting for a 
Recovery Abroad to Spark Recovery, but Reform Debate Shows 
Something Happening Domestically 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0052 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
  1.   (SBU) Summary:  The German economy is expected, at 
     best, to stagnate in 2003. Since GDP declined by -0.3% in 
     the first half of the year compared to the previous half- 
     year, positive GDP growth in 2003 is no longer achievable. 
     Driven by improving net exports, German economy will pick up 
     in 2004, reaching seasonally-adjusted 1.3% GDP growth. 
     Domestic demand will increase only moderately, despite the 
     Government\'s big reform package. The key limiting factor for 
     domestic demand in Germany is lack of confidence by 
     consumers and producers. Germany will breach the Stability 
     Pact\'s 3% ceiling in both 2003 and 2004. An improvement of 
     the state\'s financial situation can be expected only in 
     2005, after economic recovery has gathered momentum and the 
     reform package begins to yield cost savings. While prospects 
     beyond the forecast horizon are not overwhelming, something 
     is stirring in Germany that might just signal the  economy 
     is coming out of its three year hibernation. 
 
  Prospects for 2003/04: Waiting for Recovery Abroad 
  (again)! 
  --------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
  2.   (SBU) In 2003, the German economy is expected to 
     stagnate at best, given the seasonally-adjusted -0.3% 
     decline in GDP in the first half of the year, compared to 
     the last half of 2002. Driven by improving net exports, 
     German economy will pick up in 2004, reaching seasonally- 
     adjusted growth of 1.3% GDP. 2004 growth on a non-seasonally 
     adjusted basis is estimated at 1.8% due to four more working 
     days in the calendar year. 
 
  Bad Starting Point: Germany in Recession! 
  ----------------------------------------- 
 
  3.   (SBU) Germany is now in a recession: German GDP fell in 
     the second quarter for the third time in a row, this time by 
     a real, seasonally and calendar adjusted -0.1% compared to 
     the first quarter. 
 
  4.   (SBU) The decline of GDP was mainly due to a decrease 
     in exports (-2.3%), which was much stronger than the drop in 
     imports (-1.1%), causing a reduction of net exports. The 
     resulting negative contribution to economic growth (-0.5 
     percentage points) could not be completely compensated by 
     the positive growth contribution of domestic demand (+0.3 
     percentage points). The strong Euro against the US dollar, 
     the disruption of production in the automobile industry 
     triggered by strikes in East Germany and modest growth in 
     the world economy combined to dampen German exports. The 
     reduction of imports was a counter movement to the strong 
     increase at the beginning of the year due to rising oil 
     demand in view of the threatening Iraq war. The fall in 
     imports was mitigated by the strong Euro. 
 
  However, Indicators and Financial Markets are Encouraging 
  --------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
  5.   (SBU) The ZEW indicator, in an upward trend since 
     December 2002, recently recorded hefty increases and is 
     therefore well above its historical average. The more highly 
     regarded ifo index has also continued to increase, now for 
     the third month in a row. The development of both indicators 
     merely signals improving business expectations. The current 
     economic situation is still assessed as poor by the majority 
     of those interviewed. The German Economic Sentiment 
     Indicator, developed by the EU, shows a similar picture: its 
     trend line is a weak positive despite deterioration in July. 
     Increasing share prices on the German stock market reflect 
     the optimistic expectations as well -- within three months, 
     the DAX index increased by 16.6% and the TecDAX rose by 
     35.9%. 
 
  ... Though Real Data is Disappointing, 
  -------------------------------------- 
 
  6.   (SBU) Favourable indicators are not yet backed by 
     fundamental data. Industrial production and industrial 
     orders decreased significantly in the second quarter of 
     2003. Nor are the improving July numbers meaningful, since 
     they mainly reflect compensating up ticks for the production 
     losses in June caused by strikes in East Germany. 
 
  ... Confidence is Still Missing, 
  -------------------------------- 
 
  7.   (SBU) The key problem for modest domestic demand in 
     Germany is still the lack of confidence, both for consumers 
     and producers. 
 
  8.   (SBU) Consumer confidence increased initially in the 
     period after announcement of the government\'s plan to 
     advance the third step of the income tax reform. However, 
     after the summer holidays, as consumers heard more about the 
     government\'s plans to cut subsidies and tax privileges, the 
     health minister\'s decision to increase the financial burden 
     for the insured and to further increase pension 
     contributions, any glimmer of confidence has been destroyed. 
     Consumer uncertainty is reflected to some extent by 
     significant fluctuations in retail sales. It is not expected 
     that consumers will regain confidence in the near future so 
     long as unemployment remains high and uncertainty persists 
     regarding changes in the existing social system. 
 
  9.   (SBU) For their part, producers are awaiting definitive 
     implementation of the proposed reforms. Until then, they are 
     unlikely to invest in additional capital stock. The reforms 
     would release entrepreneurs from some mandated payments, 
     decreasing payroll costs. The question remains, however, 
     whether the Bundestag and the Bundesrat will approve the 
     reform plans. Apart from that, producers hope for more 
     reforms to follow. 
 
  ... Negative Forecasts Risks Have not Vanished, but are 
  Weakening, 
  --------------------------------------------- ------------ 
  - 
 
  10.  (SBU) Risks on the downside still exist, but with lower 
     weights. 
 
  11.  (SBU) The risk of deflation in Germany, the top subject 
     among German economists, has decreased due to the high oil 
     price and the easing of the euro/US dollar valuation, both 
     leading to rising producer prices. For this reason, annual 
     CPI in 2003 is expected to be higher than initially 
     forecast, reaching 1.1% instead of 0.8%. For 2004 prices 
     should increase 0.9% on average due to low advances early in 
     the year, gradually accelerating with economic recovery. 
 
  12.  (SBU) The credit crunch risk has weakened as well. 
     There are indications that German banks have begun to relax 
     their tightening of credit standards. Moreover, credit 
     demand is expected to increase as the German economy 
     recovers. 
 
  13.  (SBU) The German government has launched several reform 
     plans, most of which will need the approval of the 
     Bundesrat, the upper chamber of parliament, which is 
     dominated by the opposition. There is risk that parts of the 
     reform plans will be rejected by the Bundesrat. However, a 
     total reform failure is unlikely, given cross-party working 
     groups which were formed with the intention to work out 
     compromises on reforms to achieve agreement. 
 
  14.  (SBU) One higher downside risk threatening German 
     recovery is weak eurozone growth. For example, important 
     German markets like Italy and the Netherlands are also in a 
     recession.  France, too, is suffering from an ailing 
     economy. In contrast, there is one upside risk factor that 
     is looking better: the surprisingly good economic 
     performance of the US economy. 
 
  ... and the Government\'s budget Deficit Remains High 
  --------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
  15.  (SBU) Germany will breach the Stability Pact\'s 3% of 
     GDP deficit ceiling this year with 3.9%. The financial 
     misery is not yet under control, but consolidation measures 
     are planned. At the moment, the German budget in 2004 
     appears likely to turn in a deficit of 3.8%. Even in the 
     best case scenario --in which all planned consolidation 
     measures are put into effect, tax revenues meet 
     expectations, and the Government\'s forecast 1.8% real GDP 
     growth materializes -- the deficit would only improve to 
     3.5% in 2004, according to our calculations. 
 
  16.  (SBU) However, going forward the government\'s financial 
     situation should improve significantly in 2005 as continued 
     economic recovery will generate high tax revenues and 
     subsidy reductions and Agenda 2010 reforms will begin to 
     have positive effects on public finances for the first time. 
 
  Conclusion: Everything Stays as it was, Waiting for a 
  Recovery Abroad, 
  --------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
  17.  (SBU) Germany\'s poor economic performance in the first 
     half of the year and the lack of consumers\' and investors\' 
     confidence will lead at best to stagnation of the German 
     economy in 2003. For 2004, the June forecast of a non- 
     adjusted 1.3% GDP growth is still valid, since the 
     Government\'s reform package is not expected to have a big 
     effect on real net income. 
 
  18.  (SBU) The eventual recovery will be mainly driven by 
     the export side, as in previous years. Private consumption 
     will only increase by 0.9% due to several factors: (a) the 
     savings rate will remain at the high level of 10.8% as a 
     result of low confidence; (b) no significant change in the 
     labor market is expected (moreover, unemployment benefits 
     will be cut); (c) downward revision of GDP growth in 2003 
     will negatively affect gross income in 2004; (d) the 
     benefits to consumers of bringing forward the third step of 
     the income tax cuts will be partly counterbalanced by other 
     costs and fees. 
 
  19.  (SBU) The latter point requires some clarification. 
     Implementing the 2003 tax cut, which had been postponed to 
     2004, and bringing forward the third step of the income tax 
     cut scheduled for 2005 to 2004 will combine to decrease the 
     introductory tax rate from current 19.9% to 15% and the top 
     rate from 48.5% to 42%. This will release taxpayers from 22 
     bn euro in payments, of which 15.6 bn are due to the third 
     step of the income tax reform. Not all of this will find its 
     way into additional disposable income. Some of the measures 
     that will mitigate the income benefits include (a) higher 
     pension contributions (increase from 19.5% to 19.9% is 
     expected); (b) consumer subsidy cuts (a reduction of tax 
     privileges of about 5.5bn euro are planned - partially 
     compensated by higher expenditures); and (c) a change in the 
     health care system (lower contributions rates, but increased 
     payments for coverage from own funds). 
 
  ...but Something is Happening! 
  ------------------------------ 
 
  20.  (SBU) Although prospects beyond the forecast horizon 
     are not overwhelming, there is something going on in 
     Germany. Should the government be successful in getting its 
     program adopted, results, particularly on the budget front 
     as well as on investment and possibly even consumer 
     sentiment would be positive. The times of the \"steady hand\" 
     are over. This is already good news. Sentiment indicators 
     and market valuations also reflect improving prospects. 
     Passage of the governments reform plans, coupled with 
     improving expectations that a U.S. led global recovery is 
     underway, are combining to increase the sense that Germany 
     is finally on the way out of its three year stagnation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      Forecast- Germany 
                          (Percent) 
 
 
 
 
                    2002        2003      2004 
                    ACTUAL     FORECAST  FORECAST        --- 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
GDP :                0.2         0.0       1.8 
 
CONSUMPTION:        -1.0         0.7       1.4 
 
GOV. CONSUMPTION:    1.7         1.1       1.7 
 
INVESTMENT:         -6.7        -1.7       1.4 
 
- MACH. & EQUIP.:   -9.1        -0.7       4.5 
 
- CONSTRUCTION:     -5.8        -3.6      -1.4 
 
- OTHER INVEST.:     1.6         0.7       5.4 
 
NET EXPORTS:        51.4        -17.5      2.6 
 
- EXPORTS:           3.4         -0.2      3.1 
 
- IMPORTS:          -1.7         2.7       3.2 
 
NOM. GDP:           2110.4      2127.3    2165.6 
(Euro Bill) 
CURRT. ACCT.         59.7         44        59 
(Euro Bill) 
 
PRICES:              1.4          1.1        0.9 
 
EMPLOYMENT           38,668      38,200     38,350 
(Thousands) 
UNEMPLOYMENT          4,060       4,500      4,560 
(nat. definition) 
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE      9.8         10.9       11 
(nat. def.) 
 
TOTAL FISCAL BALANCE:  -3.8        -3.9      -3.8 
(Pct. GDP) 
 
21.  (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
22. (U) POC: Annette Foerster, Economic Specialist, e- 
mail foersterAM@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2291, fax 
49-(69)-7535-2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"11196","10/6/2003 5:49","03FRANKFURT8258","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 008258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: German Banks: Light at the End of the Tunnel? 
 
T-IA-F-03-0053 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
  1.   (SBU) Summary:  Summary:  The first half of 2003 
     witnessed stabilization in the German banking sector after a 
     disastrous 2002 - the worst since the war. However, German 
     banks are not out of the woods yet.  Continuing benefits of 
     cost cutting, consolidation, cooperation on back office 
     operations and securitization and promise of an economic 
     recovery would all be for the good.  Despite these bad times 
     for some German banks, Germany is a place where bankers can 
     make money.  Buying distressed loans or selling good ones 
     through securitization means business.  Some investment 
     banks are ramping up their German operations, a sharp 
     contrast to the reduction in activity of many German banks - 
     an indication that the landscape of German finance is 
     changing.  End summary. 
 
2002:  Banks Hit Rock Bottom? 
------------------------------------ 
 
  2.   (SBU) In its September monthly report, the Bundesbank 
     carries an article on the earnings situation of German banks 
     in 2002, which was even worse than the year before.  All 
     banks\' operating profits taken together amounted to 6.8 
     billion euro, after 13.4 billion euro in 2001.  Total annual 
     net profits fell from 14.5 billion euro in 2001 to 10.6 
     billion euro in 2002.  Risk provisions were the most 
     important factor negatively affecting banks\' revenues. 
     These resulted mostly from domestic loan business due to a 
     significant increase in insolvencies.  Commission revenues 
     went down because of low turnover at the exchanges and very 
     few IPOs.  Net interest revenues were a positive factor, 
     largely due to low-interest sight deposits.  Net 
     extraordinary revenues also increased, as a result of write- 
     ups in the banks\' own investment portfolios. 
 
Competitors Exaggerating Crisis? 
---------------------------------------- 
 
  3.   (SBU) However, the situation is probably not as bad as 
     some would like to make it out to be.  A recent article in 
     the Financial Times reported that the Financial Supervisory 
     Authority (BaFin) participated in supervisory board meetings 
     of at least the top ten German banks.  The article suggested 
     that this was a sign of the desperate situation in the 
     German banking sector.  However, the Federal Association of 
     German Banks stated that supervisors\' participation in 
     supervisory board meetings are \"an absolutely normal 
     procedure\" and by no means crisis management.  A BdB 
     spokesman called the FT\'s conclusions incomprehensible, 
     saying that this looked like cheap propaganda against 
     Germany as a financial center even though the FT knows 
     better. 
 
German Bankers Face Structural Disadvantages 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
  4.   (SBU) A study by Boston Consulting Group (BCG), which 
     focused on retail business, found that it is not so much 
     poor business models or bad management that are responsible 
     for German banks\' low profits.  Instead, structural 
     differences in the banking markets explain 70% of the 
     difference in profits between German banks and their 
     competitors in the EU.  There are three factors that put 
     German banks at a disadvantage:  the interest margin is very 
     low in Germany due to strong competition, labor costs are 
     high, and households\' financial assets are lower than e.g. 
     in Great Britain. 
 
  5.   (SBU) Of course, nobody doubts that German bank 
     managers have also made mistakes, adding to the difficult 
     environment.  However, the BCG study may provide an 
     explanation why the large German banks have so far not been 
     taken over despite their low market capitalization - i.e. 
     any new owners would have to cope with the same problems. 
     Nonetheless, some foreign banks, such as Citigroup and ING 
     subsidiary Diba, prove that it is possible to be successful 
     in the German market.  Diba is currently about to overtake 
     Commerzbank with regard to the number of retail customers. 
 
Effects of Restructuring Efforts Beginning to Show 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
  6.   (SBU) The good news is that the German banks recognized 
     their problems and managed to cut costs considerably. 
     Overall, in 2002 they reduced administrative costs by almost 
     4% compared with 2001, half of which in personnel costs and 
     half in other areas.  The large private banks were 
     particularly successful with administrative costs going down 
     by 11.2%.  The German banking sector overall cut 18,300 
     jobs, so that the number of employees dropped below the 
     level of 1992.  Private banks alone reduced their staff by 
     12,000, but also the savings banks cut 4,000 jobs. 
     Reductions in the number of branches also played an 
     important role: overall it decreased from 37,585 in 2001 to 
     35,340 in 2002.  In the course of last year, the savings 
     banks closed down almost 1,000 branches, the cooperative 
     banks over 700 and the large private banks more than 100. 
 
 
  7.   (SBU) The Bundesbank believes that banks\' profits 
     reached a low in 2002, and that 2003 will be better. 
     Stabilization of the economy should contribute to this.  In 
     particular, asset valuation expenses (i.e. marking assets to 
     their market value) are expected to go down considerably 
     this year.  Moreover, the upswing in the stock markets 
     should have a positive effect on revenues.  The Bundesbank 
     also argues that the effects of the 2002 cost cutting 
     programs have not yet fully shown so that costs can be 
     expected to fall further this year. 
 
 
  8.   (SBU) The first positive results of restructuring could 
     already be seen in the first half of 2003.   Deutsche Bank 
     fared best among large German banks.  In the first half of 
     2003, it made a profit before tax of 1,325 million euro and 
     of 353million euro after tax, mainly benefiting from 
     investment banking and business with corporate clients.  In 
     the first half of 2003, Dresdner Bank actually made a loss 
     before taxes of 450 million euro, which, thanks to a tax 
     refund, turned into a profit of 25 million euro after tax. 
     Over that period, Dresdner made an operating profit of 7 
     million euro, compared with a loss of 873 million euro in 
     the first six months of 2002.  Commerzbank showed with its 
     result for the first half of 2003 that the worst seems to be 
     over.  Its consolidated profit amounted to 73 million euro. 
     CEO Klaus-Peter Mller stated that he expects his bank to 
     make a positive operating profit for the year 2003 as a 
     whole.  In the first six months of 2003, Hypo-Vereinsbank 
     made an operational profit of 238 million euro, after an 
     operational loss of 413 million euro in the first half of 
     2002.  It made an overall profit of 144 million euro during 
     that period 
 
 
  9.   (SBU) In particular, massive job cuts have helped to 
     bring down costs, with more likely to come.  Banks focused 
     on their \"core business,\" and outsourced or closed down 
     entire business segments.  The securitization of \"good\" 
     loans was another helpful strategy.  Increasing bond issue 
     business has had a positive effect on profits so far.  The 
     private banks are now focusing more on retail customers, a 
     less cyclical business segment so far left to savings and 
     cooperative banks.  A Bundesbank contact we spoke with 
     identified cooperation in back office operations, e.g. 
     securities settlement as well as large-scale securitization 
     via a \"true sale\" of the assets organized by KfW, as another 
     new trend in the sector and expects it to increase 
     efficiency.  On October 1, Deutsche and Dresdner announced 
     that their payments will be settled by Postbank. 
 
 
  10.  (SBU) The sell-off of \"bad\" loans will likely pick up 
     in the course of this year.  Experts expect that trading in 
     such \"bad\" loans has an enormous potential.  According to 
     Aidan Freyne, Director for distressed debt at Citigroup \"all 
     important competitors want to be present in Germany.\" 
     Mattias Mosler, head of Merrill Lynch in Germany, stated 
     that Germany is becoming the most important market for such 
     business in Europe.  Merrill is opening up an office to deal 
     with such loans in Germany.  More generally, Mosler believes 
     that Germany is key for investment banking in Europe.  \"Only 
     those  successful here can play a major role in the other 
     European countries, too.\"  Merrill Lynch currently has 220 
     employees in Germany and plans to hire more. 
 
Looking ahead 
------------------ 
 
  11.  (SBU) The mood in the German banking sectors is clearly 
     brightening up.  After a phase almost exclusively focused on 
     cost cutting, the banks are now starting to develop visions 
     and strategies for the future. 
 
 
  12.  (SBU) Deutsche Bank\'s CEO Josef Ackermann stated that 
     \"we want to be leading at the global level and, at least in 
     our core business areas, to count among the five best 
     worldwide\".  Deutsche Bank is also watching out for 
     potential takeover targets, particularly in the business 
     segment \"high net-worth clients\".  Ackermann also announced 
     that Deutsche Bank will try to sell many of its equity 
     holdings.  Hypo-Vereinsbank (HVB) aims at increasing its 
     market share in Northern Germany, with the upcoming 
     integration of the Hamburg-based Vereins- und Westbank.  At 
     the same time, HVB also plans further acquisitions in 
     Eastern Europe.  Moreover, HVB wants to focus more on 
     certain activities, e.g. in retail banking it will 
     concentrate on marketing, while production will likely be 
     outsourced.  Commerzbank CEO Klaus-Peter Mller stated that 
     his bank plans to grow in the asset management and retail 
     business, which could also involve acquisitions.  The bank 
     also wants to focus its corporate clients business more on 
     SMEs, aiming at 9,000 new SME customers in the next three 
     years.  This business segment is to be linked more closely 
     to investment banking. 
 
 
  13.  (SBU) Looking further ahead, there is a hot debate on 
     the process of consolidation of the banking sector.  In its 
     Financial Sector Policy Assessment, the IMF suggests that 
     consolidation should be permitted across the three \"pillars\" 
     of German banking, e.g. the private, state, and 
     savings/cooperative banks.  This has provoked a sharp 
     negative response from the savings and cooperative banks but 
     was welcomed by private banks.  Bundesbank senior banking 
     officials have taken the view that the three pillars should 
     be preserved as they have been a successful model for 
     Germany in the past.  Others in the Bundesbank take a more 
     nuanced view, namely that the elimination of state subsidies 
     in 2005 will force the state and savings banks to adopt new 
     models, including, eventually, injections of share capital. 
     They would become private in all but name.  The Finance 
     Ministry also sees market forces playing a hand at reshaping 
     the sector over the longer term but, for the moment, does 
     not wish to invite the ire of the savings banks. 
 
Not yet safe 
-------------- 
 
  14.  (SBU) Even though the situation of German banks is 
     stabilizing, Rolf Breuer, President of the Federal 
     Association of German Banks (BdB) and chairman of Deutsche 
     Bank\'s supervisory board, stated that \"there is no reason 
     for premature optimism.  The level that we will reach this 
     year is still extremely low.\"  Bundesbank Board Member Edgar 
     Meister believes that the restructuring measures currently 
     undertaken by the German banks will strengthen them.  He 
     argues that \"the sustainability of the German banks\' 
     recovery is also dependent on economic recovery.  Our 
     Bundesbank contact stated that it is still \"not time for 
     euphoria\".  She described the current situation as 
     \"stabilization with an upward outlook\".  She also pointed 
     out that while cost cutting is indeed necessary, there is 
     also a risk that banks cut them so much that they destroy 
     their own income base. Standard & Poor\'s also believes that 
     vulnerability still exists in the German banking sector. 
 
  15.  (SBU) While stock prices of the large German banks went 
     up in the first half of 2003, this trend now seems to have 
     come to a halt.  During the first six months of the year, 
     German banks benefited from high interest revenues and low 
     risk provisions in the loan business.  According to some 
     analysts who claim that in a weak economic environment banks 
     usually have to increase risk provisions towards the end of 
     the year, the second half of the year will be more 
     difficult.  Given the bleak economic outlook for Germany, 
     the number of loan defaults might increase.  Moreover, at 
     the beginning of the year banks had unexpectedly high 
     revenues from bond trading which are unlikely to continue as 
     bond returns increase.  The large German banks\' return on 
     equity remains low by European standards.  In the first half 
     year, it was 2.4% after taxes for Deutsche Bank, and even 
     negative for Hypo-Vereinsbank.  In contrast, JP Morgan 
     Chase, Credit Suisse or UBS reach an equity return of more 
     than 17%. 
 
 
  16.  (SBU) In addition, the market capitalization of German 
     banks, once among the top international banks, is very low 
     by international comparison.  For instance the current value 
     of HSBC is at 126.6 billion euro, and that of the Royal Bank 
     of Scotland at 68.3 billion euro, while the market 
     capitalization of Deutsche Bank amounts to 31.5 billion 
     euro, that of Hypo-Vereinsbank to 8 billion euro and that of 
     Commerzbank to 7.3 billion euro.  For many observers, 
     Deutsche Bank is the only one of the large four German banks 
     that can lay claim to a global role. How times have changed. 
 
17.  (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy 
     Berlin. 
 
18. (U) POC: Claudia Ohly, Economic Specialist, e-mail 
    OhlyC@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-222367, fax 
    49-(69)-7535-2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"11200","10/6/2003 9:28","03FRANKFURT8270","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 008270 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, GM, EUN 
SUBJECT: CDU/Teufel: Insider View of European Constitution 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) Baden-Wuerttemberg Minister-President (M-P) Erwin 
Teufel (CDU - Christian Democratic Union), a prominent 
German conservative and active participant in drafting the 
proposed European constitution, supports the draft 
constitution despite its shortcomings from a conservative 
perspective.  A Convention insider, Teufel appears 
committed to enacting the constitution, but other German 
opposition figures may see political opportunity in 
highlighting its perceived flaws.  Conservative unhappiness 
on issues such as immigration and traditional values could 
limit German popular acceptance of the proposed 
constitution.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Pol/Econ reps met with Dr. Alexandra Zoller 
(responsible for European Affairs in Baden-Wuerttemberg) 
who accompanied Teufel to \"European Convention\" meetings 
over the past year.  As one of 108 delegates to the 
Convention, Teufel represented the Bundesrat and the 16 
German states (FM Joschka Fischer represented the national 
government and former MdB Juergen Meyer (SPD) represented 
the Bundestag) in the process of drafting a European 
constitution to redefine the EU\'s institutions and 
authority. 
 
EUROPEAN CONSTITUTION FROM A CONSERVATIVE GERMAN VIEWPOINT 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
3. (SBU) At the Convention, Teufel sought to limit control 
from Brussels on issues conservatives feel are better 
handled at the local or national level.  Both Teufel and 
the Schroeder government wanted to specify which powers 
would be assigned to the EU, national, and sub-national 
authorities.  Teufel acknowledges that security and foreign 
relations need to be coordinated at the EU level, and that 
the EU must continue to govern trade, monetary policy, and 
commerce.  At the same time, Teufel sought to guarantee 
local authority over many bread-and-butter issues including 
utilities, infrastructure, land use, and elements of social 
policy.  In Dr. Zoller\'s view, the Schroeder government 
gave only half-hearted support for local empowerment, and 
Teufel was ultimately unsuccessful. 
 
4. (SBU) Zoller expressed concern over issues such as 
immigration, asylum, and labor market participation.  Under 
the current draft, some of these issues will now only 
require a qualified majority vote.  Most Germans worry 
about the burden of immigrants and asylum seekers, and 
conservatives may try to capitalize on any future EU 
liberalization under the new voting procedures. 
 
5. (SBU) Like many others in the CDU, Teufel remains 
opposed to Turkish EU membership and says that the EU could 
become unwieldy and overly costly if it grows too large, 
too quickly.  Zoller raised concerns that an Islamic 
country (Turkey) would be the most populous country within 
the EU by 2020, implying that Turkey is too big, too poor, 
and too different culturally for the EU to digest 
successfully, even in the long run.  Teufel supported 
inserting a preamble reference to the EU\'s Christian 
foundations (similar to the Polish constitution), an 
initiative opposed by the French and others who considered 
it offensive to other faiths.  NOTE:  The final preamble 
text makes general reference to the \"cultural, religious, 
and humanist inheritance of Europe\" but does not refer to 
any specific religion.  END NOTE. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6. (SBU) Personally committed, Teufel sees the draft 
Constitution as a flawed but acceptable compromise -- a 
position generally in line with Schroeder and Fischer\'s 
view that the current draft represents the best compromise 
achievable and should thus be adopted without changes at 
the upcoming intergovernmental conference.  Other German 
opposition members may be less supportive and more 
opportunistic; we note Bavaria\'s suggestion that it may 
vote in the Bundesrat against the current draft 
Constitution.  Teufel\'s importance may be in convincing the 
CDU and the broader German public of the merits of the 
draft, thus helping Germany to close ranks behind a new 
European constitution.  END COMMENT. 
 
BACKGROUND: BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG AND ERWIN TEUFEL 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
7. (U) Baden-Wuerttemberg is the third largest state in 
Germany in terms of population and territory, with a GDP 
larger than Austria, Sweden, or Belgium.  Major U.S. 
companies, including IBM, Kodak, and Hewlett-Packard, have 
their German headquarters in Baden-Wuerttemberg.  Minister- 
president since 1991, Teufel has solid control over this 
largely conservative region. 
 
8. (SBU)  Teufel apparently enjoyed broad support from 
German political parties for his role at the Convention. 
Teufel befriended Giscard d\'Estaing and got along well with 
FM Joschka Fischer.  On the heels of the year-long 
convention, Teufel has broadened his network of contacts 
across Europe, but now stands under pressure to support the 
draft constitution despite his reservations as a political 
conservative. 
BODDE 
"
"11258","10/8/2003 5:38","03FRANKFURT8335","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 008335 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: HEADSCARF VERDICT LIKELY TO GENERATE NEW 
RESTRICTIONS ON RELIGIOUS EXPRESSION 
 
REF:  98 Frankfurt 6465; 00 Frankfurt 3078; 
 
      01 Frankfurt 6028 
 
1. SUMMARY: In a landmark decision, the Federal 
Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe ruled September 24 that 
Fereshta Ludin (a German teacher of Afghan descent) may 
teach in a public school without removing her headscarf, but 
strengthened the authority of German states to regulate 
religious expression.  Based on early media coverage, most 
states in SW Germany appear set to restrict religious 
expression by public employees.  In a five-to-three 
decision, the judges decided that while the plaintiff may 
wear her headscarf under the current Baden-Wuerttemberg 
constitution, state parliaments may pass laws regulating or 
forbidding the practice in schools.  Commentators predicted 
a new wave of restrictive laws, and complained that the 
mixed verdict will lead to more legal challenges.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. In 1998, Fereshta Ludin (a teacher and German citizen 
from Afghanistan) applied for a position with civil servant 
status at a public school in Stuttgart (Baden-Wuerttemberg / 
B-W).  When Ludin stated that her Muslim religious beliefs 
require her to wear a headscarf during classroom 
instruction, the Stuttgart Office of Education rejected her 
candidacy.  In February 1999, Ludin filed a complaint at the 
Administrative Court in Stuttgart, which rejected her case 
in March 2000.  In follow-on appeals, the B-W State 
Administrative Court and the Federal Administrative Court in 
Berlin upheld the decision against Ludin, emphasizing the 
necessity of maintaining neutrality and the right of pupils 
not to be exposed to religious symbols (reftels). 
 
3. In its current decision, Germany\'s highest court framed 
the issue as a conflict between the need for neutrality in 
public schools and freedoms of religion and employment.  The 
majority held that the German Basic Law grants states far- 
reaching authority over education, including the power to 
regulate religious symbols and conditions of employment. 
The court held that state legislatures have the power to 
strike the balance between religious freedom and neutrality 
towards students.  Under the new verdict, community 
traditions and the religious make-up of the population are 
legitimate considerations, and various states may legislate 
different solutions.  The court returned the Ludin case to 
the Federal Administrative Court in Berlin, which can compel 
B-W to give Ludin a teaching certificate or can wait until 
the B-W state parliament enacts legislation (most likely a 
ban on headscarves for public school teachers). 
 
4. In a minority opinion, the dissenting judges argued that 
wearing a headscarf violates the neutrality required of 
civil servants.  The minority criticized also the court\'s 
insufficient guidance to the B-W state government on how to 
proceed until a new law is passed. 
 
5.  Local political leaders reacted cautiously to the 
verdict.  B-W Minister President Erwin Teufel (CDU - 
Christian Democratic Union) and Education Minister Annette 
Schavan (CDU) said only that they would carefully study the 
Karlsruhe decision.  All four parties in the B-W state 
parliament (CDU, SPD - Social Democrats, FDP - Free 
Democrats, and Greens), however, announced they would move 
quickly to pass legislation requiring neutrality in public 
schools (i.e., against headscarves).  Islamic leaders and 
human rights advocates criticized the verdict.  The chairman 
of the Central Council of Muslims in Germany, Nadeem Elyas, 
complained that the court did not guarantee the rights of 
Muslim women and indicated that Muslims will continue 
fighting restrictions. 
 
6. COMMENT:  The Fereshta Ludin verdict has opened the door 
for state parliaments to restrict religious expression in 
public employment.  Conservative governments in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg, Hesse, Saarland, and Bavaria, as well as the 
leftist government of Berlin, have announced that they will 
enact laws to ban the wearing of headscarves by public 
school teachers (Munich 0924).  Legislators in Rheinland- 
Pfalz (SPD-FDP), on the other hand, have indicated that they 
will not ban the practice.  Because the verdict upheld 
Ludin\'s right (for the moment) to wear a headscarf, a few 
conservative politicians have used the occasion to criticize 
the court\'s earlier \"crucifix verdict\" which requires 
schools to remove crosses from classroom walls if so 
requested.  Judging from media coverage, many non-Muslims in 
Germany appear unsympathetic to Ludin\'s cause, regarding it 
as an issue of professional duty rather than religious 
freedom.   The mixed verdict is likely to mean more lawsuits 
in those states that enact bans.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"11337","10/10/2003 11:56","03FRANKFURT8426","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 008426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, EAGR, GM 
SUBJECT: Berninger/Hesse Greens Move Towards USG, CDU 
 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: Matthias Berninger, State Secretary in the 
national Agriculture Ministry and new head of the Green 
party in Hesse, wants to help repair US-German relations 
and could make helpful gestures on Iraq.  A rising star and 
protege of FM Fischer, Berninger wants to free the party 
from its dependence on Social Democrats (SPD) and 
strengthen ties to moderate Christian Democrats (CDU).  On 
agriculture, Berninger sees development aid as key to 
reviving stalled WTO talks.  Berninger argues against 
expanding Frankfurt airport and says expansion may be 
delayed until 2008.  The Greens are searching for new 
policies to address Germany\'s low birthrate and aging 
society without bankrupting the state.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Can Greens Make Positive Gesture on Iraq? 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) In a discussion with CG, Hesse Greens leader / 
federal State Secretary for Agriculture and Consumer 
Protection Matthias Berninger said that the Greens could 
support German participation in the Iraq mission even 
though the party staunchly opposed the war.  \"Fischer is 
preparing the party for things to come\" (greater 
cooperation on Iraq).  Berninger asked what the party and 
the German government could do to support US soldiers 
deployed from Germany to the Middle East and agreed to 
arrange a visit to the U.S. military hospital in Landstuhl 
by a leading member of the national Greens.  Post offered 
to facilitate a U.S. military briefing for Greens party 
leaders. 
 
Conservative-Green Coalitions Become More Fashionable 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3. (U) Berninger said he wants to free the Greens from the 
\"Babylonian captivity\" of the SPD who treat the Greens as a 
junior partner.  Relations with the SPD are tense at best, 
and Hesse Greens are forging more local coalitions with the 
CDU (most recently in Kassel / northern Hesse). 
Northrhine-Westphalia also has important CDU-Green 
coalitions, including Cologne. 
 
4. (SBU) The Greens are open to working with the CDU in 
state governments, but Berninger ruled out partnering with 
Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU):  \"Koch does not 
represent the enlightened CDU with whom we want to 
cooperate,\" adding that Koch\'s arrogance and ambition are a 
matter of concern within the CDU.  He noted that members of 
the CDU national presidium contacted Hesse Greens seeking 
ammunition against Koch.  In his estimation, Koch\'s 
mishandling of the Hesse budget will make it hard for him 
to become a credible player on the national scene, with 
Standard and Poor downgrading Hesse -- Germany\'s leading 
financial center -- while neighboring states preserve their 
AAA rating. 
 
Redirecting Farm Aid from Rich Countries to Poor 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
5. (SBU) Berninger, also the number two in the federal 
MinAg, blamed NGO\'s for the collapse of WTO talks in 
Cancun, a fiasco which will hurt developing nations since 
the WTO is the only organization that can solve 
agricultural trade problems.  Berninger believes wealthy 
countries should redirect aid from domestic farmers to 
poorer countries and supports British Treasury Secretary 
Gordon Brown\'s proposal to create a development fund for 
rural areas in developing countries.  Berninger agrees with 
the USG position that only democracy and trade can bring 
development in the long run. 
 
Reversing Germany\'s Demographic and Economic Slide 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6. (SBU) The Greens are searching for ways to reverse 
Germany\'s demographic and economic decline without 
bankrupting the state.  An unfavorable labor market, low 
birthrate, and aging society are Germany\'s greatest 
challenges at the moment.  \"Even today Germany does not 
have enough doctors or engineers ... with the birthrate 
declining even further, Germany runs the danger of losing 
out to France and Scandinavia who have a successful 
demographic policy.\"  The Greens call for better childcare, 
more aid for mothers, and other child-friendly policies. 
On Agenda 2010, Berninger said eliminating one holiday for 
all Germans would do more to reduce labor cost than many of 
the social reforms the Schroeder government is proposing. 
Berninger defended the Greens\' record on controlling public 
expenditures and complained that both SPD and CDU tend to 
spend beyond their means. 
 
Frankfurt Airport Expansion May Be Delayed Until 2008 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
7. (SBU) Berninger complained that local authorities did 
not seriously explore alternatives to expanding Frankfurt 
Airport, warning that legal obstacles could delay expansion 
until at least 2008.  The airport cannot expand 
indefinitely;  building an additional runway will only buy 
another decade of growth.  Berninger favors a high-speed 
rail or Transrapid connection between Frankfurt and Hahn 
(located 90 kms from Frankfurt).  NOTE: The Hesse Greens 
fared well in state elections this year in part by opposing 
expansion of Frankfurt Airport.  END NOTE. 
 
COMMENT: Building Bridges to Moderate Greens 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) State Secretary Berninger met the CG in the same 
week that the Greens went into coalition with CDU in Kassel 
(second largest city in Hesse).  In Hesse elections earlier 
this year, Greens expanded their vote share at the expense 
of the SPD.  Voter disenchantment with SPD in SW Germany 
could accelerate this trend of CDU-Green rapprochement. 
Berninger (37) represents the party\'s pragmatic younger 
generation that will follow the Fischer generation. 
Berninger is a fast riser and wants to steer a more 
independent course from the SPD while drawing a line 
against Roland Koch.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"11499","10/20/2003 7:55","03FRANKFURT8629","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 008629 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Expert report on best practices for financial 
analysts in the EU 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0054 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
  1.   (SBU) Summary: In September a group of European experts 
     issued a report to the European Commission with 31 
     recommendations on best practices for financial analysts. 
     This work coincides with work underway in the US, UK and the 
     International Organization of Securities Commissions 
     (IOSCO). In September IOSCO issued a statement of principles 
     to guide regulators regarding potential conflicts of 
     interest financial analysts may encounter.  The Commission 
     has called for comments on the expert report and will issue 
     a Communication of its policy approach next year.  Since 
     financial analysts issue products for use globally, they 
     have to adhere to the strictest rules.  A European approach 
     that is in line with IOSCO principles may help to avoid 
     potential conflicts with other national laws in the future - 
     assuming IOSCO members implement the principles themselves. 
     End Summary. 
 
  Ministers Ask for a Report 
  -------------------------- 
  2.   (SBU) In April 2002, against the background of market 
     abuses that have shaken investor confidence, the European 
     Commission and the EU Economics and Finance Ministers, at 
     their informal meeting at Oviedo, Spain, invited the 
     Commission to assess the role of financial analysts and 
     possible measures to improve their participation in the 
     market.  In November 2002, the Commission asked a group of 
     experts to research and evaluate current regulatory and 
     market practice issues concerning financial analysis, 
     notably those pertaining to the assessment of securities 
     traded on debt and equity markets, with a view to 
     recommending optimal regulatory and best practice options 
     within an integrated European capital market.  The group 
     consisted of 21 European experts, mostly from private banks 
     and investment firms and their associations, but also from 
     national regulators, as well as consultants and one 
     academic. 
 
Report on Financial Analysts 
----------------------------- 
  3.   (SBU) The report of the group, which was released at 
     the beginning of September 2003, is meant to be a first step 
     in a process which should develop over time through 
     \"continued and thorough consultation involving national 
     regulators, professional bodies and market practitioners.\" 
     The report particularly covers conflicts of interest 
     resulting from analyst involvement in new issues and other 
     corporate finance work, best practices for issuers, 
     analysts\' remuneration and own account dealing in 
     securities. 
4.   (SBU) The group notes that while its recommendations 
should respect and reflect the nature, structure and 
practices of European financial markets, Europe is part of a 
global marketplace and cannot be treated in isolation.  For 
instance, the recent comprehensive regulatory reforms in the 
US will have a global impact because the firms they affect 
are globally active and may thus decide to adhere to US 
rules in other jurisdictions. 
5.   (SBU) The experts agreed that the European approach to 
problems perceived in the investment research industry world- 
wide should be principles-based, emphasizing transparency 
and self-governance, rather than rules-based.  Their 
recommendations deliberately concentrate on actions, 
behaviors and outcomes, rather than the legal means of 
delivery.  The recommendations have been framed so that they 
could be implemented on a pan-European basis - either 
through EU legislation or by cooperation among national 
regulators and supervisors, assisted by professional bodies 
and market practitioners. 
6.   (SBU) The Forum Group produced a list of five core 
principles which it believes should be applied by those 
producing and disseminating investment research: 
          Clarity: research should be fair, clear and not 
          misleading 
          Competence, conduct and personal integrity: 
          research should be produced by competent analysts 
          with skill, care, diligence and integrity; and it 
          should reflect the opinion of its author(s) 
          Suitability and market integrity: research should 
          be distributed taking into account the different 
          categories of its intended recipients and the need 
          to maintain market integrity 
          Conflict avoidance, prevention and management: 
          analysts\' firms should have in place systems and 
          controls to identify and avoid, prevent or manage 
          personal and corporate conflicts of interest 
  7.   (SBU) Disclosure: conflicts of interest, whether 
     corporate or personal, should be prominently disclosed. 
8.   (SBU) The report makes 31 recommendations which relate 
to these principles. These focus in particular on conflicts 
of interest resulting from analyst involvement in securities 
offerings and other corporate finance work; best practice 
for companies issuing securities; remuneration of analysts; 
securities dealing by analysts; qualifications; and the 
distribution of investment research to the retail market. 
More generally, the experts recommend that investment 
research produced and disseminated in the EU should comply 
with the principles and standards advocated in their report 
, regardless of the location of the subject companies 
covered in the research. 
9.   (SBU) With regard to research from third countries, the 
group argues that it should be permitted for use in the EU 
if it was produced under equivalent rules.  Where the 
dissemination of research from third countries that is not 
produced to equivalent standards is permitted, this should 
be prominently disclosed.  Moreover, the experts recommend 
that the EU should seek acceptance of its standards in other 
jurisdictions relating to the production and dissemination 
of research. 
10.  (SBU) The group also notes that some of the issues 
discussed are already covered by the EU Market Abuse 
Directive or the Investment Services Directive. 
11.  (SBU) Overall, the principles and recommendations 
appear to be rather general and self-evident.  For instance, 
\"research analysts should adhere to the highest ethical 
standards.\"  According to a Commission official the expert 
group did not always agree, so that their report reflects a 
rather low common denominator. 
12.  (SBU) The Commission announced that in assessing the 
Group\'s report and any necessity for follow-up action at the 
EU-level, it will seek to strike a balance between ensuring 
investor protection, allowing investors to benefit from an 
open and competitive market for financial research and 
investment advice, and avoiding undue restrictions on the 
services investment banks can offer, thus ensuring that 
listed companies have access to the corporate finance 
services they need.  The Commission has asked for comments 
from interested parties by November 30th 2003. 
 
Commission expert View 
---------------------- 
  13.  (SBU) A Commission expert working on the report 
     explained that the trickiest issue was whether banks could 
     manage the potential conflict between its financial analysts 
     and investment banking department.  He also admitted that 
     the report was rather broad and hoped that the comments the 
     Commission will receive will give them \"more orientation\" on 
     how to address the issue.  He personally doubted that new 
     legislation was needed, particularly given that the Market 
     Abuse Directive and Investment Services Directive address 
     some of the potential conflict of interest issues.  He 
     thought that next year the Commission would issue a 
     \"Communication\" that would present its views on how to 
     proceed. 
14.  (SBU) On the provisions regarding financial analysts 
from third countries, this expert reported that the topic 
had been subject to very little discussion.  The group also 
did not have a real discussion of the US Securities and 
Exchange Commission\'s approved changes to the NASD and NYSE 
rules to address conflicts of interest raised when research 
analysts recommend securities in public communications.  He 
thought that investment banks had not reacted to these rules 
as negatively as auditing firms had reacted to the new US 
registration requirements. 
 
A View From the Market 
----------------------- 
  15.  (SBU) We talked to a contact at Deutsche Bank who had 
     been listed as member of the expert group.  He told us that 
     he only participated in the very first meeting and would 
     have considered it a \"waste of time\" to come back.  He 
     criticized that most other members of the expert group, even 
     from banks, were not practicing analysts, i.e. often came 
     from other departments and did not know much about the 
     practical side.  He felt that his views were not 
     sufficiently taken into account. 
16.  (SBU) Our contact argued that the approach of the group 
was wrong, as it focused on bank analysts.  In his opinion 
journalists and tip letters should be regulated as well.  He 
stressed that while analysts only speak with professional 
investors, the other two groups give their advise to retail 
investors, are not regulated as banks are, and have a very 
small reputational risk.  Moreover, our contact argued that 
the issuer\'s prospectus is the most important source of 
information in an IPO and that regulation should thus focus 
on its accuracy.  He pointed out that as a consequence of 
regulation, independent research houses are being opened, 
which are not regulated and make investment recommendations 
that could just be as harmful to investors as those of 
banks.  (Note: The expert group recommended that analysts in 
independent houses should be required to respect the 
principle of the report.)  With regard to EU regulation, the 
Deutsche Bank analyst stated that banks doing business on a 
global scale will always adhere to the strictest rules world- 
wide anyway.  It makes no sense to differentiate between 
markets. 
 
Other Developments 
-------------------- 
  17.  (SBU) At the beginning of September, the British 
     Financial Services Authority (FSA) announced that it will 
     not enact specific rules for analysts regarding their 
     independence as well as conflicts of interest.  Instead it 
     will publish general principles, which will be in line with 
     those formulated by IOSCO as well as with EU policies in the 
     framework of the market abuse directive.  FSA chairman 
     Howard Davies stressed that his organization starts from the 
     assumption that it is the obligation of each bank\'s top 
     management to eliminate obvious conflicts of interest. 
     Thus, the FSA continues to rely on the self-regulation 
     approach it has been following so far. 
18.  (SBU) In May the SEC approved proposed changes of rules 
by NASD and NYSE to address conflicts of interest that are 
raised when research analysts recommend securities in public 
communications.  The EU expert group\'s report and the Market 
Abuse Directive overlaps with several of these, such as 
limitations on relationships and communications between 
investment banking departments and analysts, linking an 
analysts compensation to specific investment banking 
transactions, compensation by firms for investment banking 
services, restrictions on trading by analysts and 
disclosures of financial interests. However, the SEC 
approved rules, generally, tend to be more prescriptive and 
not general principles. 
19.  (SBU) At the end of September, the International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) issued a 
Statement of Principles to guide regulators and other in 
addressing the conflicts of interest that analysts may face. 
The principles, inspired by the SEC approved rules cited 
above, stipulate that mechanisms should exist so that 
analysts\' work is not prejudiced by their or their 
employers\' financial or business relationship interests, and 
that reporting lines should be structured to eliminate or 
severely limit actual or potential conflicts of interest. 
Moreover, firms should establish written internal procedures 
to identify, eliminate, manage or disclose actual or 
potential conflicts of interest.  There should be no undue 
influence of issuers, institutional investors or other 
outside parties on analysts.  Disclosure of actual or 
potential conflicts of interest should be complete, timely, 
clear, concise, specific and prominent.  Analysts should be 
held to high integrity standards.  Investor education should 
play an important role in managing analyst conflicts of 
interest. 
20.  (SBU) These principles are combined with a set of \"core 
measures\" that are considered necessary to properly address 
potential conflicts of interests.  These \"core measures\" 
contain clear prohibitions, e.g. of analysts or their 
employers trading securities ahead of publishing research on 
the issuer, of analysts reporting to the investment banking 
function or participating in investment banking sales 
pitches.  The German Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) 
announced that it is in favor of making these principles 
binding in Germany.  The British FSA stated that it will 
largely adopt the IOSCO principles.  Experts believe that 
they will also considerably influence the EU directives on 
market abuse and investment services. 
 
Comment 
------- 
  21.  (SBU) The issue of investment banks and analysts has 
     been an issue raised in Germany while the \"Neuer Market\" was 
     melting down.  Efforts by the Economics Ministry to forge a 
     voluntary code of conduct could not secure sufficient 
     agreement among all interested parties.  Investors\' groups, 
     however, still see a need. 
22.  (SBU) EU legislation is already covering part of these 
issues, such as the Market Abuse Directive and its 
implementing measures on the fair presentation of investment 
recommendations and the disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
However, even in those rules developed by the Committee of 
European Securities Regulators, the approach is more towards 
disclosure than prescriptive rules.  As the Deutsche Bank 
analyst observed, global investment banks have to comply 
with the strictest rules.  If those are in the US, then, in 
his view, the US rules rule. 
23.  (SBU) Since the EU has yet to propose any standards on 
financial analysts it would stand to reason that whatever 
they propose should be in line with those adopted by IOSCO. 
The fact that IOSCO standards reflect US standards is 
partially a function that securities market regulators have 
similar views on the topic rather than bowing to US 
influence.  Having similar rules in the US and EU could help 
avoid potential problems and conflicts in the future. 
  24.  (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy Berlin and 
     USEU. 
 
  25.  (U) POC: Claudia Ohly, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
     ohlyc@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2367, fax 49-(69)-7535- 
     2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"11640","10/24/2003 14:42","03FRANKFURT8839","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 008839 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Economic Europe:  A Year of Redefinition? Or a 
Dangerous Cocktail? 
 
T-IA-F-03-0055 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU)  Introduction and Summary:  In his book \"Struggle 
for Europe,\" Yale University historian (and foreign service 
brat) William Hitchcock describes not wars that have swept 
through Europe but trials and tribulations of peacetime in 
post WWII Europe.  As the title suggests, peace does not 
mean tranquility.  One mechanism for securing cooperation 
among European countries has been economic agreements:  The 
European Steel and Coal Agreement, Customs Union, Internal 
Market, and, most recently, European Monetary Union.  These 
have been defining moments in the struggle for a cohesive 
economic Europe. 
 
2. (SBU)  Among the economic developments discussed at the 
EU economic officers conference this fall that we will be 
tracking in 2004 are other potentially redefining events: 
the accession of 10 new member states, signature of a 
Constitutional Treaty for Europe, a new regulatory 
infrastructure for financial services, structural reforms at 
the national level, and negotiations on the EU budget. 
Accentuating these developments will be changes in 
leadership in the European Parliament and European 
Commission in the fall of 2004 and the European Central Bank 
(ECB) in 2003. 
 
3. (SBU)  It may not be too much of a stretch of the 
imagination to think that 2003-2004 could be one of those 
periods of struggle from which emerges a re-defined economic 
Europe.  Then again, it could be just another struggle, and 
a nasty one at that.  US interests are clearly at stake, 
particularly as EU and US firms are more exposed than ever 
before to each other\'s markets.  A more dynamic, resilient 
euro area economy could help create an alternative pillar 
for global growth.  That really would be a redefining 
outcome.  End Introduction and Summary. 
 
Accession Countries 
 
4. (SBU)  Acceding countries are scheduled to join the EU in 
May.  Accounting for only around 6% of the euro area\'s GDP, 
they are unlikely to add any noticeable bounce to the euro 
area\'s overall economic performance in the short-term. 
Nonetheless, they could change the quality of the EU debates 
and exert indirect pressure for change.  As transition 
economies, these countries have moved from state-controlled 
to market-oriented economic policies, generally appreciating 
the benefits of the latter.  Could this portend different 
economic policy debates at the EU level?  A German Finance 
Ministry official unguardedly wondered whether \"old Europe\" 
was ready for the ideas that young, well-educated economic 
reformers would bring to the table. 
 
5. (SBU)  Attracting foreign direct investment has been a 
boon to many acceding countries.  Adopting policies that 
continue to do so, such as low corporate and income taxes, 
will apply indirect pressure on current member states to 
improve their own competitive position.  Standing still will 
be a poor second best option. 
 
Constitutional Treaty 
 
6. (SBU)  On the Constitutional Treaty, the Italian plan is 
to have a signing ceremony in Rome in May.  This would be 
dubbed a \"second Treaty of Rome,\" referring to the 1957 
Treaty of Rome that gave birth to the European Economic 
Community.  Building upon existing agreements, the draft 
Constitutional Treaty contains detailed provisions on the 
operation of the ECB and economic and fiscal policy 
coordination. 
 
7. (SBU)  As presently drafted, the Constitutional Treaty 
suggests a slight shift in power sharing on economic issues. 
The European Commission and Parliament would pick up new 
competencies.  In the area of financial services, the 
Commission stands to have its powers to adopt detailed 
implementing measures put on a firmer footing - provided 
Parliament is satisfied that it has a right to \"call back\" 
measures that they believe go beyond the Commission\'s 
authority. 
 
8. (SBU)  The draft would formalize the Euro Group, 
specifying areas where only members that have accepted the 
euro can take decisions.  It also would contain an enabling 
clause for enhanced cooperation among willing member states. 
These features are already present to some degree under 
current arrangements.  The Swedish \"no\" vote and the UK\'s 
failure to measure up to its self-imposed standards for euro 
adoption portends a higher likelihood of a multi-speed 
economic EU.  After all, member states that have adopted the 
euro will be in the minority in the enlarged EU (12 of 25). 
Perhaps the prospect of a multi-speed EU will provide 
additional incentive for acceding countries to persevere in 
their stated desire to adopt the euro as soon as possible 
after accession. 
 
Financial Services Regulatory Infrastructure 
 
9. (SBU)  Less obvious but potentially no less important 
redefining developments are the regulatory and institutional 
infrastructures being put into place in the area of 
financial services at the EU level.   New committees 
composed of member state representatives are to give policy 
advice to the Commission when it exercises its authority to 
adopt implementing measures.  Supporting those committees 
are other committees of experts - supervisors and 
technicians.  This structure already exists in the 
securities and financial conglomerates areas and should be 
partially established by the beginning of next year in 
banking and insurance. 
 
10. (SBU)  By assembling supervisors from all member states, 
giving them defined projects that will result in EU-wide 
binding legislation and a mandate to ensure consistent 
interpretation and enforcement of that legislation across 
the EU - well you can imagine what comes next - an EU 
regulator or regulatory system.  Not this year or next, but 
the foundation is being laid.  Indeed, a group of German 
bankers have called for the creation of a EU supervisory 
authority by 2013, and the French-based Eurofi has supported 
a European Securities and Exchange Commission.  There is a 
movement to have an enabling clause in the constitution to 
keep such an option open. 
 
National Structural Reforms 
 
11. (SBU)  Another quiet, but potent re-defining development 
is the structural reforms being undertaken in many member 
states.  Finally reality is catching up to the lip service 
and good intentions - encapsulated in Lisbon agenda and 
repeated annually in the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines. 
The anvil of slow growth and the hammer of stronger euro 
have forged the realization of the need for growth enhancing 
reforms. Germany, France, and Italy,  Portugal - embarked on 
path others (Netherlands, Finland, Spain, Austria) have 
traveled before. 
 
12. (SBU)  Such reforms are presented not as a question of 
scrapping the social welfare state (or, heaven forbid, 
becoming \"more like us\" American capitalists ).  Rather, as 
German Chancellor Schroeder shrewdly put it, \"modernizing\" 
the welfare state.  Economic growth, sometimes regarded as a 
matter of life style (the right to more leisure and less 
work), is no longer optional. 
 
13. (SBU)  An Independent High-Level Study Group\'s report to 
the European Commission asserted that \"Growth must become 
Europe\'s number one economic priority\" to help integration 
of new members and for the sustainability of the \"European 
model which puts a high premium on cohesion.\"  The Italian 
Presidency has seized upon the issue by proposing a European 
Action for Growth.  With some tweaking by the UK, France and 
Germany, Heads of State and Government should endorse the 
initiative by year\'s end. 
A Different EU? 
 
14. (SBU)  In addition to these major or minor potentially 
defining developments will be other significant events in 
2003-2004.  The ECB will have a new President on November 1, 
a new European Parliament will be elected in June 2004, and 
in the fall of 2004 there will be new Commissioners and a 
reshuffling of portfolios.  Taken together, by the end of 
2004, the EU could be rather different in economic policy 
making and orientation. 
 
  Or A Dangerous Cocktail? 
 
15. (SBU)  Then again, 2003-2004 could be exhausted by 
bitter, nasty struggles and thwarted by the powerful force 
of bureaucratic inertia.  The very ingredients that could re- 
define economic Europe are also those of a \"dangerous 
cocktail,\" in the words of a senior Commission official. 
 
16. (SBU)  The Inter-Governmental Conference charged with 
finalizing a Constitution for Europe will be composed of 
acceding countries as well as member states.  This would be, 
in the view of one observer, the \"first serious test\" of the 
enlarged EU\'s readiness to demonstrate the art of 
negotiation and compromise, putting aside national interests 
for European ones.  The Italian Presidency, Germany and 
France have cautioned against opening the draft text.  This 
smacks as a fait accompli.  Voting rights, under terms of 
the draft, would favor \"charter\" members, not Spain and 
Poland. 
 
17. (SBU)  By flouting the Stability and Growth Pact rules 
and the Treaty\'s requirements on budget deficits, France is 
suggesting that acceding countries sign on to our rules 
which apply to others, but not ourselves.  Not very 
community-like.  Fudging the SGP rules could lead to the 
same fuzzy math for the Maastricht criteria for acceding 
countries\' adoption of the euro.  Not necessarily a 
comfortable turn for the euro. 
 
18. (SBU)  Dissension over the draft Constitution and 
Stability and Growth Pact disciplines could be exacerbated 
by negotiations on the EU\'s budget perspectives for 2007- 
2013.  The Commission plans to have a \"political framework\" 
agreed by the end of 2003.  It faces serious headwinds. 
Acceding countries are vying for shares of structural funds 
while current members try to hold on to as much as possible, 
either structural funds (like Portugal and Spain) or special 
rebates (like the UK). 
 
19. (SBU)  Linkages between issues  -- the constitution, the 
SGP, budget, regulatory infrastructure, and policy measures, 
are more than likely - if not direct then indirect.  Losing 
on one front could mean getting even on another.  Taken 
together, a pretty volatile mix.  (Note: While this cable is 
confined to economic issues, several commentators have 
suggested that political issues being closely watched by 
others will also determine whether the EU undergoes a 
redefining moment or loses its way from imbibing the 
dangerous cocktail.) 
 
US Interests 
 
19. (SBU)  The United States continues to have a strong 
interest in an economically strong, vibrant Europe.  In his 
\"Drifting Apart or Growing Together? The Primacy of the 
Transatlantic Economy, \" Joseph Quinlan arrays data to 
demonstrate that Europe and the US are more economically 
interlinked than ever before.  \"The reality is that Europe, 
on account of its deep investment roots in the U.S., is far 
more exposed to U.S. economic conditions than any other 
region of the world.  A similar commitment of investment 
goes in the other direction. 58% of corporate America\'s 
foreign assets are in Europe with U.S. foreign affiliate 
sales in Europe accounting for more than half of their sales 
worldwide.\" He believes that the \"common ground between the 
U.S. and Europe is still fertile for further economic 
integration.\" 
 
20. (SBU)  Areas in which Quinlan suggests integration could 
be undertaken include corporate governance and financial 
regulatory standards, the very areas in which EU regulatory 
infrastructure is being created and on which the US and EU 
have an informal dialogue.   Structural reforms, fiscal 
discipline, the Constitutional Treaty and entry of accession 
countries could combine to affect US interests - for better 
or for worse.  A positive outcome for both the EU and the US 
would be a more dynamic EU economy more resilient to 
economic shocks, generating more domestic demand.  This 
would help create an alternative pillar for world economic 
growth.  Now that would be a re-defining outcome for Europe 
from which the global economy could benefit. 
 
21. (U) This cable coordinated with Embassies London, 
Berlin, Rome, Paris and USEU. 
 
22. (U) POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"11665","10/27/2003 7:22","03FRANKFURT8852","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","03Lisbon1831","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 FRANKFURT 008852 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT:  EU Stability and Growth Pact: Commission Wakes to 
Reality, Treads Fine Line Between Reluctant France and 
Robust Enforcers - Germany Next in Line 
 
Ref: (A) Frankfurt 06409; (B) Lisbon 1831 
 
T-IA-F-03-0056 
 
1.(SBU)  Summary:  \"We wake from one dream into another 
dream,\" mused Emerson.  The European Commission has awoken 
from the dream that France would reduce its deficit below 3% 
of GDP in 2004, as recommended by Finance Ministers in June. 
The French budget plan provides for a deficit of 3.6%, at 
best.  The Commission is not satisfied.  Nonetheless, 
economic times are tough.  So the Commission has recommended 
to Ministers that France reduce its deficit below 3% in 
2005, but with an extra effort in 2004 to reduce its 
structural deficit by one percentage point rather than the 
0.7 percentage points contained in the French budget.  The 
Commission is treading a fine line between France, who only 
reluctantly plays along with what it probably regards as 
surreal Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) procedures, and the 
Netherlands and Austria who have called for robust 
enforcement of the SGP, including sanctions. 
 
2.(SBU)  Action on Germany is likely to follow.  The 
Commission staff is not pleased with implementation of 
measures promised by Germany last May.  The Commission\'s new 
forecast for Germany, to be released October 29, will show 
the German deficit also remaining above rather than below 3% 
of GDP in 2004, also contrary to EU Ministers\' 
recommendation. 
 
3.(SBU)  Would giving France, and maybe Germany, an extra 
year mark the final nail in the coffin of the SGP?  German 
Finance Ministry officials bluntly confess they are \"playing 
for time\" since brighter economic prospects forecast for 
2005 make hitting the target more likely for them.  The 
Commission\'s realization of that reality, however, has not 
lessened its pressure.  Rather, the Commission staff seems 
to be pressing for more reforms in France and Germany, 
keeping Portugal on the hook for a sustainable deficit 
reduction, and upping public pressure on Italy that has 
slipped from its commitment to reduce its high debt.  If 
Ministers agree at their November 3-4 meeting in Brussels 
with something close to the Commission\'s recommendations on 
France, there could be more SGP and Commission in member 
states\' budget coordination life rather than less.  Therein 
would lie yet another problem.  The outcome is far from 
clear. 
 
France: The Last Shall Be First 
 
4.(SBU)  EU Finance Ministers determined that France had an 
excessive deficit in June following earlier excessive 
deficit decisions on Germany and Portugal.  France\'s 
reluctance to accede to Ministers\' recommendations, however, 
has propelled it to the role of trail blazer. Portugal moved 
(or sold) heaven and earth to get its deficit below 3% of 
GDP.  Germany, as founder and firm believer in the SGP, has 
talked a good game.  But France is France.  The French 
Finance Minister and others have been openly disdainful of 
the SGP deficit rules applied to The Hexagon.  Nonetheless, 
the GOF\'s 2004 budget announced at the end of September 
envisaged a more significant deficit reduction than mooted 
with the IMF staff last summer.  The structural deficit 
would be reduced by 0.7 percentage points, the nominal 
deficit would be 3.6% based on real growth of 1.7%.  On this 
basis the GOF met the October 3 deadline to report that it 
had taken appropriate measures to correct its deficit in 
accordance with EU Minister\'s recommendations four months 
earlier. 
 
5.(SBU)  The European Commission was not impressed.    On 
October 8 the Commission shot back with its recommendation 
to Ministers that \"France has taken no effective action in 
response to the Council Recommendation.\"  The phasing should 
not be taken literally.  It is lifted directly out of 
Article 104c(8) of the Treaty, reflecting more legalese than 
reality.  In fact, the Commission explains that the GOF has 
taken some measures to mitigate the deficit in 2004.  These 
include reforming the pension system, increasing tobacco 
taxes, and raising the social contributions for the fund 
responsible for the payment of wages of workers in companies 
in bankruptcy.  In addition, the proposed reduction in the 
structural deficit by 0.7 percentage points was consistent 
with the Council\'s recommendation.  The GOF, however, let 
the 2003 budget slip away, in the Commission\'s view, racking 
up a 4% deficit.  This is contrary to what EU Finance 
Ministers had recommended. 
 
6.(SBU)  This \"no effective action\" assessment is the first 
ever under the SGP\'s excessive deficit procedures.  Portugal 
and Germany\'s reports passed Commission staff scrutiny. 
Dubbing its efforts as ineffective has propelled France from 
a follower in the excessive deficit procedure to a leader. 
Now what? 
 
Commission Walks Thin Line: Expedites Process and Asks for 
More, But Over Longer Time 
 
7.(SBU)  The Commission\'s assessment begs the question: \"So 
what?\"  If Ministers were to agree with the recommendation, 
what would happen next?  The Commission dropped the other 
shoe on October 21.  It issued a companion recommendation to 
Ministers of new measures for France to take in 2004.  This 
recommendation is in accord with Article 104c(9) of the 
Treaty which states that if a member states persists in 
failing to put into practice the Council\'s recommendations, 
the Council may decide to give notice to the member state to 
take measures within a specified time-limit to remedy the 
situation. 
 
8.(SBU)  Part of this recommendation is to postpone the 
target date to correct the excessive deficit to 2005.  This 
would be contrary to the Recommendation EU Ministers signed 
up to in June for France calling for correction by 2004 at 
the latest.  The letter of the law, Article 3(4) of Council 
Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 (\"the regulation\"), is more 
forgiving.  It states that the deadline for the correction 
of the excessive deficit \"should be completed the year 
following its identification unless there are special 
circumstances.\"  While not citing any special circumstances, 
the Commission points out that the economic situation has 
deteriorated since June.  That deterioration would make the 
effort to bring the deficit below 4% in 2004 \"significantly 
larger than envisaged.\" 
 
9.(SBU)  The Commission has proposed the following new 
measures: 
(1) Reduction in the cyclically-adjusted balance by one 
percentage point of GDP; 
(2) Another 0.5 percentage point reduction in the cyclically- 
adjusted balance in 2005 or whatever it takes to get the 
nominal deficit below 3%; 
(3) Any higher than expected revenue in 2004 to be allocated 
to deficit reduction; 
(4) Curbing the increase in health care spending is a 
possible measure to be included in any deficit reduction 
package, consistent with the Broad Economic Policy 
Guidelines that have been approved by Heads of Government 
and State. 
 
10.(SBU)  The Commission also recommends that France report 
to the Council once every six months, in April and October, 
over the next two years so the Council can monitor progress. 
The basis for requiring such reports in found in Article 
104c(9) of the Treaty that allows the Council to request 
reports in accordance with a specific timetable to examine 
adjustment efforts. 
 
11.(SBU)  On process, the Commission is seeking to expedite 
consideration of the French case.  Under the regulation, the 
Council is supposed to take measures under 104c(9) within 
one month of its assessment under 104c(8) that no effective 
action has been taken.  The Commission wants both to be 
considered at the November 4 Ecofin meeting.  In the view of 
Commission staff, the decision on 104c(8) should be \"just a 
formality.\"  If Ministers comply and agree to recommend the 
new measures (or others) as suggested by the Commission, the 
Commission has suggested that France report back to the 
Council by December 15 on the measures it plans to take in 
2004 and 2005.  This also compresses the time frame 
envisaged in the regulation.  Article 6 permits at most two 
months between 104c(9) and the next step - sanctions.  Why 
the rush? 
 
12.(SBU)  Commission staff point out that Article 7 of the 
regulation requires that the Council\'s decision to impose 
sanctions be taken within 10 months of reporting dates for 
national accounts, e.g. from March 1 in this case.  Delaying 
the process could make the question of sanctions moot, at 
least this year.  By expediting the process, the prospect of 
sanctions provides some leverage. 
 
13.(SBU)  As noted in reftel, sanctions would be an 
admission of failure.  A senior German Finance official said 
they had been working to encourage France to make some 
additional efforts and to encourage the Commission to be 
more flexible.  He believes that \"A conflict would be in no 
one\'s interest.  He interprets the Commission\'s latest move 
as \"a tough line.\"  \"There is still a gap,\" in his 
assessment, between the Commission and the French positions. 
 
14.(SBU)  Commission staff admit that they are walking a 
fine line.  Will Ministers accept the new recommendation? 
The German Finance Ministry expert who believes the 
Commission is too tough points to the larger budget 
adjustment (he would have preferred more emphasis on 
structural reforms) and aggressive procedures (resorting to 
Article 104(9) so quickly and calling for a firm plan by 
December and semi-annually reporting).  The Commission, in 
his view, is \"putting its hands on national fiscal policy,\" 
something that, in his opinion, neither Germany nor France 
would accept. 
 
15.(SBU)  Will the Netherlands, Austria and Finland that 
have called for sanctions in the case of non-compliance go 
along with providing France an extra year to correct its 
deficit?  Dutch Finance Minister Zalm recently argued that 
the Commission should have proposed fining France and has 
threatened to stick to his plan to take the Commission to 
court, pending the outcome of the November 4 Ecofin meeting. 
Will France accept the recommendations?  And the intrusive 
reporting requirement?  Press reports suggest they have 
given the Commission\'s new approach a frosty response. 
Whatever happens could pave the way for action on Germany. 
 
Germany:  Slip, Slip, Slipping Away? 
 
16.(SBU)  Commission staff reports that they are 
disappointed with Germany\'s performance.  The measures that 
Germany had agreed to in its May report have proved 
ineffective in reducing the deficit has much as anticipated. 
Slower economic growth has widened the deficit, making 
adjustment efforts more difficult - as in the case of 
France.  Bringing the income tax cut forward from 2005 to 
2004 will create a much larger deficit than anticipated by 
the Commission last spring.  When the Commission releases 
its EU autumn forecast on October 29, the numbers for 
Germany in 2004 are likely to look roughly similar to those 
issued on October 21 by Germany\'s economic institutes: a 
deficit of around 3.5% with growth of 1.7%.  Even Finance 
Minister Eichel now has admitted that the deficit in 2004 
will exceed the 3% reference rate. 
 
17.(SBU)  Commission staff is preparing a new recommendation 
to Ministers for Germany that is likely to be taken up by 
Ministers at the December 15 Ecofin.  The content is being 
developed, but is likely to support reforms and subsidy cuts 
the German government is striving to get through the upper 
house of Parliament.  Since the prospect of Germany\'s 
deficit remaining above 3% next year are real, it would not 
be too much to imagine, as the German press has already 
begun to speculate based on Commission sources, that the 
Commission would accept that reality and call for the 
deficit to be well under 3% in 2005. 
 
18.(SBU)  German Finance Ministry officials will argue that 
(a) three years of stagnate growth are unusual; (b) they 
have significant structural reforms in the legislative 
process; and (c) bringing forward the income tax from 2005 
to 2004 will be good for German and EU economic growth and, 
technically, shouldn\'t count since it was already in 
Germany\'s stability plan for 2005.  That would shave a 
\"virtual\" 0.7 percentage points off the 2004 deficit.  As 
for getting the deficit under 3% in 2005, the Ministry\'s top 
economist confidently declared, \"I am certain of it.\" 
 
19.(SBU)  Why can the Commission be less in a rush for 
Germany than for France?  Article 9 of the Regulation notes 
that the excessive deficit procedure shall be held \"in 
abeyance\" if the member state acts in accordance with the EU 
Finance Ministers\' recommendations.  Since Germany seemed to 
be doing so, the 10 month clock was suspended. 
 
Portugal and Italy in the Wings 
 
20.(SBU)  The Commission continues to assess the budget 
situations of Portugal and Italy.  Even though the 
Portuguese, through extraordinary effort, reduced their 
deficit to 2.8% in 2002, the Commission has not recommended 
that the excessive deficit procedure be \"abrogated.\" 
Rather, they want to make sure the deficit reduction is 
sustainable.  Given the slowdown in 2003\'s growth, it won\'t 
be. 
 
21.(SBU)  However, the GOP has indicated it will, again, use 
extraordinary measures to push the deficit down.  These 
include real estates sales, selling tax receivables to 
private investors (a deal being arranged by Citibank), and 
postal system transfers to the budget for pension 
obligations (Lisbon, septel).  The GOP\'s 2004 budget, based 
on a realistic real growth forecast of 1.1%, would deliver a 
planned deficit of 2.8% in 2004, in the Commission\'s 
assessment. The Commission\'s overall view on Portuguese 
budget developments will be contained in its October 29 
forecast. 
 
22.(SBU)  Italy has also attracted the Commission\'s 
attention.  Last year when the Council was debating ways to 
improve the operation of the SGP, they agreed that more 
attention should be given to the stock of debt.  So even 
though Italy has been able to skate under the 3% deficit 
value by adopting one-off measures, the Commission is 
looking for more robust action to reduce the debt.  In an 
October 2 statement, Commissioner Solbes opined that the 
path for deficit reduction in 2004 is \"less ambitious\" than 
envisaged in last year\'s stability program and in contrast 
with Finance Ministers\' assessment that the \"pace of debt 
reduction should be significantly faster.\" 
 
The ECB: A Difficult Moment 
 
23.(SBU)  ECB experts are monitoring developments.  They 
believe the Commission is acting in the EU\'s best interests, 
but also confess that this is a \"difficult moment.\"  In its 
October Bulletin the ECB expressed \"serious concerns\" about 
recent fiscal policy developments.  The ECB wrote that it is 
\"worrying\" to see that not all countries have introduced 
sufficient consolidation measures. \"It is fundamental that 
the credibility of the institutional underpinnings of the 
EMU be maintained.\" 
 
Comment 
 
24.(SBU)  Commission staff characterize their approach on 
France is \"very delicate,\" with no certainty that Ministers 
or France will accept it.  France\'s initial public reaction, 
as recorded by the press, would seem to confirm their 
anxiety.  However, we tend to agree with the German Finance 
Ministry official\'s view that no one would benefit from a 
conflict, neither France, the smaller states, nor the EU. 
France would lose leverage in other major policy debates, 
such as in the constitution or budget; the Commission would 
lose its moral authority (by being perceived as either too 
strict or too loose); member states would lose the center 
piece for trying to coordinate fiscal policies, leaving the 
European Central Bank even less of an idea of how to 
incorporate fiscal policy into its monetary policy. 
Changing the SGP target, suggested by Italian President 
Berlusconi as recently as October 22, is not in the cards at 
present.  It would require an amendment to the Treaty, a 
process that would take too long to make a difference in the 
immediate case even if there were support to do so. 
 
25.(SBU)  All could benefit from a more assertive 
Commission.  Taking up the case of France and apparently not 
content to let Germany or Portugal easily off the hook 
without concrete evidence of sustainable deficit reduction 
could be useful.  As the Portuguese Finance Minister noted, 
the SGP provides an alibi for needed reforms and that budget 
discipline is good for growth (ref B).  Sending signals to 
Italy also could be useful, as high debt stock can play as 
much of a role in putting upward pressure on interest rates 
as rising deficits. 
 
26.(SBU)  If the case of France plays out more or less in 
line with the Commission\'s recommendation, an outcome that 
is by no means certain, there could be more rather than less 
of the SGP in member states\' lives in the months to come. 
Maybe member states will have better budget performance 
under a watchful eye.  It is clear that they did not so 
while left to their own.   However, such intrusiveness would 
cause yet another problem for member states, giving the 
Commission more of a bully pulpit on national budgets.  Then 
again, it would be better if member states exercised budget 
discipline themselves - in good times and bad. 
 
27.(U) This cable has been coordinated with Embassies 
Berlin, the Hague, Lisbon, Rome, Paris, Dublin, Vienna, and 
USEU. 
 
28.(U)  POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"11757","10/30/2003 6:31","03FRANKFURT8965","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","03Rome4730","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 008965 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Investment Services Directive:  Ruffled Feathers 
and Deja vu All Over Again 
 
Ref: (A) Frankfurt 7111; (B) Rome 4730 
 
T-IA-F-03-0057 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The political agreement reached by EU 
Finance Ministers on the Investment Services Directive (ISD) 
on October 7 ruffled more than a few feathers.  The UK is 
upset with the Italians who pushed through a position over 
the British objections; the European Commission is upset 
with the Brits; a MEP is upset with the Council and the 
Brits; and investment firms are frustrated.  Those 
apparently unruffled are stock exchanges outside the UK and 
Commissioner Fritz Bolkestein who crowed: \"Europe, its 
financial markets, investors and citizens will all be 
winners.\" 
 
2. (SBU) The issue was a \"pre-trade transparency\" provision 
for investment banks.  Such a requirement would force them 
to act like stock exchanges and entail new costs.  The 
\"compromise\" that emerged from the Council meeting was 
passed over the objection of five member states - something 
that is simply not done if at all avoidable.  Commission 
officials would like to broker a further compromise in the 
reconciliation of the Council\'s text with that passed by the 
Parliament.  So the issue is still alive, but faces 
significant challenges. 
 
3. (SBU) Moreover, any compromise that splits the difference 
between policy views might lose sight of the objective to 
create an efficient EU capital market.  This would be a 
pity.  Moreover, the process will not be transparent - 
running the risk of another disappointment of an unworkable 
text.  Recall that a year ago the controversial provision 
was inserted at the level of the Commissioners after the 
text had been informally vetted and praised by investment 
firms.  The Parliament\'s text reflected a compromise text 
supported by investment firms and stock exchanges, but was 
ignored by the Council.  Dj vu, all over again. 
 
Nobody is Happy, but Everyone Will be Winners 
 
4. (SBU) At the October 7 Ecofin, Finance Ministers grappled 
with the remaining political issues in the ISD.  This 
directive is to update the existing EU rules for the 
operation of stock exchanges and other trading venues, such 
as multilateral trading facilities (electronic exchanges) 
and investment firms that \"internalize\" trades by matching 
buy and sell orders \"in house.\"  One of the key issues was 
pre-trade transparency.  Investment firms had argued that 
t 
since they are subject to conduct of business and \"best 
execution\" rules, they had no need to publish prices in 
advance of trading.  To do so would be costly and force them 
to operate as stock exchanges.  The UK supported this line. 
Internalization is a prevalent practice in London. 
 
5. (SBU) France and Italy, among others, supported pre-trade 
transparency for investor protection - and to create a 
\"level playing for stock exchanges.\"  At present, these 
countries have \"concentration rules,\" requiring all trades 
to be executed on their stock exchanges.  Internalization is 
not permitted. 
 
6. (SBU) The compromise text forged in Ecofin would require 
pre-trade transparency for all but large (so-called \"block\") 
trades.  Moreover, once a price were published, the firm 
would have to honor that price for retail customers, but 
could offer price improvement for professional traders. 
This would make investment firms operate even more like 
stock exchanges, driving up costs and widening spreads 
between bid and ask prices as they would have to deal with 
clients with which they have no relationship -and their 
credit risks. 
 
7. (SBU) Reaching the compromise was not a happy moment for 
some.  The compromise was passed without the approval of the 
UK, Ireland, Sweden, Finland and Luxembourg.  According to 
Commission officials, forcing through a major issue over the 
objections of a member state that has a strong interest in 
an issue is very unusual.  The UK was not happy that the 
Italians pushed the issue through without vetting possible 
texts in advance; bloodied but not bowed, the Brits were 
happy they held their ground. 
 
8. (SBU) Commission officials berate the UK delegation for 
not engaging in negotiations of a compromise.  \"The most 
unbelievable negotiations I have ever seen in my life,\" 
charged one.  Commission officials are also not pleased that 
the Italians were so forceful in overriding the UK position. 
\"There will be consequences,\" one darkly predicted. 
 
9. (SBU) The Italians are pleased that they delivered a 
political agreement on the ISD, one of their top priorities 
of their EU Presidency.  One Italian Finance Ministry 
official downplayed the dust up.  Investment firms are 
greedy, in his view (spoken with some authority having 
worked for one himself). 
 
10. (SBU) The Member of European Parliament who managed the 
legislation for the Parliament had worked hard to forge a 
compromise that gained a majority vote of the Economic and 
Monetary Affairs Committee and the plenary and won the 
backing (grudgingly) of investment banks and stock 
exchanges. That text would have (a) imposed a pre-trade 
transparency obligation to a narrower range of trades; (b) 
permitted price improvements from the published quotes; and 
(c) allowed investment firms to select the clients with 
which they would deal.  This text, however, did not figure 
in the Italian proposals in Council. 
 
11. (SBU) Another MEP lambasted the UK negotiating tactics. 
Some investment firms who had worked on the Parliament text 
are frustrated.  Deutsche Boerse publicly praised the 
outcome, but privately admitted that the text was unclear. 
 
12. (SBU) Commissioner Fritz Bolkestein was clearly pleased. 
After all, the revision to the ISD is was much bigger than 
just one article, covering many important and difficult 
issues.  In the Commission\'s press release, Bolkestein is 
quoted as saying: \"The Directive will make it easier for 
businesses to raise money, improve investor confidence and 
promote growth.  The only losers will be those who want to 
hide behind national barriers to stifle competition and 
short change issuers and investors.  If we can get this 
Directive through on time, as I think we will, Europe, its 
financial markets, investors and citizens will all be 
winners.\" 
 
Next Steps:  Reconciliation 
 
13. (SBU) DG Internal Market officials have said that they 
want to try to find a consensus on the pre-trade 
transparency issue.  The timing for this will be early next 
year.  In December, the Council will transmit its common 
position on the ISD to the Parliament.  The Parliament will 
have three months to respond.  Early February would be the 
time to try to forge a better outcome, according to these 
officials. 
 
14. (SBU) This is easier said than done.  While wordsmithing 
might be possible, to get a new text passed by Parliament 
will require an absolute majority vote by all 
Parliamentarians - 316 in favor.  As the earlier text had 
passed by only a small margin, this could be difficult. 
Should the Parliament fail to muster enough votes, the text 
would remain as agreed by the Council.  The other option 
would be for Parliament to vote down the entire proposed 
revision to the ISD. 
 
The Heart of the Matter: Efficient Markets 
 
15. (SBU) The objective of the EU\'s Financial Services 
Action Plan (FSAP) is to further integrate EU financial 
markets.  Each European national market has developed its 
own system.  As noted above, internalization is prevalent in 
the UK.  Channeling all sales through a stock exchanges is 
common on the continent.  The Commission\'s stated objective 
in the ISD is to regulate trade execution venues without 
stifling the competition between them.  The Commission 
acknowledged that the \"one size fits all approach\" won\'t 
work. Let the market sort it out. 
 
16. (SBU) The proposed revision to the ISD would lift the 
concentration rules on the continent, so all trades would 
not have to be channeled to stock exchanges.  Rather, the 
investor could chose whether to use a dealer that trades on 
an exchange or one that deals on the basis of its own in- 
house trading book.  Member States agreed.  The question 
then became on what conditions internalization would be 
permitted.  It was here where the compromise was struck in 
the Council. 
17. (SBU) This, however, comes back to the question the 
Commission couldn\'t answer, finding one approach to fit all. 
A concern is that by restricting or increasing the costs of 
London operations, investors would lose as higher costs are 
pushed on to them.  Liberalizing restrictions on the 
continent could induce more competition.  However, it is 
questionable whether firms would make the necessary 
investment to exploit this opportunity that is unfamiliar to 
their market place.  So it is not clear that merely reaching 
an average between the most liberal and the most restrictive 
markets is a good outcome for market efficiency.  Again, 
letting the market sort it out could be a better approach. 
 
18. (SBU) One Commission official asserted that the 
compromise is a middle course, between liberal rules of 
London and more restrictive rules of the US.  According to a 
former SEC official working for an investment bank, this 
characterization is not quite accurate.  SEC rules do 
require pre-trade transparency.  However, the US reporting 
system that publishes such quotes, the Intermarket Trading 
System, took years to build, surrounding by detailed 
regulations.  No such system exists in the EU.  Moreover, 
under US rules, price improvement is possible.  Quotes 
signify a starting point for negotiations, like the sticker 
price for a new car. 
 
Consultations, Transparency and Workability:  Dj vu 
 
19. (SBU) Whether the compromise is right or not for 
fostering greater efficiency for EU capital markets, the 
other question is whether it is workable. A year ago the 
Commission staff had consulted with the industry and vetted 
a draft text without a pre-trade transparency provision for 
investment firms.  At the college of Commissioners level, 
however, such provisions were inserted.  Not only were 
investment firms upset with the process, they soberly 
pointed out that the text was unworkable. 
 
20. (SBU) Action shifted to the Parliament.  The lead 
manager for the legislation, being from the UK, was 
sympathetic to the investment firms\' case.  Politically, she 
e 
recognized early on that a pre-trade transparency provision 
would be needed to pass the Parliament.  Investment banks, 
realizing that had lost in their opposition to any pre-trade 
transparency, worked with her to find an acceptable 
compromise text, one that could be workable. 
 
21. (SBU) The Italian Presidency, according to one source, 
had not engaged in detailed discussions on pre-trade 
transparency during the Council working groups.  Rather, 
they waited until just before the Ecofin meeting to discuss 
the issue.  According to several experts, including in the 
Commission, the text, not surprisingly, is not technically 
clear.  According to one investment banker, it could be 
interpreted either very strictly or very broadly. 
 
22. (SBU) In the view of a market expert, the issue of pre- 
trade transparency is a \"matter of taste.\"  Why not let the 
customer decide?  An investment banker mused that his bank 
would continue to internalize, but it will be a matter of 
cost, one that his firm could meet but smaller firms might 
not.  Investors would be the one to foot the bill in 
increase costs and fewer investment choices. 
 
23. (SBU) Consultations and transparency can help the public 
\"assume ownership\" for the outcome.  However, they can also 
help get technical matters ironed out before they become 
questions of legal interpretations.  The Commission and 
Parliament seem to have taken that lesson to heart.  The 
Council would be wise to do so as well, at least in the 
upcoming reconciliation process. 
 
24. (U)  This cable coordinated with Embassies London, Rome, 
and Berlin. 
 
25. (U)  POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"12018","11/10/2003 14:25","03FRANKFURT9271","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 009271 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: BaFin guidelines on cross-border provision of 
financial services 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0058 
 
  1.   (SBU) Summary:  In September 2003, the German Financial 
     Supervisory Authority (BaFin) issued interpretive guidelines 
     on how it will treat the cross-border provision of financial 
     services into Germany.  According to the recent guidelines, 
     targeted offers of banking or other financial products to a 
     German customer by a provider located abroad require a 
     German banking license unless the provider has a \"European 
     passport\".  Exemptions may be granted for interbank business 
     and institutional investors, if the entities in question are 
     effectively supervised in their home country.  There seems 
     to be a considerable lack of clarity among market 
     participants on what the guidelines really mean for their 
     business.  Nonetheless, the BaFin is in a dialogue with the 
     Association of Foreign Banks and has expressed its 
     willingness to take account of their concerns  End summary. 
 
  BaFin\'s new guidelines 
  ---------------------- 
  2.   (SBU)  In September 2003, the German Financial 
     Supervisory Authority (BaFin) issued interpretive guidelines 
     on how it will treat the cross-border provision of financial 
     services into Germany.  These guidelines basically explain 
     how the BaFin intends to interpret the existing Banking Act, 
     which has not been changed.  However, they do change 
     administrative practice as they are based on a new 
     definition of cross-border transactions. 
3.   (SBU)  In the past, the BaFin only required a German 
banking license if transactions were carried out or services 
were provided on German soil.  According to the recent 
guidelines, targeted offers of banking or other financial 
products to a German customer by a provider located abroad 
that are made repeatedly and on a commercial basis require a 
license unless the provider has a \"European passport\".  The 
BaFin will, however, only give licenses to banks with a 
legal presence in Germany in the form of a branch or a 
subsidiary.  A representative office would not suffice.  If 
a foreign company has a branch in Germany, all the company\'s 
transactions with German customers must be carried out 
through and booked at this branch. 
4.   (SBU)  The BaFin release exclusively refers to 
\"targeted\" offers, e.g. actively soliciting business in 
Germany. Providers of cross-border products and services 
that German customers have requested on their own initiative 
are excluded from the licensing requirement.  No license is 
required, for instance, for lending business with large 
corporate customers or institutional investors, loan 
syndicates or for maintaining an existing business 
relationship.  The guidelines do not distinguish between 
activities targeted at retail customers and those targeted 
at corporate customers or institutional investors. 
5.   (SBU)  Under certain conditions, foreign entities may 
be eligible for exemption from the licensing requirement. 
This would be the case if \"the entity does not require 
supervision given the nature of the business it conducts\". 
Such an exemption will only be considered for interbank 
business and institutional investors, if the BaFin can 
assume that the entities in question will not require 
additional supervision in the host country due to effective 
supervision in their home country in accordance with 
internationally recognized standards.  Moreover, the 
competent supervisor(s) in the home country must cooperate 
with the BaFin, and the applicant is required to submit a 
certificate from the competent authority/authorities of the 
home country that confirms to the BaFin that 
              the foreign entity concerned was granted a license for 
            the banking operations and/or financial services that it 
            intends to provide on a cross-border basis in Germany, 
    the commencement of the intended cross-border services 
in Germany raises no supervisory concerns and, 
    if such concerns should arise in the future, these will 
be reported to the BaFin. 
 
  Practical implications 
  ---------------------- 
  6.   (SBU)  The BaFin\'s new guidelines also give a number of 
     examples of practices of third country financial service 
     providers that would no longer be legal without a license of 
     German supervisors.  For instance, if a foreign entity 
     targets the German market generally to offer loans or 
or 
     underwriting services, a license is required.  This is, 
     however, not the case if the offer occurs in the context of 
     maintaining existing customer relations or upon the 
     customer\'s own initiative.  U.S. banks trying to sell their 
     products via the internet, if the site is specifically 
     targeted at the German market (e.g. in German language or 
     providing German contact details), direct mailings or faxes 
     would have to do so through a German branch and not directly 
     from the U.S.  Similarly, it would be illegal to have 
     financial consultants fly into Germany for a specific bank 
     lending operation with a potential new customer. 
     Representative offices would only be permitted to watch 
     market developments, but not to market products and deal 
     with customers.  Moreover OTC business for Germans in the 
     U.S. or the execution of German orders by brokerage firms in 
     the U.S. would be illegal, unless initiated at the request 
     of the German client.  Even the foreign subsidiary of a 
     German bank would no longer be allowed to make offers to 
     clients in Germany. 
 
  The BaFin\'s motivation 
  ---------------------- 
  7.   (SBU)  In its press release announcing the publication 
     of the guidelines the BaFin states that its objective is to 
     improve investor protection, in particular in the light of 
     increasing cross-border business and the use of new media 
     such as the internet.  Moreover, it wants to submit third 
     country providers of financial services to the same 
     competitive conditions as entities from within the European 
     Economic Area (EEA). 
8.   (SBU)  The responsible official at the BaFin told us 
that the guidelines were driven by the concern to prevent 
fraud vis--vis German investors, citing as a typical 
example a Cayman Island firm providing banking services via 
the internet.  He stated that the BaFin\'s intention was by 
no means to impede \"honest\" business activities. 
  9.   (SBU)  However, there is speculation whether the 
     BaFin\'s motivation is exclusively investor protection or 
     whether tax and reciprocity issues also play a role.  The 
     Association of Foreign Banks (VAB) claims that the BaFin has 
     two reasons for this stricter interpretation: Its \"official\" 
     argument is that it wants to protect German investors from 
     dubious companies that offer their services in Germany but 
     do neither have a license to do so nor a physical presence 
     in Germany.  A typical example would be letterbox companies 
     located in Nauru.  Another reason, which is not officially 
     quoted, is that banks that make money in Germany should pay 
     taxes in Germany.  Moreover, the guidelines might also help 
     to limit tax evasion of investors.  According to the VAB, 
     the main target of the guidelines is Switzerland, which is 
     attracting a lot of investment from Germany, partly also 
     with the clear objective to evade taxes. 
  10.  (SBU)  The former managing director of the VAB told us 
     that a BaFin official had mentioned to him that reciprocity 
     considerations also play a role.  This particularly concerns 
     the US, with the BaFin official claiming that German banks 
     cannot provide their services in the US without being 
     supervised there, either. 
 
  Matter of interpretation 
  ------------------------ 
  11.  (SBU)  Currently there seems to be a considerable lack 
     of clarity among the banks concerned on what the guidelines 
     really mean for their business.  Most US banks have 
     subsidiaries in Germany anyway, whose transactions would 
     largely not be concerned by the guidelines.  However, the 
     general guidelines do not answer all questions with regard 
     to sophisticated business models.  There are specific 
     business policies which may fall under the new rules, e.g. 
     if transactions of a German subsidiary of a US bank are 
     booked in an unregulated US entity.  The chairman of the VAB 
     board, Peter Coym, deplored that the BaFin guidelines put 
     business models into question that have been used in Germany 
     for decades.  He also criticized that the status of 
     representative offices was not sufficiently clarified so 
     that they continue to operate in a gray area that leaves 
     wide scope for interpretation. 
12.  (SBU)  When we spoke with the responsible official at 
the BaFin, he stressed that in case it should turn out that 
the guidelines jeopardize legal transactions, the BaFin 
would be willing to consider modifications and that the 
wording of the guidelines may be considered as preliminary. 
He pointed out that for cases that are not explicitly 
mentioned in the guidelines, when in doubt foreign entities 
should contact the BaFin and discuss the issue.  The BaFin 
would then be willing to work out a solution.  For instance, 
the BaFin official said that if the service is provided by 
an entity that does not have a banking license in the US but 
is indirectly supervised by the Fed or the SEC and US 
regulators commit to informing BaFin in of any problems with 
that entity immediately, the cross-border transactions could 
qualify for an exemption.  Moreover, the BaFin appears to be 
inclined to regard US supervision as \"effective\". 
 
Outlook 
  ------- 
  13.  (SBU)  The BaFin, in discussions with the Ministry of 
     Finance, has already made many accommodations to VAB 
     suggestions.  The VAB as well as individual banks will 
     proceed to report to BaFin any difficulties that may occur 
     with regard to the guidelines.  Further clarification and 
     also adjustments to the rules can thus be expected. 
 
  14.  (U)  This cable coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
  15.  (U) POC: Claudia Ohly, Economic Specialist, e-mail 
     OhlyC@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-222367, fax 49-(69)-7535- 
     2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"12019","11/10/2003 14:37","03FRANKFURT9273","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","02FRANKFURT5496|03STATE29193","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 009273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/TRA BYERLY, PARSON, FINSTON, WALKLET 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS AND EUR/ERA 
FAA FOR API-1, AEE-1, AIA-300 AND ASC 
PARIS ALSO FOR FAA (EDWARDS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, ECON, PGOV, SENV, GM 
SUBJECT:  FRANKFURT AIRPORT EXPANSION HITS SAFETY HURDLE 
 
REF: A) 2002 FRANKFURT 5496; B) STATE 29193 C) FRANKFURT 
01549 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  The expansion of Frankfurt airport has hit a 
safety hurdle:  the advisory German Safety Commission 
(Stoerfallkommission des Bundes), as well as the European 
Commission, are examining risks associated with the Ticona 
chemical plant located near the planned new runway.  The 
advisory commission has hinted that it will approve the new 
runway, but concurrence is conditioned on expensive safety 
upgrades at the chemical plant.  German and EU regulatory 
actions in this controversial case could have implications 
for future growth of hub airports in Europe.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  Now that the German Safety commission has taken up the 
issue of the Ticona chemical factory, safety has overtaken 
noise as the major obstacle to expanding Frankfurt Airport, 
continental Europe\'s busiest passenger and cargo hub.  At 
issue is the possibility of an aircraft crashing into the 
chemical plant, which is located less than 200 meters from 
the planned northwest runway (REF C).  With no official 
guidelines for this kind of risk analysis, studies using 
various methodologies have produced very different 
estimates for the likelihood of such a disaster -- from one 
case in six hundred years to one in a million years. 
Recent public remarks suggest that German Safety Commission 
Chairman Christian Jochum views the risk as manageable. 
While the Commission\'s role is only advisory, its findings 
(to be released in December) will have substantial 
political clout.  The European Commission, which has 
jurisdiction under the \"Seveso II\" directive on hazardous 
chemicals, will also consider the Ticona issue, but its 
time frame is not yet clear. 
 
3.  Ticona processes highly toxic chemicals and has tall 
smokestacks (considered obstacles under ICAO Annex 14). 
Relocating the plant would cost 1.3 billion euros, a sum 
beyond the airport\'s means.  Airport management (Fraport) 
was slow to realize that the Ticona issue could delay or 
even block airport expansion but has recently offered to 
fund improved safety at the chemical plant.  Fraport would 
also pay to move fuel tanks and a power plant outside the 
range of the new runway. 
 
4.  COMMENT:  The Safety Commission\'s work so far points to 
a compromise solution in which regulators would adopt a 
middle-range risk estimate, and Fraport would agree to fund 
safety upgrades to limit the damage from a crash.  Such a 
compromise could set the stage for European Commission 
approval.  The safety commission is an independent advisor 
to the German Environment Ministry, whose State Secretary, 
Margareta Wolf (Greens), visited Ticona in September and 
said the proposed runway is too close to be safe.  (The 
German Transportation Ministry is more supportive of 
expansion).  Expansion opponents and supporters alike are 
now focused on the Ticona problem, and Fraport officials 
admit privately that 2006 is unrealistic for the opening of 
the new runway. 
 
5.  The Fraport/Ticona case could have significant 
implications for air traffic in Europe and for the future 
expansion of other hub airports in crowded urban areas. 
The new runway would allow Fraport to increase aircraft 
movements by 50 percent (to 120 per hour) and boost annual 
capacity by 25 million passengers, but the chemical factory 
is inside the runway\'s safety perimeter and too expensive 
to relocate.  Faced with this conflict, it is German and 
European public safety regulators who will determine future 
expansion at Frankfurt.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"12093","11/14/2003 8:45","03FRANKFURT9404","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 FRANKFURT 009404 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: European Financial Market Regulatory 
Infrastructure:  Bigger Before it Gets Better; A European 
Financial Services Authority a Matter of Time? 
 
T-IA-F-03-0060 
 
  1.   (SBU) Summary:  The European Commission\'s November 6 
     launch of measures to extend the Lamfalussy procedures 
     beyond securities to banking and insurance means all 
     financial services governed at the EU level will be covered 
     by a combination of policy and supervisory committees.  The 
     Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR), 
     established just over two years ago, will expand its 
     coverage under the Commission\'s decision.  New accounting 
     committees have been created and others are proposed for the 
     auditing area.  Growing like topsy. 
 
  2.   (SBU) The Lamfalussy procedures were to streamline and 
     facilitate rule-making, thereby being responsive to changes 
     in dynamic financial markets.  To date, experience in the 
     securities area generally has been positive, but not 
     uniformly so.  Too much detail in directives and 
     implementing measures detracts from flexibility, according 
     to the Inter-Institutional Monitoring Group that reviewed 
     the operation of the procedures to date.  Market 
     participants shared that view and then some, criticizing (a) 
     rushed consultations as political agendas triumphed 
     technical considerations; and (b) lack of transparency in 
     the activities of the European Securities Committee.  Some 
     of these criticisms will be overcome as committees work 
     through their start-up problems.  Others will, no doubt, 
     arise. 
 
  3.   (SBU) Longer-term, however, some observers believe the 
     multitude of committees, cumbersome procedures and inter- 
     relationship of banking, securities and insurance issues may 
     give rise to a European Financial Services Authority (EFSA). 
     To make this long-term goal a reality, its proponents would 
     like the Constitutional Treaty for Europe to contain an 
     enabling clause to allow for the creation of an EFSA - 
     whenever the time is right.  End Summary. 
 
  Expanding Lamfalussy: Banking, Insurance and CESR Plus 
  --------------------------------------------- ------------ 
  ----------- 
 
  4.   (SBU) On November 6 the European Commission  launched a 
     package of measures to extend the Lamfalussy procedures to 
     banking and insurance activities.  Four Commission decisions 
     would create two policy-level committees, the European 
     Banking Committee (EBC) and the European Insurance and 
     Occupational Pensions Committee (EIOPC), and two regulatory 
     committees, the Committee of European Banking Supervisors 
     (CEBS) and the Committee of European Insurance and 
     Occupational Pensions Supervisors (CEIOPS).  In addition, 
     two other Commission decisions would extend the purview of 
     the European Securities Committee (ESC) and the Committee of 
     European Securities Regulators (CESR) to include asset 
     management and investment funds. 
 
  5.   (SBU) The Lamfalussy procedures, recommended by a group 
     of wise men chaired by Baron Lamfalussy, were adopted just 
     over two years ago for the securities sector.  CESR was 
     established to provide the EC advice on legislation and 
     implementing measures as well as to coordinate 
     implementation and enforcement of EU securities legislation. 
     The ESC, composed of member state Finance Ministry 
     representatives, was created to approve implementing 
     measures proposed by the EC.  In this way, the Commission 
     could adopt regulations (with immediate binding effect in 
     member states) or directives (required to be transposed into 
     member state law) without going back to the Parliament.  The 
     Commission is about to adopt implementing measures, one 
     regulation and two directives, for the market abuse 
     directive.  This marks the first time Lamfalussy procedures 
     have produced implementing measures. 
 
  6.   (SBU) Two problems have arisen with the new expansion. 
     First, location.  While Finance Ministers agreed on the need 
     for the new committees, they are having more difficulty 
     settling on the location.  The UK wants the banking 
     regulatory committee (CEBS) to be in London, Germany wants 
     it to be in Frankfurt.  One solution would be to have all 
     committees based in Paris.  However, CESR is based in Paris 
     and the French have given no signs of yielding this morsel. 
     To date, stalemate. 
 
  7.   (SBU) The other problem is the Parliament.  The 
     Commission will suspend the decisions on the creation of EBC 
     and EIOPC and expanding the ESC and CESR\'s area of 
     competence until the Parliament passes a directive which 
     substitutes these new committee names for those of existing 
     committees, such as the Bank Advisory Committee.  The 
     legislation would need to move quickly, before the 
     Parliament adjourns in April.  The Commission\'s goal is to 
     have the new committees in operation by the beginning of 
     2004.  The EBC would be tasked with a new proposed capital 
     adequacy directive and the EIOPC would similarly take up new 
     insurance legislation.  The Parliament, however, is likely 
     to play hard to get. 
 
  Parliament:  Conditional Blessing 
  ---------------------------------------- 
 
  8.   (SBU) Parliament has not been comfortable with the 
     Lamfalussy procedures, fearing that the Commission and 
     Member States could adopt implementing measures beyond their 
     authority as defined by directives.  Not having the \"right 
     to call back\" such legislation, Parliament has inserted 
     \"sunset\" provisions in securities legislation specifying 
     that the Commission\'s authority to adopt implementing 
     measures will expire unless renewed by the Parliament. 
     Parliament is angling for a call back right in the Treaty 
     via the proposed draft Constitutional Treaty for Europe 
     currently under consideration by the Inter Government 
     Conference.  The recent draft gives them satisfaction.  But 
     it is still a draft. 
 
  9.   (SBU) The Chairman of Parliament\'s Economic and 
     Monetary Affairs Committee (EMAC), Christa Randzio-Plath 
     greeted the Commission\'s decision to expand the Lamfalussy 
     procedures with two conditions: (1) Finance Ministers to 
     declare publicly that the procedures foreseen in the draft 
     Constitutional Treaty for Europe will apply to the adoption 
     of implementing measures and enter into an agreement with 
     Parliament to that end pending entry into force of the 
     Constitutional Treaty; and (2) that the new committees have 
     \"real functional and operational independence,\" and not act 
     as \"mouth pieces for the Commission or the Council.\"  The 
     former may be hard for Finance Ministers to swallow, but 
     within their power to do so.  The second is so vague as to 
     be either no problem or an impossibility. 
 
  CESR et. al. 
  --------------- 
 
  10.  (SBU) Since its creation in June 2001, CESR has been 
     growing and busy.  The Secretariat has grown to 15 and moved 
     into new quarters.  Eight of the ten candidate countries 
     joined CESR in 2003 as observers. 
 
  11.  (SBU) CESR Fin, a standing committee on financial 
     issues, has issued a standard on financial information to 
     develop a common approach to the enforcement of 
     International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) in 
     Europe.  CESR Fin has also issued two drafts for public 
     comment, one for a recommendation on guidance regarding the 
     transition to IFRS (all EU listed companies must have their 
     accounts prepared according to IFRS for financial year 2005) 
     and the other for the coordination of standards enforcement 
     activity. 
 
  12.  (SBU) CESR has two Expert Groups on implementing 
     measures, one on market abuse the other on the prospectus 
     directive.  Both expert groups have issued consultation 
     papers, held public hearings, and delivered advice to the 
     Commission.  Another Expert Group is being established on 
     the Investment Services Directive composed of three 
     subgroups (market regulation, rules of conduct of 
     intermediaries, and enforcement).   CESR has worked with the 
     European Central Bank (ECB) to produce draft standards on 
     clearing and settlement.  Getting a jump on the Commission\'s 
     decisions, on October 30 CESR issued a consultation paper on 
     how it sees its new role in the regulation of asset 
     management and investment funds. 
 
  13.  (SBU) The Lamfalussy procedures, or at least the 
     committee structures, are being adopted in other areas 
     covered by the EU\'s Financial Services Action Plan. To 
     implement the International Accounting Standards Regulation 
     there is a policy level European Accounting Committee and a 
     technical committee called EFRAG, the European Financial 
     Reporting Advisory Group.  On auditing, the Commission has 
     proposed to create an Auditing Regulatory Committee and to 
     rename the EU Committee on Auditing to the Audit Advisory 
     Committee, a forum of regulators.  A new Financial Services 
     Committee, a re-worked version of the Financial Services 
     Policy Group but chaired by a member state representative, 
     is to give overall strategic guidance and set medium-term 
     objectives. 
 
  14.  (SBU) With Lamfalussy procedures spreading hither and 
       yon, it would seem like the procedures are really great. 
       Maybe in theory, but not yet in practice. 
 
  IIM and the Market:  Good and Better, but A Long Way from 
  Best Practices 
  --------------------------------------------- ------------ 
  ----------------- 
 
  15.  (SBU) To shed light on whether Lamfalussy procedures 
     have been working well in the securities area an Inter- 
     Institutional Monitoring Group of independent experts made 
     an assessment and published an interim report in May. 
     Broadly speaking, the evidence they collected has been 
     \"strongly supportive\" of the procedures, though admitting 
     that there is a \"learning by doing\" experience underway 
     suggests room for improvement.  The IIM highlighted some 
     important issues, including the possible sacrifice of 
     quality to meet self-imposed deadlines of the FSAP and too 
     much detail in directives that would impede flexibility in 
     implementation to respond to changing market conditions. 
 
  16.  (SBU) Others, responding to an invitation of the IIM to 
     comment on its interim report, were less generous.  A group 
     composed of the Federation of European Securities Exchanges, 
     the International Primary Dealers Association, the 
     International Securities Market Association, the London 
     Investment Bankers Association and the European Banking 
     Federation submitted joint comments.  They asserted that the 
     process has yielded \"far too much detail\" in directives and 
     implementing measures that has resulted in decisions taken 
     by \"politicians on matters that require detailed technical 
     knowledge\" leading to political deadlock.  Too much detail, 
     in the group\'s view, is incompatible with the diversity of 
     the European market and will present difficulties when the 
     time comes to update the measures. 
 
  17.  (SBU) CESR consultations procedures look good on paper, 
     according to the group, but have been rushed in practice. 
     Time limits have \"prevented satisfactory second rounds of 
     consultation and consultation documents are too long given 
     the time to respond to them.\"  The European Securities 
     Committee, composed of member states, \"has perhaps the 
     farthest progress to make to become sufficiently 
     transparent.\"  This is in contrast to CESR, in the group\'s 
     view, which has adopted a charter with principles for 
     consultation and used both open public consultation and 
     expert groups to consult on its work. 
 
  18.  (SBU) Finally, the group seconded the IIM\'s assessment 
     that CESR, the Commission and market participants all have 
     resource constraints in developing and enforcing legislation 
     and regulation.  A possible way out, according to this 
     group, would be to reduce the level of detail in legislation 
     and implementing measures and \"give greater weight to the 
     less politically-driven\" implementation level of the 
     Lamfalussy procedures where national authorities coordinate 
     national implementation measures via CESR. 
 
  Enter an EFSA:  A Matter of Time? 
  ----------------------------------- 
 
  19.  (SBU) The latter comment raises the question of whether 
     the EU would be better served by having a European Financial 
     Services Authority (EFSA).  Such an organization, operating 
     under broad legislation proposed by the Commission and 
     adopted by the Parliament and the Council, might be just 
     want that group is looking for - at least on paper. 
 
  20.  (SBU) Deutsche Bank\'s research staff has praised the 
     Lamfalussy procedures but considers them an intermediate 
     step to a single regulatory and supervisory authority. 
     Lamfalussy would probably agree.  Reportedly he once quipped 
     that not following his recommendations would lead to the 
     creation of a EU supervisory authority and following them 
     would lead to the same result. 
 
  21.  (SBU) The European Economic Advisory Group (EEAG) 
     composed of European academics working through Munich\'s Ifo 
     Institute arrived at a similar conclusion, but with a view 
     to promote market integration and financial stability.  With 
     respect to integration, EEAF reasons that an EFSA might 
     better resist local pressure to assist particular 
     institutions.  On financial stability, EEAG argues that 
     cross-border financial activities within the EU has made 
     \"mere coordination\" of financial supervision as likely to be 
     insufficient.  Thus, the need for a more centralized 
     supervision mechanism. 
 
  22.  (SBU) EEAG believes that the ECB could assume 
     responsibility for more centralized banking supervision and 
     a European Securities and Exchange Commission could 
     supervise securities markets.  However, they note that a 
     strong case for an EFSA that covers banking, securities and 
     insurance is based on the trend toward integration of 
     intermediaries and market operations as well as avoiding any 
     potential conflict between conduct of monetary policy and 
     supervision of the financial system. 
 
  23.  (SBU) EEAG states that supervision need not be 
     completely centralized but rely on national authorities. 
     Deutsche Bank has argued for a similar approach, modeled on 
     the ECB structure, with the central authority (like the 
     ECB\'s Governing Council and Executive Board) developing 
     principles and guidelines and coordinating their 
     implementation, but relying on national authorities (like 
     the national central banks in the euro system) to perform 
     the actual supervision and enforcement.  To put an EFSA into 
     place would require a change in the treaty.  Deutsche Bank 
     and others have called for the Inter Governmental Conference 
     to insert an enabling clause into the Constitutional Treaty 
     for Europe, for use if and when appropriate. 
 
  24.  (SBU) In October the Initiative for Finanzstandort 
     Deutschland, a group of German banks promoting Germany as a 
     financial center, endorsed the idea of a European Financial 
     Supervisory Authority.  A Bundesbank Board member 
     immediately criticized the initiative as \"illusionary,\" 
     claiming that such an EFSA would need to have a European 
     political union before it could work.  That\'s the same thing 
     critics said about European Monetary Union and the ECB. 
 
  Comment: Against the Wind 
  --------------------------- 
 
  25.  (SBU) Creation of EU committees is hardly news.  The 
     Lamfalussy procedures themselves are a form of the EU 
     \"comitology,\" well established in some other areas.  What is 
     new is that the securities committees are now an integral 
     part of implementing, enforcing and amending EU directives 
     and implementing measures.  Spreading this to banking and 
     insurance would give these groups more influence than their 
     predecessors.  The other side of the coin is that all of 
     these groups will have more significant responsibilities 
     under the directives and regulations being adopted under the 
     FSAP. 
 
  26.  (SBU) Working through the new procedures is cumbersome. 
     Although it would be ironic to concede that the once closed 
     EU rule making process in financial services now offers too 
     much consultation, some market participants admit to 
     \"consultation fatigue.\"  Consultations with the Commission 
     when it is working on a proposal, with the Parliament and 
     Council when they are considering the proposal, with CESR 
     Expert Groups in developing advice to the Commission, and 
     again with the Commission and possibly the ESC, when 
     considering adopting implementing measures based on CESR\'s 
     advice does seem excessive.  Collapsing these procedures 
     into a EFSA could help eliminate a step or two, but, would 
     still involve more consultations than has been the case to 
     date for EU level legislation on financial services. 
 
  27.  (SBU) Added to such practical advantages are those 
     pointed out by EEAG - a potentially easier path to 
     integration and better coordination for implementation and 
     enforcement.  Taken together, the arguments for a single 
     entity become stronger.  The senior Bundesbank official that 
     has downplayed the probability of an EFSA was the same one 
     who had fought for the Bundesbank and the ECB to have a 
     greater role in banking supervision.  He lost that debate. 
     Once more, he may be leaning against the wind. 
 
  28.  (U) This cable coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
  29.  (U) POC: James G. Wallar, U.S. Treasury Representative 
     for European Affairs, e-mail  wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49- 
     (69)-7535-2459, fax 49-(69)-7535-2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"12349","11/24/2003 13:26","03FRANKFURT9685","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 009685 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOE FOR R. PRICE and DOE/REE - D. GARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, ECON, SENV, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG BLOCKS WINDMILLS, PROPOSES 
EXTENDING NUCLEAR ENERGY 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  The state of Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) has 
blocked a windmill park near Freiburg and proposed 
extending the life of nuclear reactors, fueling a political 
battle with broader implications.  The CDU-FDP (Christian 
Democrat / Free Democrat) B-W government favors reopening 
debate on the phase-out of nuclear energy and even hints at 
building a new reactor.  Economics Minister Walter Doering 
(FDP) argues that since nuclear power provides 60 percent 
of the state\'s needs, B-W cannot compensate with 
alternative energy sources.  Opposition Social Democrats 
(SPD) and Greens accuse CDU/FDP of favoring nuclear over 
alternative energy.  Neither side shows any sign of backing 
down.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  In recent months, the B-W state government has fought 
the construction of a windmill park near Freiburg. 
Minister-President Erwin Teufel (CDU) intervened to block 
the project after the city and administrative district had 
already issued building permits.  Teufel and other CDU/FDP 
politicians argue that the windmills would be an expensive 
eyesore in a picturesque region.  The city of Freiburg 
under Lord Mayor Dieter Salomon (Greens) is suing to 
continue the project. 
 
3.  The conservative leadership of B-W opposes the 2001 
consensus on phasing out nuclear power.  In October, the 
Teufel administration announced that B-W and Bavaria will 
sue the federal government over the costly phase-out and 
raise the issue in the Bundesrat.  Leading CDU politicians, 
including caucus chief Guenther Oettinger (Teufel\'s heir 
apparent), have floated the idea of constructing a new 
nuclear power plant. 
 
4.  Pol-Econ rep attended a special B-W parliament debate 
on energy issues led by the opposition SPD and Greens. 
Winfried Kretschmann (B-W Greens caucus head) and Wolfgang 
Drexler (SPD caucus leader) attacked M-P Teufel for 
undermining alternative energy, calling it the only growing 
energy sector in Germany and one especially important for 
small and medium-sized companies.  The SPD and Greens argue 
that the windmill debacle will deter the private investment 
which B-W badly needs to renew and expand energy 
production. 
 
5.  Echoing points made by many in the German power 
industry, Economics Minister Doering said Germany must stop 
the \"proliferation\" of \"over-subsidized\" windmill parks and 
criticized the Greens for politicizing nuclear power.  With 
60 percent reliance on nuclear energy (the highest among 
German states), Baden-Wuerttemberg must, at a minimum, 
extend the lifetime of existing reactors (Doering denied 
there are concrete plans to build a new reactor).  \"We need 
an exit from the exit\" is Doering\'s plea for a new strategy 
on nuclear power which at a minimum would extend the life 
of current nuclear plants.  The B-W Minister for 
Environment and Transportation, Ulrich Mueller (CDU), 
claims there are no environmentally responsible 
alternatives to nuclear power:  with only seven percent of 
its supply from alternative energy (perhaps 15 percent in 
ten years), B-W cannot phase out nuclear power without 
using much more oil, coal or natural gas.  According to 
Mueller, the national government has dodged the question of 
\"what comes after\" nuclear power.  Mueller predicted 
replacing nuclear power through fossil energy sources would 
increase CO2 emissions in B-W by fifty percent. 
 
6. COMMENT:  The battle over nuclear and alternative 
energies in B-W shows no sign of abating.  B-W is the most 
dependent on nuclear power among German states (although it 
imports and exports electricity like any other part of 
Western Europe).  CDU and FDP reps in the southwest now 
openly oppose the phase-out as unfeasible and bad for 
climate change, while criticizing alternative energy as 
uneconomical and unsightly.  For their part, opposition 
Greens and SPD would like to tar the CDU/FDP government as 
pro-nuclear and anti-environment.  Neither side has the 
lead in this fight, but it is already evident that energy 
issues will play a role in European/communal elections in 
B-W in June 2004.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"12374","11/25/2003 11:29","03FRANKFURT9706","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 009706 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, GM, PINR 
SUBJECT: LAFONTAINE STEPS ASIDE IN SAARLAND CAMPAIGN 
 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Saarland Social Democratic Party 
(SPD) selected chairman Heiko Maas to challenge Christian 
Democratic Union (CDU) Minister-President (M-P) Peter 
Mueller in the September 2004 state elections.  Maas\' 
nomination to challenge the popular Mueller ended long 
speculation that the party would choose Oskar Lafontaine 
(former Saarland M-P and later federal Finance Minister). 
According to press reports, the national SPD leadership 
backed Maas even though polls favored Lafontaine (overall, 
the SPD trails the CDU in Saarland by 21 points). 
Lafontaine, an outspoken voice of the SPD\'s left wing, has 
a long history of publicly challenging Chancellor Schroeder 
on a number of issues (including economic reforms), and the 
chancellor was allegedly wary that Lafontaine could have 
used the nomination to widen his own power base.  Observers 
expect the SPD to gain ground in Saarland by next 
September.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) Following a lengthy internal debate, the Saarland 
SPD recently chose Heiko Maas to run against the popular 
Mueller in the upcoming elections.  According to media 
reports, the party chose Maas under pressure from 
Schroeder, who was reluctant to run the risk that 
Lafontaine would use the nomination to seek to re-build his 
power base in the national SPD Lafontaine enjoys strong 
name recognition (in contrast to the young Maas, a relative 
unknown) and remains a popular figure in Saarland and among 
left-wing activists. 
 
3.  (SBU) Maas denied reports that Schroeder pressured him 
to run, and SPD contacts insist that Lafontaine never 
disputed Maas\' right (as SPD chief for Saarland) to have 
first right of refusal at being the standard bearer. 
Although Lafontaine was and remains a national figure, Maas 
is clearly the \"establishment\" candidate with the solid 
support of the party apparatus in Saarland.  Maas\' staff 
predict that Lafontaine will set aside his own political 
ambitions and follow the party line, including campaigning 
for Maas and the SPD. 
 
4.  (SBU) COMMENT: Party insiders say Maas likely will 
pursue a strategy similar to Schroeder\'s 1998 national 
campaign, when Lafontaine secured left-wing votes through 
his support of the SPD ticket while Schroeder attracted the 
centrist element.  The SPD needs to energize its rank-and- 
file if it is to have any hope to break the CDU\'s absolute 
majority in Saarland, and the key to success is high voter 
turnout.  If, as in recent elections, SPD voters turn out 
in low numbers, the SPD will lose.  A good contact, Maas 
has organizational and political savvy that belies his 
young age (33), and our many meetings suggest he could be a 
pro-American force along the lines of Kurt Beck (the SPD 
Minister-President of neighboring Rheinland-Pfalz). 
 
5.  (SBU) The SPD is at a low ebb nationally and has lost 
11 mayoral elections in Saarland since Mueller assumed 
power in 1999.  Election observers expect the SPD to gain 
ground in Saarland, where the political mainstream lies to 
the left of center.  With centrist Maas in front and 
vigorous support from Lafontaine -- together with expected 
gains by the Greens and a weak showing by the FDP (Free 
Democrats), who may not cross the five percent threshold -- 
the SPD/Greens have an outside chance to unseat the CDU in 
the September 2004 Landtag elections.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"12454","12/1/2003 15:34","03FRANKFURT9824","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 FRANKFURT 009824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: The EU Stability and Growth Pact:  Dead, On Ice, It 
Lives; Form Over Substance? 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0062 
 
REF: (A) Frankfurt 08852; (B) Berlin 4399; (C) Paris 8585; 
(D) Paris 8620 
 
  (1)  (SBU) Summary: The failure of EU Finance Ministers to 
     find a compromise on November 25 acceptable to all on the 
     treatment of Germany and France under the Stability and 
     Growth Pact (SGP) sent another negative signal on the 
     viability of rules to coordinate fiscal policy in a monetary 
     union without political union.  The European Central Bank 
     (ECB)\'s statement that Econfin\'s conclusions \"carry serious 
     dangers\" is a reflection of their concern that one of the 
     institutional underpinnings of the European Monetary Union 
     has been weakened. 
 
  (2)  (SBU) A close reading of Ecofin\'s conclusions suggests 
     that the disagreements were more over process than 
     substance.  Fundamentally, the issue was who is responsible 
     for fiscal policy coordination, member states or the 
     European Commission?  By rejecting the Commission\'s 
     recommendations, the Council sent a clear message: it\'s the 
     member states.  Failure to find common ground between all 
     member states and the Commission on such an important, high 
     profile issue could be a set back for the cooperative spirit 
     necessary for SGP rules to be effective. 
 
  (3)  (SBU) On substance, the qualified majority of Ministers 
     agreed that Germany and France should correct their 
     excessive deficits by 2005 rather than 2004, given the weak 
     economic recovery.  The Commission had come to the same 
     conclusion.  However, the Commission had recommended that 
     France and Germany (a) be found not to have complied with 
     Ecofin\'s earlier recommendations (reftels); and (b) be 
     notched up on the SGP\'s disciplinary rack, to just under the 
     sanctions rung.  In so doing, the next time these countries 
     were found not in compliance with the Ecofin\'s 
     recommendations, they could face sanctions.  In this way, 
     the Commission sought to bring along the hard-line, smaller 
     countries that were disgruntled with giving the next year 
     for Germany and France to get their budgets in shape.  This 
     procedure proved to be the undoing of any compromise. 
 
  (4)  (SBU) German Finance Minister Eichel took the lead in 
     opposing the Commission\'s proposal, not wanting to appear to 
     be \"punished\" (a German Finance Ministry characterization) 
     for doing the \"right thing,\" particularly at a time when he 
     is facing tough domestic budget battles with the opposition 
     and his own party.   France was comfortable riding in 
     Germany\'s draft, calculatedly showing signs of \"flexibility\" 
     that, in the end, would be meaningless given Germany\'s tough 
     stance. 
 
  (5)  (SBU) While seemingly orthodox on substance but off the 
     consensus line on process, different portrayals of the SGP 
     have been rendered:  it is variously dead, on ice, or lives. 
     The consequences of failure to reach unanimous agreement, 
     however, could be serious -- not immediately for financial 
     markets, but for the future.  Other instances of this 
     inability of member states or the Commission to find common 
     ground in the economic world have cropped up under the 
     Italian Presidency (Investment Services Directive, Takeover 
     Directive) and could well spill over into other areas such 
     as the drafting of the Constitutional Treaty for Europe. 
     While one or two disputes might not send a signal to 
     financial markets, the inability to shape a more workable 
     Europe could.  End Summary 
 
  The Setting and Conclusions of November 25: Just the 
  Facts 
  --------------------------------------------- ------------ 
  - 
 
  (6)  (SBU) Earlier this year Ecofin had declared that France 
     and Germany have deficits that exceed the 3% of GDP 
     reference value in the EU Treaty and would be handled under 
     the SGP\'s \"excessive deficit procedures.\"  On October 8 the 
     EC had recommended, in accordance with Article 104(8) of the 
     Treaty, that France had taken no effective action to 
     implement Ecofin\'s June recommendations to correct its 
     excessive deficit.  On October 21 the Commission further 
     recommended that France take further measures to reduce its 
     deficit and that it submit implementation reports every six 
     months over the next two years so the Commission and Council 
     could assess progress.  The recommendation was under Article 
     104(9), the last step before moving to possible sanctions if 
     France were to fail to comply with the new recommendations. 
     Finally, the Commission gave France an extra year, to 2005, 
     to correct its deficit. 
 
  (7)  (SBU) The Commission\'s autumn forecast showed that 
     Germany also would fail to reduce its deficit below the 3% 
     of GDP reference value in 2004.  On November 18 the 
     Commission drafted similar recommendations for Germany under 
     Articles 104(8) and 104(9). 
 
  (8)  (SBU) At their November 25 session there was no 
     qualified majority of the Ecofin to accept the EC\'s 
     recommendations on France and Germany (reftels and USEU 
     septel).  Denmark, Spain, Belgium, Sweden, Austria, the 
     Netherlands, Finland and Greece voted for the Commission\'s 
     recommendation that both countries had taken no effective 
     action to correct their deficits.  The same countries voted 
     for the Commission\'s recommendations under 104(9), except 
     Denmark and Sweden who, because they have not adopted the 
     euro, cannot vote on decisions under Article 104(9). 
 
  (9)  (SBU) A qualified majority was mustered for an 
     alternative conclusion, described below.  Backing the 
     alternative approach on France was Germany, Italy, Greece, 
     Belgium, Portugal, Luxembourg and Ireland.  The same group, 
     but substituting France for Germany (since the country 
     subject to the procedures cannot vote on its own case), 
     voted for similar conclusions on Germany. 
 
  (10) (SBU) The Commission recorded its position in Ecofin\'s 
     report of its meeting by noting that Ecofin\'s rejection of 
     the Commission\'s recommendation was without any explanation, 
     as required in the SGP, and by stating that Ecofin\'s earlier 
     recommendation - which was a \"decision\" -- is still in force 
     (that calls for deficits to be under 3% in 2004).  The 
     Commission declared that it regretted that the \"spirit and 
     rules\" of the SGP were not followed and reserved \"the right 
     to examine the implications of the Council conclusions and 
     decide on possible subsequent actions.\" 
 
  Ecofin\'s Alternative: Broad Agreement with the Commission 
  on Substance 
  --------------------------------------------- ------------ 
  ------------- 
 
  (11) (SBU) On substance, Ecofin\'s conclusions were broadly 
     similar to the Commission\'s recommendations.  These call for 
     (a) an end to excessive deficits \"as rapidly as possible and 
     at the latest 2005;\" (b) structural reforms recommended in 
     the EU\'s Broad Economic Policy Guidelines to be reflected in 
     implementing measures to reduce the deficits; and (c) an 
     acceleration of the reduction in the cyclically adjusted 
     deficits should the recovery be stronger than currently 
     expected.  The Commission wanted any higher-than-projected 
     revenues to be allocated to deficit reduction, while Ecofin 
     agreed to do so only if growth were higher than expected. 
 
  (12) (SBU) Slight differences in the speed of structural 
     deficit adjustment in 2004 appear between the two texts. 
     Ecofin called for 0.6 percentage point reduction in Germany 
     compared with the Commission\'s 0.8.  For France Ecofin asked 
     for 0.8 percentage point reduction, rather than 1.0 sought 
     by the Commission. 
 
  Econfin\'s Alternative: Major Difference on Procedures 
  --------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
  (13) (SBU) The fundamental difference between Ecofin\'s and 
     the Commission`s approach was on process. Ecofin did not act 
     on the basis of Treaty Article 104(9) as proposed by the 
     Commission.  Under this Article, if a member state \"persists 
     in failing to put into practice the recommendations of the 
     Council may decide to give notice to the Member State to 
     take, within a specified time-limit, measures for the 
     deficit reduction.. And can request reports in accordance 
     with a specific timetable to \"examine the adjustment 
     efforts.\"  Instead, Ecofin just issued more recommendations, 
     an iteration of their earlier action under Article 104(7). 
     The difference is that failing to comply with 
     recommendations under 104(9) would mean that the next stop 
     would be sanctions. 
 
  (14) (SBU) In addition, Ecofin called for \"biannual 
     notifications\" on progress in fulfilling their commitments 
     with the Commission and Council to give \"due attention to 
     prevailing economic conditions and the structural reforms 
     being implemented.\"  The Commission had recommended four 
     \"implementation reports\" over the next two years to assess 
     progress. 
 
  Germany: Takes the Lead - France in its Draft 
  --------------------------------------------- 
 
  (15) (SBU) Germany would not accept being subjected to a 
     recommendation under Article 104(9), full stop.  According 
     to a Commission official, this was the fundamental stumbling 
     block.  The German delegation could agree to many 
     formulations, but none that included Article 104(9).  One 
     formulation sought to give Germany assurances that a 
     recommendation under 104(9) would not lead automatically to 
     sanctions if Germany were doing its best to reduce the 
     deficit.  No dice. 
 
  (16) (SBU) The German position, according to several German 
     Finance Ministry officials, was driven by their view that 
     they had lived up to Ecofin\'s recommendations issued to 
     Germany in February.  The Commission had confirmed that when 
     they assessed Germany\'s policies in May (ref a and b). 
     Deterioration in Germany\'s 2003 structural budget position, 
     as highlighted in the Commission\'s new autumn forecast, was 
     a reflection of other changed circumstances, not a change in 
     Germany\'s budget policies.  Specifically, German Finance 
     Ministry experts point that that revisions of the 
     statistical series, lower inflation (meaning lower revenues 
     than budgeted), and the Commission\'s assumption of lower 
     potential output all conspired to increase Germany\'s 
     structural deficit. 
 
  (17) (SBU) The Commission\'s recommendation to reduce the 
     structural deficit by an additional 0.2 percentage points to 
     0.8 was unappreciated.  The government is still uncertain of 
     getting its budget and reform package adopted that would 
     cause an estimated 0.6 percentage point reduction already 
     programmed into the Commission\'s calculations.  According to 
     a German Finance Ministry, the Commission said it was trying 
     to help Finance Minister Eichel in his tough budget debates. 
     With the final shape of the package in flux, the Commission 
     thought now was a good time to up the ante.  From the 
     Ministry\'s viewpoint, the Commission\'s meddling came at a 
     particularly bad time in the domestic political debate. 
     Despite having taken tough, unpopular measures in 2003, the 
     Commission\'s move to Article 104(8) and 104(9) was being 
     construed as \"punishment,\" in the words of one German 
     official, for \"doing the right thing.\"  It was asserting 
     that Germany had taken no measures and was being put on 
     formal legal notice of defaulting on its obligations.  \"This 
     is ridiculous; the Minister will not accept it.\" 
 
  Buddy System:  Two Sink or Two Swim? 
  ------------------------------------ 
 
  (18) (SBU) German Finance Ministry officials were also 
     irritated that their case was being put together with that 
     of the French.  In their view, France had been disdainful of 
     SGP procedures.  German Finance Ministry officials explained 
     that they had privately been working with French finance 
     officials, coaxing them to take additional budget 
     consolidation measures.  That seemed to be working, in their 
     view.  France had announced a 0.1 percentage point 
     additional cut to their structural deficit for 2004.  The 
     SGP was exerting pressure and \"working\" in their assessment. 
 
  (19) (SBU) The Commission\'s case on Germany was issued on 
     November 18 and put on the November 25 Ecofin agenda 
     together with the French case, the discussion of which had 
     been postponed from the November 4 Ecofin meeting.  Why not 
     postpone discussion on the German case, pleading the need 
     for more time, thus de-linking the substantive debate on the 
     two? 
 
  (20) (SBU) One German Finance Ministry official said \"there 
     is a certain dynamic\" between Germany and France that made 
     the linkage inevitable.  Another was resigned that a fight 
     was inevitable, so postponement \"won\'t help.\"  The 
     Commission logic, according to an official close to the 
     process, was the assumption that Germany would not vote on 
     the merits of the French case, rather would be driven by 
     politics.  Despite their private displeasure with the 
     French, the Germans would support them in a vote. 
 
  (21) (SBU) Also, the French had insisted on equal treatment 
     with Germany.  The Commission\'s recommendations on Germany 
     were virtually identical to those for France, a point the 
     Commission recorded in its press release.  An ECB official 
     pointed out that while the German rhetoric had been positive 
     toward the SGP, the numbers looked about the same.  Germany 
     had not reduced its structural deficit as it had pledged - 
     although not because of the central government\'s policies. 
 
  (22) (SBU) Twinning benefited France.  According to a 
     Commission official, Germany did most of the talking. 
     France demonstrated some flexibility, but maybe, mused this 
     official, because they knew it would not be taken up given 
     Germany\'s immoveable position on Article 104(9). 
 
  (23) (SBU) French Finance Minister Mer could never have 
     accepted a recommendation under Article 104(9) directed at 
     France alone.  While Germany might technically have asked 
     for a final delay to December 12 in Ecofin consideration of 
     its respect for the Commission\'s recommendations, France had 
     no more room for maneuver.  Mer went into the Euro Group 
     meeting having signaled to the press that the GOF would 
     bring flexibility to the table, but all indications are that 
     he had no mandate to accept the Commission\'s recommendation 
     of a 1%-of-GDP cut in the 2004 structural deficit.  Thus he 
     could stand shoulder to shoulder with Eichel (or perhaps, 
     back to back) in an absolute rejection of a recommendation 
     uner Article 104(9). 
 
  (24) (SBU) Despite Italian Finance Minister Tremonti\'s 
     claims just a few weeks that SGP targets should be upheld, 
     his reversal to support the Germans and French is not 
     surprising.  Tremonti has often expressed his concern that 
     the SGP does not encourage economic growth - and in country 
     with the lowest growth rates in the EU, this concern 
     resonates particularly well.  The Italian Government also 
     realizes that it could be well be standing in German shoes 
     next year; even under the most optimistic economic 
     predictions, Italy in 2004 will likely be hovering around 
     the three percent deficit ratio.  Self-interest rather than 
     esprit de corps with the French and Germans prompted 
     Tremonti\'s \"change of heart.\" 
 
  The Commission: Rejected Again -- Principles and 
  Practicalities 
  --------------------------------------------- ------------ 
  ------ 
 
  (25) (SBU) The Commission wrapped its position in principle. 
     In explaining the decision to the European Parliament in 
     Strasbourg on November 18, Commissioner Solbes declared that 
     \"The College stood firmly by the principle that we are a 
     Community of law and that the Treaty and the Stability and 
     Growth Pact have to be applied together.\"  While Germany had 
     taken budget consolidation measures in 2003, it is in \"non- 
     compliance\" with the Council recommendation to end its 
     excessive deficit situation in 2004.  Therefore the 
     Commission has an obligation to inform the Council of this 
     fact and \"recommend further steps to be taken according to 
     Article 104(9).\" 
  (26) (SBU) The Germans argued that the Commission took a 
     \"mechanistic\" approach.  First, the Commission could not 
     assert that Germany had taken \"on effective action,\" since, 
     as noted above, the Commission had signed off Germany\'s 
     package as recently as May.  Second, even if the actions 
     were inadequate, there is nothing in the Pact or the Treaty 
     to suggest a country should be immediately treated under 
     104(9), in their view.  A German Finance Ministry official 
     reports that the Council\'s legal services shared this view - 
     at odds with the Commission\'s legal services.  Ecofin\'s 
     approach, in the view of theis official, was to \"update\" the 
     earlier recommendations in light of changed circumstances 
     since Germany has complied with the recommendations but the 
     deficit failed to respond. 
 
  (27) (SBU) By using Article 104(9), the last stop before 
     landing on the possibility of sanctions, the Commission 
     sought to increase pressure on Germany and France, thereby 
     seeking to appease the hard-line countries who were 
     disgruntled that the Commission had given both countries the 
     extra year to correct their excessive deficits.  According 
     to a Commission official, the smaller countries would have 
     accepted the Commission\'s compromise.  Excluding action 
     under 104(9) meant no compromise.  And so it was. 
 
  (28) (SBU) A neater legal solution would have been for the 
     Commission to see which way the wind was blowing then, with 
     the appropriate concessions to save its face, proposed 
     revised recommendations based on the approach favored by the 
     qualified majority.  The Commission, according to this 
     German official, knew it did not have the votes on France as 
     early as the first week in November.  Not heeding the 
     warning signs, the Commission barreled along, putting the 
     German case on the table as well.  The Commission, in this 
     official\'s view, was heading for failure.  In the 
     negotiations the Commission demonstrated flexibility on 
     substance, but not on process.  In the end, the Commission\'s 
     decision to stick to their guns was not Commissioner Solbes 
     decision to make, according to this official, but left to 
     the President of the Commission. 
 
  ECB: \"Serious Dangers\" 
  ------------------------ 
 
  (29) (SBU) The ECB had been concerned about the debate and 
     had weighed in on the side of the Commission\'s compromise. 
     In its November Monthly Bulletin the ECB reported that the 
     \"Governing Council takes the view that the proposals of the 
     Commission push the room for interpretation of the rules and 
     procedures to the limit.\"  A senior ECB official repeated 
     this statement when asked the ECB\'s view on the Commission 
     compromise. 
 
  (30) (SBU) In his first major policy speech on November 20, 
     ECB President Trichet made an impassioned plea:  \" I very 
     profoundly wish an hope that all partners concerned will, in 
     the coming days, live up to their responsibilities: The 
     Commission, the Council, the governments concerned, so that 
     we can not only preserve but reinforce the overall 
     credibility of the euro area, and therefore growth.\" 
     Trichet and Vice President Papademous participated in 
     Ecofin\'s all night discussions on November 24 that ran until 
     4:30 am. 
 
  (31) (SBU) Following Ecofin\'s conclusions, the ECB\'s 
     extraordinary press release declared that the Governing 
     Council \"deeply regrets these developments and shares the 
     views of the Commission on the Ecofin Council conclusions. 
     The Conclusions adopted by the Ecofin Council carry serious 
     dangers.  The failure to go along with the rules and 
     procedures foreseen in the Stability and Growth Pact risks 
     undermining the credibility of the institutional framework 
     and the confidence in sound public finances of Member States 
     across the euro area.\"  This is \"serious,\" in the words of 
     an ECB official. 
 
  A Word From the Market 
  ---------------------- 
 
  (32) (SBU) As confirmed by an ECB official, the decision had 
     no effect on the market.  However, one currency strategist 
     said if this disagreement were to lead to a break-down of 
     the Inter Governmental Conference, such a break down would 
     send negative signals to investors about the euro.  Ecofin\'s 
     decisions could have implications for the IGC\'s negotiations 
     on a Constitutional Treaty for Europe, potentially making 
     agreement more difficult rather than less. 
 
  Two Observations: Deeper Meaning of the Pact 
  -------------------------------------------- 
 
  (33) (SBU) As a comment, we limit ourselves to two 
     observations, one on the operation of the SGP, the other on 
     the potential deeper implications. 
 
  (34) (SBU) With respect to the operation of the SGP, it has 
     been variously described as \"dead,\" (Financial Times),\"on 
     ice\" (Dutch Prime Minister) and \"living\" (German Finance 
     Minister Eichel).  We discount the FT\'s view since they are 
     generally negative on the SGP in principle (although they 
     have softened of late - agreeing on the need for rules to 
     coordinate fiscal policy in the monetary union).  The FT\'s 
     ability to generate so many stories on a \"dead\" agreement 
     suggests the SGP has more lives than the proverbial cats\' 
     nine. 
 
  (35) (SBU) The Dutch have a point, but one enshrined in the 
     SGP.  If countries fulfill Ecofin\'s recommendations, then 
     the excessive deficit procedures are considered to be in 
     abeyance.  Ecofin made that explicit in its conclusions. 
 
  (36) (SBU) Eichel too has a point.  The SGP continues to 
     exert peer pressure and is taken seriously, very seriously 
     in Germany.  Over the November 28-29 weekend German Finance 
     Ministry officials conveyed their views to the press that 
     the SGP included the necessary flexibility to accommodate 
     the current economic situation.  Perhaps this could explain 
     why Eichel reacted so strongly.  Entrenched in a political 
     battle not only with the opposition but also his own party 
     for his budget stewardship.  After using the SGP to help 
     justify his own predeliction for subsidy cuts and keeping 
     deficits as low as possible, to be seen as \"punished\" by the 
     SGP procedures would be a political cut of the deepest sort. 
     Groused one Finance Ministry official - \"the SGP means 
     nothing to the French population - in Germany it does.\"  The 
     irony of Germany\'s position in the SGP continues to 
     compound: the principal author, one of the first test cases, 
     now running interference for the French.  Eichel is playing 
     a high stakes game domestically that has washed over to the 
     EU level - increasing the stakes considerably. 
 
  (37) (SBU) The second observation is on the deeper meaning 
     of Ecofin\'s decision.  One reason to be concerned with the 
     outcome is the failure to find a compromise that was 
     acceptable to all.  The SGP is more than rules.  It is 
     almost a state of mind, of the individual members reflected 
     the broad good of the whole - being communautaire. 
     Coordination of fiscal policy in a single monetary union is 
     a cooperative exercise, depending upon compliance with rules 
     - not enforcement. 
 
  (38) (SBU) A key to moving forward is to recapture that 
     cooperative spirit.  Pursuing the issue in courts is a 
     questionable tactic to foster cooperation.  Moreover, it 
     implies that the SGP is a precise legal covenant.  The 
     Commission\'s portrayal of its position as one of principle 
     and legal correctness is also questionable.  Arguing that 
     because its forecast estimates that Germany will have a 
     deficit over 3% in 2004 requires the Commission to use 
     104(9) because Germany \"persists\" in failing to adopt 
     Council recommendations might be tough in front of a judge. 
 
  (39) (SBU) The Commission itself chose to exercise the SGP\'s 
     flexibility that excessive deficits \"should\" be corrected in 
     the year after they are identified by pushing the date out 
     one more year.  In fact, the Treaty, the basis for the Pact, 
     gives no date certain for the deficits to be corrected. 
     Both Solbes and Tremonti are correct when saying the 
     Commission\'s and Ecofin\'s positions were, at once, 
     \"political\" - both seeking to find a view acceptable to all, 
     if not a qualified majority of member states, and \"law 
     based\" using the SGP rules and Ecofin voting procedures. 
     The SGP rules provide a framework, not a chemical formula. 
 
  (40) (SBU) Existentialist believe that \"we are our choices.\" 
     Having made their choice, all Ecofin members and the 
     Commission should come together.  Visible, meaningful 
     results in Germany and France budget programs would be the 
     most important and necessary step toward this end.  Going to 
     court is a question of finding who has power.  Do member 
     states coordinate fiscal policy or the Commission?  That 
     should be settled in the IGC. 
 
  (41) (SBU) Italy\'s EU presidency has seen two other 
     decisions in which important interests were overridden by 
     votes: the Investment Services Directive (UK, Ireland, 
     Finland, Sweden opposition overridden)  and the Takeover 
     Directive (the Commission\'s position overridden).  As to 
     whether this is any indication of the current spirit of 
     cooperation on larger issues, like the ICG, only time will 
     tell. 
 
  (42) (U)  This cable coordinated with USEU and Embassies 
     Berlin, Paris and Rome. 
 
  (43) (U)  POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
     wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
     7535-2238 
 
  PASI 
"
"12503","12/3/2003 14:31","03FRANKFURT9873","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 009873 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, GM 
SUBJECT: Hohmann Anti-Semitism Affair Leaves Open Wounds 
 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  The CDU\'s tepid and belated response to 
anti-Semitic remarks by Bundestag member (MdB) Martin 
Hohmann has highlighted enduring nationalist sentiments and 
resentment against Germany\'s Holocaust burden, and weakened 
leading CDU figure Roland Koch.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) On German Unity Day (Oct. 3), CDU Bundestag member 
Martin Hohmann delivered a speech to two hundred 
constituents in Neuhof (rural Hesse, near Fulda).  In a 
speech with many nationalist themes, Hohmann remarked: 
 
     BEGIN UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION:  \"Germans have paid for 
the Holocaust with billions of Euros (...) but I raise the 
provocative question:  Is there a dark side to the Jewish 
people in more recent history, or is the role as victim, 
which we exclusively attribute to Jews, justified?\" 
Referring to the participation of Jews in the Russian 
revolution, Hohmann said \"... with some justification, 
consider the millions of deaths in the (Bolshevik) 
revolution and raise the question of Jewish complicity ... 
Calling the Jewish people perpetrators (Taetervolk) follows 
the same logic as calling Germans committers of crimes.\" 
     END TRANSLATED EXCERPT. 
 
3. (SBU) Hohmann\'s speech did not cause public controversy 
until several weeks later, since no one in the audience 
registered offense.  Hohmann later apologized for the 
remarks, but refused to renounce the speech itself.  NOTE: 
According to consulate sources, the Office for Protection of 
the Constitution (which monitors extremist groups) 
discovered the speech after Horst Mahler, a leading figure 
in the far-right NPD (National Democratic Party), circulated 
Hohmann\'s text as a model of far-right thinking.  END NOTE. 
 
4. (SBU) The CDU\'s reaction to the speech was mixed and 
conflicted.  While national CDU leadership quickly condemned 
Hohmann\'s remarks, Hesse Minister-President / CDU chief 
Roland Koch declared the case closed after the CDU presidium 
resolved to replace Hohmann as Bundestag domestic affairs 
committee spokesman (but leave him in the CDU caucus).  When 
Hohmann persistently refused to renounce the speech, Merkel 
announced that the CDU caucus would exclude Hohmann, and a 
visibly defeated Koch indicated that the Hesse CDU would 
strip Hohmann\'s party membership. 
 
5. (SBU) On November 14, the CDU Bundestag caucus voted 
behind closed doors to exclude Hohmann from the caucus, 
apparently the first such vote in the party\'s history. 
Although CDU leadership secured the necessary two-thirds 
majority, media seized on the fact that a fifth of CDU 
deputies refused to censure Hohmann (195 MPs voted for 
expulsion, 28 against, 16 abstentions) as a further sign 
that CDU hardliners are unwilling to part ways with anti- 
Semitist notions. 
 
Grass Roots Support for Hohmann? 
-------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Defense Minister Peter Struck (SPD) fired BG 
Reinhard Guenzel, commander of the KSK (Kommando 
Spezialkraefte/Special Forces), for sending a letter to 
Hohmann -- on Bundeswehr letterhead -- praising Hohmann\'s 
courage and supporting the remarks.  On Nov. 4, DefMin 
Struck censured Guenzel for damaging the reputation of 
Germany and of the military but called the letter the 
isolated opinion of \"a confused general who supports an even 
more confused CDU Bundestag deputy.\"  NOTE: Guenzel later 
threatened to sue Struck for defamation.  Guenzel drew 
headlines and a reprimand in 2001 for warning that Germans 
would face a bloodbath in Afghanistan, but was popular 
within the KSK.  Observers noted the contrast between 
Struck\'s quick reaction and CDU\'s waffling.  END NOTE. 
 
7. (SBU) A number of CDU local reps and individual members 
have also voiced support for Hohmann.  Not surprisingly, 
Hohmann has supporters from his home region of rural Hesse. 
CDU MdB Vera Lengsfeld (Thueringen) criticized the alleged 
media campaign against Hohmann.  A handful of CDU city 
assembly members in Hesse (including Frankfurt), Baden- 
Wuerttemberg, and elsewhere declared their support for 
Hohmann.  Media reported that most phones calls to CDU 
headquarters in Berlin were in support of Hohmann.  Even as 
late as November 20, Hohmann spoke at a closed-door local 
CDU assembly in Fulda, where members recommended giving 
Hohmann a second chance. 
 
Jewish Community Reaction 
------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Moritz Neumann, head of the Jewish community in 
Hesse, described the speech as the worst anti-Semitic 
statement from a German politician in a long time and 
dangerous in that it breaks the taboo of anti-Semitism and 
\"relativizes\" the Holocaust.  \"Hohmann said what many in the 
CDU actually feel.\"  Neumann asked how someone \"with a 
notorious history of making statements against minorities\" 
could become responsible for Holocaust compensation issues 
in the CDU caucus.  Many Jews are unhappy with the Hesse 
CDU\'s handling of the affair and particularly with Koch, who 
has otherwise shown support for Jewish community issues. 
Show of Weakness for Koch 
------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) The Hohmann affair has damaged Koch politically and 
could continue to hurt the Hesse CDU, since the legal 
process of stripping Hohmann\'s party membership may take 
months.  In a speech at the Reichspogromnacht (Kristalnacht) 
commemoration in Frankfurt on November 9, Koch had ruled out 
barring Hohmann from the CDU -- prompting audience members 
to boo his comments -- only to find himself overruled by 
Merkel the following day.  In media accounts, Koch appeared 
outmaneuvered by hardliners and by the national CDU, and the 
affair could damage Koch\'s efforts to present himself as a 
moderate.  Hesse CDU reps told Pol-Econ rep that Hesse 
conservatives are embarrassed and angry at Merkel for having 
\"exploited\" this opening against Koch. 
 
PASI 
"
"12782","12/18/2003 8:33","03FRANKFURT10308","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 010308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Responses to Commission Communication on Company 
Law and Corporate Governance 
 
T-IA-F-03-0064 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
Reftel Frankfurt 10696 (2002) 
 
1.   (SBU)     Summary:  The European Commission has 
published a synthesis of the results of the consultation on 
its Communication on \"Modernising Company Law and enhancing 
Corporate Governance in the European Union\".  While there 
was widespread support for a very large majority of the 
proposals, some concerns on specific measures or their 
legislative nature were expressed, for instance concerning 
the use of directives in the field of corporate governance, 
which may not take sufficient account of national legal 
frameworks and traditions.  End summary. 
 
2.   (SBU)     The European Commission has published a 
synthesis of the results of the consultation on its 
Communication on \"Modernising Company Law and enhancing 
Corporate Governance in the European Union\".  The Action 
Plan set out in the Communication had been adopted in May 
2003.  It proposed a number of initiatives aimed at 
strengthening shareholders\' rights, reinforcing protection 
for employees and creditors and increasing the efficiency 
and competitiveness of European business.  Moreover, a 
series of proposed corporate governance initiatives aims at 
boosting confidence in the capital markets. 
 
3.   (SBU)     The Plan was open for public consultation 
until mid-September.  The Commission received 114 responses, 
mainly from industry representatives, institutional 
investors, financial service providers and associated 
professions.  Few respondents commented on all points of the 
Action Plan but only to the issues of greatest concern to 
them.  Thus, in the following reference to a \"majority of 
respondents\" always means a majority of those who commented 
on a specific issue. 
 
General Comments 
----------------- 
 
4.   (SBU)     The Commission stresses that there was 
widespread support for a very large majority of the 
proposals for legislative and non-legislative action and 
that most responses also agreed to the timing envisaged for 
the realization of the Action Plan and the prioritization 
order of the individual measures.  Nevertheless some 
concerns on specific measures or their legislative nature 
were also expressed. 
 
5.   (SBU)     The large majority of respondents considered 
the Commission\'s approach combining self-regulatory market 
solutions, co-ordination of corporate governance codes and 
legislation as appropriate.  Several respondents, however, 
expressed their concerns about an apparent contradiction 
between the Commission\'s declared aim to avoid over- 
regulation and the establishment of an extensive legislative 
program, in particular the use of directives in the field of 
corporate governance.  It was generally argued that 
directives are not an appropriate instrument in this area 
due to their lack of flexibility and the risk the they could 
be followed by further overly prescriptive and detailed 
implementing measures.  Thus, a large number of respondents 
favored a more extensive use of recommendations, which would 
allow for adjustments to nation legal frameworks and 
traditions.  Moreover, many respondents commented that the 
Commission\'s timing might be too ambitious and would not 
leave enough time for proper consultation of all interested 
parties.  It was also suggested to subject the main measures 
of the Action Plan to detailed impact analysis. 
 
Comments Regarding Corporate Governance 
--------------------------------------- 
 
6.   (SBU)     The very large majority of respondents agreed 
with the Commission\'s assessment that there is no need for 
an EU corporate governance code, but that systems can be 
expected to develop and progress in a \"natural\" way under 
market pressure.  General agreement was expressed on the 
principle of enhanced corporate governance disclosure. 
However, many respondents would prefer a recommendation over 
a directive as an instrument for introducing some disclosure 
requirements.  Concerns were also expressed about the 
potential duplication of existing requirements under 
national legislation, about the scope of the required 
Corporate Governance Statement and its inclusion in the 
annual reports. 
 
7.   (SBU)     The general feeling was that greater 
accountability of institutional investors should be ensured. 
However, the Commission\'s legislative initiative to that end 
was received much more cautiously by the majority of 
respondents.  There was wide support for the Commission\'s 
view that institutional investors should not be required to 
systematically exercise their voting rights. 
 
8.   With regard to the objective to strengthen shareholders 
rights, broad support was expressed for encouraging the use 
of electronic facilities for receipt and dissemination of 
information, provided that this was not made mandatory.  A 
very large majority of respondents supported the proposal in 
the Action Plan to develop a regulatory framework to 
encourage the exercise of various shareholders\' rights in 
listed companies and to solve problems related to cross- 
border voting.  This legislative proposal was the one most 
positively received.  Very diverging views were, however, 
expressed on the proposal to establish the \"one share = one 
vote\" principle throughout the EU. 
 
9.   (SBU)     A significant majority of respondents 
welcomed the Commission initiative to prepare a 
recommendation aiming at strengthening the role of 
independent executive and supervisory directors.  A very 
large majority suggested that the responsibility for 
identifying candidates to fill board vacancies should in 
principle be entrusted to a group composed mainly of 
independent non-executive directors.  Moreover, many 
requested that with regard to the number of mandates that 
may be held concurrently a one-size-fits-all approach would 
take insufficient account of the complexity of individual 
companies. 
 
Other Issues 
------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) Second Company Law Directive on the coordination 
of safeguards regarding the maintenance and alteration of EU 
public limited liability companies\' capital: A very large 
majority of respondents supported the Commission in 
considering a rapid modernization. 
 
11.  (SBU) Disclosure of financial and non-financial 
information: A small majority of respondents agreed with the 
Commission on the need for additional measures at the EU 
level to improve the information disclosed by groups when 
the parent company is not listed.  However, the need to 
assess carefully the costs and benefits for reporting 
companies and users of such statements was stressed. 
 
12.  (SBU) Tenth Company Law Directive cross-border mergers 
and Fourteenth Company Law Directive on cross-border 
transfer of seat: The Commission\'s intention to present 
proposals in the short term was supported by a very large 
majority of respondents. 
 
13.  (SBU) European legal statute for small and medium-sized 
enterprises: The proposal to launch a feasibility study to 
evaluate the advantages and problems of a possible statute 
was very well received. 
 
14.  (SBU) Comment:  The report on the modernization of 
company law (reftel), which was produced in November 2002 by 
the so-called Winter group at the request of the Commission 
recommended a broader use of alternatives to primary 
legislation through directives.  In its Communication, the 
Commission did not really follow this advice, aiming at 
relying on directives to a significant extent and not so 
much on recommendations or other alternatives. Not 
surprisingly, respondents have criticized this approach. 
End comment. 
15.   (U)This cable coordinated with USEU and Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
16.   (U)POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"12797","12/18/2003 13:07","03FRANKFURT10314","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 010314 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: ECB on the Stability and Growth Pact:  Results or 
Call The Bluff 
 
T-IA-F-03-0065 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.   (SBU) Summary:  The European Central Bank (ECB) was 
exceptionally, sternly and publicly critical of Ecofin\'s 
decision on Germany and France under the Stability and 
Growth Pact (SGP), but has been careful neither to trash the 
SGP nor the process.  Rather, their message is that the SGP 
lives and that they expect Germany, France and Ecofin to 
live up to their commitments.  In the case of the two 
countries, this means that deficits be under 3% in 2005 and, 
failing to do so, Ecofin take measures under the procedures 
previously recommended by the Commission.  Putting a bit of 
monetary muscle into the mix, the ECB has listed \"fiscal 
policies\" as one of the various indicators it considers when 
assessing future inflation trends, although they are quick 
to point out this has always been so.  A Council Secretariat 
expert points out that, in fact, by \"suspending\" the 
proceedings, Ecofin wanted to be clear that it reserved the 
possibility to re-open proceedings and still apply 
sanctions, even though the time limit for doing so is to 
expire at the end of the year.  The question remains whether 
and on what evidence the Commission, the only entity that 
can recommend re-opening the proceedings, would do so.  Once 
burned, twice shy.  End Summary. 
 
ECB: Not Dead, but Alive 
________________________ 
 
2.   (SBU) Senior ECB officials have explained that while 
the ECB was very upset with Ecofin\'s decision under the SGP 
on Germany and France, they don\'t want to give the 
impression that the SGP is dead or they want to change it. 
Rather, they want the commitments made in the Ecofin 
decision to be respected. 
 
3.   (SBU) In its December Monthly Bulletin, the ECB\'s 
editorial reported that the Governing Council took note of 
the commitments made by France and Germany to \"correct their 
excessive deficits as rapidly as possible and at the latest 
by 2005.\"  The Council also noted that the Ecofin Council 
\"stands ready to give notice to the two governments to take 
measures that would lead to a correction of their excessive 
deficits.\"  ECB President Trichet was more direct in his 
press conference after the Governing Council\'s December 4 
meeting:  the Governing Council \"noted that the Ecofin 
Council stands ready to take a decision under Article 
104(9), on the basis of the Commission recommendation, 
should the two government fail to act in accordance with 
their own commitments.\"  He went on to declare that the SGP 
\"remains of central importance and should be fully 
respected.\" 
 
Link to Monetary Policy?  All Part of the Whole Ball of Wax 
_____________________________________________ ______________ 
 
4.   (SBU) At his December press conference Trichet also 
mentioned that the outlook for price stability is 
conditional on quite a number of assumptions.  Among them he 
cited the usual, e.g. oil prices, exchange rates, and wage 
developments.  He also mentioned \"fiscal measures.\"  This 
lead to a follow up question, on whether the discussion over 
the SGP will have a direct effect on ECB interest rate 
policy.  Trichet replied that they take in all data to make 
such an assessment and they have a \"working assumption\" that 
the \"commitments that were made by the countries concerned 
and the commitments that were made by the qualified majority 
of the Council would be met 100%.\" 
 
5.   (SBU)Some market commentators have speculated that the 
ECB Governing Council might use monetary policy to \"punish\" 
Finance Ministers for their decision.  ECB officials are 
quick to point out that this is not the case.  Rather, 
fiscal policies are included in the comprehensive array of 
data the ECB examines in determining potential inflationary 
pressures. (Note:  The notion of such retribution is not as 
odd as it may sound; the halls of the Bundesbank still echo 
with the story of the then-Chancellor Schmidt flying to 
Frankfurt to plea for lower interest rates directly with the 
Bundesbank Council, only to have the Council raise rates 
after he left the room - as if to disabuse anyone that they 
were not truly independent.) 
 
Form and Substance:  ECB Focuses on Substance 
_____________________________________________ 
 
6.   (SBU) At the press conference one journalist attempted 
to lure Trichet into a debate of the form of Ecofin\'s 
decision over its substantive meaning, e.g. implications for 
the euro.  Trichet would not take the bait, musing that one 
cannot \"separate the form, the procedure and the substance.\" 
However, the following week at the Economic and Monetary 
Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Trichet did 
seek to clarify the \"economic underpinnings\" as to why the 
SGP is \"very important for the function of the single 
currency area.\" 
 
7.   (SBU) He explained that the SGP allows him to respond 
to two criticisms, \"frequently voiced from the other side of 
the Atlantic.\"  First, is the criticism about monetary 
policy conducted with \"random behavior of fiscal policies\" 
in the absence of an EU federal budget.  Second, is the 
criticism that the absence of a federal budget does not 
allow Europe to cope with asymmetric shocks, when one 
country suffers a shock not felt by another.  The SGP is the 
only means by which Europe can claim to deal with random 
fiscal policies and to admonish countries to have a close to 
balanced budget to provide room for maneuver to cope with 
shocks. 
 
8.   More generally, Trichet said that there is a limit 
beyond which increased deficits \"hamper growth because you 
are creating more lack of confidence than .you can get from 
the simple neo-Keynesian effect.\"  According to an ECB 
official close to Trichet, this is a very personal view, not 
one necessarily blessed by the Governing Council.  Trichet 
had elaborated that point in his first major policy speech 
on November 20 in Frankfurt.  He had said that governments 
following the SGP \"will reduce public spending, which is 
conducive to growth through the alleviation of unproductive 
spending and reduction of costs in the economy.\"  In his 
view, economic growth would be enhanced since lower deficits 
would diminish medium and long-term interest rates and 
improve households\' and business confidence that taxes won\'t 
increase leading to higher consumption and investment. 
 
Ecofin Decision: Trigger Cocked, but Will Commission Pull 
It? 
_____________________________________________ ____________ 
 
9.   (SBU) According to an expert in the EU Council, the 
Council decision reflected the discretion afforded Ministers 
under the SGP, but was firmer than the press or the 
Commission made it out to be, in his opinion.  He shared the 
ECB\'s view that Ecofin had put itself on the hook to take 
action:  \"The Council stands ready to take a decision under 
Article 104(9)\"  should France or Germany \"fail to act in 
accordance with the commitments set out in these 
Conclusions.\"  Note that Article 104(9) is the step 
requiring specific commitments to be fulfilled within a 
specific timeframe.  Failing that, the next step would be 
sanctions under Article 104 (11). 
 
10.  (SBU) With respect to sanctions, this Council expert 
pointed out that Ecofin\'s decision to hold the excessive 
deficit procedure in \"abeyance\" was designed to retain the 
leverage of possible sanctions.  Under Article 7 of Council 
Regulation 1467/97, the decision to impose sanctions \"shall 
be taken within 10 months\" of the dates from which the 
excessive deficits were reported.  For France that would be 
at the end of December - one reason the Commission rushed it 
treatment for France (reftel).  By putting the procedure 
into \"abeyance\" (a measure also provided for in the Council 
Regulation), the clock is stopped on the 10 months time 
limit for imposing sanctions.  In practical terms that would 
mean that failure to fulfill these commitments would still 
result in sanctions even though the original 10 months time 
period had lapsed. 
One Observation 
_______________ 
 
11.  (SBU) All this is interesting, but the open question is 
whether Ecofin would fulfill its own commitment.  To do so, 
the Commission would have to make another recommendation to 
Ecofin for action should France or Germany be straying from 
their respective consolidation paths.  Having lost this 
round, the Commission may feel shy about a second attempt - 
once bitten, twice shy.  On the other hand, if France and 
Germany are clearly off track, it would be interesting for 
the Commission to call Ecofin\'s bluff.  If the Commission 
had a strong case, it would be difficult for Ecofin to face 
it down again - particularly with so many other EU economic 
issues, e.g. budget, constitution, at play. 
 
12.  (U)This cable coordinated with USEU and Embassy Berlin. 
 
13.  (U)POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"12798","12/18/2003 13:15","03FRANKFURT10320","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 010320 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: ECB Staff Projections: Growth to Pick Up in 2004 - 
Forecasting External Sector Is Tricky Business 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0066 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.   (SBU) Summary:  The European Central Bank\'s (ECB\'s) 
December staff projections suggest real Euro area annual 
average growth of 0.4% in 2003 rising to 1.6% in 2004 and 
2.4% in 2005.  The basic story is that exports will help 
lift growth in the near term followed by a strengthening of 
domestic demand, particularly private consumption.  The 
staff projections carry a larger range of uncertainty for 
exports and imports, understandably so given the euro\'s 
appreciation against the USD.  While a \"rule of thumb\" would 
suggest an appreciating euro could be, on balance, a drag on 
EU growth, the strong pick up in US demand suggests that the 
negative growth effects may not be as strong as the \"rule\" 
implies - at least in the near term.  End Summary 
 
ECB Staff Projections 
 
2.     (SBU)  In  its  December  monthly  bulletin  the  ECB 
presented   current  staff  projections  for   macroeconomic 
developments in the euro area. The ECB, which expresses  its 
growth  projections in terms of \"ranges,\" adjusted  expected 
GDP growth downwards for 2003, slipping the mid-point of the 
projection ranges from 0.7% to 0.4%.  This adjustment is due 
to  a  weaker  than expected outcome in the second  quarter. 
However, they left the growth projection for 2004 unchanged, 
with  a mid-point of 1.6%. In their view, the impact of  the 
announced expansionary fiscal measures in the euro  area  is 
limited,  as  the  increase of households\'  real  disposable 
income due to tax cuts is expected to be counterbalanced  by 
higher  consumer prices. For 2005 projections show the  mid- 
point of the growth range  rising to 2.4%. 
 
3.   (SBU) Inflation, as measured by the Harmonized Index of 
Consumer  Prices  (HICP) is expected to be  around  2.1%  in 
2003.  However, the staff shifted upward the range projected 
for  the  HICP  in 2004 from a mid-point of  1.3%  to  1.8%, 
compared to their last forecast in June. The increase is due 
to  various  planned fiscal measures, such as  increases  in 
indirect  taxes  and administered prices,  as  contained  in 
national budget plans. 
 
4.    (SBU) The staff projections are based on the following 
main assumptions: 
       short-term  interest  rates are  constant  over  the 
     projection horizon at slightly below 2.2%; 
    EUR/USD exchange rate assumed to be constant at 1.17 
over the horizon; 
    Annual average oil prices assumed to decline from 28.5 
USD per barrel in 2003 to 24.5 USD in 2005; 
    World real GDP growth outside euro area estimated at 4% 
on average in 2003, increasing to 4.5% in 2004 and 5% in 
2005; 
 
 
 
 
ECB projections,                      December 2003 
 y/y in % 
                    2002     2003              2004 
                          2005 
Real GDP            0.9     0.2 - 0.6        1.1 - 2.1 
                    0.5   1.9 - 2.9 
                    2.8     1.0 - 1.4        1.1 - 2.1 
                          1.4 - 3.0 
                    -2.8    0.9 - 2.1        0.6 - 1.6 
                          0.3 - 1.3 
                    1.7 
                           -1.7 - -0.7       0.2 - 3.2 
                    0.0   2.3 - 5.5 
 
                    2.3    -1.6 - 1.2        2.8 - 6.0 
                          5.0 - 8.2 
 
2 
 
                            0.1 - 2.7        2.9 - 6.3 
                          5.1 -8.5 
 
                            2.0 - 2.2        1.3 - 2.3 
                          1.0 - 2.2 
Private Consumption 
Government 
Consumption 
Gross fixed 
Capital Formation 
Exports (goods & 
services) 
Imports (goods & 
services) 
HICP 
 
 
Real GDP Growth Projection 
_______________________________ 
 
5.    (SBU)  The ECB expects only a weak GDP growth  between 
0.2  and  0.6%  for 2003 (mid-point of 0.4%), since  in  the 
first  half of the year real GDP stagnated in the euro area. 
For  2004  and  2005,  they project an acceleration  of  GDP 
growth,  reaching values between 1.1 and 2.1% (mid-point  of 
1.6%)  and  1.9  and 2.9% (mid-point of 2.4%), respectively. 
Economic  development will be characterized by a pick-up  in 
export  growth and recoveries in both investment and private 
consumption.   The  ECB  expects  a  significant   rise   in 
employment at the earliest in 2005, as reflecting the  usual 
lag in the cyclical pattern of employment. 
 
Price and Cost Projections 
_______________________________ 
 
6.    (SBU) The ECB estimates HICP to be in a range  between 
2%  and  2.2%  in  2003. For the following  years,  the  ECB 
expects lower inflation rates due to the assumed decline  in 
oil prices. Import prices are currently dampened by the euro 
appreciation. They are estimated to remain subdued in  2004, 
not  least because of decreasing energy prices, then passing 
over to a modest increase in 2004. Unit labor cost growth is 
forecast  to decline in 2004 and 2005, which will be  driven 
by  a recovery in labor productivity. After remaining low in 
early  2003, labor productivity would pick up at the end  of 
2003, moving back to rates close to the long-term average at 
the end of the staff projection horizon. 
 
External Sector:  Rule of Thumb and Disconnects 
_____________________________________________ __ 
 
7.    (SBU)  Export and import components always  have  been 
difficult to forecast.  The wide range of possible out comes 
for  2004,  i.e.,  exports to grow between  2.8%  and  6.0%, 
reflects  the  difference between actual outcomes  and  past 
projections.  That is, it is a mechanical exercise and  does 
not  reflect any judgments on a range of probability by  ECB 
staff.   With  the euro at 1.21/USD in early December,  4.1% 
higher than its end-October level and 28% stronger than  its 
2002  average,  according  to  ECB  statistics,  forecasting 
external accounts is even trickier business. 
 
8.   (SBU) Although the ECB does not present its forecasting 
methodology,  it  has  made  some  specifications   of   its 
macroeconomic  model  available.   From  this,  some  market 
analysts  have derived what they consider a \"rule of  thumb\" 
for    computing   exchange   rate   effects   on   economic 
developments.   Deutsche Bank Research and  Lehman  Brothers 
both indicate that, using the ECB\'s model implies that a  10 
percent  rise  in the real effective exchange  rather  would 
knock 0.5 percentage points off inflation and 0.6 percentage 
points  off  growth in the first year.  While  the  ECB  has 
suggested that the appreciating euro\'s contribution to lower 
inflation  would  contribute to higher real  incomes,  these 
effects  appear  to be overwhelmed by a negative  net  trade 
balance as imports grow while exports struggle. 
 
9.    (SBU) To every rule of thumb there are exceptions.  To 
this  one there are many.  First, in any model there is  the 
economists\'   favorite  \"all  other  things   being   equal\" 
assumption.  That  is, the model assumes  that  there  is  a 
\"shock\"  in the exchange rate market rather than changes  in 
underlying economic activity.  Reality is different. 
 
10.  (SBU) In last year\'s Article IV consultation, IMF staff 
examined  the  Euro  area\'s experience  when  the  euro  was 
weaker.  They found an apparent \"disconnect\" in the exchange 
rate  link with trade flows between the euro and other large 
currency areas. During 1996-2001 the real effective exchange 
rate  of the euro declined by almost 30 percent.  IMF  staff 
compared  a simulation using conventional measures of  trade 
elasticities  and  the  linkage  between  trade  flows   and 
exchange rates with actual changes.  The simulation  results 
suggested  that non-oil trade surpluses would have increased 
by  2.3%  of GDP as more competitively priced exports  would 
increase  (2.9%) and more expensive imports decline  (0.6%). 
Actually,  trade  balances declined  by  0.2%  of  GDP  -  a 
deviation of a whopping 2.5% of GDP as exports increased but 
so  did  imports.   The IMF staff observed  that  all  other 
things  \"have  clearly  not been  equal,\"  pointing  to  the 
effects  of domestic and foreign absorption growth on  trade 
volumes  and  the  effects  of  domestic  and  foreign  cost 
developments   on  domestic  prices.   In  a  more   refined 
calculation,  the  IMF shows that the \"disconnect\"  was  the 
strongest  for capital goods imports, perhaps  reflecting  a 
rising share of relatively price-inelastic high tech goods. 
 
11.    (SBU)  IMF  staff  findings  \"suggest  caution  using 
standard  econometric  model  simulations  for  gauging  the 
macroeconomic   effects  of  a  reversal   of   the   euro\'s 
depreciation.\"   Specifically they  thought  the  assumption 
that   the  \"close-to-one-pass-through\"  of  exchange   rate 
changes  to import prices \"may no longer match up\"  for  the 
EMU as a whole. 
 
12.   (SBU) With much faster growth in the U.S. than Europe, 
\"foreign  absorption,\"  to  use  the  IMF\'s  phrase,   could 
mitigate the otherwise price competitiveness effects  of  an 
appreciating  exchange rate - at least  for  a  while.   UBS 
Investment  Research has a crude model that suggests  growth 
in   global  industrial  production  is  roughly  twice   as 
important  as changes in the real trade-weight euro  in  the 
short run.  Given the lags between the increase in demand to 
translate  into  exports, UBS expects euro area  exports  to 
pick  up  over the next two (for consumption goods)  to  six 
(for investment goods) months.  Only when global (read U.S.) 
demand cools and the euro continues to appreciate would  the 
effects  of the latter begin to be more of a drag on  export 
performance.   That would be in 2005, in UBS\'s assessment  - 
by  which  time the euro area should be running on  stronger 
domestic demand. 
 
13.   (SBU)  Publicly the ECB does not want to be associated 
with  any  \"rule of thumb\" on exchange rates.  At his  early 
December appearance before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament, ECB President  Trichet 
refused to be tied down, declaring \"we are not the prisoners 
of a particularly equation or of a particular way of looking 
at  things.\"   Informally, ECB staff admit to such  formulas 
but  quickly  point  out that they are  used  to  provide  a 
\"perspective\" or \"orientation\" for discussion.  The exchange 
rate   together  with  external  demand  and  profit  margin 
adjustments  and  market shares must  be  taken  account  to 
produce  a  final result.  While the formula are mechanical, 
other elements, in the end, are subjective. 
 
14.    (SBU)   ECB  staff  projections  and   the   European 
Commission\'s  forecast are broadly similar.  The  Commission 
forecasts euro area growth at 0.4% in 2003, 1.8% in 2004 and 
2.3%  in 2005.  With respect to the assumptions, both assume 
a  pick  up in world growth (EC puts it at 4.1% in 2004  and 
2005).    The   Commission\'s  forecast  sees   net   exports 
contributing to growth in 2004 and 2005, albeit a slight 0.1 
and  0.2  percentage  points, respectively.   However,  both 
assume  a  Euro/USD exchange rate of 1.17.  Some forecasters 
see that as unrealistic - implying that the drag of exchange 
rate  appreciation  could bite faster when  external  demand 
begins   to   flag.   All  the  more  reason  for   European 
governments to concentrate on domestic policies to  generate 
confidence and growth. 
 
15.  (U)This cable coordinated with USEU and Embassy Berlin. 
 
16.  (U)POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"12801","12/18/2003 14:36","03FRANKFURT10327","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 010327 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: The German Banking Sector -- Something Happens 
 
T-IA-F-03-0067 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.    (SBU)  Summary  and  Comment:  From  speculation  over 
banking  mega-mergers,  to mooted  collapse  of  the  three- 
pillared  banking  system, to a circling of  the  wagons  to 
protect against foreign invaders, the German banking  sector 
is  abuzz  with rumor.  With too many German  banks  and  an 
acute  need  to  improve profitability,  the  lines  between 
public and private banking sectors are becoming blurred.  In 
advance  of  withdrawal of state guarantees in 2005,  public 
savings  and  state  banks are waking up  to  the  need  for 
restructuring  and perhaps cooperation.  Meanwhile,  private 
sector  banks  in  the \"third pillar\" have  tightened  their 
belts  only  to  find themselves possible takeover  targets. 
The  Finance  Ministry now seems to recognize the  need  for 
market-based  solutions,  but  many  politicians   want   to 
preserve the German banking tradition in the face of  global 
pressures.   Where is this all headed?  The  answer  remains 
unclear  --  however,  Germany\'s  three-pillared  system  is 
obviously beginning to wobble. 
 
2.    (SBU)  Something is clearly going on  in  the  sector, 
though  exaggerations and misfires by  the  financial  press 
make  it  difficult to separate fact from fiction.  Comments 
from  Eichel, Koch-Weser and Breuer appear to  be  aimed  as 
shaking  up  the system, at stimulating change  rather  than 
closing   Germany\'s  banking  sector  to  outside  interest. 
Public  sector banks are running scared, faced with loss  of 
state  guarantees in 2005, poor ratings and mostly miserable 
returns.   Politicians will be eager to protect local  jobs, 
the  German  tradition and state influence over Landesbanken 
and   public  savings  banks.   Nevertheless,  under  global 
pressures the entire German banking system appears likely to 
undergo  significant  change in the  midterm.   Bankers  are 
warily  sizing  up competitors and seeking allies.   Outside 
banks,  to include U.S.-based institutions, will be watching 
the process closely. 
3.   (SBU) While it is not so surprising that the public 
banks seek government support for safeguarding the current 
three-pillar system, it is strange that the otherwise market- 
oriented private banks evidence a sudden concern for the 
financing of domestic companies.  It was the private banks 
that recently significantly reduced their lending to small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).  This appears a 
possible change in business strategy, seeking to demonstrate 
that private banks would ensure there is no drop off in 
lending to SME\'s with any cross-pillar mergers -- a sure way 
to win the hearts and mind of otherwise reluctant government 
officials.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
Bank Mergers Back on the Agenda? 
-------------------------------- 
4.    (SBU) With the German economy apparently in the  early 
stages of recovery, historic agreement on structural reforms 
and equity markets up significantly from recent lows, German 
banks  -- showing improvement after a round of cost-cutting, 
balance  sheet  cleanup and internal  restructuring  --  are 
mooted to have become attractive takeover targets, not least 
because their market capitalization remains relatively low. 
 
5.    (SBU) In its recent analysis of the EU banking sector, 
the  ECB  predicted increasing consolidation if the  banking 
environment  improves  and  the  gradual  economic  recovery 
proves  to be durable.  It suggests factors such as  the  EU 
Takeover  Directive and the further withdrawal of the  state 
from   domestic   banking  activity  will  also   facilitate 
consolidation  and cross-border mergers.  According  to  the 
news  magazine \"Der Spiegel\", a high-ranking German  federal 
official is certain of a merger wave next year after  German 
banks  post 2003 results.  Fitch Ratings sees potential  for 
further domestic consolidation in the German banking  sector 
that  will  remain constrained by the existing  three-pillar 
system.  Speculation about imminent mergers and acquisitions 
has  heated  up, helping improve large German  banks\'  stock 
valuations. 
 
6.   (SBU) However, Standard & Poors has meanwhile issued  a 
report  critical of German banks, arguing that profitability 
and capitalization are so weak that outside banks would find 
them  uninteresting.  Fitch Ratings still sees German  banks 
at  the  bottom end of the European scale, despite signs  of 
weak  recovery in the third quarter.  Moreover, a  Frankfurt 
investment  banker believes German labor  law,  banks\'  poor 
loan  portfolios and the cultural differences still function 
as effective deterrents to international takeover. 
 
Foreign \"Conquerors\" at the Gate... 
----------------------------------- 
7.    (SBU) But rumors are circulating that Citibank may  be 
interested in taking over Deutsche Bank.  While the latter\'s 
costs are high by international comparison, it has more than 
12  million retail customers worldwide and has relationships 
with  many  of  Europe\'s  most  important  companies.   \"Der 
Spiegel\"  reports that Sanford Weill, chairman of  Citibank, 
has  met  with  both Chancellor Schroeder  as  well  as  the 
Minister President of Hesse soliciting political support for 
a  potential takeover.  According to \"Der Spiegel\", Citibank 
might even transfer its European headquarters from London to 
Frankfurt   in  order  to  make  such  a  deal   politically 
acceptable  in  Germany. Other reportedly interested  buyers 
are  Credit  Suisse,  BNP Paribas  and  the  Royal  Bank  of 
Scotland. 
 
8.    (SBU)  German banks are apparently so concerned  about 
takeovers  from  abroad  they  have  sought  help  from  the 
government.   After closed talks with government  officials, 
the  President  of the Federal Association of  German  Banks 
(BdB)  and  head of Deutsche Bank\'s supervisory  board  Rolf 
Breuer, publicly warned political decision-makers to  beware 
that   \"conquerors\"  are  on  the  doorstep.   Breuer  asked 
\"shouldn\'t  it  make  a difference to  us  whether  domestic 
industry  can  fall  back on German banks  or  whether  they 
depend on foreign credit institutions?\"  Breuer argued  that 
there  is  a  risk, for instance, that American banks  would 
\"for  obvious  reasons\" (referring to the  conflict  between 
Berlin  and  Washington due to the war in Iraq)  would  take 
more account of U.S. government interests.  Referring to the 
need  for  German  banks  to  increase  competitiveness  and 
inflexibilities   due  to  the  rigid   separation   between 
Germany\'s  three  banking pillars, Breuer  also  stated  \"we 
don\'t have any time to lose.  German banks must at last free 
themselves from their bonds.\" 
 
9.    (SBU)  Apart from any possible interest in  takeovers, 
foreign banks do appear to regard Germany as an increasingly 
attractive  place to do business due to sector growth  rates 
that  are  the  highest in continental Europe.   Several  of 
banks,  among  them  Lehmann Brothers,  JP  Morgan  and  UBS 
Warburg,   are  currently  increasing  staff   in   Germany, 
particularly  in  investment banking  and  equity  business. 
Peter Coym, chairman of the Association of Foreign Banks and 
board member of Lehmann Brothers finds \"the prevailing  mood 
regarding  Germany is positive.  Some Anglo-Saxon banks  are 
responding  with  decentralization  and  a  stronger   local 
presence.\" 
 
... a National Solution? 
------------------------- 
10.   (SBU) Given the \"threat\" of takeover by foreign banks, 
the idea of a merger among large German banks has received a 
great  deal of press play, despite earlier failures such  as 
deals  between  Deutsche  Bank  and  Dresdner,  and  between 
Dresdner and Commerzbank.  Recent rumors have all four large 
banks  considering a mega-merger, either  completely  or  of 
individual   segments  such  as  retail  banking   business. 
According to \"Financial Times Deutschland,\" Deutsche  Bank\'s 
CEO  Josef  Ackermann  pronounced  himself  in  favor  of  a 
\"national\" solution (Ackermann is Swiss).  The German  press 
reported  that  Finance Minister Eichel was  pushing  for  a 
merger  of  the country\'s large banks.  The Federal  Finance 
Ministry,  however, denied that Eichel  had  made  any  such 
statement,  claiming  that he had  only  suggested  thinking 
about cooperation.  According to \"Handelsblatt,\" Rolf Breuer 
called speculation over a mega-merger absurd. 
 
11.   (SBU)  Many experts have weighed in as well,  decrying 
the  likelihood  of  such a merger on the  grounds  of  high 
restructuring  costs and acute politically sensitivities  to 
probable job cuts and branch closures. 
12.   (SBU)  According to press reports, the Bavarian  state 
government  favors  a merger between HVB  and  the  Bavarian 
Landesbank in order to safeguard Munich as a banking  center 
and  is  pushing the two banks to start talks.   However,  a 
number  of  hurdles would have to be cleared before  such  a 
deal  could  happen.  Landesbank representatives called  the 
idea completely unrealistic. 
 
Cooperation and Mergers in the Public Sector 
-------------------------------------------- 
13.  (SBU) Given the Federal Government\'s agreement with the 
European  Commission to abolish state guarantees  for  state 
(Landesbanken)  and public savings banks, the  public  banks 
know  that  they  need to restructure.  In  particular,  the 
Landesbanken  face a bleak outlook unless they fundamentally 
improve  their profitability and credit standing.  According 
to   the  controversial  and  yet  unpublished  analysis  by 
Standard  &  Poor\'s,  the ratings of  the  Landesbanken  are 
expected  to  fall to the \"BBB\" level once they  lose  state 
guarantees.   Mergers and cooperation  may  be  one  way  to 
prevent that from happening. 
 
14.  (SBU) The Landesbank Hessen-Thringen (Helaba) has 
revealed plans for a new structure of their cooperation with 
the savings banks.  Helaba intends to establish a \"network 
bank\" with the core functions of marketing and project 
management for the savings banks\' products.  Landesbank 
Baden-Wrttemberg recently concluded a cooperation agreement 
with all 57 savings banks in the state in order to make use 
of synergies.  Similarly, the BayernLB and the Bavarian 
savings banks have agreed to establish a network. 
 
15.    (SBU)   Moreover,  Landesbank  Baden-Wrttemberg   is 
is 
currently  in  merger talks with Landesbank Rheinland-Pfalz, 
even though speculation of an imminent merger was denied  by 
the  institutions.  Nonetheless, the consolidation trend  is 
building steam. 
 
Breaking up the Three Pillar System? 
------------------------------------ 
16.  (SBU) The IMF\'s recent controversial country report  on 
Germany  found  public bank ownership leads  to  competitive 
distortions   in  the  banking  business.   It   recommended 
following the example of other EU countries that have turned 
their  public  banks into joint stock corporations  allowing 
private investment.  Moreover, the IMF\'s Financial Stability 
Assessment Program Paper called for expeditious creation  of 
a  \"legal  framework  to reduce barriers  to  consolidation, 
within  or  across  pillars, and thereby  facilitate  market 
oriented restructuring.\" 
 
17.   (SBU)  In a speech at the end of October,  Caio  Koch- 
Weser, Ministry of Finance State Secretary, also called  for 
banking  sector  reform in order to gear  it  toward  market 
signals  and  permit  a  higher share  of  private  (equity) 
capital   throughout   the  sector.   Koch-Weser   suggested 
alternative  legal  forms be introduced  for  public  sector 
banks in order to permit mergers possible within and between 
the   three  pillars.   Moreover,  he  criticized  Germany\'s 
\"regional  principle,\" which carefully  divides  the  market 
between  the local savings banks.  In his view, this barrier 
to  competition also needed to be reformed.  Other countries 
in Europe have outpaced Germany\'s banking reform, he warned. 
 
18.   (SBU) Finance Minister Eichel also voiced support  for 
the  IMF\'s  recommendations for a loosening of  the  banking 
structure.  His ministry shares the view that \"an  efficient 
banking  system  must  be  open to market-oriented  change.\" 
Eichel stressed the need to focus reform to ensure stability 
of  and viability of Germany\'s banking system, and he  urged 
that caution be used in crafting a medium-term strategy. 
 
19.   (SBU)  For their part, public sector banks  vehemently 
rejected   the   IMF\'s  analysis  along  with   Koch-Weser\'s 
comments.   Their  defense  of the Germany\'s  unique  three- 
pillar   model  was  subsequently  supported   publicly   by 
politicians from across the political spectrum. 
Outrider in the East 
-------------------- 
20.  (SBU) At the end of November, the mayor of Stralsund, a 
Baltic  sea-coast town, announced his intention to  put  the 
local  savings  bank up for auction, stating his  preference 
for  a  private  bank  buyer.  Such a  sale  would  generate 
privatization  revenues not forthcoming  in  an  alternative 
merger  with  another  public  savings  bank.   Moreover,  a 
privatized  private bank would no longer  be  restricted  to 
doing business only in its designated region.  However, sale 
to a private bank would set a precedent for savings banks in 
Germany.   The  mayor\'s plans led to public  intense  debate 
over  the  damage  they might inflict  on  the  three-pillar 
system.   Given  the  current  financial  problems  of  many 
municipalities,  others may be eager to  follow  Stralsund\'s 
example.   Some pundits speculated that private banks  might 
be  willing to pay a premium for the Stralsund savings  bank 
just  to  \"break the ice\" legally.  Among the large  private 
institutions even Commerzbank expressed an interest. 
 
21.   (SBU)  The  Finance Minister of the  German  state  of 
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern  where  the  bank  is   located   has 
challenged  the  mayor\'s plan, claiming  that  it  would  be 
illegal under state law.  The Stralsund mayor and his  legal 
advisors take a different view.  The issue remains in  legal 
limbo pending review. 
 
Increasing Cooperation Between Pillars 
-------------------------------------- 
22.   (SBU) While mergers between private and public pillars 
are still visions for the future, cooperation across sectors 
already  exists in restricted areas, mostly for  back-office 
operations.  The most recent development is a late  November 
decision  by  Dresdner  Bank  to out-source  its  securities 
settlement to DWP Bank, which is owned by cooperative sector 
institutions  DZ  and  WGZ  Bank  and  the  savings   banks\' 
association  in  North-Rhine Westphalia.  State-owned  KfW\'s 
cooperation with private banks for a joint securitization of 
loans to the SME sector is another example. 
 
23.  (U)This cable coordinated with USEU and Embassy Berlin. 
 
24.  (U)POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"12840","12/19/2003 13:23","03FRANKFURT10353","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 010353 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: CDU CONVENTION DEBACLE IN BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG SETS 
OFF ERWIN TEUFEL SUCCESSION DEBATE 
 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The December 5-6 Christian Democratic 
(CDU) convention / leadership election in Boeblingen/Baden- 
Wuerttemberg has raised doubts about Minister President 
Erwin Teufel\'s political future.  Although Teufel was 
reelected with 76 percent of the vote, this was his worst 
showing as CDU party chief and one of the worst of any 
leader in the state\'s fifty-year history.  A defiant Teufel 
said he does not intend to step down, but the convention 
debacle has put his future in question.  Meanwhile, caucus 
chief Guenther Oettinger and B-W Education Minister Annette 
Schavan are quietly maneuvering to succeed him.  While some 
CDU contacts hope Teufel will hand over power in late 2004, 
others fear a drawn out succession battle will damage the 
CDU in one of its strongholds.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU) On the heels of the CDU election victory in the 
2001 state elections, key political observers expected Erwin 
Teufel -- B-W\'s longest serving minister president -- to 
hand over the reins by 2004, in time to prepare a successor 
for the 2006 elections.  Teufel defied expectations by 
landing a seat at the European constitutional convention, 
launching a multi-year reform of public administration, and 
steadfastly refusing to name a successor.  The media have 
reported on increasing friction within the CDU and coalition 
partner FDP (Free Democrats) over Teufel\'s autocratic 
management style and unwillingness to make way for a 
successor. 
 
3. (SBU) At the convention, delegates told us they hoped 
Teufel would use his speech to lay the groundwork for the 
next generation of CDU leaders.  Instead, Teufel ended a 
lackluster speech with a promise to lead the party for 
another two years.  Although delegates gave Teufel a 
standing ovation, many refused to support him in the 
subsequent leadership vote.  Accustomed to near 100 percent 
support (two years ago, Teufel was re-elected with 93.7 
percent), Teufel was visibly shocked over his meager result 
of 76.9 percent.  Delegates also \"punished\" CDU B-W 
Secretary General/Federal Parliamentary Business Manager 
 
SIPDIS 
Volker Kauder (75 percent).  Teufel\'s poor showing became 
the central theme at the convention and has dominated the 
political scene in B-W since then. 
 
4. (SBU) A shocked Teufel blamed unpopular cutbacks and 
reforms: \"He who follows a clear political line has 
enemies.\"  In a radio interview on December 8, Teufel said 
he had no intention of stepping down and hinted at revenge 
against his detractors: \"... a showing like this is not 
possible without people pulling strings in the background.\" 
 
5. (SBU) Prior to the convention, the B-W CDU had kept the 
succession debate under the carpet.  The two most prominent 
candidates to succeed Teufel -- caucus chief Guenther 
Oettinger and B-W Education Minister Annette Schavan -- are 
positioning themselves for a leadership bid.  At the 
convention, Schavan pledged support for Teufel and attacked 
delegates for using a secret ballot to vent frustration.  In 
press interviews, Oettinger -- whose ambitions are no secret 
-- denied any ill will towards the Minister President but 
refused to condemn the anti-Teufel movement. 
 
6. (SBU) COMMENT:  Teufel\'s domineering style, recent 
spending cuts and unpopular administrative reforms, as well 
as his refusal to contemplate retirement, have fueled the 
tensions within the party that finally erupted at the 
Boeblingen convention.  Teufel\'s poor re-election showing 
underscores the retirement issue and leaves the succession 
question unanswered.  Many CDU members hope that Teufel will 
step down in late 2004, when Teufel turns 65 and after 
European/communal elections in June.  Teufel\'s fighting 
words worry even some supporters, who fear the long-serving 
minister president -- like former chancellor Helmut Kohl -- 
might hang on for too long, damaging the CDU\'s standing in 
one of its heartlands.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"13030","1/5/2004 13:23","04FRANKFURT39","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Frankfurt9873","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 000039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: Protests Target Koch, Poor University Conditions 
 
REF: (A) Frankfurt 07786, (B) Frankfurt 9873 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  University strikes and protests in Hesse 
during recent weeks continue to target Minister-President 
Roland Koch (CDU).  University leaders and students say 
funding cuts and fee hikes violate prior agreements and 
will endanger Hesse\'s leading position in science and 
research.  Protests against Koch\'s \"Operation Safe Future\" 
(reftel) include universities, churches, trade unions and 
even former coalition partner FDP (Free Democrats) 
officials.  The state government defends the cuts and shows 
no signs of bending.  While Hesse officials are 
increasingly nervous, Koch appears to prefer 
confrontational \"wedge politics\" to Germany\'s post-war 
culture of consensus -- even within his own party.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) In September, the Hesse government announced far- 
reaching budget cuts (ref A), prompting university 
presidents to openly criticize the government for breaking 
the \"university pact\" signed after Koch came to power in 
1999.  That agreement mandated university reforms in 
exchange for shielding higher education from budget cuts. 
While universities enacted reforms, the 2004 Hesse budget 
foresees a 1.9 percent cut in university funding.  Former 
Higher Education Minister Ruth Wagner (FDP) condemned the 
cuts as a threat to Hesse\'s position as a center of 
research and innovation.  Tensions between government and 
university leaders escalated this month when Koch 
threatened to cut funding for Kassel University because its 
president publicly supported the striking students. 
 
3. (SBU) Students in Hesse have held weeks of protests 
against M-P Koch, and university students remain on a 
month-long strike.  As in Berlin and other cities, 
Frankfurt students are protesting decreased funding at a 
time of peaking enrollment.  Protests in Hesse culminated 
in a rally December 13 at which virtually every banner 
denounced Koch.  Campus leaders oppose fees of 500-900 
euros per semester on long-term students -- not the fees 
per se, but the fact that revenues will go to reduce the 
state deficit and not to universities.  Students also say 
the fees are unfair because poor funding keeps them in 
school longer (many classes are oversubscribed). 
 
4. (SBU) In recent weeks, Koch and Hesse Minister for 
Higher Education Udo Corts have faced blockades, 
disruptions, and protests at many events.  The Koch 
government is holding firm and defends the 1.9 percent cut 
as small relative to other areas of government.  Corts says 
there are too many long-term students (ten percent are 
enrolled for more than 16 semesters in undergraduate 
programs).  Frankfurt Goethe University student spokesman 
Falk Hertfelder told us that students would end the strike 
for the holiday season, but that \"Koch won\'t have a minute 
of peace in Frankfurt next year.\" 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5. (SBU) The current wave of university protests/strikes is 
not a 1968-style movement: students appear thus far to have 
specific goals and a narrow political agenda.  The protests 
are focused on Koch\'s confrontational and autocratic 
leadership style.  Koch did not consult universities, NGO\'s 
or churches before announcing program cuts, which the Hesse 
CDU see as policy tools and not just ways to bring the 
budget closer to balance. 
 
6. (SBU) Koch dislikes consensus-style \"appeasement 
roundtables\" and prefers to use the CDU\'s absolute majority 
in Hesse to make and carry out decisions.  This 
confrontational approach has proven divisive (alienating 
the FDP) and risky, as evidenced by Koch\'s poor showing in 
the Hohmann affair (ref B).  Despite the political fallout, 
Koch views these as risks worth taking in his efforts to 
streamline Hesse\'s extensive social system.  END COMMENT. 
 
7. (U) This message has been coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"13340","1/16/2004 15:04","04FRANKFURT400","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04FRANKFURT208","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 000400 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
DEPT FOR DS/DSS/ITA, DS/DSS/IP, DS/ICI/PII, DS/IP/CC, 
DAMASCUS, BERLIN, MUNICH FOR RSO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, PTER 
SUBJECT: FOLLOW UP - SUSPECTED MEMBER OF EL QAEDA ARRESTED 
 
REF: FRANKFURT 208 
 
1.  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
2.  (SBU) This cable is a follow up to FRANKFURT 208 which 
described concerns the German police had about a suspected 
terrorist, Chaouki Ben Adelouaheb Mrad who disappeared 
shortly after altering his traditional Islamic appearance in 
order to appear more Western.  German police suspected that 
he may have intended to travel to Syria at the time of his 
disappearance. 
 
3.  (SBU)  On January 11, 2004, SUBJECT was detected and 
arrested during a traffic stop in Vaihingen, near Stuttgart, 
Germany.  SUBJECT attempted to resist arrest.  SUBJECT was 
temporarily incarcerated at Ludwigsburg prison and has been 
sentenced to deportation.  As of January 13, 2004, SUBJECT 
has been in Heilbronn prison, awaiting repatriation to 
country of origin. 
 
4.  (U)  RSO continues to monitor the situation in 
conjunction with other appropriate Mission elements. 
BODDE 
"
"13384","1/20/2004 16:03","04FRANKFURT462","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","03FRANKFURT8335","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 000462 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT:  GERMANY\'S LIBERAL PARTY HITS THE MARK IN NATIONAL 
CONVENTIONS, BUT LONG ROAD AHEAD 
 
REF: 03 FRANKFURT 8335 
 
1. SUMMARY:  In strong recent performances at the FDP (Free 
Democrat) national convention in Stuttgart January 6-7 and 
European election kick-off in Saarbruecken Jan. 17, party 
head Guido Westerwelle called for less government and more 
private initiative, starting with radical tax reform.  Party 
leaders condemned the Schroeder government for mishandling 
the U.S.-German relationship and voiced strong opposition to 
Turkey\'s admission to the European Union.  Delegates also 
endorsed a draft law (reftel) to ban headscarves in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg public schools.  Overall, the FDP made a good 
show of unity in its political heartland, but it remains 
unclear whether the party can capitalize on voter 
dissatisfaction with the Schroeder government.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Westerwelle Puts In Strong Performances 
--------------------------------------- 
 
2. After a difficult 2003 for Westerwelle and the FDP -- 
with the apparent suicide of controversial FDP figure 
Juergen Moellemann (accused of corruption and anti-Semitism) 
and wide criticism of Westerwelle\'s leadership style -- the 
FDP chief\'s convention speech in Stuttgart appeared to 
energize rank-and-file members.  Calling 2004 the \"year of 
the liberal,\" Westerwelle criticized recent economic reforms 
as token and asserted that only the FDP can promote a 
fundamental change of mentality that would help Germany move 
beyond the \"free rider\" syndrome:  Germans \"all sit in one 
boat and everybody has to row.\"  Westerwelle stressed 
economic liberalization and private initiative as keys to 
reviving the country\'s moribund economy.  He called for 
radically simplifying the tax code and lower tax rates 
across the board to spur initiative and ease the problem of 
unregistered labor (Comment:  although all of Germany\'s 
major parties have engaged in a spirited debate on tax 
reform, this far only the FDP has submitted a concrete 
proposal in the Bundestag).  The FDP chief noted that the 
CDU (Christian Democrats) and even SPD (Social Democrats) 
now endorse ideas which the FDP has espoused for years.  On 
the selection of a new president in May -- where FDP will 
hold the balance -- Westerwelle said the FDP will not/not 
automatically support a CDU/CSU candidate. 
 
3. Westerwelle advocated letting universities collect 
tuition and select their own students, dismissing the 
Schroeder government\'s plan to establish elite German 
universities as insufficient.  He said Germany must do more 
to retain top students, noting that one out of every seven 
German doctoral students leaves for the United States, 
attracted by better educational/professional opportunities. 
 
\"Collateral Damage\" in the Transatlantic Relationship 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
4. FDP Bundestag caucus leader Wolfgang Gerhardt emphasized 
the importance of the U.S.-German partnership and Germany\'s 
participation in transatlantic institutions.  He praised 
U.S. willingness to promote stability throughout the world 
and called German foreign policy weak and uncoordinated. 
Gerhardt said the Schroeder foreign policy had caused \"too 
much collateral damage,\" undermining U.S.-German relations 
and Germany\'s international credibility. 
 
Keep Turkey Out of the EU for Now 
--------------------------------- 
 
5. FDP speakers voiced support for the European Union and EU 
enlargement and criticized the SPD-Green government\'s 
handling of key European issues (under the slogan \"We can do 
Europe better\").  Gerhardt and B-W Deputy Minister- 
President/FDP State Chairman Walter Doering cautioned that 
with ten new member states joining the EU in May, the EU 
must reform its institutions before taking on more new 
members.  FDP leaders expressed pointed concerns over 
Turkey\'s accession;  Doering stated bluntly that \"Turkey 
does not belong in the EU.\" 
 
\"Women should use their heads, not cover them\" 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
6. The headscarf issue (reftel) -- the move to ban 
headscarves on public teachers in the name of gender 
equality and the neutrality of schools -- featured 
prominently at the convention.  The Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) 
FDP passed a resolution at the convention supporting that 
state\'s draft law to forbid the wearing of headscarves in 
class (but allowing the use of Christian symbols), stating 
that headscarves symbolize a sexist society in conflict with 
the German constitution\'s guarantee of equal rights for men 
and women.  NOTE: the anti-headscarf resolution applies only 
to Baden-Wuerttemberg, but was welcomed by national party 
leaders.  END NOTE. 
 
7. FDP caucus chief Gerhardt endorsed the anti-headscarf 
resolution, noting that \"there is no right to cultural 
authenticity if it means violating human rights and 
oppressing women.  Multi-cultural values do not apply in 
this case.\"  He quoted the Nobel Peace Prize winner, Iranian 
lawyer and human rights activist Ms. Shirin Ebadi, that 
\"women should not cover their heads but rather use them.\" 
 
COMMENT:  FDP on the Rebound, but Long Road Ahead 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
8. Convention delegates gave Westerwelle an unexpectedly 
strong reception, relieving some of the pressure on 
Westerwelle to defend his leadership position.  The FDP\'s 
short-term goals are to re-enter the European Parliament 
(after a ten-year absence) and to poll over the five percent 
threshold in 2004 state and communal elections, but support 
is wavering in traditional strongholds such as southwest 
Germany and national polls show support for the FDP 
stagnating at 6-7 percent.   Despite having championed for 
decades the type of reforms that all of Germany is now 
talking about, the FDP has so far failed to package its 
ideas in ways that will attract voters or otherwise 
capitalize on the unpopular economic reform plans of the 
Schroeder government.  Reeling from the Moellemann affair 
and the party\'s poor showing in the 2002 national elections 
(for which Moellemann and Westerwelle received the principal 
blame), the FDP seemed to have been caught flat-footed when 
the economic reform debate began in earnest, and accordingly 
did not do a good job in showcasing its own ideas for wide- 
ranging reforms.  Moreover, during the past several months a 
number of senior FDP officials have taken to the Op-Ed pages 
with articles harshly critical of Westerwelle\'s leadership 
style and abilities.  Westerwelle\'s successful performance 
at recent conventions is a good first step in turning around 
his and his party\'s fortunes, but the road ahead will be 
long.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"13466","1/23/2004 11:36","04FRANKFURT567","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 000567 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, SOCI, PGOV, PREF, PHUM, GM 
SUBJECT: Hesse Integration Emphasizes German Language, 
Culture 
 
SUMMARY 
--------- 
 
1.  (U) Beginning this month, Hesse becomes the first state 
in Germany to mandate German-language pre-school 
instruction in public schools, part of a broader campaign 
by the CDU government to promote German language and 
culture among the state\'s large immigrant community (12% of 
the total population).  Reflecting this approach, the 
state\'s 2004 budget sharply cuts funding for foreign- 
language programs and NGOs that work on immigrant issues. 
Some critics applaud Hesse\'s focus on German language but 
think that its hardline assimilationist stance will counter 
integration efforts by marginalizing immigrant culture. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
Hesse Integration Emphasizes Language, Cuts Social Programs 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
2.  (U) Hesse is introducing a year of mandatory German- 
language training prior to the beginning of primary school 
for children with insufficient German language skills.  The 
state government will actively discourage those who do not 
pass this course from beginning their education.  Older 
children entering Hesse will be asked to pass a German 
entrance exam before attending school.  Students already 
enrolled in Hesse schools who exhibit an obvious language 
deficit will be asked to enroll in intensive German 
training concurrent with their normal course load. 
 
3.  (U) Hesse Social Ministry Head of Integration Dr. 
Walter Kindermann believes the classes will help integrate 
Hesse\'s immigrants and propagate German culture. 
Kindermann asserts that promoting these values is essential 
to the success of integration efforts.  Language education 
is the centerpiece of a media campaign called \"Hesse 
without borders,\" which aims at promoting the state\'s 
openness to international business and its approach to 
cultural concerns. 
 
4.  (U) Hesse\'s 2004 budget includes deep cuts in 
assistance for NGOs that work on immigrant issues.  Social 
Ministry officials maintain that these groups often 
\"agitate against the state government\" (e.g., protests 
against the refugee holding center at Frankfurt airport), 
and should not receive taxpayer money to sponsor their 
efforts.  The government has also dramatically scaled back 
support for foreign-language social counseling for its 
immigrant population.  They expect the cuts to stand, 
pointing to the lack of public outcry after Baden- 
Wuerttemberg eliminated similar programs last year. 
Officials highlight the fact that, even with the cuts, the 
current CDU administration is spending more on integration 
than Hesse\'s previous SPD/Green coalition government. 
 
5.  (U) Frankfurt, Hesse\'s largest and most diverse city, 
(almost 27% of the population does not hold a German 
passport) has a major focus on language and assimilation. 
Frankfurt Commissioner for Integration Albrecht Magen cites 
the Frankfurt initiative \"Mama learns German\", which 
provides German-language training for immigrant mothers, as 
an important success.  The program is completely funded by 
Frankfurt and has become the template for similar 
initiatives in Stuttgart and other cities across Germany. 
Frankfurt Chairwoman for Multicultural Affairs Helga Nagel 
maintains that \"Mama learns German\" promotes female 
empowerment by removing mothers from an often limiting and 
conservative family and social structure.  Frankfurt\'s 
private sector is active in a variety of formal and 
informal integration efforts, including sports and leisure 
programs and independent outreach initiatives. 
 
NGOs, Opposition Parties Reject Hesse\'s Approach 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
6.  (U) The Council For Foreigners in Hesse (AGAH), an 
umbrella organization of Hesse\'s local offices for 
foreigners and NGOs, disagrees with the Hesse initiative. 
While the group acknowledges that German-language education 
is essential for integration, they stress the need for a 
more comprehensive approach, including help for abused 
women as well as initiatives to prevent hate crimes and 
racism.  The AGAH maintains that Hesse\'s budget cuts and 
single-minded focus on language threaten many of these 
goals.  Illustrating the point, AGAH chairman Manuel 
Parrondo quotes a government poster reading \"Only somebody 
who speaks German gets into first class.\"  The German word 
Klasse means both \"grade\" and \"class\", and Parrondo 
believes that the government\'s campaign implies that all 
non-German speaking foreigners are second-class citizens. 
 
7.  (U) Opposition parties in Hesse evince a predictable 
but strongly-felt resistance to the CDU program.  SPD 
education spokesman Lothar Quantz condemns the recommended 
exclusion of foreign students from classes because of 
insufficient language skills, saying that \"these kids 
require more support rather than less.\"  The FDP has a 
similar position.  Hesse\'s Green Party criticizes the CDU\'s 
lack of dialogue with NGOs and churches on integration, and 
sees a growing alienation between the Hesse government and 
groups working with foreigners.  Opposition parties 
continue to work against Hesse\'s integration program in the 
state legislature but are unable to overcome the CDU\'s 
absolute parliamentary majority. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
8.  (SBU) Hesse\'s initiative is the latest chapter in 
Germany\'s continuing struggle to assimilate its immigrant 
population while preserving a distinctly German cultural 
identity.  Although some Germans may view immigration as a 
threat to the \"traditional\" German way of life, the vast 
majority recognizes the need for integration.  German 
cities and industries already depend heavily upon an 
immigrant workforce to power their economies, and Germany\'s 
demographic outlook (an aging population coupled with a 
dwindling birth rate) underscores the need for a continued 
influx of workers to support the economy and maintain the 
country\'s extensive social welfare system.  How the 
integration of these immigrants should proceed remains 
undecided, however, and the speed and scope of Germany\'s 
efforts in this area is and will remain part of the 
political discourse for the foreseeable future.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"13622","1/30/2004 7:39","04FRANKFURT737","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 000737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COLLECTIVE 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS, EUR/ERA, AND EB/TPP/ATT/ATP 
STATE PASS USTR 
TREASURY FOR OAISA SOBEL HARLOW CARNES 
HHS FOR FDA 
USDOC FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: Sanofi-Aventis Takeover Battle Ignites Political 
Dispute over Jobs 
 
 
1. Sanofi-Synthelabo\'s bid to take over French-German 
pharmaceutical company Aventis has sparked resistance in 
Germany, particularly over French government remarks 
suggesting that Germany will absorb all the job losses. 
 
2. The Sanofi-Synthelabo bid is facing fierce resistance in 
Hesse, location of Aventis\' German headquarters and its 
largest production facility.  (NOTE: Aventis dates from the 
1999 merger of Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst, the world\'s 
biggest pharmaceutical company until the 1990\'s;  it employs 
9000 people in Germany, of which 7800 in the Frankfurt area 
-- END NOTE).  At the center of controversy are the French 
government\'s apparent support for the Sanofi bid and remarks 
Monday by French Social minister Francois Fillon that jobs 
in France are not at stake (implying that Aventis\' 
operations in Germany are at risk).  The takeover would 
create the world\'s third largest pharmaceutical company. 
 
3. Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU/Christian 
Democrats) sharply criticized the French government\'s role 
in Sanofi\'s takeover plans (\"this is not how partners treat 
each other\") and said Sanofi intends to transfer \"a great 
deal\" of Germany\'s biotech competence to France and with it 
thousands of jobs.  Hesse SPD caucus chief leader Juergen 
Walter criticized the bid as the product of an \"aggressive 
French industrial policy that goes far over the top.\" 
German chemicals union IG-BCE warned of a catastrophe for 
German biotech if Sanofi succeeds.  Aventis opposes the 
Sanofi bid and is looking for an alternative partner. 
 
4.  The German government is reportedly engaged on the issue 
at the national level.  According to media reports, 
Economics/Labor Minister Wolfgang Clement (SPD) is  in talks 
with the French government and with various companies. 
 
5.  COMMENT. The issues involved in the Sanofi-Aventis 
takeover battle -- and resistance to the French government\'s 
apparent role -- are politically salient in Germany.  The 
Hesse State Chancellery believes that political support for 
Aventis in Germany will prevent the takeover.  The Frankfurt 
Economic Promotion Board points to the one billion euros 
Aventis has invested in Frankfurt over the last five years 
(including the world\'s largest production site for inhalable 
insulin).  The Aventis works council in Frankfurt says the 
Sanofi-Synthelabo bid is a desperate move to save Sanofi 
itself being taken over and points out that Sanofi would 
likely dissolve the Hoechst holding company (making the 
merged company exclusively French).  Sources in the Hesse 
Economics Ministry say Aventis probably cannot ward off 
takeover unless it can find another partner. 
"
"13644","1/30/2004 14:54","04FRANKFURT772","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 000772 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Uproar Follows Plan to Relocate German Crime Bureau 
 
 
1. SUMMARY. Protests against the German government\'s 
surprise proposal to relocate to Berlin much of the BKA 
(Bundeskriminalamt - German equivalent of the FBI) have 
prompted the Interior Ministry to back down for the moment. 
Interior Minister Otto Schily (SPD/Social Democrat) 
announced in early January that the terrorism and 
transnational crime offices of the BKA would move to Berlin 
in order to better coordinate the German response on these 
issues.  Under the plan, the BKA would move 2500 jobs from 
Wiesbaden to Berlin and close its subsidiary in Bonn- 
Meckenheim (1000 employees).  Critics (some within Schily\'s 
own party) argue that the move to Berlin would damage the 
BKA as an organization, cost at least EUR 500 million (USD 
625 million), and threaten German federalism.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. On January 8, Interior Minister Otto Schily announced a 
plan to relocate the BKA\'s terrorism and transnational crime 
units from Wiesbaden (Hesse) and Meckenheim (North Rhine- 
Westphalia - NRW) to Berlin over the next four years. 
Schily asserted that the move would facilitate cooperation 
between the BKA and other German law enforcement agencies, 
citing difficulties last year coordinating the response to 
the kidnapping of German tourists in northern Africa. 
 
Opposition Loud and Wide 
------------------------ 
 
3. Reaction to Schily\'s announcement was immediate and 
overwhelmingly negative.  Hesse Minister-President (M-P) 
Roland Koch (CDU/Christian Democrat) blasted Schily for not 
informing him beforehand and called the move \"outrageous\" 
and politically motivated.  Critics from within Schily\'s own 
party, including NRW Minister-President Peer Steinbrueck, 
have been almost as vocal.  Steinbrueck wrote a letter to 
Chancellor Schroeder on the matter calling for 
reconsideration of the relocation plans.  In an unusual 
move, federal Development Aid Minister Heidemarie Wieczorek- 
Zeul (SPD) spoke to 6000 protesters at a rally in Wiesbaden 
on January 24, criticizing Schily for not consulting the 
cabinet and demanding that Schily withdraw the relocation 
plan.  Many BKA employees have vigorously opposed the move, 
claiming that they were \"hoodwinked\" by BKA leadership. 
 
4. In a letter to minister-presidents in the other fifteen 
German states, Koch argued that the BKA move would call into 
question Germany\'s strong tradition of federalism and 
potentially jeopardize other federal agencies around 
Germany, including the German Supreme Court (Karlsruhe), 
Federal Labor Office (Nuremberg), and Office for the 
Protection of the Constitution (Cologne).  Koch has received 
support from other minister-presidents, notably Rheinland- 
Pfalz M-P Kurt Beck (a locally popular SPD figure with 
strong party connections) and Bavarian M-P Edmund Stoiber. 
 
5. Media critics point to the high cost of the relocation 
(at least 500 million euros) and question whether the move 
would make the BKA more effective.  Schily took hits from 
all around, as Schroeder hesitated to back the plan and news 
media obtained a videotape of a high-level BKA meeting, 
casting BKA leadership in a negative light.  Schily has 
committed to reconsider the proposal \"from the ground up\"; 
political observers expect BKA president Kersten to lose his 
job over the controversy. 
 
6. COMMENT: Schily\'s failure to seek cabinet approval or 
consult state politicians before announcing the plan has 
left him isolated against a strong and bipartisan tide of 
opposition.  A strong BKA is a critical component of German 
cooperation in the war on terror, and the ongoing debate 
over the proposed move to Berlin could hamper the agency\'s 
operational effectiveness, whatever the merits of Schily\'s 
plans to bring all terrorism-fighting agencies together in 
one city.  Schily\'s announcement follows a decision last 
year to move the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND - Germany\'s 
equivalent of the CIA) from Pullach (near Munich) to Berlin. 
Concerns over upheaval within the BKA, the high cost of 
relocation, and political fallout in the important states of 
North Rhine-Westphalia and Hesse may sink the idea for good. 
END COMMENT. 
"
"14113","2/20/2004 8:41","04FRANKFURT1390","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","00FRANKFURT3078|01FRANKFURT6028|03FRANKFURT8335|04HAMBURG1|98FRANKFURT6465","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 001390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: GERMAN STATE FIRST TO BAN HEADSCARVES ON PUBLIC 
SCHOOL TEACHERS 
 
REF:  A) 98 Frankfurt 6465; B) 00 Frankfurt 3078; 
      C) 01 Frankfurt 6028; D) 03 Frankfurt 8335 
      E) 04 Hamburg 0001 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On April 1, Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) will 
become the first German state to ban the use of headscarves 
by teachers in public schools.  The new law does not apply 
to students (unlike in France) and specifically permits 
Christian and Jewish symbols.  A wide majority of 
legislators have voiced broad support for the ban, proposed 
in reaction to a lawsuit by Muslim educator Fereshta Ludin 
(reftels).  State politicians see Ms. Ludin as an extremist 
and view the headscarf as a divisive political symbol rather 
than protected religious expression. 
 
2. (U) As defendant in the Ludin constitutional court case 
(ref D), the B-W state government is rushing to enact 
Germany\'s first law banning headscarves, arguing that the 
state must defend the neutrality of public schools and 
oppose discrimination against women.  B-W Minister for 
Education, Annette Schavan (Christian Democrat/CDU), 
presented the draft law on February 4, calling the headscarf 
a political symbol for \"the suppression of women [and] an 
interpretation of Islam contrary to the principle of equal 
rights for men and women\" and therefore contrary to the 
German constitution.  Schavan defended allowing Christian 
and Jewish symbols in public schools, since the B-W state 
constitution says education should be based on Christian and 
Jewish traditions (articles 12, 15, and 16). 
 
3. (SBU) There is overwhelming legislative support for the 
ban.  Social Democratic/SPD reps argue that teachers who 
wear headscarves undermine the integration of Muslim women 
into mainstream society.  SPD legislators Nils Schmid and 
Herbert Moser told a Consulate representative that schools 
must not reinforce discrimination against women, calling 
Ludin\'s legal campaign an affront to the German 
constitution.  Both are confident that the courts will 
uphold the law.  Citing a confidential source at the Federal 
Constitutional Court, Moser repeated something echoed by 
other sources as well, namely that Ludin\'s court fees are 
paid by the Islamic lobby group Milli Goerues (as additional 
\"justification\" for the accusation that Ludin has a 
political rather than a religious agenda).  By way of 
example, Schmid -- who recently visited the U.S. on an IV 
program -- pointed to his wife, a devout Muslim who strongly 
opposes the headscarf. 
 
4. (U) A handful of politicians argue the law goes too far 
in banning expression.  Greens caucus leader Winfried 
Kretschmann called for allowing headscarves unless schools 
or communities object.  FDP (Free Democrat) representatives 
support the ban, but -- like Greens -- express concerns that 
the German high court may strike down the law\'s preferential 
treatment of Christian and Jewish symbols. 
 
5. (SBU) Within the state government, experts support the 
ban but worry about its consequences.  The state\'s special 
representative for minorities, Christian Storr, opined 
privately that Ludin has become the mouthpiece of the 
Islamic fundamentalists who bankroll her legal battles. 
Storr voiced concern that the ban could spur economic or 
social discrimination against Muslim women who choose to 
wear a headscarf.  Storr expects that the Federal 
Constitutional Court will find fault with the new law\'s 
special treatment of Christian and Jewish symbols, adding to 
the legal uncertainty.  NOTE:  The law leaves open the 
question of customs vital to other religious minorities -- 
both women and men -- for instance Sikh headdress.  END 
NOTE. 
 
6. (U) COMMENT:  The B-W government is hurriedly enacting 
the ban in reaction to the verdict in the Ludin case (ref 
D), since failure to pass new legislation might compel 
Baden-Wuerttemberg to give Ms. Ludin a teaching position. 
Because the draft law gives preferential treatment to the 
Christian and Jewish religions, however, it is unlikely to 
become the last word on this question.  END COMMENT. 
 
PASI 
"
"14248","2/25/2004 9:26","04FRANKFURT1495","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE327580","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 001495 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, MASS, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: Rheinland-Pfalz Lobbies for U.S. Troops to Stay 
 
REF: A) 03 STATE 327580, B) Frankfurt-EUR/AGS email 19Feb04 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) Concerned over the USG Global Posture Review (ref 
A), the state of Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) is fighting hard to 
hang on to the approximately 24,000 active-duty U.S. 
soldiers stationed within the state. Home to US Air Force 
Europe (USAFE) headquarters at Ramstein Airbase as well as 
the airbase at Spangdahlem and Army bases at Baumholder and 
Pirmasens, the U.S. military is one of Rheinland-Pfalz\'s 
largest employers.  Despite assurances that the upcoming 
decision will be based on strategic considerations, R-P 
leaders are looking for \"carrots\" to convince the USG to 
retain a sizable presence in SW Germany.  Press coverage 
and speculation on possible outcomes continue to raise 
anxiety levels.  END SUMMARY. 
 
R-P Takes Advantage of Congressional Staff Visit 
to Make Case For Basing 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. (SBU) In reaction to the President\'s November 
announcement that the USG will review stationing of forces 
worldwide (ref A), Rheinland-Pfalz has initiated a lobbying 
campaign with the goal of maintaining current troop 
strength.  The state sent a delegation to Washington in 
late 2003, held extensive meetings with USAFE and USAREUR 
(US Army Europe, in Heidelberg) and recently sponsored the 
visit of a group of congressional staffers to discuss the 
future of the U.S. military in Germany (organized by a 
German-American NGO, the Hanseatic Institute).  During the 
three-day program, staffers met with state and local 
officials and toured U.S. bases and the city of 
Kaiserslautern (home to the largest overseas American 
military community in the world) before traveling to 
Bamberg and Berlin, where they met with representatives of 
the MFA, MOD and Chancellery. 
 
3. (SBU) In their briefing to Congressional staffers 
(attended by Pol/Econ rep), R-P Interior Ministry officials 
previewed an \"incentives package\" they will soon submit to 
the USG.  The package highlights the state\'s receptive 
attitude towards the U.S. military presence and proposes 
economic inducements designed to make basing more 
affordable.  Rheinland-Pfalz officials also announced that 
a high-level delegation will visit Washington on March 23- 
24 to engage decision-makers on the issue.  The German 
Embassy in Washington will coordinate the program. 
 
4. (SBU) The incentives package\'s focus is a public-private 
initiative to build new military housing, with public land 
to be donated by the state and federal governments 
providing land (either free or at reduced cost), and 
construction supplied by a private developer (as yet 
unnamed).  Under the proposed arrangement (along the lines 
of the Residential Communities Initiative within the U.S.), 
the developer would lease the new developments to the U.S. 
military, providing new housing and related facilities 
(community center, pre-schools) without requiring the U.S. 
military to pay for construction up front.  NOTE:  Staffers 
pointed out that the RCI program in the U.S. involves long- 
term leases (up to 50 years), and questioned whether 
Rheinland-Pfalz would be able to secure private financing 
given the shorter time horizon of overseas bases.  END 
NOTE. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5. (SBU) R-P officials continue to press their case despite 
USG assurances that the basing review is neither connected 
to recent disagreements over Iraq nor subject to influence 
through lobbying.  R-P officials fear the state\'s rural 
economy will not be able to recover from massive troop 
reductions in the same way that Bavaria, a state with a 
larger and more diverse infrastructure, could, especially 
given Germany\'s long-term economic stagnation.  In the 
absence of a final decision, R-P officials have targeted 
their lobbying efforts to respond to recent \"insider 
reports\" (in Stars and Stripes, Wall Street Journal, and 
Handelsblatt) on timetables and numbers of troop reductions 
in Germany, despite the absence of any confirmation of 
these reports through official channels. 
 
6. (SBU) R-P officials claim to be confident that Ramstein 
will remain largely intact in the upcoming review but worry 
about other bases in the area, particularly Baumholder 
(13,000 troops) and Spangdahlem (5,000).  CG and EUCOM 
Deputy Commander General Charles Wald are scheduled to meet 
with Rheinland-Pfalz Minister-President Kurt Beck (SPD 
Social Democrat) in April to follow up on U/S Grossman\'s 
consultations in Berlin.  In the interim, we expect 
lobbying efforts to remain intense  Rheinland-Pfalz feels 
that it has nothing to gain and everything to lose by 
sitting on the sidelines as the process unfolds.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
PASI 
"
"14729","3/9/2004 10:49","04FRANKFURT1938","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 001938 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, L/LEI, EB/ESC, AND EUR/AGS 
 
USDOJ FOR CRIMINAL DIVISION, OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND VIOLENT 
CRIMES - TERESA WALLBAUM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PINR, PGOV, AG, GM 
SUBJECT: German High Court Restricts Police Surveillance 
 
1. SUMMARY: On March 3, the First Senate of the Federal 
Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe sharply restricted 
application of a 1998 law authorizing the electronic 
surveillance of private homes for law enforcement purposes. 
The Court ruled that police eavesdropping in private 
residences is a violation of the German Constitution\'s 
guarantee of human dignity and limited the practice to cases 
where serious crimes are concerned (involving a possible 
sentence of over five years) are concerned.  Law enforcement 
officials expressed concern that the precedent will restrict 
Germany\'s ability to monitor suspected organized crime and 
terrorist activities.  However, the restrictions will affect 
only a small number of the relatively infrequent cases where 
electronic surveillance is used in private homes.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
2.  After 15 years of debates, the Kohl government -- at 
that time trying to fight the spread of organized crime -- 
reached agreement with the opposition Social Democrats/SPD 
in 1998 to authorize police to enter private homes for 
surveillance purposes (the law required a two-thirds 
legislative majority).  German liberals (then in coalition) 
generally opposed the law:  Federal Justice Minister Sabine 
Leutheuser-Schnarrenberger (FDP/Free Democrat) resigned over 
the plan in 1996, and after the law went into effect, former 
FDP ministers Leutheuser-Schnarrenberg, Burkhard Hirsch and 
Gerhard Baum filed a constitutional challenge against it. 
 
VERDICT AND IMPLICATIONS 
------------------------ 
 
3.  Article 13 of the German constitution guarantees the 
sanctity of private homes.  Judges ruled that electronic 
surveillance is not an inherent violation of Article 13, but 
certain ways of executing electronic surveillance in private 
homes could conflict with Article 1 Para 1, which guarantees 
the invulnerability of human dignity, the most important 
basic right in the constitution.  The state may not 
eavesdrop on personal conversations with family members or 
confidants (lawyers, priests, and doctors) in private homes, 
and electronic surveillance is permissible only when police 
have evidence in advance that conversations are likely to 
provide information on illegal activities.  The court banned 
surveillance where the suspect is alone in his home with 
family members who are not involved in any criminal 
activity, and in cases of misdemeanors and less serious 
felonies (those involving prison terms of less than five 
years), and stipulated the police must delete any private 
conversations immediately.  The Court gave the Federal 
Government until June 30, 2005 to comply with the new 
regulation.  Two of the eight judges, Renate Jaeger and 
Christine Hohmann-Dennhardt, published a minority opinion 
strongly opposing police eavesdropping in private homes. 
 
4.  The German police union criticized the verdict as a 
setback for the fight against organized crime in Germany. 
The Federal Ministry of Justice took a more positive stance, 
noting that the court upheld police surveillance (albeit 
under restrictive conditions).  The Ministry further noted 
that almost 90 percent of the cases of electronic 
surveillance of private homes already involved very serious 
crimes  and would be still admissible under the Federal 
Constitutional Court ruling.  Also, tPolice use this 
investigative method in relatively few cases has been 
employed is relatively low, with a  (total of 119 cases 
between 1998 and 2002).  Some liberal politicians welcomed 
the new restrictions -- such as Baden-Wuerttemberg Minister 
of Justice Corinna Werwick-Hertneck (FDP) -- while others 
called for further safeguards against invasion of privacy. 
 
5.  COMMENT:  The verdict imposes several restrictions on 
eavesdropping on private residences.  For example, suspicion 
of  mere support for a terrorist organization can no longer 
form the basis for eavesdropping on private homes, since 
that crime carries a maximum sentence of under five years. 
It should be noted, however,  that this surveillance 
technique has always been a last resort and has been used 
infrequently in the past.  The ruling did not address Other 
other forms of technical surveillance were not addressed in 
the ruling..  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"15235","3/23/2004 9:17","04FRANKFURT2367","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 002367 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Pro-U.S. Rheinland-Pfalz Leader Kurt Beck Remains 
Strong Despite Faltering Social Democrats 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Rheinland-Pfalz Minister-President since 
1994, Kurt Beck (SPD/Social Democratic) is one of the most 
popular leaders in the traditionally conservative state\'s 
60-year history.  Economic indices in R-P remain relatively 
strong at a time of national stagnation, and Beck\'s coalition 
government with the liberal Free Democrats (FDP) is the 
only one of its kind in Germany.  Beck supports Chancellor 
Schroeder and the government\'s Agenda 2010 economic reform 
package and consistently takes a more pro-U.S. stance than 
many others in the SPD.  Well-informed insiders claim Beck 
has no national political ambitions.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Traditionally a conservative state (and home of 
former Christian Democratic (CDU) Chancellor Helmut Kohl), 
Rheinland-Pfalz voters elected Beck as Minister-President 
in 1994 and re-elected him in 1996 and 2001.   Beck\'s 
moderate and consensus-oriented approach has garnered him 
considerable support within the CDU opposition as well as 
his own party.  Beck spoke out in support of U.S. forces 
during the war in Iraq and has tried to improve commercial 
ties with the U.S., particularly with R-P\'s sister-state 
South Carolina. 
 
3. (U) Although the SPD is currently not polling well in 
R-P (a reflection of nationwide trends), Beck retains a 
high personal approval rating in contrast to Christian 
Democrat opposition leader Christoph Boehr  indeed, Beck 
is regarded as the most popular SPD Minister-President 
nationwide.  Beck\'s recent election as SPD deputy chairman 
fueled speculation that he might have a future at the 
national level.  Beck is an important stalwart for 
Chancellor Schroeder in predominantly conservative SW 
Germany.  The SPD-FDP coalition in R-P also appeals to a 
chancellor looking for bipartisan support for economic 
reforms. 
 
4. (SBU) Observers, however, see a move to the national 
level as unlikely.  Mainz University\'s Dr. Juergen Falter 
asserts that Beck is too provincial to have a future in 
Berlin.  In Falter\'s opinion, Beck\'s professional 
background -- he is trained as an electrician, with limited 
academic or university experience  could affect his 
chances for a ministerial portfolio at the national level 
(although it strengthens his \"working-man\" appeal for many 
in the mostly-rural Rheinland-Pfalz).  Falter cites as a 
further caveat other popular politicians from R-P who have 
tried to become national figures and failed, most notably 
former R-P Minister-President Rudolf Scharping (SPD) and R- 
P FDP head Rainer Bruderle (although at least one other 
- former chancellor Helmut Kohl - succeeded). 
 
. 
 
5.  (SBU) Beck\'s press spokesperson, Monika Fuhr, confided 
to us that Beck sees his future in R-P.  She maintains that 
Beck himself never sought a national party position but 
yielded to pressure from the R-P SPD to build stronger 
linkages between Rheinland-Pfalz and decision-makers in 
Berlin.  Fuhr says that Beck remains committed to 
Rheinland-Pfalz and has no interest in assuming a position 
in the national government. 
 
6. (SBU) Although Beck seldom comments on national 
politics, his new position as deputy party chair ties him 
more closely to the national SPD and could make 
him more vulnerable to increasing dissatisfaction with 
Schroeder\'s administration.  Coalition partner FDP also has 
mixed feelings about the M-P\'s increased responsibilities 
and fears it could tarnish the R-P coalition\'s solid 
reputation. 
 
7. (SBU) COMMENT: Beck\'s moderate views and pro-U.S. stance 
have made him a valuable local partner for the USG on a 
number of issues, and his support will facilitate smooth 
implementation of upcoming force restructuring within 
Rheinland-Pfalz, which hosts 24,700 active-duty U.S. 
troops.  Although his new position with the national SPD 
could bring more fire his way on economic and reform 
issues, Beck has shown remarkable resiliency in his eight 
years as Minister-President and, given the lack of a 
credible challenger from the CDU opposition or within his 
own party, he likely will continue to hold the reins of 
power in Rheinland-Pfalz until the 2006 elections and 
beyond.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"15276","3/24/2004 7:41","04FRANKFURT2404","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04REFTEL:FRANKFURT567","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

240741Z Mar 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 002404 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS, EUR/ERA, INL 
DOJ FOR OIA, AFMLS, NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCIN 
USEU FOR DOJ 
DEA HQS ONDCP 
DEPT PASS IRS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, SNAR, SOCI, GM 
SUBJECT: FRANKFURT\'S MODEL DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT PROGRAM 
FACES NEW HURDLES 
 
REFTEL: FRANKFURT 0567 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  In just a decade, Frankfurt has evolved from being 
Germany\'s drug capital to a city that uses an innovative and 
widely-praised initiative to treat and rehabilitate addicts. 
In meetings with Pol/Econ reps, police and city officials 
report new challenges, namely dealing with crack use and 
coping with substantial budget cuts at the state level. 
Police also note significant drug use among the city\'s large 
immigrant population (almost 28 percent of Frankfurt 
residents do not hold a German passport).  Post is working 
on a separate cable to address Frankfurt\'s role as a major 
transit point for ecstasy entering the U.S. market.  End 
Summary. 
 
Frankfurt Uses Old Method to Fight New Foe 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2.  The city of Frankfurt gained worldwide recognition in 
the 1990s for an integrated anti-narcotics approach that 
emphasizes treatment and rehabilitation.  Officials 
established \"fixer rooms\" within the city where addicts 
could use clean needles (under medical supervision) without 
fear of arrest.  Those participating in the voluntary 
program receive free counseling and job training, and 
doctors provide methadone replacement therapy for users 
trying to shake their heroin addiction.  Other health 
services include needle exchange and condom distribution. 
The city\'s efforts were successful, with the number of 
registered drug addicts in Frankfurt declining 38 percent in 
five years (from 5,039 in 1993 to 3,138 in 1998).  Drug- 
related deaths dropped from 108 in 1990 to 30 a decade 
later.  Cities around the world (including Vancouver) 
modeled their anti-narcotics initiatives on the Frankfurt 
system. 
 
3.  As the nineties drew to a close, however, overall drug 
use in Frankfurt began to climb because of increased crack 
cocaine consumption, rising to 4,044 registered drug addicts 
in 2002 (the last year for which statistics were available). 
Confiscation of narcotics by the police suggest an increased 
availability of cocaine -- according to Frankfurt Police 
Head for Anti-Drug Operations Werner Roth, city law 
enforcement confiscated 60 kilograms of cocaine in 2002, 
double the amount seized in 1998.  Authorities confiscated 
four kg of crack in 2002, up from 2.6 kg in 1998. 
Meanwhile, Roth noted a considerable decline in the supply 
of heroin, with only 25 kg confiscated in 2002 (as opposed 
to 73 kg in 1998).  Crack users also indulged in their 
addiction more frequently, with 71 percent of crack addicts 
surveyed in a 2002 Frankfurt study using the drug at least 
once daily. 
 
4.  Despite the lack of effective replacement therapy and a 
higher propensity for violence among crack users, Frankfurt 
Drug Office Deputy Chief Juergen Weimer reports some success 
in the city\'s efforts to stem crack use. Adopting the same 
treatment-based approach used for heroin addicts, he notes 
that the percentage of patients remaining clean after 
rehabilitation has risen to 45 percent.  Weimer also asserts 
that key statistics (including number of drug users and 
amount of drug-related deaths) in Frankfurt have leveled out 
since 2002. 
 
State Budget Cuts Curtail Parts of Frankfurt Program 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
5.  Sharp reductions in the amount of state assistance to 
Frankfurt threaten to curtail the city\'s treatment-based 
approach.  Hesse\'s 2004 budget cuts support for drug 
assistance programs by approximately 33 percent, a decrease 
that threatens counseling and treatment centers targeting 
youth.  Frankfurt depends upon state support to maintain 
these facilities, and the reduction in funding may force 
several to close. 
 
Drug Use Among Frankfurt\'s Immigrants on the Rise 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
6.  Frankfurt police also express concern over the rising 
use of drugs among the city\'s immigrant population, 
especially among ethnic Germans from the former Soviet Union 
(Russo-Germans).  Although no statistics measuring the 
extent of drug use among this group (they are listed as 
\"German\" because of their ethnic heritage) exist, police 
contend it is widespread.  Hesse\'s budget cuts will force 
several centers in an area with a high Russo-German 
population to close, potentially further aggravating the 
problem (reftel).  Police advocate closer coordination with 
immigration officials and a political recognition of the 
link between immigration and drugs. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  Frankfurt\'s international character and geographic 
location have long made it a popular staging area for new 
trends in narcotics use.  The city\'s treatment-based 
approach to deal with heroin addiction reaped substantial 
dividends in the 1990s, but authorities are struggling to 
fine-tune their approach to deal with new challenges.  The 
increasing prominence of crack cocaine, rising drug use 
among immigrants, and the advent of designer drugs like 
ecstasy (septel) could threaten the effectiveness of a 
system stretched thin by recent budget cuts.  End comment. 
"
"15679","4/5/2004 7:04","04FRANKFURT2778","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 002778 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: Hesse Leader Koch Will not Actively Seek 
Chancellor Bid -- For Now 
 
REF: 03 Frankfurt 9873 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) At the Hesse CDU (Christian Democratic) convention 
March 20, Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch announced 
that he would not actively  seek nomination as the party\'s 
candidate for chancellor in the 2006 national elections. 
Koch acknowledged Angela Merkel\'s \"undisputed\" leadership of 
the CDU while indirectly criticizing her role in the 
selection of presidential candidate Horst Koehler.  Koch\'s 
precisely formulated words left Berlin political pundits 
unanimous in assessing that he will in fact leave the door 
open to take advantage of possible future missteps on 
Merkel\'s part.  Convention delegates voiced anger at the CDU 
leadership\'s handling of the Hohmann anti-Semitism affair 
(reftel).  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) At the March 20 Hesse CDU convention in Oberursel, 
Hesse Minister-President and CDU chairman Roland Koch 
announced he would not actively seek the nomination as CDU 
chancellor candidate in 2006, adding that he considers party 
chief Angela Merkel the \"undisputed number one in the CDU.\" 
Koch said he would focus on making Hesse a conservative 
stronghold \"on the order of Bavaria\" and defending the CDU\'s 
absolute majority in 2008 Hesse state elections.  Koch 
hinted he would be less vocal on national issues, 
cautioning, however, that he \"will not be reduced to silence 
by anyone.\"  Koch criticized the party\'s rejection of 
Wolfgang Schaeuble for federal president (after Schaeuble 
had been all but officially \"anointed\") as flawed and 
unfair.  Koch was re-elected as party chairman with over 95 
percent of the vote.  Although this result would please most 
politicians, it reflects a slight decline in support over 
the past two years (he received 98.9 percent at the CDU 
convention in 2002). 
 
3. (U) Koch laid out a conservative vision on cultural, 
economic, and national security issues.  He advocated 
banning Islamic headscarves for civil servants and remarked 
-- to loud applause -- that \"we have a 2000-year Christian- 
Jewish history, and we will not banish that from our 
country.\"  As an example of economic success,  Koch cited 
Hesse\'s record on privatization (for instance, as the first 
German state to open a private jail) and pledged continued 
support for the expansion of Frankfurt airport.  He 
criticized the Greens, who \"would even agree to building a 
nuclear power plant next to the airport, if that helped to 
prevent the expansion.\"  Koch also advocated a harder line 
against terror after the Madrid bombings, including the use 
of Bundeswehr units for anti-terrorist operations within 
Germany. 
 
4. (SBU) Convention delegates told us that few expected Koch 
to challenge Merkel in 2006;  most saw his national position 
as weakened by recent \"defeats\" by Merkel, such as over the 
Hohmann affair.  Party activists remain angry at what they 
perceive to be the national CDU\'s \"unfair\" targeting of the 
Hesse CDU (and Koch, by extension) after Bundestag member 
Martin Hohmann\'s controversial references to Jews as a 
\"guilty people\" (reftel).  Hesse CDU Youth (Junge Union) 
chairman Peter Tauber put it bluntly:  \"Angela Merkel 
deliberately used the case to damage Koch ... Merkel should 
be careful what she does -- she is a politician who has 
never won an election and the party will consider that when 
selecting a challenger\" to take on Chancellor Schroeder. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT:  Koch enjoys overwhelming support and 
solidarity within the Hesse CDU.  Moreover, Koch is young 
(he just turned 46) and could still stage a leadership bid 
should Merkel make any missteps.  Indeed, press commentary 
and our discussions with German political pundits suggest 
that the prevailing view here is that Koch would 
\"reactivate\" his pursuit of the candidacy should 
circumstances so permit.  CDU activists and Koch 
acquaintances opine that his decision to lie low for now was 
inevitable given growing acceptance of Merkel as the 
putative challenger to Gerhard Schroeder.  That could change 
if Merkel stumbles.  The next big test will be the election 
of the federal president.  While Merkel has been hailed by 
some as a winner in the presidential selection infighting 
thus far, her enemies could still create difficulties by 
withholding support for CDU/CSU candidate Horst Koehler on 
the first (and maybe second) ballot.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"15782","4/7/2004 5:21","04FRANKFURT2923","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 002923 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS AND EB/OIC 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EINV, PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Leading Frankfurt Prosecutor says Germany has a 
Long Way to Go in Anti-Corruption efforts 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Frankfurt prosecutor Wolfgang 
Schaupensteiner -- Germany\'s leading expert on corruption -- 
says Germany needs stricter anti-corruption laws and a 
public awareness campaign to help overcome complacency. 
Authorities in Germany have fewer and less effective tools 
to fight corruption (particularly corporate misconduct) than 
their counterparts in the U.S.;  Germany needs U.S.-style 
measures to deal with corporate crimes coupled with enhanced 
internal controls within large companies.  A handful of 
German states maintain procurement blacklists of corrupt 
private companies;  Schaupensteiner stressed the need for an 
EU-wide blacklist of companies convicted of bribery in any 
jurisdiction.  The city of Frankfurt was the first to 
establish an anti-corruption task force.  On two of 
Germany\'s largest international bribery cases -- involving 
Frankfurt Airport Authority (Fraport) participation in the 
Tashkent and Manila airport projects -- he said that 
prosecutors face uphill battles in collecting evidence 
abroad and in forcing full disclosure by Fraport.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Corruption is more widespread in Germany than most 
Germans believe, according to Wolfgang Schaupensteiner, the 
head of the Anti-Corruption Department at the Frankfurt 
prosecutor\'s office.  Schaupensteiner, whom media deem 
Germany\'s leading expert on corruption, told consulate 
representatives that prosecutors are hampered by scarce 
resources and weak enforcement tools.  Thirty-five of the 
hundred prosecutors in Frankfurt handle commercial crimes, 
but only four of those focus on corruption.  The office has 
no internet connection and as of December 2003, had a 
backlog of 574 cases.  This huge load of pending cases means 
the statute of limitations (typically five years / 
extendable to ten years) may expire in some cases. 
Schaupensteiner noted that Frankfurt prosecutors must divide 
their time between complex commercial bribery cases and 
local corruption cases.  Frankfurt -- although no more 
corrupt than other cities in Germany -- has a higher profile 
on the issue as the first German city to institute an anti- 
corruption unit in 1989 (it currently has three full-time 
staff dealing with corruption). 
 
3. (U) Schaupensteiner praised U.S. law on corporate crimes 
and characterized the German legal framework as inadequate 
to prosecute corporate crimes.  Unlike in the U.S., German 
prosecutors cannot indict companies (only individuals).  In 
contrast to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), German stock market authorities have no mechanism to 
punish criminal misconduct by companies listed on German 
exchanges.  Schaupensteiner said the German government and 
the EU should create blacklists (Korruptionskataster) of 
companies involved in corruption at any level.  Six German 
states (including Hesse) have such blacklists, but a 
government bill which passed the Bundestag in 2002 failed in 
the conservative-dominated Bundesrat. 
 
4. (SBU) On high-profile international bribery cases, 
Schaupensteiner said that evidence points to Fraport 
misconduct in connection with airport construction projects 
in Tashkent and Manila, but that prosecutors face enormous 
procedural hurdles.  Unlike in the U.S., Schaupensteiner 
cannot force Fraport to disclose all of its files on the 
deals (it can only search for such files and ask specific 
questions).  He noted that in similar U.S. cases (Enron / 
Arthur Andersen), the failure to disclose records is itself 
a criminal offense.  Since Germany and the Philippines have 
no bilateral legal assistance treaty, German prosecutors 
face an additional hurdle in collecting evidence from the 
Philippine side.  Until Germany adopts legal reforms, 
prosecutors will face an uphill battle in such cases. 
Meanwhile, Schaupensteiner hopes political pressure will 
force large companies to improve internal controls.  For 
instance, Deutsche Bahn instituted an anti-corruption 
ombudsman in 2000 (after a corruption scandal in eastern 
Germany) which has investigated dozens of allegations, 
saving the company an estimated ten million euros to date. 
Companies themselves stand to benefit from avoiding 
misconduct and litigation:  Fraport, for instance, lost 350 
million euros on the abandoned Manila Airport project (not 
including legal costs). 
 
5. (U) COMMENT: In media appearances, Schaupensteiner points 
out that Germans condemn corruption in public life but 
assume incorrectly that their country is relatively free of 
the phenomenon.  Many Germans also accept \"insider 
influence\" as a normal part of doing business.  From a 
prosecutor\'s viewpoint, he believes simply outlawing 
corruption is not enough:  without effective legal 
procedures and sanctions against corporate misconduct, the 
state is more likely to spend its resources going after 
small fry and punish \"petty\" corruption while allowing the 
big fish -- in corporate and international commercial 
bribery cases -- to get away.  Germans appear to have little 
sense of urgency on the issue:  with a lack of legislative 
initiative for effective sanctions at the federal and state 
level -- and unwillingness to publicize an embarrassing 
phenomenon -- fighting corruption remains an idea whose time 
has not quite arrived.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"16050","4/16/2004 8:29","04FRANKFURT3169","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 003169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB BAY, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: Commission proposes directive on auditor regulation 
and oversight 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-0004 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The European Commission has proposed a 
directive to clarify the duties of statutory auditors in the 
European Union and to set out clear principles to ensure 
their objectivity and independence.  The proposal mirrors 
much of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and reflects close 
consultation with the U.S. Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board.  If adopted as currently drafted, auditors 
from third countries will have to be approved and registered 
in the EU if they audit companies listed in the EU. 
However, on the condition of reciprocity and equivalence, 
the proposed directive allows for exemptions for non-EU 
auditors from registration, quality assurance, 
investigations and sanctions.  Moreover, under certain 
conditions it would permit the transfer of audit documents 
to third country authorities.  The latter provision is 
regarded with skepticism by some member states, including 
Germany, as well as by many auditors.  End summary 
 
------------------------------- 
Combating fraud and malpractice 
------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) On March 16, the European Commission presented its 
long-delayed proposal for a directive \"on statutory audit of 
annual accounts and consolidated accounts\".  The proposed 
directive aims to clarify the duties of statutory auditors 
and to set out clear principles to ensure their objectivity 
and independence.  It would introduce a requirement for 
external quality assurance, new rules for robust public 
oversight for auditors, and promote cooperation between EU 
regulatory authorities.  The proposal also calls for the 
creation of an audit regulatory committee by member state 
representatives to assist the Commission in the 
implementation of the directive.  Moreover, the Commission 
proposes the use of International Standards on Auditing 
(ISA) and establishes a basis for co-operation with third 
countries.  The proposal must be adopted by the Council of 
Ministers and the European Parliament under the co-decision 
procedure before it can be implemented by member state 
governments. 
 
3. (SBU) The initiative is the second in a pair of 
initiatives announced in 2003 intended to improve corporate 
governance in European Union countries.  The Commission 
stressed that while the recent corporate scandals in the 
U.S. and the EU have emphasized the need for ensuring the 
credibility and reliability of companies\' financial 
statements, its proposal for a directive is not \"a knee-jerk 
response\" to these scandals, but rather reflects a long- 
standing reorientation of EU policy on statutory audit 
dating from 1996.  Nevertheless, the actual Commission 
proposal mirrors much of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Ensuring independence and quality of auditing 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) The proposal prescribes that each member state 
designate competent authorities for the approval of auditors 
and mandates that statutory audits be carried out only by 
auditors or audit firms approved by the member state where 
the audit is carried out.  Those auditors would be put in a 
public register. 
 
5. (SBU) The text would require Member States to ensure that 
auditors are subject to principles of professional ethics, 
which at least cover the overall responsibility of the 
auditors towards the public, their integrity and 
objectivity, and their professional competence and due care. 
National authorities would also have to make sure that 
auditors are independent from the audited entity and are not 
in any way involved in the latter\'s management decisions. 
Auditors would be prohibited from carrying out a statutory 
audit of a firm if they had any financial, business, 
employment or other relationship, including the provision of 
additional services, with the firm that might compromise the 
auditors\' independence.  The Commission proposal would also 
require member states to ensure that auditors be dismissed 
only where there are proper grounds - divergence of opinions 
on accounting treatments or audit procedures are not 
considered proper grounds.  Both the audited entity and the 
auditor would have to inform the competent authorities about 
the dismissal and the reasons for it. 
 
6. (SBU) The Commission proposes that all statutory audits 
prescribed by Community law be carried out in accordance 
with International Standards on Auditing (ISA), as endorsed 
by the Commission.  Moreover, it also requires that member 
states ensure a system of quality assurance for auditors 
which meets a list of specified requirements.  Among other 
things, the quality assurance system must be organized in a 
manner that is independent from the reviewed auditors.  The 
Commission proposal would also require member states to put 
in place effective systems of investigations and sanctions 
to detect, correct and prevent inadequate execution of 
statutory audits.  Where an auditor does not meet the 
requirements of the directive, national authorities would 
impose effective and proportionate civil, administrative or 
criminal penalties. 
 
7. (SBU) Reflecting the subsidiarity principle, the draft 
leaves it to Member states rather than the Commission to 
organize public oversight systems to which all auditors in 
their respective jurisdictions would be subject.  These 
national systems would have to be governed by boards 
comprising a majority of non-practitioners in auditing who 
are, nevertheless, knowledgeable in the area. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Specific rules for \"public interest entities\" 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) The draft directive also includes special 
provisions for so-called public interest entities: companies 
whose securities are traded on a regulated market as well as 
banks and insurance companies.  Such enterprises would be 
required to publish annual financial reports and to 
establish an audit committee composed of non-executive 
members of its administrative body or members of the 
supervisory board, including at least one independent member 
with competence in accounting or auditing.  The text calls 
for this audit committee, inter alia, to monitor the 
financial reporting process, the effectiveness of the 
company\'s internal controls as well as the auditor\'s 
independence, and to oversee the statutory audit of the 
firm\'s annual and consolidated accounts.  The appointment of 
an auditor by the administrative body or supervisory board 
must be based on a nomination by the audit committee.  For 
public interest entities, the proposal delegates oversight 
of auditors exclusively to non-practitioners.  More 
controversially, it would require public interest entities 
to rotate the statutory auditor or key audit partner within 
a maximum of five years, and the audit firm within a maximum 
of seven years.  As many firms will end up being classified 
as public interest entities this requirement will have far- 
reaching implications for the audit industry. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Regulatory and oversight arrangements between EU member 
states 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
9. (SBU) The Commission would require the national 
authorities to establish procedures for the approval of 
statutory auditors approved in other member states, thus 
applying the principle of mutual recognition.  The proposal 
lays out how mutual recognition of regulatory arrangements 
between member states would function:  regulatory 
arrangements of the member states would have to respect the 
principle of home country regulation and oversight by the 
member state where the auditor is approved and registered. 
For example, regarding statutory audit of consolidated 
accounts, the national authority requiring the audit of the 
consolidated accounts could not impose additional 
requirements concerning registration, quality assurance, 
auditing standards, ethics or independence on an auditor 
carrying out an audit of a subsidiary established in another 
member state.  In the case of a company whose securities are 
traded in a member state different from where it has its 
registered office, the national authority where the 
securities are traded could not impose any additional 
requirements in relation to the statutory audit. 
 
10. (SBU) Moreover, the proposal requires the responsible 
national authorities to cooperate with each other whenever 
necessary for the purpose of carrying out their duties of 
oversight of the auditors approved by them.  This includes 
assistance to the competent authorities of other member 
states, in particular the exchange of information and 
cooperation in investigation activities. 
 
--------------- 
Third countries 
--------------- 
 
11. (SBU) The Commission proposal would permit, \"on the 
condition of reciprocity,\" the competent authorities of an 
EU country to approve auditors from a third country, 
provided they can furnish proof of being approved as an 
auditor, theoretical knowledge, practical skills, and 
integrity \"equivalent\" to the provisions of the proposed 
directive, as well as legal knowledge relevant in the member 
state in question. 
 
12. (SBU) Auditors and auditing firms from third countries 
that issue audit reports of firms with securities traded in 
the EU would have to be registered in an EU member state and 
be subject to that member state\'s systems of oversight, 
quality assurance, investigations and sanctions.  Only 
auditors meeting the \"equivalent\" quality criteria could be 
registered. In order to prevent unnecessary international 
regulatory overlap, the proposed directive allows for 
exemptions from registration on the basis of reciprocity, if 
audit firms from third countries are subject to equivalent 
systems of registration and oversight.  This equivalence 
would be assessed by the Commission rather than, but in 
cooperation with, member state authorities, and be decided 
upon by the Commission as well. 
 
13. (SBU) The Commission proposal notes that the complexity 
of international group audits requires good cooperation 
between the competent authorities of the member states and 
those of third countries.  Therefore, it proposes that 
member state authorities may, under certain conditions, 
allow the transfer to the competent authorities of a third 
country of audit working papers or other documents held by 
statutory auditors subject to their jurisdiction.  The text 
lays out preconditions including that \"there are working 
arrangements on the basis of reciprocity agreed between the 
competent authorities concerned.\"  Moreover, justification 
would have to be provided by the third-country authority of 
the purpose of the request for audit working papers and 
other documents, which could only be used for the exercise 
of the third countries\' authorities\' functions of public 
oversight, quality assurance and investigations.  The 
authorities receiving the information would also need to 
respect professional secrecy requirements. 
 
--------- 
Reactions 
--------- 
 
14. (SBU) According to press reports, the German federal 
government is, in principle, in favor of the Commission 
proposal and supportive of closer cooperation with third 
countries, in particular with the U.S.  However, it is 
skeptical of the proposal on transferring audit documents 
outside EU territory.  Many observers in Germany regard the 
latter provisions as the Europeans going down on their knees 
before the Americans.  Reportedly, these provisions were 
also controversial when discussed inside the Commission and 
a number of member states are opposed to them.  Experts 
believe that it will take several years before the 
conditions for the transfer of information to third 
countries, such as approving reciprocity agreements, are 
met.  This may be due, not only to the length of time that 
will be required for the EU to consider and implement the 
legislation, but also to the fact that the Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act does not contain any rules on cooperation with other 
countries. 
 
15. (SBU) The German auditors association (IDW), while in 
principle welcoming the Commission\'s proposal, is vehemently 
opposed to external rotation.  It also criticized the 
proposal for the provision of non-auditors exclusively to 
the public oversight bodies for the public interest 
entities, arguing that this even goes beyond the provisions 
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.  Moreover, the IDW is very 
critical of the potential transfer of documents to third 
countries, evoking professional secrecy and data protection 
requirements. 
 
16. (SBU) The Federation of European Accountants (FEE) 
welcomed the Commission\'s initiative to modernize 
legislation on auditing, but also voiced concerns over the 
provisions that foresee the transfer of information to third 
countries and the mandatory rotation of auditors. 
Furthermore, the FEE criticized the Commission for proposing 
to exclude the audit profession from national oversight 
systems for listed companies. 
 
17. (SBU) According to the Financial Times, the big four 
firms (Deloitte, Ernst & Young, KPMG and PwC) are strongly 
opposed to rotation of audit firms, partly as it could 
threaten their dominance of auditing multi-national 
companies, thus providing new business opportunities for 
their medium-sized competitors. 
 
18. (SBU) Internal Market Commissioner Bolkestein briefed 
member state finance ministers about the proposal at the 
April 2-3 Informal Ecofin.  However, with a new Parliament 
and Commission not expected to be up and running until the 
fall, this matter will fall to the incoming Dutch, UK and 
Luxembourg presidencies to navigate through the EU 
legislative process before action passes to member states. 
 
19.  (U) This cable has been coordinated with USEU. 
 
20.  (U) POC: C. Ohly, Economic Specialist, e-mail 
ohlyc@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2367, fax 49-(69)-7535- 
2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"16135","4/20/2004 10:27","04FRANKFURT3351","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 003351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB GREENWOOD, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: The Lisbon Agenda: targets missed 
 
T-IA-F-03-0004 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The March 25/26 European Council 
confirmed that there is little news regarding the so-called 
Lisbon Agenda, which aims at making the EU the world\'s most 
dynamic and competitive economy by 2010.  Lack of progress 
in meeting the Lisbon targets has been highlighted in 
structural indicators compiled by the EU Commission, which 
show that instead of catching up with the U.S., the EU has 
fallen even further behind.  To a large extent, this can be 
ascribed to the member states, both with regard to slow 
implementation of EU directives and to insufficient reforms 
in areas that are exclusively their responsibility, such as 
labor market, tax or pension reform.  The outlook is not 
encouraging.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Little news at Spring Council due to limited progress 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
2. (SBU) The March 25/26 European Council once again 
highlighted the lack of progress that has been made in 
meeting the targets of the Lisbon Agenda, which aims at 
making the EU the world\'s most dynamic and competitive 
economy by 2010.  It is becoming increasingly clear that the 
EU is unlikely to achieve this goal.  Instead of catching up 
with the U.S., it has fallen even further behind.  The 
Council found that in order to reach the Lisbon target \"the 
pace of reform needs to be significantly stepped up\".  It 
agreed that the critical issue is better implementation of 
commitments already made and identified \"unacceptably high 
deficits in transposing agreed measures into national law. 
The credibility of the process requires stepping up the pace 
of reform at member state level.\"  The Council focused on 
two key areas:  Sustainable growth should be generated by 
sound macroeconomic policies, and measures to enhance 
competitiveness, such as the completion of the internal 
market, better regulation and higher rates of R&D 
investment.  Measures suggested to create \"more and better 
jobs\" include reduction of non-wage labor costs, the 
promotion of flexible forms of work and higher investment in 
education and training. 
 
3. (SBU) However, there are considerable doubts whether such 
statements will change much.  Before the Council meeting, 
Commission President Romano Prodi stated that nothing much 
could be expected from this summit in terms of economic 
policies.  He said that he is \"almost embarrassed\" to 
constantly repeat that it is high time to finally take the 
Lisbon Agenda seriously.  In a letter to Council President 
Bertie Ahern, Prodi wrote that \"We have to be honest and 
admit that the reform process has slowed down considerably.\" 
The President of the European Parliament, Pat Cox, commented 
that \"in some respects there is little news as there has 
been such limited progress\", and that the current lack of 
\"deliverability\" on Lisbon reforms could lead to a 
\"credibility gap\". 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Commission report reveals that EU is falling behind 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
4. (SBU) In its progress report to the Spring Council, the 
Commission found that the EU \"is still far from achieving 
the objectives set at the 2000 Lisbon European Council. 
Employment and productivity do not make a sufficient 
contribution to European growth.\"  The main reasons for 
this, according to the Commission are the low employment 
rate of workers aged between 55 and 64, the inadequate take- 
up and use of information and communication technologies and 
the lack of investment in knowledge sectors (research 
innovation, education, training).  Moreover, the internal 
market is still too fragmented in terms of both services and 
intra-EU trade. 
 
5. (SBU) The structural indicators compiled by the 
Commission show that the EU has not managed to catch up with 
the U.S.  In 2003, GDP per capita was 39% higher in the U.S. 
than in the EU.  While the difference has been reduced by 
three percentage points, the EU is still lagging far behind 
the U.S.  The EU has also fallen back with regard to labor 
productivity growth, with an annual average of 1.8% in the 
U.S. between 1999 and 2003 and only 0.7% in the EU.  The gap 
in labor productivity with the US has thus widened and 
accounts for 40% of the difference in GDP per capita.  In 
2002, the participation rate in the EU was 64.3%, clearly 
below the 67% target for 2005 and 70% in 2010 - and even 
further below the U.S. employment rate of 71.9%. 
 
6. (SBU) In its progress report, the Commission identified 
three priorities for 2004:  more investment in networks and 
knowledge, the reinforcement of industrial competitiveness 
and more measures to increase labor market participation, in 
particular of older workers. 
 
------------ 
Whose fault? 
------------ 
 
7. (SBU) The lion\'s share of the problem lies at the member 
state level.  According to the Commission\'s progress report, 
\"the performance of the member States in transposing the 
directives related to the Lisbon strategy area is . 
mediocre.\"  Currently the share of transposed directives 
amounts to \"an average of 58% across the Union\". 
 
8. (SBU) Moreover, there are many areas in which 
responsibility for reforms lies exclusively with the member 
states, such as labor market, pension or tax reform. 
According to competition Commissioner Mario Monti, the 
achievement of the Lisbon target \"largely depends on factors 
which are outside the Community control,\" i.e. at the member 
state level.  Clearly, member states\' efforts have not been 
sufficient:  The Commission finds that labor market reforms 
have been stepped up but appear insufficient to reach the 
employment targets.  Similarly, despite significant progress 
in pension reforms, long-term sustainability of public 
finances is not yet secure in about half of the member 
states. 
 
------- 
Outlook 
------- 
 
9. (SBU) After the Spring summit, Council President Bertie 
Ahern stated that \"the climate for delivering the Lisbon 
Agenda is better than at any time in the past four years\". 
Ahead of the Lisbon mid-term review in spring 2005, the 
Council invited the Commission to establish a high-level 
group headed by Wim Kok, the former Dutch Prime Minister, to 
carry out an independent review (USEU septel).  The group 
should prepare a report identifying measures which together 
form a consistent strategy to achieve the Lisbon objectives. 
 
10. (SBU) Comment:  It is unlikely that another report will 
produce much value added.  Everybody knows very well what 
needs to be done, now it is high time to walk the talk. End 
comment. 
 
11. (U) This cable has been coordinated with USEU. 
 
12. (U) POC: C. Ohly, Economic Specialist, e-mail 
ohlyc@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2367, fax 49-(69)-7535- 
2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"16251","4/22/2004 14:28","04FRANKFURT3507","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","04BERLIN1028|04MUNICH149|04STATE4493","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L FRANKFURT 003507 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/22/2014 
TAGS: SOCI, PHUM, PREL, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG REMAINS SKEPTICAL OF 
SCIENTOLOGISTS, SLOW TO CONSIDER OFFER OF DIALOGUE 
 
REF: A. STATE 4493 B. BERLIN 1028 C. MUNICH 149 
 
Classified By: Consul General Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) state authorities 
stand by their designation of the Church of Scientology (CoS) 
as an extremist sect and will continue official surveillance 
of CoS activities for the time being.  State government 
representatives are still considering our request (per ref A) 
for direct dialogue between CoS and local authorities. 
Follow-up discussions indicate that achieving progress will 
be difficult and will require continued USG engagement.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) On March 11, Poloff delivered Ref A points to 
Hans-Werner Carlhoff, head of Baden-Wuerttemberg\'s 
Interministerial Working Group on Sects, regarding USG 
support for the Church of Scientology\'s request for an 
informal dialogue with German authorities.  Carlhoff promised 
that the interministerial group would consider the USG 
demarche. 
 
3.  (C) Carlhoff pointed out \"inaccuracies\" in the latest USG 
Human Rights Report, namely that CoS is the only religion 
surveilled by B-W authorities (they monitor radical Islam as 
well) as well as the claim that CoS enjoys tax-exempt status 
in B-W (it does not).  According to Carlhoff, a de facto 
exchange already exists between the Church of Scientology and 
B-W authorities: the State Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution (OPC) mails its periodic public reports on 
Scientology to CoS representatives, and the CoS frequently 
sends copies of Scientologist literature to the B-W 
government. 
 
4.  (C) During the demarche, Poloff made clear that the USG 
views the CoS issue as one of religious freedom.  Carlhoff 
emphasized that Scientologists, like Satanists, are 
guaranteed freedom of conscience and religion under Article 
Four of Germany\'s constitution.  He noted, however, that 
Scientology tactics differ from those of other proselytizing 
groups like Mormons and Jehovah\'s Witnesses, calling CoS 
methods questionable and sometimes intimidating.  By way of 
example, he confided that the B-W CoS had forwarded the 
addresses of state politicians to CoS Europe headquarters for 
lobbying purposes, adding that CoS demonstrations in 
Stuttgart had featured a poster with his photo that said \"Get 
Rid of Carlhoff\".  He also claimed local Scientologist 
protestors often can\'t speak German, hinting that the Church 
recruits foreigners (particularly from the former Yugoslavia) 
to bolster its turnout at rallies. 
 
5.  (C) Carlhoff said that while the CoS does have local 
adherents, the organization is so tightly centralized that 
the B-W government has difficulty identifying genuine local 
decision-makers to engage as dialogue partners.  According to 
Carlhoff, local politicians who attempted to engage the CoS 
in dialogue in the past often found that the CoS used the 
meetings for propaganda purposes.  He also downplayed B-W\'s 
December 12 court verdict upholding CoS\'s non-profit status, 
qualifying the decision by explaining that it dealt only with 
CoS\'s charitable operations and not the organization as a 
whole. 
 
6.  (C) During an April 19 follow-up discussion, Carlhoff 
confirmed that B-W government officials are still examining 
the CoS request for dialogue but hinted that it would be 
difficult to open a dialogue with an organization under state 
surveillance.  We noted that (opportunities for) dialogue 
could occur at a variety of formal and informal levels and 
said that we would remain engaged on the issue. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  (C) Skepticism and distrust of the Church of Scientology 
within the Baden-Wuerttemberg government are widespread, as 
evidenced by a December 2003 state parliament session in 
which various representatives harshly criticized the CoS and 
its activities.  While the CoS has asked for dialogue with 
high-level B-W government figures (including Minister for 
Culture Annette Schavan and State Secretary Helmut Rao), we 
believe that any meetings likely to occur will be informal 
and low-level.  Baden-Wuerttemberg representatives 
acknowledge our status as an interested party, but the 
state\'s continued categorization of the CoS as a subversive 
organization makes a self-sustaining dialogue unlikely at the 
present time.  Post will continue to engage B-W government 
representatives on the issue.  END COMMENT. 
BODDE 
"
"16554","5/3/2004 13:51","04FRANKFURT3861","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 003861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB BAY, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, STUART 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: New Bundesbank President calms situation; 
ethics moves to the fore 
 
 
T-IA-F-04-0004 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not 
for Internet distribution. 
 
Ref: (A) Berlin 1385 (B) Berlin 1416 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Well-respected monetary policy 
expert Axel Weber was appointed as the new Bundesbank 
President.  A supporter of stability-oriented monetary 
policy, his nomination was well-received across party- 
lines and among academics as well as in the financial 
markets.  While many observers had feared that the 
federal government would take advantage of the 
opportunity provided by Welteke\'s resignation to 
increase its influence on the Bundesbank, these 
concerns were alleviated by the nomination of Weber. 
Meanwhile, the Welteke case appears to have increased 
German public sensitivity with regard to ethical 
conduct.  End summary. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Axel Weber Appointed as Bundesbank President 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) On April 30, Axel Weber was formally appointed 
as the new Bundesbank President by President Rau.  On 
April 27, the Bundesbank board approved his nomination 
by the federal government. 
 
3. (SBU) Former Bundesbank President Ernst Welteke 
stepped down after the media exposed details about his 
(and his family\'s) four-day stay at a luxury hotel in 
Berlin paid for by Dresdner Bank.  Subsequently, 
Frankfurt public prosecutors launched an investigation 
to assess whether Bundesbank President Ernst Welteke 
\"accepted an advantage\" or Dresdner Bank intended to 
gain one.  The investigation is still underway. 
Initially reluctant to resign, Welteke stubbornly 
rejected criticism but eventually conceded when new 
accusations appeared in the media about a stay at a 
Formula 1 race in Monaco at the invitation of BMW.  The 
carmaker also owns a bank, which is supervised by the 
Bundesbank. 
 
--------- 
Axel Who? 
--------- 
 
4. (SBU) Although largely unknown to the wider public, 
Weber is a well-respected academic, whose main research 
area is monetary policy.  He teaches economics at the 
University of Cologne and is a member of the Council of 
Economic Advisers to the federal government.  From 1998 
to 2002, he was director of the Frankfurt-based Center 
for Financial Studies, which has close ties with both 
central banks - including the ECB - and private 
financial institutions.  Reportedly, Weber is a 
confidant of ECB chief economist Otmar Issing. 
 
5. (SBU) Since October 2000, Weber has been a member of 
the Academic Advisory Council to the Bundesbank.  He 
was Visiting Fellow at the Brookings Institutions in 
1992/93, and before that at the Center of Economic 
Research of the University of Tilburg and at the Queen 
Mary College of the University of London.  He is also a 
Research Fellow of the Center for Economic Policy 
Research (CEPR). 
 
-------------------- 
Where does he stand? 
-------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Weber is politically independent and has 
described himself as a \"partisan of stability-oriented 
monetary policy\". 
 
7. (SBU) At the press conference following his 
nomination, Weber stated that the Council of Economic 
Advisers\' assessment of the current interest rate level 
last fall is still correct.  The Advisers found that 
the key interest rate was adequate given the exchange 
rate environment.  More generally, Weber argued that 
monetary policy makers should not look dogmatically at 
only a few variables when trying to control inflation. 
He stated that a range of variables, not only money 
supply, needs to be taken into account.  He pointed out 
that the ECB strategy was developed for the transition 
to EMU, without practical experience on how the 
transmission mechanism would work.  Although the ECB 
reviewed this last year, Weber considers the process to 
be incomplete at this point. 
 
8. (SBU) In their 2003 report, the Council of Economic 
Advisers - led by monetary policy expert Weber - 
welcomed in principle the review of the ECB\'s strategy, 
but qualified their approval by noting that the full 
integration of the two pillars (\"economic\" and 
\"monetary\" analysis) would have been advisable.  The 
Council also stated that a more precise numerical 
definition of the inflation target would have enhanced 
transparency.  More generally, it criticized that the 
methods used to collate all the information relevant 
for decision-making are not sufficiently transparent 
and understandable.  The report called for the ECB to 
further strengthen the role of its inflation and 
economic forecasts both in its decision-making and its 
communication. 
 
9. (SBU) Observers call Weber \"pragmatic and 
undogmatic\", fully in line with the \"neo-classical 
mainstream\".  He is against using monetary policy for 
anti-cyclical fine-tuning, but is well aware that 
interest rate policies have an impact on the real 
economy.  Weber has stated in the past that the low 
growth in Germany cannot be overcome by short-term 
impulses, but that there is a need for structural 
reforms.  This assessment is in line with the 
Bundesbank position. 
 
10. (SBU) When asked at the press conference whether he 
considers the current exchange rate system as 
appropriate, he answered that he finds this question 
\"somewhat weird\" and that exchange rates are the result 
of market processes. 
 
11. (SBU) Moreover, Weber stressed that the Stability 
Pact is still an important pillar of fiscal policy and 
must not be damaged.  He called for a fast reduction of 
deficits in order to restore the credibility of fiscal 
policies.  He is skeptical of proposals by some Social 
Democrats to introduce exchange rate targets or a Tobin- 
tax. 
 
12. (SBU) Weber also said at the press conference that 
the internal structural reforms launched by the 
Bundesbank are \"absolutely right\".  He suggested that 
it put more emphasis on its competence in financial 
market issues and lead the way in that area within the 
euro zone in the future.  Observers expect him to 
strengthen monetary and financial research within the 
Bundesbank in order to bolster his positions in the ECB 
Council. 
 
13. (SBU) Bert Rrup, also a member of the Council of 
Economic Advisers, characterized Weber as an advocate 
of rules-based monetary policy.  Rrup would not call 
him an \"extreme hawk\", but sees him in the Bundesbank\'s 
tradition of strict adherence to stability.  Overall, 
Rrup considers Weber to be an \"excellent macro- 
economist, laying particular emphasis on empirical work 
rk 
and with profound knowledge of monetary policy 
institutions\". 
 
14. (SBU) Weber is not known as an extrovert.  Even in 
his capacity as member of the Council of Economic 
Advisers, some of whom keep a high media profile, he 
has hardly ever spoken out.  His students at the 
University of Cologne characterize his lectures as 
\"dry\" yet \"demanding\". 
 
--------- 
Reactions 
--------- 
15. (SBU) The nomination of Weber was well received 
across party lines.  The opposition CDU, CSU and FDP 
all welcomed the government\'s decision, stressing that 
it is in the interest of the Bundesbank\'s independence. 
Both academic and financial market circles reacted 
positively. 
 
16. (SBU) Some observers, however, regard his lack of 
practical central banking experience as a weakness. 
Moreover, they claim that he has no experience in 
managing and restructuring a large institution. 
 
17. (SBU) Others criticize that the natural and best- 
qualified candidate for Bundesbank President would have 
been Vice-President Jrgen Stark, who was not favored 
by the government as he is too close to the CDU. 
 
------------------ 
Wider Implications 
------------------ 
 
18. (SBU) As a consequence of the Welteke scandal, 
Theodor Baums, law professor at the university of 
Frankfurt and financial market and corporate governance 
expert, was put in charge of corporate governance at 
the Bundesbank.  He monitors compliance with the rules 
of conduct for the Bundesbank board, laid down in the 
Bundesbank law, the contracts relating to regional 
offices and branches, and the ethical code of the ECB. 
Baums\' nomination is to ensure an \"independent and 
objective external monitoring\". 
 
19. (SBU) Reportedly, the Finance Ministry insists on a 
clause in Weber\'s contract, referring to the strict 
rules of conduct for civil servants.  As a consequence, 
changes may also need to be introduced in the contracts 
of the other Bundesbank board members. 
 
20. (SBU) The recent events at the Bundesbank have 
raised public awareness of ethical conduct issues. 
Welteke\'s behavior may just be the tip of the iceberg - 
other similar cases are possible.  The public outrage 
over the Welteke case may thus lead to the 
establishment of ethical rules or code of conduct in 
the Bundesbank or other institutions or, where they 
exist already, to stricter enforcement. 
 
21. (SBU) Cleared with U.S. Embassy Berlin. 
 
22. (U) POC: C. Ohly, Economic Specialist, e-mail 
ohlyc@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2367, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238. 
 
BODDE 
"
"17298","5/27/2004 10:15","04FRANKFURT4560","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","03FRANKFURT7909","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 004560 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DRL/IL, EUR/AGS AND EB 
DEPT PASS DOL/ILAB (BRUMFIELD) 
TREASURY/OASIA FOR MCDOWELL 
DEPT PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FOR ELLEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, ECON, GM 
SUBJECT: Hesse Leads Opposition to Agenda 2010 Unemployment 
Benefits Reform 
 
REF: A) 2003 FRANKFURT 07909, B) Berlin 1570 
 
1.  SUMMARY: Led by Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch 
(CDU - Christian Democrat), the conservative-dominated 
Bundesrat recently rejected a bill to combine social-welfare 
and long-term unemployment benefits, a key element of the 
Schroeder government\'s \"Agenda 2010\" economic reform 
package.  Although government and opposition generally agree 
on the need to streamline and reduce jobless benefits, Koch 
and other conservatives want to give local authorities more 
scope to administer unemployment benefits as a wedge to 
introduce flexibility into labor markets.  The current 
deadlock means that local governments, which had expected 
the federal government to pay benefits under the planned 
reform, may face an additional burden of up to 2.5 billion 
euros in 2005.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  On May 14, the CDU-lead majority in the Bundesrat 
(Germany\'s upper house) rejected the \"Hartz IV\" welfare 
reform, which would merge unemployment benefits and social 
welfare payments to long-term unemployed (those drawing 
benefits for more than 12 months), effectively reducing 
payments (ref B).  The bill will now go to a mediation 
committee.  Government and opposition agree on the need for 
reform but disagree on the question of turf:  Whereas Social 
Democrats (SPD) and Greens would put the Federal Employment 
Agency in charge, the CDU and Free Democrats (FDP) want to 
give cities and counties more authority to administer 
benefits.  As architect of the so-called \"Optionsmodell\" 
(inspired by the \"Wisconsin Works\" program), Koch recently 
managed to unite other CDU-led states behind his opposition 
to the SPD-Green plan, arguing that the government\'s bill 
would merely expand the federal government\'s reach.  Since 
cities and counties are subordinate to states, Koch\'s plan 
to put local communities in charge of benefits would tend to 
give state governments -- most of which are conservative at 
this time -- more influence over the labor market. 
 
3.  Other CDU-led states have practical concerns about the 
reform, including Saarland -- traditionally a net 
beneficiary of social transfer payments -- which originally 
supported the SPD-Green model (Ref A) but recently closed 
ranks with the opposition.  Aide to Saarland Minister- 
President Peter Mueller (CDU) Stefan confided that Koch had 
lobbied other states heavily on this issue.  State Secretary 
Josef Hecken (CDU) added that the Saarland CDU is not 
looking to hand the Schroeder government a defeat but fears 
a debacle if governments appear unable to pay benefits on 
January 1.  Given the legal and financial uncertainties 
connected with the reforms, Saarland had no choice but to 
reject the bill.  Hecken is hopeful that the sides can still 
reach a compromise. 
 
4.  Local communities fear the deadlock will cost them 
billions of euros.  Few believe that the Federal Employment 
Agency will be ready to pay benefits on January 1, meaning 
that cities and counties (many of which teeter on the edge 
of bankruptcy) will have to keep paying welfare to the long- 
term unemployed.  The spokesman for the Council of Cities in 
Hesse, Bernhard Brehl, told us cities could live with a 
variety of reforms, but failing to implement reforms by 
January 1 would be \"the ultimate disaster\" -- an additional 
2.5 billion euro expense in 2005 for local budgets.  Brehl 
criticized the Koch plan since it would not support local 
authorities who choose to let the Federal Employment Agency 
administer benefits.  Frankfurt Lord Mayor Petra Roth (CDU) 
-- who also serves as head of the German Council of Cities - 
- has spoken out in favor of a greater federal role in 
fighting long-term unemployment.  On May 25, the Federal 
Employment Agency announced an agreement with the Council of 
Cities and the Federation of Cities/Towns, signaling local 
government support for the federal government\'s approach 
over Koch\'s conservative model. 
 
5. COMMENT:  Continued stalemate on reforming long-term 
unemployment benefits could be the worst possible outcome -- 
a defeat for economic reform, a continued drag on growth and 
employment, and an unfunded mandate for local governments. 
END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"17345","5/28/2004 12:01","04FRANKFURT4611","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE29193","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 004611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/TRA BYERLY, PARSON, FINSTON, WALKLET 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS AND EUR/ERA 
FAA FOR API-1, AEE-1, AIA-300 AND ASC 
PARIS ALSO FOR FAA 
THE HAGUE PLEASE PASS AMSTERDAM 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, ECON, PGOV, SENV, GM 
SUBJECT: Frankfurt Airport Expansion Delayed At Least Two 
Years 
 
REF: A) 2003 FRANKFURT 01549; B) 2003 STATE 29193 C) 2002 
 
FRANKFURT 5496; D) 2003 FRANKFURT 09273 
 
Sensitive but unclassified;  Not for internet distribution. 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  Frankfurt Airport\'s expansion now faces at 
least a two-year delay, meaning a fourth runway will not 
open until at least 2009.  The Hesse government announced 
the delay on May 25, blaming the airport authority (Fraport) 
and refusing to set a new target date.  The political 
opposition called the setback a major defeat for Minister 
President Roland Koch (CDU), who has closely associated 
himself with the airport expansion plans.  Airlines warn 
that further delays could undermine Frankfurt\'s position 
relative to other European airports and mean job losses. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Hesse Economics Minister Alois Rhiel (CDU - Christian 
Democrat) announced May 25 that the construction of a fourth 
runway at Frankfurt airport will be delayed \"at least two 
years\" past 2007.  Rhiel refused to set a new timeline until 
the airport resolves safety concerns associated with the 
Ticona chemical plant located near the planned runway (refs 
C,D).  He blamed airport management for the delay, saying 
that Fraport could have submitted regulatory requests two 
years earlier and that Fraport\'s submissions understated 
problems with the chemical plant and wildlife preservation 
areas.  NOTE: The state government -- which until now had 
defended Fraport and the 2007 target date -- now echoes 
criticism by the regional zoning authority which last 
November called Fraport\'s studies \"sloppy\" and inadequate. 
END NOTE. 
 
3. (U) Fraport managers claim they can live with the delay 
by optimizing slot usage at existing runways.  Airline reps 
generally agreed, but warned that they might move flights to 
Paris, Amsterdam or London if expansion is further delayed. 
Lufthansa, Fraport\'s main customer, said its plans would not 
be affected since most of Lufthansa\'s growth in the past 
five years has occurred at Munich (the airline\'s second 
hub).  Lufthansa Cargo pointed out a bright side to the 
delay:  \"Every year without a night-flight ban is good for 
us.\"  (NOTE: Frankfurt Airport will eliminate night-flights 
once the fourth runway comes into operation. END NOTE). 
Business associations used the occasion to criticize onerous 
German bureaucracy and to warn that Frankfurt could lose its 
attractiveness for many businesses. 
 
4. (U) The political opposition held Minister-President 
Roland Koch (CDU) personally responsible.  SPD (Social 
Democrat) caucus chief Juergen Walter blamed Koch for 
Fraport\'s sloppy and flawed approach -- including its 
neglect of safety issues -- pointing out that Koch served as 
chairman of Fraport\'s supervisory board when it formally 
applied for expansion.  The Greens, who oppose the 
expansion, declared the project dead.  Christian Jochum, 
head of the German Safety Commission, remarked that the 
airport should not seek approval from the European 
Commission (which expressed concerns about Ticona last year) 
until safety issues are further addressed (refs C, D). 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT: The expansion of Frankfurt is not only the 
largest infrastructure project in Germany, but also one of 
Koch\'s main projects as Minister President.  An early 
advocate of the controversial north-west runway (next to the 
Ticona plant), Koch could suffer politically if the 
expansion project falls further behind.  Hesse\'s inability 
to set a new and credible timetable is a bad signal to 
airlines, who could look elsewhere to expand operations. 
Fraport\'s mishandling of expansion and its disastrous 
involvement in the Manila airport project (where it lost 
almost 500 million Euros - REF A) mean that Koch will have 
to throw his full weight behind the project to secure 
Frankfurt\'s role as a leading hub in Europe.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"17672","6/9/2004 14:59","04FRANKFURT4964","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 004964 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, TBIO, GM 
SUBJECT: Local Election Preview / SW Germany 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified -- not for internet distribution. 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: On June 13, three states in SW Germany -- 
Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W), Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) and Saarland 
-- will hold local elections concurrently with EU-wide 
European Parliament elections in an effort to increase voter 
participation.  Local elections will serve as a bellwether 
for the overall political climate in southwestern Germany 
and could have an immediate impact on the political future 
of important figures including R-P Christian Democrat (CDU) 
flag-bearer Christoph Boehr and B-W Minister President Erwin 
Teufel (CDU).  We expect strong support for conservatives in 
all three states and continuing dissatisfaction with the 
national government and Chancellor Schroeder\'s Agenda 2010 
reforms.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Saarland 
-------- 
 
2.  (U) Saarland\'s June 13 local races will take place 
during the run-up to its September 5 state elections.  In 
1999, the CDU\'s strong finish in local elections served to 
foreshadow the end of the SPD\'s 15-year rule in Saarland 
later that year.  Popular Christian Democrat Minister- 
President Peter Mueller continues to draw wide support and 
is the odds-on favorite to retain his seat in the upcoming 
contest.  Although the SPD currently holds a majority in 
Saarland\'s counties, three Social Democrats are up for re- 
election or are retiring this year, and the balance could 
change.  Of particular interest is the upcoming election for 
lord mayor of Saarbruecken, the second most powerful person 
in Saarland.  The contest will be wide open, as SPD 
incumbent Hajo Hoffman is retiring this year. 
 
3.  (U) Recent opinion polling places the CDU 21 points 
ahead of the SPD (54 to 33) in Saarland\'s state elections, 
with the Greens at five percent and the FDP at three 
percent.  CDU caucus leader Peter Hans attributes four 
percent of the CDU lead to a \"brilliant Minister-President\" 
and another four to a \"competitor that gets weaker by the 
day.\"  Former Saarland minister-president Oskar Lafontaine 
has had little success in rallying the SPD base in support 
of the party\'s lead candidate, Heiko Maas.  Social Democrats 
opine that the continued unpopularity of the national 
government has undermined their \"substantive criticism\" of 
Saarland\'s CDU administration.  Among the smaller parties, 
FDP state chairman Christoph Hartmann blamed his party\'s low 
numbers on Mueller\'s strength and popularity, noting that 
\"people simply believe the CDU can do it alone.\"  The Greens 
hope to re-enter the Saar parliament on the back of the 
SPD\'s unpopularity and are doubtful that the CDU will lose 
its absolute majority. 
 
Baden-Wuerttemberg 
------------------ 
 
4.  (U) Recent polls indicate a comfortable lead for the B-W 
Christian Democrats while the SPD continues to suffer from 
general voter dissatisfaction with the national government. 
In the 1999 local elections, the CDU emerged as the 
strongest party with 34 percent of the vote state-wide, 
edging out traditionally strong independent lists (which 
together garnered 33.7 percent).  Social Democrats  seek to 
maintain their 1999 level of support (19.8 percent) based on 
charismatic SPD Bundestag member Ute Kumpf\'s challenge to 
CDU incumbent Wolfgang Schuster in October elections for 
lord mayor of Stuttgart (B-W\'s biggest city and home of 
automotive concerns Daimler-Chrysler, Bosch, and Porsche). 
Independent voter groups will continue to play a major role 
on the local level. 
 
5.  (U) Susanne Eisenmann, CDU standard-bearer in Stuttgart, 
confided that she believes the Christian Democrats will 
prevail in local elections, but predicts they will have a 
hard time making additional gains beyond those made in 1999. 
Key contacts expect M-P Teufel to declare his political 
intentions after the elections, and some speculate that 
Teufel might seek another term if the CDU makes an excellent 
showing. 
 
Rheinland-Pfalz 
--------------- 
 
6.  (U) In the 1999 local elections, the CDU defended its 
position as Rheinland-Pfalz\'s strongest party with a showing 
of 46.1 percent, versus 36.1 percent for the SPD.  Other 
parties all polled  single digits (independents 7.6 percent, 
Greens 5.0 pct, FDP 4.1 pct).  Recent polls indicate that 
the CDU likely will repeat its strong 1999 performance.  SPD 
sources in Rheinland-Pfalz worry the party\'s weakness at the 
national level may cause it to lose ground locally. 
Although the CDU is framing local elections as a dry run for 
Rheinland-Pfalz\'s 2006 state elections, observers currently 
believe that Minister President Beck\'s personal popularity 
could outweigh flagging support for the party and secure him 
another term. 
 
7.  (SBU) Elections in Rheinland-Pfalz may become a 
referendum not on M-P Beck, but on R-P CDU leader Christoph 
Boehr.  Although the CDU remains strong within Rheinland- 
Pfalz, Boehr is often criticized within the party for poor 
leadership and an aloofness that contrasts sharply with 
Beck\'s \"human touch.\"  According to Ralf Glesius, party 
manager of the Junge Union (the CDU\'s youth organization), 
the CDU will visit the issue of \"standard-bearer\" after the 
June elections.  The CDU is unlikely to fare poorly, but if 
they fail to break new ground against a weakened SPD, 
Boehr\'s days as party leader could be numbered. 
COMMENT 
------- 
8. (SBU) Although all politics may be local, the continuing 
unpopularity of the national government will likely be the 
dominant factor in the upcoming June 13 elections. 
Conservatives are likely to make strong showings in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg and Rheinland-Pfalz local elections -- despite 
leadership struggles within both state parties -- and the 
SPD will be fortunate even to match its relatively weak 1999 
showing.  With a popular CDU minister-president and the 
recent modest upturn in the Saar economy, Saarland\'s voters 
seem to have little desire for change.  Consequently, the 
Saar CDU is likely to do very well in local contests and to 
retain its absolute majority in upcoming state elections. 
END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"17755","6/14/2004 5:43","04FRANKFURT4974","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04MUNICH380","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 004974 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, SMIG, SOCI, PHUM, GM, EUN 
SUBJECT: Turks in Germany Press Issue of Turkey\'s EU 
Membership 
 
REF: MUNICH 0380 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified  not for Internet distribution 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The Turkish community in Germany voiced 
their frustration with opponents of Turkey\'s EU membership 
at a high-profile May 25 debate in Frankfurt in which the 
four major German parties sought to win the Turkish 
community\'s support in the June 13 European and local 
elections.  At the event (hosted by a leading Turkish 
organization), the Social Democrats (SPD) continued to 
advocate Turkey\'s entry into the EU (with the Free Democrats 
and Green Party also showing putative support) while the 
conservative Christian Democrats (CDU) remained firm in 
their rejection of opening accession negotiations.  Audience 
members (largely business representatives) cautioned that 
the Turkish government has taken great strides to fulfill EU 
requirements and that the political mood in Turkey could 
quickly sour if the EU resets the goalpost.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU) A consulate representative attended a campaign 
debate organized by the \"Rat der Tuerkeistaemmigen 
Staatsbuerger in Deutschland\" (Council of Turkish-born 
citizens in Germany, an umbrella organization of 15 Turkish 
associations), at which representatives of the four largest 
German parties discussed Turkey\'s EU accession bid and 
related issues.  The following candidates took the stage: 
-- Michael Gahler, CDU MEP (Hattersheim  near Frankfurt) 
-- Ozan Ceyhun, Turkish-born SPD MEP (Ruesselsheim --  near 
Frankfurt) 
-- Heide Ruehle, Green MEP from Boeblingen (Baden- 
Wuerttemberg) 
-- Kerstin Laabs, Free Democrat (FDP) European Parliament 
candidate (Darmstadt). 
 
 
3. (SBU)  Gahler said that although the CDU would continue 
to speak out against Turkey\'s membership in the EU, it would 
not make the issue a centerpiece of its campaign (e.g., no 
anti-membership billboards or television advertisements). 
He reiterated his party\'s call for a \"privileged 
partnership\" (including an expanded custom union and closer 
cooperation on security issues -- see reftel) in lieu of 
full EU membership for Turkey.  Gahler listed several 
reasons for the CDU\'s opposition to opening accession 
negotiations in the near future, including the EU\'s need to 
integrate its ten new members, Turkey\'s record on human 
rights (e.g., the imprisonment of Kurdish activist Leila 
Zana), and the possibility that early EU membership could 
overwhelm Turkey and generate backlash among Turks in Turkey 
against further European integration. 
 
4. (SBU) The Turkish audience expressed its disappointment 
with the CDU\'s stance and speculated that a \"closed door\" 
policy could alienate and radicalize Turks across Europe and 
in Turkey itself.  Several participants cited Turkey\'s far- 
reaching reforms and its 60 billion euro investment in the 
EU-Turkey custom union as proof that Turkey could make the 
necessary changes for EU membership within ten years -- the 
length of time most observers expect accession negotiations 
would last. 
 
5. (SBU) The SPD\'s Ozan Ceyhun (the only German MEP with a 
Turkish background) blamed the CDU for creating the 
impression that Germans are voting on Turkey\'s EU membership 
in the upcoming European elections.  Ceyhun dubbed the CDU\'s 
\"privileged partnership\" a \"trick to keep Turkey out.\"  He 
emphasized that negotiations with Turkey had to be 
accelerated to curb growing frustration and to make Turkey a 
role model for the rest of the Muslim world.  Participants 
expressed strong support for Ceyhun, but some criticized 
Interior Minister (and SPD member) Otto Schily\'s hard-line 
stance on German immigration as well as a recent comment 
attributed to (and denied by) Turkish-born SPD candidate 
Vugal Oeger that \"Turkish women will accomplish today what 
Turkey could not 400 years ago\" (i.e., a high birth rate 
will allow today\'s Turks to \"conquer\" Europe, something that 
the Ottomans failed to do in the 17th century). 
 
6. (SBU) Greens representative Heide Ruehle delivered the 
most well-received statement in favor of Turkey\'s EU 
membership.  Because of CDU \"demagoguery\", she said, 80 
percent of the German population wrongly thinks negotiations 
on EU membership will start soon after the elections, when 
in fact all that will be decided this year is whether or not 
to open negotiations -- and, if so, when.  (Comment: Her 
point is a bit disingenuous, given that the EU pledged in 
December 2002 that a positive decision on opening 
negotiations would be followed by the start of talks 
\"without delay\" -- most likely in the first half of 2005. 
End Comment.)  She called the privileged partnership 
\"something we already have\" and noted that, from a security 
standpoint, delaying negotiations could destabilize Turkey. 
Turning to Turkey\'s responsibilities, Ruehle called upon the 
Turkish government to strengthen reforms in agriculture, 
education, and the fight against corruption. 
 
7. (SBU) FDP representative Kerstin Laabs noted that Turkey 
had made significant progress in fulfilling the EU\'s 
membership criteria.  He stressed the cultural importance of 
Turkey\'s accession to the EU, saying that Turkey\'s 
membership could be a role model for peaceful cooperation 
between Christians and Muslims. 
 
8. (SBU) COMMENT: Although three of Germany\'s four major 
parties support EU membership for Turkey, audience reaction 
at the conference centered on the CDU\'s continued 
resistance.  Most participants portrayed the CDU\'s reasons 
for opposition as pretexts for a party that still does not 
believe that Turkey is really part of Europe.  Germany\'s 
Turkish community worries that the CDU\'s rising national 
popularity and continuing difficulties for the SPD could 
mean a change of government following Germany\'s 2006 
national elections and a resulting loss of German support 
for Turkish EU membership.  While nothing new was said at 
the convention, the audience\'s pointed commentary highlights 
a Turkish community in Germany increasingly anxious about 
Turkey\'s future within the EU.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"17836","6/16/2004 8:03","04FRANKFURT5072","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","04FRANKFURT3507|04STATE4493","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L FRANKFURT 005072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/14/2014 
TAGS: GM, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, SOCI 
SUBJECT: BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG REJECTS SCIENTOLOGIST REQUEST 
FOR DIALOGUE 
 
REF: A) FRANKFURT 3507 `B) STATE 4493 
 
Classified By: Consul General Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
 1.  (C) SUMMARY: In a June 4 letter to Church of Scientology 
(CoS) President Helmuth Bloebaum, Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) 
State Secretary Rudolf Boehmler refused CoS Germany\'s request 
for dialogue with B-W state authorities (reftels), listing 
\"widespread parliamentary opposition\" as a primary concern. 
Scientology officials cite alleged pressure from the national 
Office for the Protection of the Constitution as a reason for 
B-W\'s refusal to engage.  The CoS will continue to pressure 
B-W authorities for informal contacts as a precursor to 
substantive dialogue but realize that a breakthrough is 
unlikely.  We will stay engaged on the margins and reiterate 
our support for dialogue (formal or informal) between the 
parties.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) CoS Germany contacted the Baden-Wuerttemberg State 
Chancellery on March 2, requesting an informal dialogue with 
a \"neutral committee\" of ad hoc officials from the B-W state 
government.  Poloff voiced USG support for Scientology\'s 
request during a March 11 meeting with Hans-Werner Carlhoff, 
the head of Baden-Wuerttemberg\'s Interministerial Working 
Group on Sects (reftels).  At that meeting and in subsequent 
contacts, Carlhoff underlined the importance of USG support 
for the Scientologist initiative, and promised to follow up. 
 
3.  (SBU) Boehmler\'s letter to Scientology President Bloebaum 
did not mention USG involvement, merely noting unanimous B-W 
parliamentary opposition to the CoS as an organization and 
the government\'s continued belief that CoS matters are most 
appropriately handled by the Interministerial Working Group 
on Sects.  The letter cited two different recent instances 
(December 10, 2003 and April 24, 2004) where B-W Parliament 
members had spoken out against Scientology and its activities 
in Baden-Wuerttemberg.  In our subsequent engagement with CoS 
officials, they expressed disappointment with the decision 
and asserted that they would continue to lobby for dialogue 
and an end to \"state-sponsored discrimination\" against the 
CoS in Baden-Wuerttemberg. 
 
4.  (C) COMMENT: CoS Germany\'s Human Rights Office Director 
Ingo Lehmann told us that he had learned that the national 
Office for the Protection of the Constitution had pressured 
Baden-Wuerttemberg and other states to refuse CoS requests 
for dialogue because they would interfere with pending CoS 
litigation against the OPC.  Scientologists have long been 
active in trying to get the OPC to stop surveillance of CoS 
activities, and we believe that any step towards 
\"normalization\" of relations could damage the OPC\'s case for 
regarding Scientology as an anti-constitutional movement and 
maintaining surveillance of CoS groups.  Given B-W\'s 
consistent hostility towards Scientology, however, it is 
unlikely that national-level pressure from the OPC, even if 
true, is solely responsible for the state\'s continued 
intransigence.  END COMMENT. 
BODDE 
"
"17937","6/18/2004 9:27","04FRANKFURT5178","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04FRANKFURT4964","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 005178 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, TBIO, GM 
SUBJECT: Euro-Elections/Regional: CDU Stays Strong, Greens 
Make Surprising Gains 
 
REF: FRANKFURT 4964 
 
1.  SUMMARY: In European elections in the four states of SW 
Germany, the CDU remained the leading party but failed (as 
expected) to reach its 1999 high-water mark, with a 
particularly disappointing performance in Hesse.  The SPD 
suffered dramatic losses throughout the region, including 
its worst results ever in Hesse and Baden-Wuerttemberg. 
The clear winners were the Greens, who outran the SPD in 
large cities including Frankfurt and Stuttgart.  In 
Freiburg, the Greens achieved their best result nationwide, 
outpolling all other parties with 37 percent.  The FDP 
recaptured some of its former voters.  Radical groups 
(Republikaner, NPD) achieved only marginal results.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Baden-Wuerttemberg: SPD Suffers Historic Defeat 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
2.  In Baden-Wuerttemberg, the Social Democrats scored 20 
percent (down seven points), their worst results in the 
post-war era.  B-W party head and Federal Interior Ministry 
State Secretary Ute Vogt blamed national politics for the 
party\'s \"bitter defeat.\"  B-W\'s Greens were clear winners 
with statewide results of 14 percent (up five points).  In 
Freiburg, the Greens outpolled everyone, scoring 37 
percent.  The party also did well in Stuttgart, Heidelberg, 
and Tuebingen, moving into second place after the CDU in 
each city with results between 22 and 29 percent.  The B-W 
FDP managed to improve its 1999 mark from just shy of five 
percent to seven percent.  Minister-President Erwin 
Teufel\'s Christian Democrats succeeded in defending their 
leading position with 47 percent (a loss of four points 
since their 1999 peak, but enough to secure a CDU absolute 
majority under Landtag election rules).  Teufel announced a 
special party convention for February 12, 2005 to determine 
the standard bearer for the 2006 state election and said he 
will have decided by then whether to run again for 
Minister-President or retire. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Hesse: Greens Beat SPD in Frankfurt 
----------------------------------- 
 
3.  In Hesse, the SPD lost ten points, dropping to an 
anemic 25 percent of the vote.  The CDU also fared below 
expectations with returns of 41 percent, a six-point drop 
from its 1999 total.  The party lost ground in its 
strongholds of southern Hesse, including Minister-President 
Roland Koch\'s hometown of Eschborn (near Frankfurt).  Media 
editorials blamed the CDU\'s relatively poor showing on 
Koch\'s governing style.  The FDP finished strongly with 
eight percent (up four points), with gains apparently 
coming at the expense of the CDU.  Greens posted 
extraordinary results, besting the SPD in Frankfurt (by 
more than five points) and Darmstadt and matching the SPD 
in other cities such as Wiesbaden (statewide, they polled 
15 percent, a gain of six points).  According to party 
contacts, the Greens\' strong showing in the region was due 
to the popularity of standard-bearer Daniel Cohn-Bendit. 
Voter turnout in Frankfurt reached an all-time low (40 
percent). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Rheinland-Pfalz:  Christian Democrats Unexpectedly Strong 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
4.  Christian Democrats under Christoph Boehr polled 
surprisingly well in Rheinland-Pfalz with 47 percent of the 
vote, defying pre-election concerns over Boehr as a 
candidate (reftel).  The party\'s success prompted Boehr to 
announce his candidacy against Kurt Beck for Minister- 
President in 2006.  The FDP and Greens also fared well, 
improving their results by three and two points 
respectively.  As in other SW German states, the R-P Social 
Democrats suffered severe losses (almost ten points), 
dropping to 26 percent of the vote.  Minister-President 
Beck\'s personal popularity was unable to mitigate the SPD\'s 
poor showing, and Beck himself called the results \"more 
than disappointing.\" 
 
----------------------------------- 
Saarland: Clear Victory for the CDU 
----------------------------------- 
 
5.  Contrary to results in Saarland\'s concurrent communal 
elections (septel), the CDU posted a clear victory in the 
state\'s European contests.  The party won 45 percent of the 
vote (a drop of under one point), with the SPD receiving 30 
percent (down 11 points), the Greens eight percent (up 
three points), and the FDP just under 5 percent (up 3 
points).  Minister-President Peter Mueller (CDU), who faces 
state elections in September, said the results were 
encouraging.  Social Democrat leader Heiko Maas (SPD) 
expressed disappointment with his party\'s poor showing, but 
pointed out that SPD results in Saarland were significantly 
better than the national average. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6.  Protest voters in SW Germany followed the national 
trend of punishing the SPD for a lagging economy and the 
sting of Agenda 2010 reforms while rewarding their Greens 
party coalition partners.  The Greens\' decision to campaign 
on a pan-European platform led by popular standard-bearer 
Daniel Cohn-Bendit reaped substantial dividends.  The FPD 
picked up much of the CDU\'s lost ground, particularly in 
Hesse.  Radical anti-European parties including the 
Republikaner and the NPD (Nationaldemokratische Partei 
Deutschlands) failed to profit significantly from voter 
dissatisfaction but remained a force in local elections 
(septel).  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18182","6/28/2004 7:20","04FRANKFURT5543","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04FRANKFURT4964|04FRANKFURT5178","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005543 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: Local Elections: SPD Struggles, CDU Stays Strong 
 
REF: (A) FRANKFURT 4964 (B) FRANKFURT 5178 
 
1.  SUMMARY: Voters in June 13 communal elections in SW 
Germany followed the nation-wide pattern of punishing SPD 
candidates in a protest vote against the SPD national 
government.  The SPD fared poorly in Baden-Wuerttemberg and 
Rheinland-Pfalz, and turned in a weak performance that 
nonetheless exceeded expectations in Saarland.  Greens, Free 
Democrats, and independents recorded the largest gains, 
while support for the conservative Christian Democrats (CDU) 
remained strong throughout the region.  Although the CDU\'s 
margin of victory in Saarland (under popular Minister- 
President Peter Mueller) was narrower than expected, the CDU 
remains the favorite to prevail in state elections there 
this September.   END SUMMARY. 
 
Baden-Wuerttemberg  Independents Move Into First Place 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
2.  Baden-Wuerttemberg communal elections featured minor 
losses for the CDU, painful defeats for the SPD, and gains 
for the Greens and the FDP.  The biggest winners were 
independents with 34.4 percent of the vote (up 0.7 pct) -- 
reflecting the state\'s regional diversity and traditional 
voter willingness to entrust local issues to independents -- 
followed by Christian Democrats with 32.4 percent (down 1.5 
percent).  The SPD dug a deeper hole for itself with 18 
percent of the vote (down from its 1999 low of 19.9 
percent).  Greens and Liberals increased their vote shares 
to 6.6 and 3.1 percent respectively.  The Greens, who only 
ran in one third of B-W\'s communities, had spectacular gains 
in the university cities of Tuebingen (where they became the 
strongest party), Freiburg, Heidelberg, and Stuttgart.  In 
Stuttgart, the CDU lost almost six points but defended its 
majority and remains optimistic that CDU incumbent Schuster 
will be re-elected in October 10 mayoral elections. 
 
Rheinland-Pfalz  Popular M-P Beck Unable to Stem SPD Losses 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
3.  On the heels of dismal results in balloting for the 
European elections (reftel B), Rheinland-Pfalz Social 
Democrats suffered their worst ever defeat in communal 
elections, receiving only 28.9 percent of the vote (down 7.2 
percent).  The R-P CDU maintained its position as the 
strongest party in the state with 45.2 percent of the vote 
(down 0.9 percent).  Smaller parties posted gains, with 
independent voter groups receiving 11.6 (up four percent), 
Greens receiving 7.1 percent (up 2.1 percent), and Free 
Democrats polling 6 percent of the vote (up 1.9 percent). 
Popular and well-regarded Minister-President Kurt Beck (SPD) 
described the results as \"a bitter day for the SPD\" and 
asserted that voters were punishing the party for painful 
but necessary reforms at the national level.  Meanwhile, CDU 
leader Christoph Boehr called the election \"a dream result\" 
for the CDU and an excellent foundation for state elections 
in 2006.  Boehr announced a special convention at the end of 
the year to select the CDU\'s standard bearer for the 2006 
contest. 
 
Saarland  CDU Victorious, but Rays of Hope for the SPD 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
4. The CDU notched a clear victory over the SPD in Saarland, 
receiving 46 percent of the vote in contrast to the SPD\'s 37 
percent total.  The Greens and Free Democrats posted gains, 
with the Greens receiving 5.9 percent (up 1.5 percent) and 
the FDP 4.3 percent (up 1.7 percent) respectively.  This 
year\'s polling marks only the second time in postwar history 
that the CDU has beaten the SPD in Saarland communal 
elections.  The SPD managed a strong finish in local 
elections, with the SPD challenger forcing a popular CDU 
incumbent into a second round of voting for mayor of 
influential Saarlouis.  The SPD leadership hopes that its 
unexpectedly strong showing will generate momentum for state 
elections in September. 
 
5.  COMMENT:  Communal election results in SW Germany were 
largely consistent with results from concurrent European 
elections (ref B) as well as communal contests in other 
parts of Germany.  The Greens used the elections to expand 
their electoral base across the region, particularly in 
Baden-Wuerttemberg (a traditional CDU stronghold that has 
nonetheless tradionally had a strong Greens party).  The 
CDU\'s impressive results in Rheinland-Pfalz strengthened 
party head Christoph Boehr\'s position as putative standard- 
bearer against SPD M-P Beck in 2006 state elections. 
Although results in Saarland show that the Saar Social 
Democrats have managed to sidestep some of the 
disappointment with the government in Berlin, the party 
still remains a clear underdog against popular and energetic 
CDU Minister-President Peter Mueller in September.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18190","6/28/2004 9:29","04FRANKFURT5551","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005551 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, TBIO, GM 
SUBJECT: Baden-Wuerttemberg FDP Head / Minister Doering 
Resigns Amid Scandal 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution. 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On June 18, Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) 
Economics Minister and Deputy Minister President Walter 
Doering (FDP - Free Democrats) resigned from his positions 
as economic minister, FDP state chairman and deputy chairman 
of the national FDP, keeping only his elected mandate in the 
B-W State Parliament.  Doering\'s resignation in the wake of 
the Flow-Tex corruption scandal has thrown the state party 
into chaos.  B-W Liberals selected Bundestag member Birgit 
Homburger to replace Doering as state chairperson and FDP 
state caucus chief Ernst Pfister as B-W economics minister. 
The affair is likely to strengthen the CDU\'s hold on power 
in Baden-Wuerttemberg.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) Doering\'s resignation came after weeks of 
revelations concerning his alleged involvement with the Flow- 
Tex company, which was convicted of fraud in Germany\'s 
largest white-collar scandal in recent decades. 
Contradictory statements by Doering and his staff about Flow- 
Tex\'s funding of a 1999 poll commissioned by Doering gave 
the impression that the minister had misrepresented his 
dealings with Flow-Tex.  The Stuttgart prosecutor\'s office 
searched Doering\'s office and the office of former personal 
aide Margot Haussmann, announcing that expanded 
investigations against Doering for accepting political 
favors and giving false testimony, prompting Doering to 
resign (effective July 1). 
 
3.  (U) The burgeoning scandal and Doering\'s surprise 
resignation threw the B-W FDP into turmoil.  The favored 
candidate, Bundestag member and FDP labor-policy 
spokesperson Dirk Niebel, turned down the opportunity to 
succeed Doering, citing national-level ambitions in Berlin. 
After a marathon weekend meeting, the B-W FDP executive 
committee presented Bundestag member Birgit Homburger as the 
new state party leader (to be confirmed at a special FDP 
convention on July 17).  Doering\'s successor as economics 
minister and deputy minister-president will be FDP caucus 
leader Ernst Pfister (deputy FDP state chairman Michael 
Theurer challenged Pfister\'s nomination but lost the 
divisive battle). 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Political insiders express concern over 
Homburger\'s ability to lead the state FDP from Berlin and 
Pfister\'s potential as economics minister and deputy 
minister-president.  Most observers view Pfister -- a 
teacher by training (like Doering) with scant business 
experience -- as an affable but uncharismatic figure and ill- 
prepared for a leadership role. 
 
5.  (SBU) Doering\'s resignation will strengthen Christian 
Democrats in the CDU-FDP coalition and may lead Minister- 
President Teufel (CDU) to reshuffle the state cabinet.  With 
Doering\'s fall, the CDU has an even better chance to gain an 
absolute majority in 2006 state elections.  Over the years, 
Doering had reduced the B-W FDP to a one-man show, leaving 
little room for up-and-comers in the party\'s ranks.  The 
Flow-Tex scandal and the FDP\'s inability to find strong new 
leadership mean that the party is likely to lose visibility 
and support in Baden-Wuerttemberg, a traditional stronghold. 
END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18309","7/1/2004 10:24","04FRANKFURT5675","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005675 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS AND DRL/CRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: German Court Approves Ban on Teacher Headscarves 
 
REF:  A) 98 Frankfurt 6465; B) 00 Frankfurt 3078; 
 
      C) 01 Frankfurt 6028; D) 03 Frankfurt 8335; 
      E) 04 Frankfurt 1390; F) 04 Hamburg 0001 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  On June 24, the Federal Administrative Court 
in Leipzig upheld the Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) law banning 
headscarves on public school teachers.  It dismissed the 
appeal of Fereshta Ludin, whose case has become a bellwether 
for Germany\'s tolerance of Muslim religious expression in 
public life.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  In April, the B-W state government became the first 
German state to outlaw the wearing of headscarves for Muslim 
teachers in public schools (ref E).  On June 24, the Second 
Senate of the Federal Administrative Court in Leipzig ruled 
that the B-W headscarf law is in accordance with the German 
constitution (Basic Law), thus dismissing Ludin\'s lawsuit. 
The Second Senate further stated that reference to Christian 
and Jewish traditions in the law does not constitute 
preferential treatment to those religions. 
 
3.  With yesterday\'s verdict, the court upheld its July 2002 
decision against Ludin.  In November 2003, Germany\'s Supreme 
Court (Federal Constitutional Court) returned the case to 
the Administrative Court pending a new law regulating the 
issue.  The Administrative Court also considered the case of 
a Muslim teacher from Lower Saxony, ruling that she can keep 
her position after she declared at the hearing that she will 
now remove her headscarf during instruction. 
 
4.  The B-W state government and opposition both welcomed 
the verdict.  B-W Education Minister Annette Schavan (CDU) 
indicated that the state will now move to dismiss two other 
female teachers who have refused to take off their 
headscarves. 
 
5.  COMMENT:  With this latest verdict, the B-W legislation 
has overcome its first constitutional hurdle.  Ms. Ludin 
will likely appeal again to the Constitutional Court.  That 
court, which had avoided a clear-cut decision last November, 
will need to come to a unequivocal verdict.  In the 
meantime, the image of German authorities compelling Muslim 
women to remove their headscarves will continue to 
complicate relations with Germany\'s Muslims.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18310","7/1/2004 10:25","04FRANKFURT5676","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, PREL, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: Hesse Hosts Large Event for OIF/OEF Military 
Families 
 
1. SUMMARY:  The state of Hesse recently hosted a day of 
appreciation for 2200 U.S. military and family members -- in 
particular families of those deployed to Iraq and 
Afghanistan -- in the most recent expression of Hesse\'s 
desire to be a good host for U.S. forces.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  On June 24, the Ambassador attended a large picnic 
hosted by Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU) for 
families of deployed soldiers stationed in Hesse.  More than 
2,200 soldiers and family members (including approx. 700 
children) enjoyed an afternoon of fun and food at the 
historic Hessenpark.  The state originally targeted families 
of 1st Armored Division soldiers still deployed in Iraq, but 
expanded it to all soldiers and their families (including 
those living in nearby Rheinland-Pfalz and Mannheim 
installations).  German and American sponsors chipped in to 
provide food and activities such as basketball and football 
clinics by German professional teams.  About 60% of the 
estimated EUR 90,000 cost was covered by donations. 
 
3. Hesse M-P Koch, who spent almost three hours at the 
event, gave an opening speech (to rousing applause) 
recognizing the sacrifice of U.S. soldiers and their 
families and declaring that the state would always welcome 
them.  The Ambassador thanked the state of Hesse and M-P 
Koch for this latest gesture of support.  Mrs. Deanie 
Dempsey (wife of deployed 1AD Commander Maj. General Martin 
Dempsey) spoke on behalf of families. 
 
4.  COMMENT:  Regional newspapers gave very positive 
coverage to the event, the latest expression of Hesse\'s 
efforts to be seen as a welcoming host for American forces. 
END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18321","7/1/2004 12:56","04FRANKFURT5692","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005692 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: Saarland SPD Leaders Air Dirty Laundry, Embrace 
Centrist Platform for Upcoming Elections 
 
REF: a) 2003 Frankfurt 03946, b) 2003 Frankfurt 04964, 
 
c) 2003 Frankfurt 005178 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  In a nationally-publicized showdown, former 
finance minister/Social Democratic (SPD) chairman Oskar 
Lafontaine used the Saarland SPD\'s June 20 convention to 
issue a blistering critique of Chancellor Schroeder\'s 
national government and its Agenda 2010 reform program. 
With national SPD chairman Franz Muentefering in attendance, 
Lafontaine called for the SPD to return to its roots as a 
working-class party and to abandon what he termed the 
Schroeder government\'s \"public relations campaign\" of 
reforms.  Saar party chairman and lead candidate Heiko Maas 
echoed Lafontaine\'s left-wing tenor but succeeded in passing 
a moderate center-left platform for state elections this 
September, when the party faces an uphill battle to unseat 
Christian Democratic Minister-President Peter Mueller.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  On June 20, a Consulate representative attended the 
SPD\'s final convention in Saarland before state elections in 
September.  The event featured state party chairman and 
election standard-bearer Heiko Maas as well as former 
Saarland Minister-President Oskar Lafontaine, a noted left- 
wing activist within the party.  National SPD chairman Franz 
Muentefering attended the event in an effort to boost 
visibility in the Saar SPD\'s state election campaign. 
 
3.  In his speech, Lafontaine railed against the SPD\'s 
economic reform program.  The former SPD chairman labeled 
Agenda 2010 as a \"public relations campaign,\" saying the 
reality was wage cuts, longer work hours, and sharply 
reduced social benefits.  The usually moderate Heiko Maas 
surprised political observers by underscoring Lafontaine\'s 
remarks and warning that the national SPD\'s current policies 
will cost the party the election in 2006.  Maas called for 
greater attention to economically vulnerable groups and a 
rejection of reforms that widen the gap between rich and 
poor. 
 
4.  Muentefering used his time at the podium to defend 
Agenda 2010 and criticize Lafontaine for political dogmatism 
and an inability to compromise.  He stressed that the Social 
Democrats should focus on achievable goals and not 
unrealistic promises.  In sharp contrast to the enthusiastic 
responses given to Lafontaine and Maas, Muentefering\'s 
remarks met with tepid applause, and the chairman left 
clearly disappointed by the day\'s events. 
 
5.  In spite of Lafontaine\'s populist rhetoric, convention 
delegates produced a centrist platform for the September 
elections similar in some ways to the CDU platform issued 
the same weekend.  The SPD manifesto largely embraces the 
incrementalist reforms of Agenda 2010 while criticizing the 
Mueller government\'s performance in Saarland (particularly 
on education).  The manifesto criticizes the state\'s narrow 
focus on the automotive sector, advocating more investment 
in energy and life sciences. 
 
6.  COMMENT: An unapologetic left-wing true believer, 
Lafontaine strikes an emotional chord with many SPD members 
disappointed by painful reforms and the sluggish economy. 
Saarland Social Democrats also worry that voter 
dissatisfaction with the Schroeder government may overshadow 
Saarland state issues like record debt and lagging education 
reforms.  Maas is trying to use Lafontaine\'s rhetoric to 
distance himself from the unpopular national government 
while fielding a centrist platform to appeal to moderate 
swing voters.  Saar Social Democrats\' greatest obstacle, 
however, is popular CDU Minister-President Peter Mueller, 
who remains the clear favorite in September (reftels).  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18491","7/7/2004 14:42","04FRANKFURT5840","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005840 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, GM 
SUBJECT: Baden-Wuerttemberg hosts Large July 4 Event 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  Continuing an annual tradition, the state of 
Baden-Wuerttemberg and the German-American Institute in 
cooperation with ConGen Frankfurt held a high-profile 
Independence Day reception in Stuttgart for three hundred 
German guests.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  On July 1, the James F. Byrnes German-American 
Institute celebrated Independence Day on the Stuttgart 
compound of SWR (Germany\'s second largest TV broadcaster). 
The event was well attended with over three hundred guests 
including dignitaries from government, business, and U.S. 
and German military.  The B-W state government and the city 
of Stuttgart -- which together give the Byrnes Institute 
approx. EUR 250,000 support per year -- have co-sponsored 
the event since the closure of ConGen Stuttgart in 1996. 
 
3.  Keynote speakers (including the Consul General, State 
Secretary Rudolf Boehmler and Stuttgart Lord Mayor Wolfgang 
 
SIPDIS 
Schuster), highlighted the state\'s strong ties to the 
United States including U.S. military based in the state. 
State and local politicians committed to do everything 
possible to keep U.S. armed forces in Baden-Wuerttemberg. 
High-level EUCOM attendance and the performance of a EUCOM 
color guard gave the event a traditional July 4th flavor. 
 
4.  COMMENT: Stuttgart papers gave very positive coverage 
to this unique annual event reflecting enduring U.S.-German 
friendship in the state.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18513","7/8/2004 7:33","04FRANKFURT5846","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","04BERLIN1867|04FRANKFURT1495","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 005846 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, MASS, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: RHEINLAND-PFALZ PROPOSES JOINT TRAINING FACILITY 
AT BAUMHOLDER TO KEEP U.S. PRESENCE 
 
REF: A) FRANKFURT 1495 B) BERLIN 1867 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Consul General Peter Bodde, reasons 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY: The Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) state government 
has proposed converting Baumholder (a 29,158 acre army 
training facility supporting around 13,000 U.S. soldiers and 
family members) into a multi-purpose facility for 
humanitarian intervention and civil defense training.  This 
\"Joint Training Area\" would be available to Germany, the 
U.S., NATO, the EU, and others.  Rheinland-Pfalz is awaiting 
a German federal endorsement of the plan.  This proposal 
supplements Germany\'s existing efforts at Grafenwoehr to 
train third-country forces from outside the region (theater). 
 R-P\'s initiative is the latest expression of its commitment 
to finding workable compromises for major military 
installations in Rheinland-Pfalz in light of possible cuts 
from USG Global Force Posture Review.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (SBU) At the request of the R-P government, the Consul 
General, accompanied by the Foreign Liaison Officer (FLO) for 
Rheinland-Pfalz and Saarland as well as a representative from 
the European Command (EUCOM), met with Rheinland-Pfalz State 
Secretary Karl-Peter Bruch on June 14 to discuss force 
 
SIPDIS 
posture review.  Bruch had asked for the meeting as a 
follow-up to May 28 consultations in Berlin (ref B).  Bruch 
began by discussing the stationing concept presented by U.S. 
Army Europe (USAREUR) Commanding General B.B. Bell at the May 
28 consultations.  Bruch acknowledged that he realized Bell\'s 
presentation was still pre-decisional, but observed that the 
plan made no mention of the Baumholder training facility, 
currently supporting around 13,000 U.S. soldiers and family 
members. 
 
3.  (C) Bruch unveiled a R-P government proposal to convert 
Baumholder into a multi-purpose Joint Training Area (JTA) for 
use in joint and combined crisis response, humanitarian 
intervention, and civil defense training.  He noted that the 
facility would be available for use by U.S., German, EU, 
NATO, and third-country troops.  Bruch said that they were 
awaiting final approval from the military and the German 
government, but hoped to have the concept finalized by 
September and included in the German military\'s base planning 
for the next fiscal year. 
 
4.  (C) Bruch said that Department of Defense Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for NATO and European Affairs Ian 
Brzezinski explained in March that any facility proposed by 
Rheinland-Pfalz would have to be available for both German 
and American use to be successful.  Bruch noted that the 
proposed training and exercise area would be designed for use 
by a variety of civil and military organizations, but hopes 
that the new facility could encourage a decision to retain a 
significant U.S. military presence to remain in Baumholder. 
 
5.  (SBU) CG, USFLO, and EUCOM representatives were generally 
in a listening mode.  Nevertheless, while acknowledging the 
potential uses of the proposed training and exercise facility 
for German and European troops, EUCOM and USFLO 
representatives remarked that the U.S. military already uses 
Grafenwoehr (a U.S. army base in Bavaria) to perform similar 
training exercises for Non-Commissioned Officers from Poland 
and other Eastern European NATO partner states, and asked 
what the proposed facility could provide above and beyond 
Grafenwoehr\'s capabilities.  Bruch asserted that Baumholder 
could provide low-tech training to a variety of security 
forces and crisis responders and has the advantage of 
proximity to the existing U.S. infrastructure in the 
Ramstein/Kaiserslautern area.  State Secretary Bruch has 
already written to Department of Defense Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Installations and Environment Ray DuBois to 
 
SIPDIS 
request a meeting on the Baumholder proposal and he has also 
signaled his intent to continue to raise the issue 
aggressively with the German government and German military. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6.  (C) The proposed JTA at Baumholder is the latest in a 
series of efforts by the state to minimize the impact of 
troop withdrawals associated with U.S. force posture review. 
R-P has the largest number of resident U.S. troops of any 
German state (approximately 24,700), and its smaller economy 
(dependent on American forces) would be hardest hit by a 
reduced U.S. military presence.  Since the R-P government 
understands that they will retain major facilities such as 
Ramstein and Landstuehl, their attention is now focused on 
medium-sized installations like Baumholder.  Although R-P has 
a popular and active Minister-President in Kurt Beck (SPD), a 
financially stretched German military is moving forward with 
plans to close more than 100 existing Bundeswehr facilities 
across Germany.  Continued belt-tightening in Berlin means 
that securing funding for R-P\'s Baumholder proposal will be 
difficult.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18600","7/12/2004 5:51","04FRANKFURT5927","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04FRANKFURT462","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005927 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: Saarland Leader Mueller Lauds Own State as 
Blueprint for National Success 
 
REF: FRANKFURT 0462 
 
1.  SUMMARY: Saarland Minister-President Peter Mueller 
(Christian Democrat-CDU) used the state\'s June 30 \"Empower 
Germany\" conference to call for greater innovation and cited 
his own state\'s comprehensive economic development strategy 
as a model for Germany.  Mueller\'s American-style manifesto 
includes greater autonomy for universities and the 
development of economic \"clusters\" within Saarland.  It is 
the M-P\'s latest effort to publicize his record of reform in 
the leadup to September state elections.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  On June 30, M-P Mueller addressed almost 1000 attendees 
(including most of the state cabinet and Social Democrat-SPD 
opposition leader Heiko Maas) at the state\'s \"Empower 
Germany\" conference, Saarland\'s biggest political event of 
the year.  His speech centered on the need for innovation in 
the German economy.  He noted that while Germany is a global 
leader in terms of invention (with 19.5% of the world\'s 
patents), too many of its ideas are purchased by foreign 
companies and taken overseas.  Mueller called for an 
economic approach that encouraged new ideas to stay at home. 
The M-P pointed to France\'s practice of creating \"national 
champions\" (such as the recent Sanofi-Aventis merger) as a 
possible model for Germany. 
 
3.  Mueller asserted that German business suffers from a 
sclerotic and risk-averse approach that discourages 
innovation.  He cited the recent failure of the 
Siemens/Daimler toll collection initiative for trucks as an 
example, mentioning that the government had spent two 
billion euros to fund the unsuccessful project while 
ignoring a competitive and more practical proposal by a 
Bremen student consortium that would have cost only 1300 
euros.  The Minister-President called German bureaucracy 
ponderous and excessive, noting that it takes twenty-two 
days to open a business in Germany as opposed to only seven 
days in Great Britain. 
 
4.  Mueller called upon German leadership to abolish the 
current system of higher education and \"start from scratch.\" 
Instead of \"elite\" universities (reftel), he advocated more 
autonomy for universities in selecting their students and 
the creation of interdisciplinary research networks to 
develop new ideas and share information.  Mueller condemned 
traditional \"stovepipes\" at German universities that 
compartmentalize research and discourage innovation. 
 
5.  Mueller hailed his administration\'s accomplishments in 
promoting innovation and reducing bureaucracy, suggesting 
that a victorious CDU in 2006 could use Saarland\'s success 
as a template for national reform.  He noted that Saarland 
had abolished 70% of the \"red tape\" governing business in 
the state.  Mueller lauded Saarland\'s flexibility in 
establishing economic \"cluster\" regions and research 
networks using the state\'s small size to exploit niche 
marketing opportunities like nanotechnology.  The M-P 
pointed to the EU\'s designation of Saarland as the number 
one nanotech region in Europe as proof of the state\'s 
success.  He also observed that Saarland had increased the 
number of employees in its IT sector by 40% since 1999 
(compared with 0.8% growth nationwide). 
 
6.  COMMENT: Mueller\'s manifesto marked a clear shift 
towards more \"American-style\" economic ideas, stressing 
equality of opportunity over equality of result and calling 
for a flexible business climate fostering hard work and 
innovation.  He stated at one point that \"the strong are not 
here to devour the weak; they are here to encourage the weak 
to get stronger.\"  Although some of Saarland\'s structural 
reform began under the previous SPD administration, Mueller 
has succeeded in convincing most of the electorate that he 
is personally responsible for the state\'s forward-leaning 
approach.  He remains the clear favorite in September state 
elections.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18661","7/13/2004 15:03","04FRANKFURT6002","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Reftel:4Frankfurt5551","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 006002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, TBIO, GM 
SUBJECT: Baden-Wuerttemberg Cabinet Shuffle Raises Eyebrows 
 
Reftel:  04 Frankfurt 5551 
 
Sensitive but unclassified: not for internet distribution. 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) Minister President 
Erwin Teufel (Christian Democrat/CDU) has restructured the 
state cabinet following the retirement of Interior Minister 
Thomas Schaeuble (CDU) and State Minister of Economics 
Walter Doering\'s (FDP) resignation amid scandal.  Teufel 
took a chance on a major restructuring in order to bring 
more women and younger politicians into the cabinet. 
Lucrative public-sector jobs for retiring ministers and 
Teufel\'s unwillingness to declare his own future intentions 
have sparked criticism within the party.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) On July 8, Teufel announced the new CDU cabinet 
members.  Heribert Rech, currently Schaeuble\'s State 
Secretary (2001-present), will become Interior Minister. 
 
SIPDIS 
Current State Secretary Stefan Mappus will become minister 
for environment and transportation, replacing incumbent 
Ulrich Mueller.  Federal Parliament (Bundestag) delegate/CDU 
national executive board member Tanja Goenner will become 
minister for social affairs (replacing Friedhelm Repnick). 
Teufel also appointed three new state secretaries (all CDU): 
Friedlinde Gurr-Hirsch (Ministry of Agriculture), Dieter 
Hillebrand (Ministry of Environment and Transportation), and 
Wolfgang Reinhardt (Finance Ministry).  NOTE:  Following 
Economics Minister Doering\'s resignation in June, the FDP 
nominated state caucus chief Ernst Pfister as new economics 
minister (reftel). 
 
3. (U) Prior to the cabinet restructuring, Teufel had agreed 
to make Schaeuble CEO of the Rothaus Brewery (a highly 
profitable state-owned enterprise in the Black Forest region 
near Schaeuble\'s hometown).  Teufel offered Repnick the CEO 
position at the B-W state lottery (Lotto-Totto GmbH). 
Repnick, who initially resisted leaving government, agreed 
to accept Teufel\'s generous job offer.  The golden 
parachutes sparked protests from party circles including the 
B-W Young Conservatives (Junge Union) and the Association of 
Taxpayers.  CDU contacts privately expressed concern that 
these moves will expose the party to charges of cronyism. 
 
4. (U) With the appointment of Goenner and Mappus as 
ministers, Teufel increased the representation of women and 
rejuvenated his cabinet, since Goenner (34 years) and Mappus 
(38 years) are considerably younger than the average cabinet 
minister.  The reshuffle has fueled the smoldering 
successorship debate, as the B-W conservative women\'s 
association and the CDU labor wing called on Teufel, who 
turns 65 in September, to announce his retirement plans. 
Christian Baeumer (head of the CDU labor wing and close ally 
of CDU caucus chief/heir apparent Guenther Oettinger) 
demanded that Teufel put his cards on the table by October. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT:  Political observers in the region see the 
cabinet reshuffle as a sign that Teufel wants to continue 
beyond the 2006 state elections -- but if Teufel intended to 
gain some political buffer as a result of this reshuffle, he 
did not achieve his goal.  In fact, the nominations have 
created a mini-political inferno in the state.  The decision 
to award lucrative jobs in state-owned enterprises to 
departing officials caused an outcry at a time of high 
unemployment and constant cutbacks of social benefits.  Some 
CDU activists predict a backlash at election time.  Media 
and some party insiders are beginning to question whether 
Teufel is starting to lose his political instincts, 
suggesting thirteen years in power may have created a sense 
of omnipotence and a loss of grounding in reality.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18857","7/19/2004 12:56","04FRANKFURT6156","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","02FRANKFURT10187|04FRANKFURT567","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L FRANKFURT 006156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2014 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, KISL, PINS, PHUM, PGOV, GM, MO, BINR 
SUBJECT: SEARCH OF FRANKFURT MOSQUE PROVOKES CONTROVERSY; 
EVIDENCE UNCLEAR 
 
REF: A) FRANKFURT 0567 B) 02 FRANKFURT 10187 
 
Classified By: Consul General Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY: Police searched Frankfurt\'s Taqwa (\"Fear of 
Allah\" in Arabic) mosque on July 11 in response to 
allegations that Taqwa\'s religious curriculum includes 
violent and extremist material.  Justification for the raid 
centered on a 9-year old\'s statement to police that the 
mosque\'s school showed images glorifying violence and 
promoting attacks on non-Muslims as well as a videocassette 
allegedly purchased at Taqwa that includes footage of Muslim 
rebels and calls for jihad.  Authorities say they confiscated 
numerous videotapes and digital storage devices as well as 19 
computer hard drives and will need weeks to analyze the 
material.  The raid provoked surprise and controversy, as 
Frankfurt\'s Office for Foreigners had considered the mosque 
to be relatively progressive.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) Over two hundred Frankfurt police armed with machine 
guns searched the Moroccan mosque Taqwa (located near the 
city\'s main train station) on July 11 after a statement 
alleging reports of material at the mosque\'s religious school 
demonizing \"non-believers\" and glorifying acts of violence 
against non-Muslims.  The school enrolls over 300 students 
and receives partial funding from the Moroccan consulate. 
According to police, a 9-year-old student confided to a 
teacher at her German school that Taqwa was using brutal and 
extremist imagery (including that of a pregnant woman\'s 
stomach violently slashed) to promote attacks against 
non-Muslims. 
 
3.  (C) A Taqwa spokesman denied police allegations and 
demanded a public apology for the raid.  The spokesman 
explained reports of police seizures of large quantities of 
high-tech equipment from Taqwa premises by noting that the 
material was part of a library that Taqwa kept for use by its 
congregation.  In a subsequent statement, police qualified 
the raid by saying that the Taqwa mosque was not under 
suspicion and that authorities had no plans at present to 
press charges.  Frankfurt\'s Commissioner for Foreigners, 
Albrecht Magen, called the police statement a contradiction 
and cited Taqwa\'s reputation as a moderate voice among 
Frankfurt\'s Muslims and its long record of participation in 
community initiatives such as \"Mama lernt Deutsch (Mama 
learns German)\", a program to teach German to immigrant 
mothers. 
 
4.  (C) Frankfurt law enforcement revealed on July 15 that 
they possessed a tape allegedly purchased in the Taqwa mosque 
glorifying violence and calling for attacks on non-Muslims. 
Authorities in Cologne discovered the tape and passed it to 
Frankfurt police.  The video opens with footage of a red 
tulip blossoming and then moves to images of Muslim 
insurgencies in Afghanistan and Chechnya accompanied by calls 
for jihad.  Police note that the tape was part of the 
evidence they presented to obtain a search warrant for the 
mosque. 
 
5.  (C) COMMENT: Frankfurt was home to a North African 
Islamic terrorist cell convicted of planning attacks against 
the Strasbourg Christmas Market in 2000 (ref B).  As reported 
in the press, local politicians like city Social Democrat/SPD 
party manager Gregor Amman (who lives next door to the 
mosque) have cited Taqwa\'s strong community involvement and 
progressive reputation while criticizing the heavyhanded way 
in which police conducted the raid (including bringing a 
camera crew and failing to take their shoes off before 
entering the mosque.)  Law enforcement authorities have 
adopted a cautious tone and say that it will take weeks to 
translate and analyze the material seized.  Meanwhile, the 
incident has sparked a heated debate within Frankfurt on 
Muslim religious schools and their possible use as incubators 
for Islamist extremism.  END COMMENT. 
BODDE 
"
"18961","7/21/2004 15:06","04FRANKFURT6238","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 006238 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EIND, ELAB, ECON, ETRD, ELTN, GM 
SUBJECT: Troubled GM/Opel Signals Further Cutbacks as CEO 
Forster Moves On 
 
Ref: 03 Frankfurt 07910 
 
Sensitive but unclassified  not for internet distribution 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  GM recently shuffled top management at 
European subsidiary Opel (based in Ruesselsheim outside 
Frankfurt) amid continued weak consumer demand within the 
flagging German economy.  Effective July 1, Opel CEO Carl- 
Peter Forster became President and Deputy Chairman of GM 
Europe, charged with restructuring affiliates Opel, Saab, 
and Vauxhall (Opel board member Hans Demant replaced Forster 
as Opel CEO).  GM\'s European headquarters will assume direct 
management of subsidiaries and streamline production. 
Continued losses at Opel stem from a half-decade of stagnant 
demand in Germany, where new car registrations are one-fifth 
below the 1999 level.  Opel\'s experience is not unique -- 
sales in Germany (across various automakers) continue to 
decline -- but Opel is uniquely dependent on the European 
and especially German markets since it cannot compete with 
GM models in many places outside Europe.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) As GM\'s main mass-market brand in Europe, Opel 
accounts for about four-fifths of GM\'s revenues -- and net 
losses -- in Europe.  Forster, who joined Opel in 2001, 
enjoyed early success in increasing Opel\'s German market 
share from nine to almost 11 percent but was unable to cut 
costs enough to make the troubled automaker profitable.  The 
year 2003 -- predicted to be Opel\'s turnaround year -- was a 
particular disappointment as Opel posted a fifth year of 
losses (EUR 384 million on falling sales of EUR 14.1 
billion).  Forster reacted by cutting production of the 
Vectra and Signum models by 60,000 units and by reducing 
working hours for assembly-line employees from 35 to 30 
hours.  In a meeting with the Consul General (reftel), 
Forster cited political mismanagement of the German economy 
and high labor costs as factors spurring Opel and its 
suppliers to move more production to Eastern Europe.  GM 
leadership recently announced that the R&D center in 
Ruesselsheim will play a leading role within GM Europe, but 
made no guarantees about manufacturing in Germany. 
 
3.  (U) At GM\'s European headquarters in Zurich, Forster 
will oversee Opel, Saab, and Vauxhall.  GM Europe -- until 
now primarily a holding company -- will have day-to-day 
oversight of GM\'s subsidiaries.  New Opel CEO Demant (and 
the heads of Saab and Vauxhall) will report directly to 
Forster.  The restructuring comes at a time of continued 
weak demand for cars in Germany:  the VDA (German automaker 
association) announced July 5 that new car sales in Germany 
for the first half of 2004 fell 1% year-on-year (versus an 
increase of 3% for Europe as a whole).  This marks a fifth 
year of stagnation (new car registrations in Germany remain 
19% below the 1999 level). 
 
4.  (U) Opel Works Council head Klaus Franz (representing 
Opel\'s 32,000 employees in Germany) expressed concern that 
Opel will lose autonomy under the new management structure. 
Labor sharply criticized the decision to produce the new 
Zafira model at Opel\'s plant in Poland.  Opel will however 
shift production of 22,000 Vectras from the UK (Ellesmere 
plant) to Ruesselsheim, a consolidation measure.  Forster 
and GM Europe emphasize that tighter brand integration -- 
including more shared platforms and components -- will bring 
new opportunities for Opel:  in the near future, for 
instance, Opel could assemble Saab or Cadillac models in 
Germany. 
 
5.  (SBU) COMMENT:  Despite years of concerted efforts to 
lower costs at Opel, the company is still in the red. 
Unlike other automakers, Opel cannot compete with parent GM 
in many overseas growth markets -- above all China and the 
United States -- so it cannot paper over its European losses 
with export gains overseas.  Barring a dramatic turnaround 
in Germany\'s domestic economy or far-reaching labor market 
reforms, however, Opel has a long tough road ahead.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"18962","7/21/2004 15:12","04FRANKFURT6240","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04BERLIN2178","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 006240 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DRL/IL 
DEPT PASS DOL/ILAB (BRUMFIELD) 
TREASURY/OASIA FOR MCDOWELL 
DEPT PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FOR ELLEN MEADE 
 
USDOC FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EIND, ELAB, ECON, ETRD, ELTN, GM 
SUBJECT: Proposed Daimler-Chrysler Cost-Cutting Measures 
Spark Union Outrage 
 
REF: BERLIN 2178 
 
Sensitive but unclassified -- not for internet distribution 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY: Emulating an earlier approach by Siemens, 
German auto giant Daimler-Chrysler has demanded from IG 
Metall cuts in bonuses under the threat of moving 6,000 
jobs from their main plant in Sindelfingen to either Bremen 
(where the Mercedes C-Class model costs 500 Euro less to 
produce) or South Africa to save 500 million Euro (USD 617 
million).  The Daimler-Chrysler works council has agreed to 
make concessions totaling 180 million Euro so far.  On July 
15, about 80,000 Daimler-Chrysler employees participated in 
a nationwide two-hour strike to protest the company\'s 
drastic cost-cutting plans.  Daimler-Chrysler management has 
expressed provisional willingness to reduce management 
salaries as a gesture of goodwill to works council and 
union members.  Daimler sources are confident that they can 
reach an agreement that allows C-Class production to remain 
in Sindelfingen.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) In response to sluggish sales, Daimler-Chrysler has 
called for cost reductions totaling 500 million Euro for 
its 42,000-employee Sindelfingen plant, the primary site of 
C-Class production and the largest Mercedes plant in 
Germany.  Using its production facility in Bremen as a 
model, the company is seeking concessions from its works 
council and the Metal Workers Union (IG Metall) on cutting 
special bonuses granted only to workers in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg, including a five-minute break every hour and 
late-shift supplements starting at noon.  B-W Daimler 
employees also currently enjoy three more public holidays 
per year than their Bremen colleagues.  Mercedes Chief 
Juergen Hubbert claims that Bremen employees work 72 more 
hours per year than their Sindelfingen colleagues and 
attributes the disparity to the  \"Baden-Wuerttemberg 
disease.\"  Hubbert has called for the elimination of these 
\"Sindelfingen\" benefits by spring of 2005 and has 
threatened relocation of C-Class production to Bremen or 
South Africa if union and works council do not accept the 
reductions.  Relocation of C-Class production would make 
approximately 6000 jobs at the Sindelfingen facility 
redundant. 
 
3.  (U) In response to management\'s demand, Daimler- 
Chrysler\'s works council has agreed to cost reductions 
totaling 180 million Euro so far, but indicated that 
further cuts also required concession by management.  Erich 
Klemm, chairman of the Daimler-Chrysler works council, and 
Joerg Hoffmann, chief of IG Metall Baden-Wuerttemberg, 
accuse Daimler-Chrysler management of jumping on the 
Siemens bandwagon to extend the workweek and cut benefits 
(reftel).  Klemm described Hubbert\'s offer as a violation 
of existing contracts and said that management proposed the 
cuts only to increase its own profit margin.  Worker 
response has been considerable: on July 10 and 17, ten 
thousand employees failed to report for the early shift at 
the Sindelfingen plant, and on July 15, 60,000 Daimler- 
Chrysler workers participated in a nationwide \"action day\" 
to protest the Daimler-Chrysler initiative. 
 
4.  (U) B-W Minister-President Erwin Teufel (Christian 
Democrat-CDU) condemned Hubbert\'s use of the term \"Baden- 
Wuerttemberg disease\" while conceding that B-W needed to 
extend its workweek to remain competitive.  Teufel noted 
that Daimler-Chrysler should coordinate any curtailment of 
Christian holidays with B-W churches.  B-W employer 
association chairman Hans-Eberhard Koch concurred with 
Teufel\'s assessment that Hubbert\'s statement was far too 
negative but agreed that relatively higher labor costs in 
Baden-Wuerttemberg were a barrier to effective competition 
within Germany. 
 
5.  (U) In a lunch with consulate representatives, Daimler- 
Chrysler chief economist Peter-Ruediger Puf echoed the 
message that labor and production costs in SW Germany were 
too high.  Puf took issue, however, with the tenor of 
Hubbert\'s cost-cutting strategy and criticized as unhelpful 
his threat to move production facilities to South Africa. 
He noted that it would have been better to advertise the 
cuts as a necessary step to keep jobs and production at 
home.  He pointed out that Daimler-Chrysler competitor BMW 
does not provide additional Sindelfingen-style benefits to 
its employees and as a result enjoys a cost advantage of 
around eight percent.  (NOTE: Other observers also cite 
BMW\'s highly flexible production schedule  virtually 
around the clock, six days a week  as a significant reason 
for the company\'s cost advantage.  END NOTE.) 
 
6.  (U) On July 15, Daimler-Chrysler CEO Juergen Schrempp 
expressed his public expectation that a compromise could be 
reached and added that he expects a resolution of the 
dispute by July 23 or earlier.  Schrempp qualified 
Hubbert\'s use of the term \"Baden-Wuerttemberg disease\" by 
saying that the term applied only to working conditions in 
Sindelfingen and not to B-W as a whole.  Meanwhile, a 
company spokesperson confirmed on July 18 that management 
has agreed to wage cuts as an incentive for works council 
and union to accept the overall package of cost reductions. 
 
7.  (SBU) COMMENT:  Mercedes has long been the most 
important profit center within the Daimler-Chrysler group. 
In 2003, the Mercedes-Benz group contributed 3.1 billion 
Euro to Daimler-Chrysler\'s overall 5.7 billion Euro net 
operating profit.  Daimler-Chrysler often has used its 
extensive benefits system in SW Germany to negotiate 
favorable packages with IG Metall and worker 
representatives that smaller companies are unable to match. 
 
8.  (SBU) COMMENT (cont\'d): Chrysler Group COO and Mercedes 
heir apparent Wolfgang Bernhard lost his job recently for 
discussing publicly the need for cost-cutting measures and 
the movement of production facilities abroad.  Hubbert\'s 
absolutist ultimatum has further aggravated sensitivities 
on this issue and alienated some labor representatives. 
Since Hubbert\'s announcement, Daimler has focused on damage 
control (downplaying his comment on the \"Baden-Wuerttemberg 
disease\") and concessions designed to entice labor back 
into the fold (the mooted cuts in management compensation.) 
Although the company likely will reach a compromise that 
allows production to remain in Sindelfingen, Daimler\'s 
initial lack of surefootedness in announcing the cuts has 
certainly muddied the waters.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"19049","7/23/2004 14:38","04FRANKFURT6334","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","04APRIL26","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 006334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/OHI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KCRM, GM 
SUBJECT: RHEINLAND-PFALZ AGREES TO REINSTATE PENSION 
BENEFITS TO SATMAR HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS 
 
REF: A) MAY 19 SHEMANSKI E-MAIL (NOTAL) B) APRIL 26 
 
     BODDE/CLOUD BRIEFING MEMO C) JULY 9 
     GILMAN/MILLER/HODGES/MATHAI CONFERENCE CALL 
 
Classified By: Consul General Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY: As of July 1, the Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) 
state government reinstated full payment of pensions to all 
Holocaust survivors involved in the Satmar payments dispute 
(reftels) and will refund all funds withheld to date.  R-P 
took the move in response to a meeting between Consul General 
and R-P Finance Minister Gernot Mittler.  The Finance 
Minister signaled his state\'s willingness to work with Post 
to bring the matter to a satisfactory conclusion.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) On June 8, Consul General met with Rheinland-Pfalz 
Finance Minister Gernot Mittler (accompanied by R-P 
Reparations Office head Juergen Pauly and senior Finance 
Ministry official Reinhold Bott) to discuss allegations that 
Holocaust survivors in the Satmar Community (an orthodox 
Jewish group) filed fraudulent claims for Holocaust-related 
medical treatment.  R-P officials maintain that from the 
early 1990s to 2002, Satmar survivors (represented by New 
York Rabbi Sandor Katz and California chiropractor Dr. Paul 
Ross) submitted more than 180 claims for medical treatment at 
non-existent medical facilities.  The Reparations Office 
begun withholding funds (150-200 euros monthly) from survivor 
pensions to recoup the amounts from allegedly fraudulent 
claims already paid.  Former House International Relations 
Committee Chairman Benjamin Gilman contacted the R-P 
government and Post several times on behalf of the survivors. 
 
3.  (C) During the meeting, Consul General stressed the 
politically sensitive nature of the dispute and underscored 
our interest in finding a fair and equitable solution that 
did not penalize innocent survivors.  He offered ConGen\'s 
assistance and suggested that Post Legatt could work with the 
R-P government to further investigate the matter. 
 
4.  (C) Summing up the R-P legal position, Reparations head 
Pauly maintained that his office performed due diligence in 
investigating the claims and was convinced that they were 
fraudulent.  He suggested that Rabbi Katz and Dr. Ross might 
have exploited survivors and kept the claim money for 
themselves, noting several letters from surprised Satmar 
survivors indicating that they were outside the U.S. at the 
time of the alleged treatments.  Pauly remarked that the R-P 
Reparations Office spoke with the FBI in the United States to 
request a formal fraud investigation. 
 
5.  (C) Acknowledging the delicacy of the situation, Finance 
Minister Mittler accepted the CG\'s offer to work together to 
end the dispute.  He indicated that the Finance Ministry 
would suspend action against all Satmar survivors pending 
cooperation between the ministry and the consulate. 
 
6.  (C) Mittler stated in a subsequent letter to Consul 
General that the R-P government would resume payment of all 
Satmar pensions and refund any money already withheld from 
Satmar survivors beginning July 1.  He underscored that the 
R-P government took action against Satmar individuals only 
after giving them numerous opportunities to respond to the 
fraud allegations.  Mittler ended the letter by welcoming USG 
involvement while leaving open both the nature and extent of 
our possible cooperation. 
 
7.  (C) In a July 9 conference call (ref D), ConGen Poloff 
related to former representative Gilman the R-P government\'s 
decision to reinstate Satmar pensions.  Poloff emphasized 
that the decision did not signify a change of heart regarding 
the alleged fraudulence of Satmar claims.  Gilman promised to 
work together with Rabbi Katz to provide additional 
information to the R-P government exonerating Satmar 
survivors.  In response to Mittler\'s concerns over the dearth 
of Satmar replies to R-P government correspondence, Gilman 
stated that he would advise Rabbi Katz to encourage Satmar 
members to answer inquires in a more timely manner.  Gilman\'s 
attorney David Miller floated the idea of enlisting local 
counsel in R-P to act as liaison with the state government in 
settling the dispute. 
 
8.  (C) COMMENT: Mittler\'s executive order to resume survivor 
pensions and refund withheld compensation indicates that the 
R-P government now realizes the political sensitivity of the 
issue.  Nevertheless, Mittler and other R-P government 
officials stand by their belief that Satmar claims are 
fraudulent.  As proposed in the Mittler meeting, Post 
enlisted the aid of its resident Legatt to investigate the 
dispute.  On the political level, we will continue to work 
together with Embassy Berlin and OHI to formulate avenues for 
cooperation with the R-P government that ensure fairness and 
transparency.  END COMMENT. 
BODDE 
"
"19148","7/27/2004 15:23","04FRANKFURT6441","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04FRANKFURT5675","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 006441 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KISL, GM 
SUBJECT: Germany\'s Supreme Court President Predicts Ludin 
Headscarf Appeal 
 
Ref: FRANKFURT 5675 
 
Sensitive but unclassified  not for internet distribution 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: In a July 15 meeting with Consul 
General, Federal Constitutional Court (BVG) president Hans- 
Juergen Papier predicted that Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) 
plaintiff Fereshta Ludin would appeal a newly-minted B-W 
law banning headscarves for civil servants (reftel.) 
Papier opined that the motion would force a decision from 
the Karlsruhe-based Federal Constitutional Court, Germany\'s 
supreme judicial authority, on whether the B-W law\'s 
special exemption for Christian and Jewish religious 
symbols signifies preferential treatment for those faiths 
and contravenes religious freedom as enshrined in Germany\'s 
constitution.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) Consul General visited Federal Constitutional Court 
(FCC) President Hans-Juergen Papier on July 15.  Papier 
began his presidency in March of 2002 and, unlike 
predecessors Ute Limbach and Roman Herzog (who went on to 
become Federal President of Germany), has limited 
experience in elected office.  He has instead amassed a 
reputation as one of Germany\'s keenest legal minds before 
becoming FCC president.  He is a member of the Christian 
Social Union (CSU) (Bavaria\'s conservative ruling party) 
and has registered minority opinions against the Court\'s 
sanctioning of same sex marriages and its abolition of 
Bavaria\'s restrictions on abortion. 
 
3.  (SBU) Papier voiced his expectation that B-W plaintiff 
Fereshta Ludin would appeal the Leipzig Federal 
Administrative Court\'s upholding of a recent B-W law 
banning headscarves for public servants.  The FCC attracted 
controversy in September 2003 for its decision to allow 
state parliaments to pass laws regulating or forbidding the 
wearing of headscarves by public school teachers.  The 
court\'s verdict addressed a long-running dispute between 
teacher Fereshta Ludin and the B-W government over Ludin\'s 
right to wear her headscarf while teaching.  Papier 
predicted that the case would end up in the First Senate 
(the section of the FCC that rules on matters of religious 
freedom), as opposed to Leipzig\'s assignation of the matter 
to its own Second Senate (which deals with the rights of 
civil servants.)  The FCC president believes that Ludin\'s 
appeal will force his court to decide whether the B-W law\'s 
exemption of \"Christian and Jewish traditions\" from the ban 
contradicts the doctrine of religious freedom mandated in 
Germany\'s constitution. 
 
4.  (SBU) Papier noted that increasing involvement from the 
European Human Rights Commission and the European Court 
complicated the FCC\'s ability to set and maintain legal 
precedent.  He cited the independent European Human Rights 
Commission review of the B-W headscarf law as an example. 
Papier added that ratification of the European Constitution 
would further blur jurisdictional authority. 
 
5.  (SBU) COMMENT: The Ludin appeal should reach Karlsruhe 
before the end of the year.  Although Papier is a staunch 
conservative, the liberal composition of the First Senate 
and its relative independence from the court presidency 
could mean that a decision striking the B-W law\'s reference 
to \"Christian and Jewish traditions\" is likely.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"19149","7/27/2004 15:24","04FRANKFURT6445","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 006445 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, GM 
SUBJECT: Hesse CDU Expulsion Marks Latest Chapter of Hohmann 
Scandal 
 
REF: 03 FRANKFURT 9873 
 
Sensitive but unclassified  not for internet distribution 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY: Hesse Christian Democrats (CDU) expelled 
Fulda member Martin Hohmann from the party on July 20 for an 
October 2003 speech comparing the actions of Soviet 
Bolshevist Jews during the Communist Revolution to Nazi 
involvement in the Holocaust.  The CDU federal parliamentary 
caucus expelled Hohmann last November for the remarks. 
Hohmann will appeal the decision to the CDU\'s national party 
court.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) Hesse CDU members stressed in their decision that 
Hohmann\'s greatest failure was refusing to distance himself 
from the speech after negative reaction from the media and 
the party.  Hesse CDU General Secretary Michael Boddenberg 
noted that Hohmann could have prevented his expulsion by 
renouncing the anti-Semitic elements of his speech following 
the public uproar.  Boddenberg added that he expects Hohmann 
to wage a long legal battle against the expulsion order. 
 
3.  (U) Hohmann indicated that, given the widespread 
negative public reaction, he now regretted giving the 
speech.  He refused, however, to apologize for his remarks 
and maintained that the comparison of Soviet Bolshevist Jews 
to Nazis was historically accurate.  Hohmann, who ironically 
received the most support of any Hesse CDU MP in the 2002 
Bundestag elections, underscored his wish to stay in the CDU 
and called upon local members to remain in the party (NOTE: 
After Hohmann\'s exclusion from the national caucus in 
October, 150 Fulda Christian Democrats resigned in protest. 
END NOTE.)  Hohmann ascribed the controversy to a \"media 
witchhunt\" and said that he would appeal the decision to the 
CDU\'s national party court. 
 
4.  (SBU) COMMENT: CDU head Angela Merkel solidified her 
hold on party leadership last year by making it clear 
through Hohmann\'s expulsion from the national caucus that 
the CDU would not tolerate anti-Semitism.  Consequently, the 
Hesse CDU\'s decision to remove the Fulda MP comes as no 
surprise.  What we do find surprising, however, is not only 
that the popular and traditionally-moderate Fulda MP was the 
one to make these anti-Semitic remarks, but also that some 
within the party so vocally defended Hohmann\'s assertions 
when the scandal broke.  Hohmann remains in the Bundestag as 
an independent and his popularity within Fulda is largely 
undiminished.  Although Hohmann has expressed his wish to 
remain with the CDU and fight expulsion proceedings, his 
support base in Fulda remains strong enough to make re- 
election to his seat as an independent in 2006 a real 
possibility.  END COMMENT. 
"
"19454","8/5/2004 8:41","04FRANKFURT6697","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 006697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KCRM, KWMN, SOCI, SMIG, GM 
SUBJECT: TIP: Rheinland-Pfalz Pioneers Innovative Concept to 
Fight Trafficking in Persons, Sees Positive Results 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified  not for internet distribution 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: The government of Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) 
has developed a victim-oriented approach to combating human 
trafficking that offers police protection, NGO (non- 
governmental organization) counseling, and immigration 
advice for trafficked women.  The initiative supports women 
willing to testify against trafficking syndicates.  In 
contrast to Germany\'s national TIP witness protection 
scheme, victims are required only to provide information 
related to their own experiences (as opposed to an 
indictment of senior figures within the trafficking 
organization) to qualify for the program.  Several other 
German states have expressed interest in adopting R-P\'s 
approach because of its success in procuring the cooperation 
of victims often afraid to testify against their captors. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (SBU) ConGen Frankfurt Pol/Econ representatives met with 
R-P Interior Ministry and police officials to discuss the 
state\'s unique approach to combating trafficking in persons. 
Officials explained that the initiative was a joint effort 
by the Ministries of Interior, Education, and Labor, the R-P 
police, and NGOs to provide comprehensive support to the 
victims of human trafficking.  The program provides 
counseling, police protection, and immigration assistance 
for those women willing to testify against human trafficking 
syndicates.  In contrast to the national-level TIP witness 
protection program, women do not have to directly finger 
senior trafficking figures or provide detailed information 
on the structures of trafficking syndicates to qualify for 
services under the R-P initiative.  Victims enjoy full 
anonymity for the length of their stay in Germany. 
 
3.  (SBU) R-P Police head of Witness Protection Wolfgang 
Merken noted that police raids are responsible for the 
discovery of most TIP victims.  Once the women agree to 
cooperate and enter police custody, they receive advice and 
aid from NGO counselors who accompany them for the duration 
of the trial.  Following the proceedings, the NGO works with 
the R-P Immigration Office to facilitate the victim\'s 
voluntary return home.  Those who wish to stay in the 
country are eligible to apply for asylum but are subject to 
the same immigration regulations governing other potential 
asylees.  The R-P Immigration Office assists those who do 
not qualify with repatriation to their home country. 
 
4.  (SBU) Interior Ministry officials admitted that long- 
term financing of the program had been the biggest initial 
hurdle.  Rheinland-Pfalz implemented the concept in 2003 and 
asked local communities to fund associated costs from social 
welfare budgets.  While the program helped eleven 
trafficking victims that year, local communities balked at 
the continued financial burden and refused to fund the 
initiative for 2004.  Ultimately, the Interior Ministry 
appropriated a yearly allocation of 100,000 euros (from its 
budget for the re-integration of ethnic Germans) to fund the 
program.  Merken estimates that about 20 women will qualify 
for the program this year.  The vast majority of R-P\'s TIP 
victims (87.2%) come from Eastern Europe, with the remainder 
hailing largely from Africa (4.3%), Asia (3.4%), and North 
America (1.4%). 
 
5.  (SBU) Interior Ministry official Eberhard Weber contends 
that information provided by victims under R-P\'s new program 
has increased TIP convictions and provided a deterrent to 
trafficking.  Weber cites a major recent R-P TIP conviction 
obtained through victim eyewitness testimony as proof of his 
claim (overall figures are unavailable because of the 
relative newness of the program).  Moreover, Weber asserts 
that Rheinland-Pfalz\'s concept and its successful 
implementation have attracted the attention of several other 
German states, including Baden-Wuerttemberg and Hesse.  The 
European Union has also expressed interest in Rheinland- 
Pfalz\'s initiative as part of its greater emphasis on TIP- 
related issues. 
 
6.  (SBU) COMMENT: Originally, the federal interagency anti- 
trafficking working group developed a model for interagency 
cooperation at the laender level that was offered to the 
laender for their use.  Since the laender are responsible 
for coordinating the interagency cooperation in trafficking 
victims cases, somewhat different approaches have been 
followed by each land depending on the scope of the problem 
in the land, resources, etc.  Rheinland-Pfalz\'s integrated 
approach to combating human trafficking springs from a need 
for credible eyewitness testimony to obtain convictions as 
well as a recognition of the physical, emotional, and social 
impact of trafficking on its victims.  The comprehensive 
approach results in a well-coordinated interagency response 
that reduces the potential for conflicts to arise between 
organizations dealing with victims of trafficking.  The 
program has also benefited from the fact that R-P has only a 
small portion of Germany\'s total number of TIP victims (62 
out of 805 in 2003) which keeps the scale of the program at 
a more easily managed level.  END COMMENT. 
 
7.  (U) This message has been coordinated with Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
"
"19473","8/5/2004 14:54","04FRANKFURT6722","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04STATE166111","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L FRANKFURT 006722 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EUR, EUR/EX, BERLIN FOR RSO, EXEC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/04/2013 
TAGS: ASEC, PTER 
SUBJECT: FRANKFURT CONVENES EAC ON AUGUST 3, 2004 
 
REF: A. A. STATE 166111 
 
     B. B. STATE 167132 
     C. C. STATE 166240 
     D. D. STATE 166237 
 
Classified By: Peter Bodde, Consul General, Reason E.O. 12958 1.5 B&D 
 
1.  Amcongen Frankfurt convened a CORE EAC (CG, RSO, ADM, 
CONS ESC and RSC/ABA Rhein Mein) in response to information 
reftel(s) concerning the Tashkent Bombings and Escalated 
Homeland Security ratings. 
 
2.  EAC discussed issues concerning the Tashkent bombing 
scenario along with potential target information listed in 
DHS warnings concerning New York, Northern New Jersey and 
Washington D.C.  Although Amcongen Frankfurt and other U.S. 
facilities in Germany are not listed specifically, EAC is 
reviewing protective measures throughout the Frankfurt 
Community in addition to contacting the U.S. business 
community to include Citibank operations located in Frankfurt 
since they were specifically mentioned in the DHS 
announcement. 
 
3. EAC closed the meeting agreeing that post will monitor 
closely and continuously evaluate Amcongens security posture. 
BODDE 
"
"19543","8/9/2004 9:08","04FRANKFURT6769","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04Frankfurt5551","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 006769 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Resignation of Liberal Justice Minister Almost 
Topples Baden-Wuerttemberg Government 
 
REF: Frankfurt 5551 
 
Sensitive but unclassified - not for internet distribution 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: The July 22 resignation of Baden- 
Wuerttemberg (B-W) Minister of Justice Corinna Werwigk- 
Hertneck (Free Democrat Party - FDP), amid allegations that 
she leaked confidential information to former Economics 
Minister and B-W FDP chairman Walter Doering, triggered a 
call for new elections by B-W Minister-President (M-P) 
Erwin Teufel (Christian Democrat Union - CDU).  Teufel\'s 
subsequent retraction -- reportedly the result of pressure 
from national CDU chair Angela Merkel -- has led CDU and 
opposition insiders to question his leadership during the 
FDP scandal and postulate that Teufel saw the resignation 
as a chance to solidify his absolute majority through new 
elections.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Corinna Werwigk-Hertneck resigned as B-W Justice 
Minister on July 22 following reports that she leaked 
confidential information to former B-W FDP chairman and B-W 
 
SIPDIS 
Economics Minister Walter Doering on investigations against 
him related to the Flow-Tex scandal (reftel.)  In a 
personal statement released to the press, Werwigk-Hertneck 
rejected the charges but noted that she would step down to 
prevent further damage to the office. 
 
3.  (SBU) Although initially calling for new elections in 
the wake of Werwigk-Hertneck\'s resignation, M-P Teufel 
stated on July 23 that he believed that the CDU-FDP 
coalition was capable of governing until state elections in 
2006.  Press reports attribute the reversal to pressure 
from national CDU chair Angela Merkel, who was reportedly 
asked by national FDP chairman Guido Westerwelle to 
intervene with Teufel on the FDP\'s behalf. 
 
4.  (SBU) The CDU-FDP governing coalition has resisted 
calls from opposition Social Democrats and Greens to 
discuss Teufel\'s about-face, voting down a July 28 SPD- 
Greens\' motion to discuss new elections.  This followed an 
agreement between the CDU and SPD caucuses the day before 
to hold talks on the issue.  B-W SPD caucus chief Wolfgang 
Drexler labeled the rejection a violation of parliamentary 
procedure and threatened to bring the matter before the B-W 
Constitutional Court. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT: Teufel\'s call for new elections damaged 
relations with the FDP and was perceived by many within the 
B-W CDU as an impromptu power-grab to extend his elected 
mandate as M-P for an additional five years in the face of 
declining support.  Observers (including some within his 
own party) contend that recent miscalculations have damaged 
Teufel\'s reputation as a keen political tactician.  Septel 
will track debate within B-W on whether Teufel should stand 
again for M-P in the state\'s 2006 elections.  END COMMENT. 
 
PASI 
"
"19900","8/19/2004 11:40","04FRANKFURT7197","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 007197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Baden-Wuerttemberg Minister-President Teufel Forced to Decla 
as Succession Debate Intensifies 
 
REF:  A) 03 Frankfurt 010353; B) 04 Frankfurt 5551;  C) 04 Frankfurt 
 
Frankfurt 6769 
 
Sensitive but unclassified not for internet distribution 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Recent events have led to calls for Baden-Wuerttem 
Minister-President Erwin Teufel (Christian Democrat -- CDU) to step d 
Teufel\'s role in securing lucrative private sector jobs for retiring 
face on calling new elections after the resignation of his FDP Justic 
have angered the B-W public, alienated FDP coalition partners and rou 
within Teufel\'s own party.  On August 16, he stated he would announce 
candidacy in 2006 B-W state elections by the end of the year.  Party 
caucus chief and longtime Teufel rival Guenther Oettinger to replace 
candidate in 2006.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
Teufel Miscues Bring Succession Debate Into the Open 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Hobbled by recent mistakes (reftels) and under pressure from 
Minister-President Erwin Teufel declared on August 16 that he would d 
of the year whether or not to run again as Minister-President in 2006 
indicated previously that he would wait until a special CDU nominatin 
February of 2005.  CDU caucus chief and longtime rival Guenther Oetti 
favorite among party members to succeed Teufel and has exploited Teuf 
miscues to broaden his political base and solidify his claim as likel 
and-file Christian Democrats speculate that a refusal by Teufel to st 
1991, he is the longest-serving state leader in Germany) could produc 
similar to the one that removed Helmut Kohl as chancellor in 1998 aft 
office. 
 
3.  (SBU) B-W Young Christian Democrat leader (and 2004 ConGen Frankf 
Thomas Bareiss told a Pol/Econ representative that he was confident t 
announce his retirement.  He conceded, however, that Oettinger\'s like 
made Teufel reluctant to cede power and that excessive pressure from 
might cause him to dig in his heels, opining that such an impasse cou 
within the party and damage the CDU\'s chances for the 2006 elections. 
former Teufel advisors made headlines on August 2 when they stated pu 
should retire. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Teufel Uses \"Mystery Poll\" to Rebut Critics 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Teufel has dismissed recent speculation on his future by ci 
conducted by the Allensbach Institute (a well-respected German pollin 
that placed his approval rating at above 50 percent.  According to Te 
shows Culture Minister (and Teufel favorite) Annette Schavan as a rel 
popular choice for B-W\'s top post than caucus chief Oettinger.  Oetti 
the numbers by noting that Schavan\'s ministerial portfolio gave her g 
among the general public and made her the natural choice for those re 
their choice on name recognition.  He qualified the results by noting 
rose to Minister-President from the unlikely post of caucus chief.  T 
repeated calls by CDU and opposition politicians to make the poll pub 
note that the Allensbach poll predates recent Teufel missteps and doe 
Minister-President\'s current popularity.  They point to a July Infrat 
percent of respondents as in favor of Teufel\'s retirement as a more r 
Teufel\'s dwindling base of support. 
 
5.  (SBU) B-W\'s Social Democrat (SPD) opposition underscores the incr 
of the Teufel camp.  SPD member Nils Schmidt relayed to us that Chris 
have been openly leaking information from confidential meetings betwe 
CDU caucus in an attempt to discredit Teufel.  Schmidt speculated tha 
to step down in 2006 could jeopardize the chances of his chosen succe 
Schavan with those in the party (and the state at large) looking to m 
following the departure of the longtime Minister-President. 
 
--------------- 
COMMENT 
--------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The CDU has dominated political discourse in Baden-Wuerttem 
decades, and growing opposition to Teufel is unlikely to affect the c 
retain the Minister-Presidency in 2006.  Some state and local CDU rep 
see fallout from the Teufel saga, however, as disenchantment with Teu 
balance in favor of SPD challengers (and incumbents) in close races. 
continued pressure from party leadership will convince Teufel to with 
consideration as the 2006 CDU candidate in an attempt to preserve his 
Teufel may try to use his exit from power as leverage to gain party a 
as his successor, Oettinger\'s broad political base and connections wi 
secure his emergence as the CDU\'s candidate in 2006.  END COMMENT. 
 
PASI 
"
"20024","8/24/2004 13:01","04FRANKFURT7332","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 007332 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Hesse Social Democrats Weakened by Infighting as 
Internal Opposition to Agenda 2010 Grows 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified  not for internet distribution 
 
REFTEL: A) BERLIN 2737 B) FRANKFURT 4560 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (SBU) Torn by increasing internal opposition to Agenda 
2010 reforms and plagued by declining membership, Hesse 
Social Democrats have been unable to serve as an effective 
foil to the Christian Democrat (CDU) government of Minister- 
President Roland Koch.  Smaller parties like the Free 
Democrats (FDP) and Greens have assumed de facto the 
opposition role.  A failed attempt last month to corral 
left-wing elements of the party threatens to push the SPD 
further left and damage its viability as an alternative to 
Koch and the CDU.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Rebellious Hesse Social Democrats Draw Attention From Berlin 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Hesse Social Democrats face continued debate over 
the ideological direction the party will take to oppose 
Minister-President Koch in 2008 elections.  Support within 
the party is split between left-leaning Hesse SPD leader 
Andrea Ypsilanti (a 2004 ConGen Frankfurt IV) and centrist 
Landtag caucus leader Juergen Walter.  The battleground for 
this struggle has been the traditionally left-wing district 
of South Hesse (the Hesse SPD is organized in two districts 
with a weak state office).  A July convention exposed the 
rift within the party as Hesse SPD Bundestag member Nina 
Hauer came from Berlin to support Walter\'s proposal to 
eliminate the SPD\'s two district authorities and consolidate 
power within the state office.  After a heated debate, 
delegates defeated the initiative.  Many in attendance 
rejected Walter\'s call for reform and instead interpreted 
the move (and centrist Hauer\'s attendance) as a power play 
against the leftist elements of the party.  One delegate 
commented on the failure of the maneuver by noting \"if 
Berlin has decided to send a proconsul to quiet down a 
rebellious SPD district, this is a powerful response.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Hesse SPD Critics of Agenda 2010 Oppose Party Reform 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
3.  (SBU) In their conversations with consulate 
representatives, Social Democrat insiders echoed the 
observation that Walter\'s call for reform stems from a 
desire to solidify his power base within the party, noting 
that party reform itself is not the real issue.  Even 
supporters of the present structure admit that it hinders 
the SPD\'s ability to campaign effectively.  However, they 
claim it is inappropriate to start discussing organizational 
reform while the party is out of the ruling coalition. 
Furthermore, many party followers identify increasingly with 
the south Hesse wing\'s condemnation of Agenda 2010 and feel 
that the Hesse SPD platform should reflect this stance  an 
unlikely proposition under the mooted reorganization. 
 
4.  (SBU) The party\'s internal strife has weakened the 
entire Hesse opposition.  While Greens and FDP provide 
frequent and public criticism of the CDU administration, the 
infrequent SPD responses are often late.  Hesse papers 
instead often point to Greens caucus chief Tarek Al Wazir as 
the \"real\" opposition leader.  Although Walter is a strong 
speaker who can hold his own in parliamentary debate with 
Koch, divisions within the party prevent him from being 
truly effective.  Financial constraints triggered by 
decreasing membership (the South Hesse district has lost 
more than twenty-five percent of its members since Koch took 
power in 1999) also limit the party\'s reach. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Contacts tell Pol/Econ representatives that Walter 
and Hauer\'s political futures could be in danger as a result 
of their failed initiative.  Party stalwarts have become 
increasingly uncomfortable with the centrist wing of the SPD 
in the wake of public fallout from Schroeder\'s Agenda 2010 
reforms, particularly Hartz IV (reftels).  Hesse SPD caucus 
Social Affairs spokesman Stefan Schaefer-Guembel tells us 
the SPD will need to more openly address the \"impoverishment 
of wide population groups\" after Hartz IV goes into effect. 
Guembel\'s opinion reflects the genuine crisis of conscience 
many in the party are having about the centrist direction of 
the national SPD and Schroeder\'s program of reform. 
Ultimately, the party\'s prospects will depend on state chair 
Ypsilanti\'s ability to unify a rank-and-file increasingly 
unhappy with the Agenda 2010 process.  END COMMENT. 
 
PASI 
"
"20312","9/2/2004 13:39","04FRANKFURT7642","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 007642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: Christian Democrats Likely to Win Absolute Majority 
in Upcoming Saarland Elections 
 
REF: a) Berlin 2736, b) 2003 Frankfurt 3946, c) Frankfurt 
 
4964 d) Frankfurt 5178 e) Frankfurt 5692 f) Frankfurt 5927 
 
Sensitive but unclassified - not for internet distribution 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (SBU) Bolstered by the popularity of Minister-President 
Peter Mueller, the Saarland CDU (Christian Democrats) likely 
will retain its majority in September 5 state elections and 
improve on the party\'s 1999 result, when they won 45 percent 
of the vote.  Opposition Social Democrats (SPD) could see 
their support decline to around 30 percent (from 44% in 
1999).  Fueled by a successful campaign against genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs), Saarland\'s Greens should return 
to Parliament after a poor 1999 showing, while the Free 
Democrats (FDP) have a smaller chance of crossing the five- 
percent threshold.  Observers warn of a possibility, albeit 
remote, that disenchantment with economic reform could 
propel the far-right National Democrats (NPD) into 
Parliament.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Opinion Polls Indicate Decisive Victory for CDU 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
2. (U) Recent polls indicate a commanding lead for Minister- 
President Peter Mueller and the CDU.  A September 26 poll by 
Saarlaendischer Rundfunk and Infratest Dimap predicts a 51% 
return for the CDU (up from 48% in a May 2004 poll), 30% for 
the SPD (down 3%), 7% for the Greens (up 2%), 5% for the FDP 
(down 2%), and 7% for other small parties (up 2%). 
Minister-President Mueller polls 62%, far outstripping SPD 
challenger Heiko Maas (27%). 
 
3.  (SBU) CDU General Secretary Stephan Toscani told a 
Consulate representative the CDU\'s clear lead is due to a 
focus on its candidate (Mueller) as well as an appeal to the 
electorate\'s growing pride in Saarland and its 
accomplishments (NOTE: Mueller\'s focus on flexible high-tech 
ventures utilizing Saarland\'s small size and low 
unemployment within the state has been a central feature of 
the CDU platform.  END NOTE).  He added that former 
Minister-President and SPD left-wing activist Oskar 
Lafontaine\'s criticism of the Agenda 2010 reforms has 
complicated the Saarland SPD\'s campaign because of the 
increasingly unpopular Lafontaine\'s association with the 
party (NOTE: Polls indicate that a majority of Saarland 
voters perceive Lafontaine\'s criticism as an attempt to 
regain the national spotlight rather than genuine opposition 
to Schroeder reforms.  END NOTE).  Toscani also noted an 
alarming growth of anti-Americanism during the campaign, 
citing as an example a CDU poster with an English-language 
slogan (\"Best of Politik\") that was withdrawn after 
widespread criticism of the advertisement as \"too American.\" 
 
4.  (SBU) The election for Saarbruecken mayor (regarded as 
the second-most powerful post in the state) could be a 
potential bright spot for the SPD.  Popular SPD challenger 
Charlotte Britz is the favorite to unseat interim Green 
incumbent Kajo Breuer (who assumed the seat after the 
resignation of Social Democrat Hajo Hoffman due to 
allegations of fraud).  An SPD victory in Saarbruecken could 
preserve SPD chairman Heiko Maas\'s standing within the party 
despite a defeat at the state level. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Smaller Parties See Greens Surge, NPD Threaten 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5.  (SBU) Saarland\'s Greens are the clear favorite among 
smaller parties to enter the Saarland Landtag, currently the 
only two-party (CDU/SPD) state parliament in Germany.  Green 
party manager Marcus Tressel credits much of the increase in 
popularity to the party\'s vigorous campaign against 
genetically modified organisms and notes the Greens netted 
15,000 signatures for a \"GMO-Free Saarland\" during their 
campaign.  Tressel does not expect an SPD-Green coalition 
(his preferred option) and calls a coalition with the CDU an 
option of last resort (assuming the CDU cannot form its own 
majority). 
 
6.  (SBU) The FDP has a smaller chance of re-entering 
Parliament, plagued by low visibility and the migration of 
some of its voters to the CDU.  A strong FDP showing could 
complicate CDU efforts to keep its absolute majority, as the 
CDU would need to get 50 percent of the popular vote (versus 
around 47 percent in a legislature including only the CDU, 
SPD, and Greens). 
 
7.  (SBU) Some observers speculate that dissatisfaction with 
Hartz IV reforms could herald the entry of the far-right 
National Democrats into parliament.  NPD national chairman 
Udo Voight has mounted a symbolic bid for mayor of 
Saarbruecken accompanied by a blitz of advertisements. 
Christian Democrat youth chairman Alexander Funk pointed to 
significant numbers of anti-Hartz IV NPD protesters at 
recent CDU rallies as well as surprising returns in some 
cities in recent Saarland local elections as signs of NPD 
support.  While Green manager Tressel also expressed 
apprehension at the NPD surge in popularity, he sees its 
entry into Parliament as unlikely.  He noted that most of 
the party\'s core support structure remains in east Germany 
and predicts the few votes the NPD receives would be 
protests against Hartz IV and other unpopular recent 
reforms.  At the opposite end of the spectrum, the left-wing 
Party for Democratic Socialism (PDS) remains a long shot to 
enter parliament despite months of vigorous campaigning. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8. (SBU) Current controversy over Hartz IV has erased any 
bounce the Saarland SPD might have enjoyed after an 
unexpectedly strong showing in this summer\'s local and 
European elections.  Oskar Lafontaine\'s vocal criticism of 
Schroeder and Agenda 2010 reforms has also hurt the party, 
scaring away voters repelled by Lafontaine\'s perceived 
obsession with the spotlight.  While SPD candidate Heiko 
Maas is a savvy politician and party manager, he is unable 
to compete with Mueller\'s broad personal appeal.  The SPD\'s 
best chance for good news on September 5 remains 
Saarbruecken mayoral candidate Charlotte Britz. 
 
9.  (SBU) A vigorous campaign by Saarland\'s Greens 
highlighting weaknesses in the CDU\'s environmental and 
education policy should yield them seats in Parliament. 
Mueller\'s co-opting of Free Democrat core voters through an 
FDP-style economic policy makes it somewhat unlikely the FDP 
will re-enter Parliament.  Opposition to economic reform may 
yield increased support for the NPD (they polled 1% of the 
vote in 1999).  Lacking an extensive support structure 
within the state, however, Saarland pundits predict the 
party will be unlikely to cross the five-percent mark and 
enter the legislature.  END COMMENT. 
 
PASI 
"
"20511","9/10/2004 14:52","04FRANKFURT7903","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","04BERLIN2736","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 007903 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/10/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, GM 
SUBJECT: CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATS RETAIN ABSOLUTE MAJORITY IN 
SAARLAND ELECTIONS; FAR-RIGHT NPD MAKES SURPRISING GAINS 
 
REF: A. BERLIN 2736 
 
     B. 2003 FRANKFURT 3946 
     C. 2003 FRANKFURT 5668 
     D. 2003 FRANKFURT 9706 
     E. FRANKFURT 4964 
     F. FRANKFURT 5178 
     G. FRANKFURT 5692 
     H. FRANKFURT 5927 
     I. FRANKFURT 7642 
     J. BERLIN 3066 
 
Classified By: Deputy Principal Officer Geeta Pasi, reasons 1.4(b) and 
(d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (U) Led by popular Minister-President Peter Mueller, 
Saarland Christian Democrats (CDU) netted an impressive 47.5% 
of the vote in September 5 elections and defended their 
absolute majority in the state assembly.  Damaged by public 
disenchantment with Hartz IV reforms (Ref A), Social 
Democrats (SPD) polled 30.8%, a 13.6% drop from 1999 and the 
party\'s second-worst result in the postwar era.  Greens and 
Free Democrats (FDP) re-entered Parliament (with 5.6% and 
5.2% respectively) after failing to cross the five-percent 
threshold in 1999.  The far-right National Democrats (NPD) 
capitalized on anti-reform sentiment to capture 4% of the 
vote, a four-fold increase from 1999.  Voter turnout was 
55.5%, the lowest in any western German state since the end 
of World War II.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Victorious CDU Cites Botched National Reforms 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) The Saarland CDU coasted to victory on the coattails 
of popular Minister-President Peter Mueller, retaining its 
absolute majority in the state parliament with 47.5% of the 
vote (up 2%).  Meanwhile, Saarland Social Democrats suffered 
losses across the board, winning in only three of the state\'s 
52 districts.  A lone bright spot for the SPD was the strong 
showing of Saarbruecken mayoral candidate Charlotte Britz, 
expected to beat Josef Heckmann (CDU) in the upcoming runoff. 
 Voter turnout was 55.5%, the lowest in postwar German 
history.  Sixty-thousand SPD voters from 1999 (out of 800,000 
eligible voters) stayed home during this election while 
30,000 cast votes for other parties.  In a meeting with the 
Ambassador two days after his victory, Minister-President 
Mueller attributed the strong CDU showing to the SPD\'s 
failure to properly explain and implement Agenda 2010 reforms. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
...While Social Democrats Finger Left-Wing Lafontaine 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3.  (U) SPD leader Heiko Maas blamed the party\'s poor 
performance on former Minister-President and outspoken 
left-wing activist Oskar Lafontaine.  Maas characterized 
Lafontaine as a divisive force whose high-profile campaign 
against Agenda 2010 had compromised the state party\'s 
campaign for moderate reform.  National SPD chairman Franz 
Muntefering accused Lafontaine of scuttling the campaign.  In 
an interview with the daily tabloid Bild Zeitung (which has 
the largest circulation in Germany), Lafontaine rejected the 
accusations and blamed the SPD loss on the failed Agenda 
2010, saying that Social Democrats would continue to lose 
elections as long as Chancellor Schroeder maintains the 
present course of reform. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Far-Right National Democrats Make Disturbing Gains 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
4.  (SBU) The far-right and anti-immigrant National 
Democratic Party of Germany (NPD) received 4% of the vote, a 
four-fold increase from 1999 and their best showing since 
1962.  Observers express particular concern that the party 
polled 11% among young voters (more than the mainstream FDP, 
for instance).  Saarland NPD standard-bearer Peter Marx 
brandished the result as a sign that the NPD will \"leave the 
SPD behind\" in upcoming Saxony elections.  Political 
observers attributed the far-right\'s surge to anti-reform 
sentiment (many of the votes came from former SPD 
strongholds) and to a new level of cooperation among 
right-wing parties.  Following the June 2004 agreement 
between the NPD and DVU (German People\'s Union) to coordinate 
election lists in Brandenburg and Saxony, the far-right 
Republicans (Republikaner, who polled 1.4% in 1999) agreed to 
withdraw from Saarland elections to clear the way for the NPD 
and avoid splitting the right-wing vote. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Mainstream Small Parties Also Make Big Moves 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Both the FDP and the Greens posted clear gains in 
the recent election.  Green party officials hailed their 5.6% 
showing as a significant achievement given Saarland\'s largely 
rural and conservative electorate.  Charismatic FDP 
standard-bearer Christoph Hartmann noted that the FDP is now 
on an equal footing with the Greens in Saarland and credited 
the public\'s desire for a \"centrist opposition party\" 
(according to polls, most voters believed the FDP would not 
end up in coalition with the CDU).  The Party for Democratic 
Socialism (PDS) polled a disappointing 2.3% despite months of 
intensive campaigning, underscoring that party\'s weakness 
outside its power base in eastern Germany. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Mueller\'s strong performance further cements his 
status as a rising star among conservatives and positions him 
as a potential player in any CDU national government 
following federal elections in 2006.  The Saarland SPD 
stumbled in its campaign to mobilize its base through 
Lafontaine\'s high profile: left-wing voters dismissed Maas\'s 
moderate manifesto, while centrists bristled at Lafontaine\'s 
media crusade against Agenda 2010.  Growing support for the 
NPD reform critique could be a harbinger of greater far-right 
gains in upcoming east German state elections. 
BODDE 
"
"20635","9/15/2004 13:07","04FRANKFURT8020","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Frankfurt2923","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 008020 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS AND EB/OIC 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCOR, ECON, EINV, PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: German Real Estate Corruption Scandal Implicates 
Major Investment Funds 
 
REF: Frankfurt 2923 
 
Sensitive but unclassified;  not for internet distribution 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Frankfurt prosecutors will soon issue 
corruption indictments against fund managers, architects, 
and builders in a series of large real estate deals across 
Germany.  The alleged corruption includes bribes and a 
number of transactions in which participants pocketed bogus 
commissions from fictitious agents.  The manager of 
Germany\'s largest real estate fund and a prominent banker 
are under arrest and are cooperating with police.  More than 
forty persons are under investigation in a case involving 
more than a dozen real estate projects throughout Germany. 
The scandal could seriously damage the credibility of German 
real estate funds (managing nearly 70 billion euros in 
public investment) and deal another blow to a weak 
construction market.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Frankfurt prosecutors are investigating a major 
corruption scandal involving leading real estate fund 
managers.  The investigation began in 2002 with a corruption 
case against a Deutsche Bank real estate manager, who 
disclosed information concerning a major project in 
Frankfurt -- the Investment Banking Center (IBC) -- and 
claimed bribes in a \"six-digit range\" were paid to secure 
building contracts.  The manager of Deka Bank\'s real estate 
fund (Germany\'s largest retail fund in the sector) was fired 
last week for \"irregularities\" and then began to cooperate 
with Frankfurt prosecutors.  Another fund manager disclosed 
information leading to three other cases.  The weekly 
magazine FOCUS (right-of-center with a circulation of around 
770,000) cites alleged corruption in a dozen other projects 
across Germany. 
 
3. (SBU) Frankfurt chief prosecutor Wolfgang Schaupensteiner 
-- one of Germany\'s leading crusaders against corruption - 
stated publicly that although he cannot estimate the damage 
to investors and shareholders, the indictments will break 
\"new ground\" in their scale.  The deals share a similar 
pattern of corruption:  in the final stages of a 
transaction, participants bring in a fictitious real estate 
agent and divide the commission among all parties.  In an 
earlier meeting with consulate representatives (reftel), 
Schaupensteiner expressed concerns about his office\'s 
limited resources to pursue complicated cases such as this 
one. 
 
4. (U) The indictments may have an impact well beyond the 
tainted firms and individuals.  Bankers and fund managers -- 
already struggling with a depressed building market - worry 
the scandal will damage the credibility of real estate 
funds.  The German Financial Supervisory Authority (BAFIN) 
has launched an investigation into damage to investors. 
Critics are using the scandal to question the viability of 
major construction projects financed by real estate funds, 
including the 450 million euro IBC building constructed for 
(but never occupied by) Deutsche Bank. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT:  Although the full scale of corruption is 
unclear, more arrests are certain and the scandal appears to 
rank among the largest in Germany\'s recent history.  The 
ultimate damage could be greater to the extent that the 
scandal undermines the credibility of popular real estate 
funds.  According to the Bundesbank statistics, real estate 
funds open to the general public have 68.7 billion euros 
under management.  Contacts in the banking community speak 
of a \"grenade detonating\" under an already weak market for 
new construction.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"20992","9/27/2004 8:17","04FRANKFURT8336","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 008336 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSATIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS LEE 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, HALL 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: European Commission Blinks on French and German 
Stability and Growth Pact Cases: A Question of Power 
 
T-IA-F-04-009 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.   (SBU) Summary:  According to European Commission, 
  French and German Finance Ministry officials, the Commission 
  is likely to await the 2005 national budgets for France and 
  Germany at year\'s end before deciding its next step against 
  the two under the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP).  If true, 
  this would suggest that the Commission would not press its 
  recommendation of last November to take a step toward 
  sanctions, but rather de facto adopt the Council\'s position 
  of giving both countries an extra year until 2005 to reduce 
  their deficits below the 3% of GDP reference value. 
 
2.   (SBU) French and Commission officials are confident 
  that France\'s government deficit will fall below 3% next 
  year (the announced budget has the deficit at 2.9%).  The 
  absence of any recovery in domestic demand, depressing tax 
  revenues, makes this a tougher call for Germany, but the 
  Finance Ministry has undertaken \"Project 3%\" to do the 
  necessary. 
  Why didn\'t the Commission go along with the Council\'s 
  position last November?  \"It was a question of power,\" 
  observes one German official.  In this episode, the 
  Commission has slipped a notch.  End Summary. 
 
Waiting Until 2005 Data 
----------------------- 
 
3.   (SBU) According to a top European Commission official 
  as well as French and German Finance Ministry officials, the 
  Commission will not issue immediately a new recommendation 
  on France and Germany under the Excessive Deficit Procedures 
  (EDP) of the SGP.  Both cases had been in abeyance, in part, 
  due to a case the Commission brought against the Council in 
  the European Court of Justice.  The Commission had 
  challenged the Council\'s right not to accept the 
  Commission\'s recommendation to proceed under Treaty 
  paragraph 104(9), the last step before considering 
  sanctions.  Instead, the Council wrote its own conclusions 
  under 104(7) arguing that the previous conclusions under 
  this same paragraph had become partially obsolete. 
 
4.   (SBU) In July the Court issued a decision stating that 
  the Council could not issue its own conclusions but must 
  accept or reject recommendations put forward by the 
  Commission.  The Commission claimed this as a victory since 
  it annulled the Council\'s conclusions.  German members of 
  the Council regarded the outcome as, at best, a split 
  decision.  The Court declared the Commission\'s argument that 
  the Council had to accept its recommendation as 
  \"inadmissible.\" 
 
5.   (SBU) Now, according to a top European Commission 
  official, the Commission will await the proposed national 
  budgets for 2005 for both France and Germany.  These are 
  scheduled to be submitted to the Commission in early 
  December.  Should either country not have a credible budget 
  that reduces their deficit below the 3% GDP reference value, 
  the Commission would issue a recommendation under paragraph 
  104(9) of the Treaty.  If   the Council were to adopt such a 
  recommendation, failure to comply would lead to the next 
  step in the EDP, i.e. a Commission recommendation for, and 
  Council consideration of, sanctions. 
 
Council Conclusion of November - De Facto Acceptance 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
6.   (SBU) If the above scenario plays out, we will find 
  ourselves essentially where we would have been had the 
  Commission accepted the Council\'s conclusions of November 
  25, 2003.   The key points in the Council\'s conclusions of 
  November 25, 2003, were: (1) acceptance of the French and 
  German public commitments to reduce their deficits to below 
  3% in 2005 (an extra year from the Council\'s earlier 
  conclusions); and (2) willingness to escalate the case under 
  104(9) should either country \"fail to act in accordance with 
  its commitments.\" 
7.   (SBU) Tactically, accepting this position would put the 
  Commission in the strong position of holding both countries 
  to their own commitments.  Such a course of action suggests 
  the Commission is, for the moment, allowing the EDP for both 
  countries hang in limbo.  According to the operative 
  outstanding Council conclusions both countries are required 
  to reduce their deficits by 2004.  Clearly this is not going 
  to happen.  Technically the appropriate action would be for 
  the Commission to issue a new recommendation under 104(7) 
  for the Council\'s consideration, according to French and 
  Luxembourg Finance Ministry officials. This recommendation 
  should reflect the new situation and, in the view of the 
  Luxembourg official, be accepted by all Council members. 
  This course of action was suggested by the Court. 
  Commission staff, however, relay that their lawyers still 
  believe the only appropriate course would be a 
  recommendation under 104(9), the approach that failed last 
  November. 
 
More Comments 
------------- 
 
8.   (SBU) The Commission\'s apparent unwillingness to press 
  its cases against France and Germany is, upon reflection, 
  not surprising.  The Commission staff believes it can only 
  proceed under 104(9) which is unacceptable to the Council 
  Revising rules for implementing the SGP, as the Commission 
  has suggested (septel) could provide a way out for the 
  Commission.  The other way would be to use new data to 
  \"refresh\" the cases. Delays associated with either approach 
  reveal the Commission\'s relatively weak position. 
 
9.   (SBU) The Court case and Commission\'s delay have sown 
  acrimony over the SGP.  A European Central Bank official 
  commented that the SGP has been useful but the controversy 
  surrounding it has not been.  \"The Commission acted 
  unwisely,\" in his assessment.  Had the Commission gone along 
  with the majority in the Council last November, perhaps an 
  uproar would have ensued, but the long-running controversy 
  avoided.   A German Finance Ministry official recalled that 
  the then Economics and Finance Commissioner Solbes was 
  willing to go along with the Council\'s position.  \"It was 
  Commission President Prodi\" who would not give in, according 
  to this official.  It was \"a question of power\" between the 
  Commission and Member States.  The stuff of history books. 
 
10.  (U)This message coordinated with Embassies Paris, 
  Berlin, The Hague, Luxembourg and USEU Brussels 
 
11.  (U)POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
  wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
  7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"20993","9/27/2004 8:17","04FRANKFURT8337","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 FRANKFURT 008337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSATIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS LEE 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, HALL 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT: European Commission Proposes Changes to Stability 
Pact:  Rules and Reality 
 
 
T-IA-F-04-008 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.   (SBU) Summary:  On September 3 the European Commission 
  initiated a discussion of possible changes to the Stability 
  and Growth Pact (SGP).  The Commission is seeking to find a 
  balance between flexibility that accommodates individual 
  country circumstances and strict rules that instill 
  necessary budget discipline.  The initial reaction of 
  Finance Ministers was to welcome an examination of ways to 
  strengthen the SGP, but to rule out any changes to the 
  Treaty while keeping any regulatory changes to an absolute 
  minimum.  The discussion will continue at the November 
  Ecofin Council session. Any final outcome is unlikely until 
  the first half of next year. 
 
2.   (SBU) On balance the Commission\'s suggestions are 
  useful and arguably could be adopted   without changes to 
  the regulations. Agreeing to changes in implementation of 
  the SGP could provide the Commission a way out of the dead 
  end in which it has found itself since last November when 
  its interpretation of the rules differed from that of 
  Council\'s.   More rules, however, would not guarantee better 
  implementation of the SGP.  Key decisions on excessive 
  deficit procedures (EDP) still will be political and taken 
  by the Council.  In a match up of rules versus reality, 
  reality wins.  End Summary. 
 
Commission Launches Debate 
-------------------------- 
 
3.   (SBU) On September 3 the European Commission issued a 
  \"Communication\" that commenced a debate on possible changes 
  to the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP).  The Pact is 
  composed of provisions from the EU Treaty, Council 
  Regulations, and a Council Resolution.  The Commission 
  states that tensions have accumulated in the application of 
  the SGP leading to a \"loss of credibility and ownership and 
  institutional uncertainty.\" 
 
4.   (SBU) The Commission\'s proposals are for a 
  \"strengthened\" SGP and a Code of Conduct containing specific 
  economic-analytical tools to allow consistency in budgetary 
  surveillance.  According to a senior Commission official, 
  the Commission is seeking to strike a balance between rules 
  that can take into account each country\'s unique economic 
  circumstances and those that are sufficiently strict to 
  instill necessary budgetary discipline. Another theme, 
  according to this official, is to place more emphasis on 
  \"preventative\" measures, e.g. taking steps to reduce 
  deficits in good economic times, rather than only 
  concentrating on \"corrective\' measures. 
 
Key Elements of Commission Proposals 
------------------------------------ 
 
5.   (SBU) The Commission proposes to (a) refocus the SGP; 
  (b) better coordinate budgetary policies; and (c) improve 
  enforcement. 
 
6.   (SBU) With respect to refocusing the SGP the Commission 
  suggests: 
 
           i.   Placing more focus on government debt and 
            sustainability.  The Commission suggests making the debt 
            criterion of the Treaty operational (e.g. initiate an 
            \"excessive debt procedure\" when the debt exceeds the 60% 
            reference value) and clarifying the basis on which to ass 
            a \"satisfactory pace\" of debt reduction, including an 
            assessment of debt sustainability that takes into account 
            pensions, contingent liabilities, and assets. 
ii.  Allowing for more country-specific circumstances in 
defining the medium-term deficit objective of \"close to 
balance or in surplus.\"  A country with a higher debt level, 
for example, would be subject to a more stringent 
interpretation of the notion of \"close to zero or in 
surplus\" over the medium-term than a country with a lower 
debt level. 
iii. Considering economic circumstances and developments in 
implementation of the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP). 
One option would be to redefine the \"exceptional 
circumstances\" clause that can be invoked to avoid an EDP by 
adding the notion of \"prolonged economic downturn\" as such 
an \"exceptional circumstance.\"  Another approach would be to 
allow country-specific deadlines for action rather than the 
standard ten months after the date new budget data is 
released, thereby seeking to better reflect a country\'s 
cyclical development and debt level. 
iv.  Ensuring earlier actions to correct inadequate 
budgetary developments.  Under this approach the Commission 
would issue early warnings directly to member states when 
deficits are close to 3% (a point on which Ministers have 
agreed in the Constitutional Treaty) but also in good times 
if a government is not moving close to balance or surplus. 
The Commission also could issue recommendations under the 
Broad Economic Policy Guidelines (BEPG). 
 
7.   (SBU) On coordination budgetary policies, the 
  Commission would like to reinforce the link between BEPG, 
  budget programs submitted under the SGP and national 
  budgetary processes.  BEPG address recommendations to member 
  states on structural policies, such as health care and 
  pension systems and labor and capital markets.  The 
  Commission believes that economic and budgetary policies 
  need to set the \"right priorities toward economic reforms, 
  innovation, competitiveness and strengthening of private 
  investment and consumption, thereby contributing toward 
  achieving the economic objectives of the Lisbon strategy.\" 
 
8.   (SBU) The Commission suggests that Stability and 
  Convergence Programs should define the medium-term budget 
  strategy at the beginning of a country\'s budget cycle.  At 
  present all Stability and Convergence programs are submitted 
  to the Commission in early December, regardless of a 
  country\'s own budget cycle. Synchronizing national and EU 
  level budget exercises would allow a member state to reflect 
  the   Commission\'s and Council\'s assessments of its proposed 
  national budget as well as the BEPG\'s in its national 
  deliberations.  Such sequencing would increase the 
  interaction between European and national levels to include 
  national parliaments in the debate. 
 
9.   (SBU) With respect to enforcement, the Commission 
  suggests improving the quality, timeliness and reliability 
  of fiscal statistics, the effectiveness of peer pressure 
  (naming, shaming and blaming), and greater transparency and 
  accountability on budgetary policies (including reports to 
  the European Parliament and greater involvement of national 
  parliaments).  These would complement a change already 
  agreed to by Ministers in the context of the Constitutional 
  Treaty, namely that the Commission be authorized to send 
  early warnings directly to countries without securing 
  Ecofin\'s approval. 
 
Finance Minister\'s Take 
----------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) At their informal meeting in the Netherlands on 
  September 10, EU Finance Ministers issued a short statement 
  reflecting on the Commission\'s ideas.  The thrust of these 
  comments is toward strengthening, or at least improving the 
  implementation of, the SGP.  Ministers ruled out changing 
  the Treaty (i.e. 3% deficit and 60% debt reference values to 
  remain) and want only minimum changes to the regulations, 
  \"if necessary at all.\"  Specifically, the Ministers asked 
  the Economic and Finance Committee to work out elements on 
  the following issues: 
 
     1.   Strengthening the preventative arm of the SGP by having 
       budget discipline in good times to gradually achieve 
       budgetary surpluses, practicing peer pressure, and having 
       transparent budget figures and growth assumptions. 
2.   Enhancing the focus on debt and its sustainability by 
having debt over the reference value diminish at a 
satisfactory pace, taking into account the future costs of 
aging and implications of pension reforms. 
3.   Drawing a distinction between measures taken and 
economic forecasting errors when assessing compliance with 
Council decisions; and 
4.   Having budgetary policies set the right priorities 
towards structural reforms, innovation, and competitiveness 
in support of the Lisbon agenda to promote economic growth 
and employment creation. 
 
Some Views: To Modify or Not to Modify 
-------------------------------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) A German Finance Ministry official noted that the 
  informal Ecofin seemed to concentrate on areas that would 
  strengthen the rules, an outcome he suspected was driven by 
  the Dutch Presidency that has taken a strict line in 
  implementing the SGP.  A Commission official explained that 
  the Ministers\' statement reflects areas on which there was 
  consensus.  This official suspects that some member states 
  would support more flexibility.  According to a senior 
  Bundesbank official, some of the new member states\' central 
  bankers and finance ministers are none too pleased with 
  contemplated changes to the rules that they have been 
  required to use in drawing up their medium-term budget 
  programs. 
 
12.  (SBU) Another German official speculated that the 
  Economic and Finance Committee would not suggest any changes 
  to the regulations.  This position was supported strongly by 
  European Central Bank President Trichet at his September 22 
  hearing before the European Parliament.   A senior 
  Bundesbank official, however, was not sanguine that this 
  position would hold.  The Dutch, Austrians and Nordics 
  continue to toe the line against changes, but Germany, once 
  the leader of this pack, is no more, in his view. 
 
13.  (SBU) Three points in the Commission\'s proposals would 
  require a change in regulations according to a Commission 
  official.  These would be to (a) modify the definition of 
  \"exceptional circumstances;\" (b) provide for another 
  timetable for sanctions to be taken rather than the 10 
  months from the date that new budget data is released; and 
  (c) modify the timetable to correct the excessive deficit to 
  reflect a country\'s circumstance rather than requiring it be 
  done \"a year after its identification.\"  A senior Luxembourg 
  Finance Ministry official believed that some of these 
  changes would be necessary to bring more clarity in how the 
  SGP is being implemented.  In his view, these neither 
  strengthen the SGP nor weaken it. 
 
14.  (SBU) A French Finance Ministry official generally 
  supported the main ideas of the Commission\'s paper, but 
  cautioned that the details could prove to be tricky.  Tying 
  national budget cycles to the EU-level Stability Programs or 
  giving more weight to the BEPG are, in his view, unlikely. 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
15.  (SBU) The Economic and Finance Committee will flesh out 
  Ministers\' ideas with a view to having a first discussion at 
  the November Ecofin.  European Commission staff expect 
  discussions to roll into the next year.  After the Ecofin 
  Council has concluded its deliberations, the Commission must 
  present recommendations to the Council for approval.  A 
  Senior Luxembourg Finance Ministry official thought wrapping 
  up the exercise in the first half of next year would be 
  \"fortunate.\"  He hopes they can conclude the work during the 
  Luxembourg Presidency. 
 
Observations 
------------ 
16.  (SBU) According to a senior German official, the 
  College of the European Commission agreed to taking the 
  Council to the European Court of Justice over the excessive 
  deficit cases of Germany and France provided that it also 
  developed ideas for improving implementation of the SGP. 
  This has positioned the Commission to devise new approaches 
  to implementing the SGP.  In doing so, it could provide a 
  way out of the dead end it has found itself by sticking to a 
  recommendation that the Council could not adopt last 
  November (see septel).  While this commitment was taken 
  while Commissioner Solbes was in charge of DG Economics and 
  Finance, the new Commissioner Alumina is more \"politically 
  savvy,\" according to this German official, and wants to find 
  a compromise that member states can live with.  The 
  Commission has put its \"cards on the table.\" 
 
17.  (SBU) We would agree with the Commission staff 
  observation that most of their suggestions and those of the 
  Finance Ministers could be implemented without any changes 
  in the regulations.  The Commission staff already examines 
  cyclically adjusted balances as part of their overall 
  assessment of a country\'s fiscal position.  We would also 
  argue that the \"special circumstances\" clause can be 
  interpreted to make allowances for the timing of the 
  adjustment path to correct the deficit.  The German Finance 
  Ministry has argued that the unforeseen, prolonged economic 
  slow done is such a \"special circumstance.\"  On the other 
  hand, expanding the definition of \"exceptional 
  circumstances\" would allow countries to avoid any EDP and 
  more intense budget scrutiny. This would not be helpful. 
 
18.  (SBU) Putting more focus on debt would be a welcomed 
  change.  After all, financing costs are driven, in part, by 
  the stock of debt and its dynamics rather than the deficit 
  of a single year.  Seven of the Euro 12 (or nine of the EU 
  25) are over the 60% limit, three of the 12 are close to the 
  100% level (Italy, Greece and Belgium).  The 60% limit was 
  established in the 1990\'s when that was the average stock of 
  debt for the prospective euro area.  That number has gone up 
  to 70% in 2003.  In its latest World Economic Outlook, the 
  International Monetary Fund confirms that the EU has 
  demonstrated an \"unsustainable deficit bias\" since the 
  creation of the European Monetary Union. 
 
19.  (SBU) Subjecting member states to peer review when 
  budgets are in better shape also makes sense.  The authors 
  of the IMF report cited above note that a \"key priority in 
  the reform of the SGP should be to enforce greater fiscal 
  restraint in good times\" in light of the costs of aging 
  populations that loom larger and closer.  Deutsche Bank 
  Research has calculated that a one percentage point increase 
  in EU government deficits raises 10 year government bond 
  yields by 36 percentage points.  Rather than spending money 
  on deficit financing it might be better be spent easing 
  structural reforms or cutting taxes. 
 
20.  (SBU) Better forecasts and statistics (as in the case 
  of Portugal and Greece) are very important.  Uncritically 
  accepting national budget forecasts is nice, but unhelpful 
  in the budget surveillance process.  A little tough love 
  would be better. 
 
21.  (SBU) Providing better consistency between budget 
  proposals and structural reforms, innovation and competition 
  covered in the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines make sense. 
  The SGP should not be just a numbers game, but a discussion 
  of economic policies designed to promote growth and 
  employment.  Deficit spending does not mean the money is 
  spent wisely.  Promoting such consistency would bring EU 
  level macro efforts into the national arena, the purview of 
  member states - a move many member states are likely to 
  resist. 
 
22.    (SBU) One issue confronting the Commission is whether 
  the rules should be drafted to reflect economic reality or 
  whether it is implementation that is to reflect the reality. 
  Drafting more precise rules will not solve the issue of 
  political will.  That, or the absence thereof, still will 
  reside with the Council. 
 
23.  (U)This cable coordinated with Embassies Berlin, 
  Luxembourg, Paris, The Hague and USEU Brussels. 
 
24.  (U)POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
  wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
  7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"21183","10/1/2004 15:11","04FRANKFURT8521","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 008521 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2014 
TAGS: ASEC, EAIR, PTER, SNAR, GM 
SUBJECT: FRANKFURT AIRPORT MANAGEMENT DISPUTES MEDIA 
REPORTS OF SECURITY LAPSES 
 
REF: FROATS-SILER-TULENKO E-MAIL/MEDIA TRANSCRIPT 
 
     (MAY 27) 
 
Classified By: Consul General Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 SUMMARY 
 -------- 
 
1.  (C) Over the past few months, German media outlets, on a 
number of occasions, have reported negatively on Frankfurt 
Airport (Fraport) customs enforcement and its control of 
restricted areas.  In a meeting with consulate 
representatives, senior Fraport officials said the airport is 
100-percent secure and blamed the reports on labor disputes. 
TSA and DHS-ICE representatives believe that Fraport provides 
 
SIPDIS 
fully adequate security.  In reaction to the media attention, 
Fraport plans to introduce stricter controls on its (over 
40,000) identification badges.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) Pol/Econ officer met with Fraport board member and 
head of External Relations Volker Zintel and Peter Dienstbach 
(Senior Vice President for Traffic and Terminal Management). 
Both German interlocutors spoke at length about alleged 
security lapses, and Dienstbach indicated he had engaged TSA 
representatives in similar discussions. 
 
CUSTOMS CONTROLS: POOR LAW ENFORCEMENT OR LABOR DISPUTE? 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
3.  (SBU) In March, German media -- including \"Frankfurter 
Rundschau\" (a left-leaning national daily based in 
Frankfurt), \"Spiegel\" (the leading national news weekly 
magazine) and ARD/ZDF (the two largest TV networks) began 
reporting on Customs controls at Frankfurt Airport.  In those 
reports, anonymous customs employees produced internal 
documents that purportedly showed customs inspection points 
going unmanned for days (even during arrivals from high-risk 
regions), claiming that customs management put revenue 
collection (duties on cigarettes, alcohol, etc.) and 
passenger convenience above intercepting traffickers and 
potential terrorists, under the motto \"customs officials are 
not the police\".  (NOTE: The German Federal Border Police -- 
or Bundesgrenzschutz -- which operates under the purview of 
the MOI, has primary responsibility for border control, 
including at Germany\'s airports.  END NOTE) 
 
4.  (C) Fraport interlocutors indicated they understood the 
media campaign to be the result of an internal labor dispute 
involving competing unions, namely the German Customs and 
Finance Union (Deutsche Zoll und Finanzgewerkschaft, which 
has traditionally represented airport customs personnel) and 
the Police Union GdP (Gewerkschaft der Polizei), which wants 
to take over this representation.  Zintel (who asked not to 
be quoted) implied that leaks to the media and complaints of 
understaffing and bad management were part of the Police 
Union\'s aggressive campaign to gain entry to Customs\' works 
council (labor representation) at the airport. 
 
5.  (C) Airport management did note that German Customs 
(Zollkriminalamt -- ZKA) at the airport still operates \"as 
they did 40 years ago\", while police at the airport have 
modernized considerably.  Zintel indicated that Airport 
Customs head Hartmut Nessler -- a polarizing figure in 
labor-management disputes at airport Customs -- will depart 
soon, making way for a new start in the organization. 
 
ALLEGED SECURITY LAPSES 
----------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) In the most recent media expose (ref A), ZDF TV 
newsmagazine \"Frontal 21\" documented (via hidden cameras) 
alleged lapses in access controls at Fraport.  The video 
(provided to TSA) shows hidden-camera footage of reporters in 
off-the-shelf uniforms gaining access (on four consecutive 
days) to cargo storage, a hangar, and other airfield 
locations by following vehicles through gates and walking 
through unlocked doors. 
 
7.  (C) Our Fraport interlocutors took issue with the media 
expose, arguing that reporters falsely claimed to have 
penetrated secure airside operations (Fraport says that all 
areas shown were company-internal workspaces).  Fraport 
coordinates security but its carriers and other customers are 
responsible for areas under their authority.  In one case, 
Zintel claimed, someone had apparently lodged open a door the 
night before the hidden camera arrived, suggesting a set-up. 
Zintel characterized the key witness ZDF used in its report, 
an attorney, as someone with a vested interest in claiming 
that anyone can go anywhere at the airport.  (NOTE: The 
attorney in question represents 20 former Fraport employees 
convicted in 2003 of participation in a cargo theft ring. 
END NOTE.)  Dienstbach said that Fraport management had asked 
ZDF to amend its report to reflect the above information but 
had been unsuccessful.  (NOTE: \"Frontal 21\" has aired a 
series of exposes on airport security, including a report 
earlier this year on unmanned immigration checkpoints at 
Munich Airport that prompted the departure of that airport\'s 
head of Border Police.  END NOTE) 
 
8.  (C) Fraport representatives insisted that their security 
is sound and that the airport complies fully with all 
regulations but recognize \"areas for further improvement.\" 
Management reviewed its security procedures following the 
media reports and found no gaps but established an informal 
agenda for improvement, including oversight of the 
approximately 40,000 security passes issued so far -- many to 
outside contractors and non-airport employees.  (NOTE: The 
May 2004 expose highlighted a former employee who had 
retained a valid Fraport access card a month after his 
departure because of his former company\'s failure to cancel 
it in a timely fashion.  END NOTE.)  In June, Fraport brought 
in its subsidiary ICTS Europe (International Consultants on 
Targeted Security, one of Europe\'s leading security 
providers) to replace a passenger screening contractor that 
had previously serviced much of the airport. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9.  (C) TSA Frankfurt believes that Frankfurt Airport 
security is adequate, but has incorporated media reports into 
its ongoing inspections of airport facilities and carriers. 
While Federal Border Police are the lead agency for airport 
security, Frankfurt DHS-ICE notes that customs personnel at 
Frankfurt Airport -- as at many European airports -- often 
focus on revenue collection more than criminal threats, 
including terrorism.  Although Customs thinking and focus 
have evolved in light of a changing security environment, the 
operational transformation is still underway.  END COMMENT. 
BODDE 
"
"21358","10/6/2004 16:23","04FRANKFURT8667","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 008667 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PINR, PTER, GM, IZ 
SUBJECT: Schroeder Calls for More Arab Support for Iraq 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: In widely-publicized remarks at the Frankfurt 
Book Fair -- dedicated this year to the Arab world -- German 
Chancellor Schroeder reiterated German support for the war 
on terror and for stability in Iraq, calling on Arab states 
(specifically the Arab League) to take a more active role in 
Iraq.  END SUMMARY. 
 
UNITED AGAINST TERROR 
--------------------- 
 
2.  At the opening ceremony of the Frankfurt book fair 
October 5 -- where the \"Arab World\" is this year\'s guest of 
honor -- chancellor Gerhard Schroeder spoke about the West\'s 
approach to terrorism, the Arab world, and Iraq.  He said 
terrorist attacks are a \"call to battle\" for the civilized 
world and one of the greatest threats to the international 
community, but noone should equate the war against terror 
with a \"clash of civilizations.\"  Schroeder emphasized that 
economic development and human rights are key elements to 
counter the terrorist threat in the Muslim world.  He 
declared that the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians 
can only be solved politically and not militarily. 
 
ARAB STATES SHOULD DO MORE ON IRAQ 
----------------------------------- 
 
3.  On Iraq, Schroeder said: \"In Iraq, the security and 
stability of the whole region are at stake.  Germany will 
continue to contribute to the stabilization and 
reconstruction of Iraq.  When evaluating the conflict, the 
focus should not be on \"who was right\" -- this question is 
already part of history, though an important one -- but 
rather on our common responsibility for stability and 
democracy in the region.  This can only be realized when we 
are able to bring peace to Iraq.  In cooperation with the 
United Arab Emirates, we are training Iraqi police and 
military personnel ... to enable the people of Iraq to 
guarantee safety and security.  I believe only in this way 
can the conflict be solved.  But Arab states must also use 
their traditionally close relations with the Iraqi people to 
enable peace and guarantee economic development ....  I 
think the Arab League has in this respect a very important 
role to play.\"   NOTE:  Arab League Secretary General Amre 
Moussa was present at the ceremony, but spoke primarily on 
cultural issues.  END NOTE. 
 
BODDE 
"
"21449","10/8/2004 10:55","04FRANKFURT8717","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 008717 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS LEE 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, HULL 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT:  Forecast for Germany: Moderate Growth, High 
Deficits; Clear, Consistent Reform Efforts Still the Key 
 
 
T-IA-F-04-0023 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Our forecast for Germany shows moderate 
real GDP growth of 1.7% in 2005 after 1.8% in 2004.  The 
government deficit should top 4% of GDP this year, then 
decline to 3.5% in 2005, based on current policies. 
Persistent joblessness in western Germany, and even more so 
in the East, is a strong Government concern.  Typically 
German recovery is fueled by export growth that feeds back 
into investment, then employment, then consumption.  The 
investment link is the weakest this time around. 
Supplementary labor costs borne by enterprises, relatively 
high tax rates, and burdensome regulations are among 
impediments to investors.  These drawbacks seem to have 
become relatively more pronounced as investment options in 
central European countries continue to improve.  Fiscal 
policy has not produced the demand side effects anticipated, 
despite a deficit well beyond \"restraints\" of the EU 
Stability and Growth Pact. Perhaps a partial answer lies in 
the quality of public expenditure, which is consumed by 
social and financing costs and not investment.  Spending 
smarter while cutting taxes or social charges through 
coherent, consistent, and comprehensive reforms could help 
boost both investment and the government\'s bottom line. 
There is German public support for reform, but the discord 
among the country\'s political leaders as well as the round 
of state and local elections in the run-up to the 2006 
national campaign is sapping the government\'s will and 
ability to make the long-needed reforms.  End Summary 
 
Forecast: Moderate Growth in 2004 and 2005 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) Our recent forecast points to German real GDP 
growing by 1.7% in 2005 after an increase of 1.8% this year. 
Growth in both years will be mainly driven by exports. 
Softer growth in the Euro area next year will be compensated 
by a pick up in German domestic demand. 
 
Consumer Demand to Pick Up 
-------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) In a typical German economic recovery, export 
growth triggers higher investment, raising employment, 
consumer confidence and retail sales.  The recovery we see 
this time around will by pass strong investment growth. 
Private consumption has been stagnating in 2003 and 2004 due 
to a slow rise in disposable income and a noticeably higher 
savings rate, up from 9.6% in 2000 to 11% in 2004.  Consumer 
confidence has been soft, employment declining, unemployment 
raising and high contributions to social security systems 
continuing.  Businesses blame uncertainty over Germany\'s 
economic outlook and confusion over the course of reforms 
for causing Germans to boost their already high level of 
savings. There may be a moderate up tick in 2005 consumption 
stemming from stronger growth in disposable income caused by 
lower income taxes (the last step of the income tax reform) 
and higher self-income.  However, current consumer behavior 
makes this more difficult than usual to predict.  Next 
year\'s boost to consumption should stem from stronger growth 
in disposable income caused by lower income taxes (the last 
step of the income tax reform) and higher self-employed 
income. 
 
Investment Weakness a Puzzle 
---------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Investment continues to be a partial puzzle.  The 
prolonged drag on overall investment by the construction 
sector, which accounts for 50% of all investment, will not 
disappear next year.  Machinery and equipment investment 
will rise 4.6% -- much better than recent years, barely 
pushing growth in overall investment activity past the 0.5% 
mark.  Recent en vogue explanations for poor investment 
performance include \"credit crunch\" and \"outsourcing.\" 
Bundesbank officials argue that the rise in German overseas 
investment, which does not register in the available 
statistics, is financed by capital German firms are raising 
outside the Federal Republic. 
 
5.  (SBU) The Bundesbank makes a credible argument that 
demand for loans is what is lacking, not supply.  With 
respect to outsourcing, it is true that share of imported 
materials in German exports has risen from around 30% in 
1995 to almost 39% in 2002.  This phenomenon has generated a 
heated debate on whether Germany has become a \"bazaar 
economy,\" with industrial production hollowed out as 
investors make needed inputs in other countries.  A lower 
share of industrial output in overall economic activity, 
however, does not necessarily mean a decline in overall 
output.  That is, unless workers cannot find new jobs in 
other, equally or higher productive jobs such as in the 
service sector.  Unfortunately, that seems to be the case 
according to a McKinsey report cited by USB Warburg research 
economists.  While for each euro of outsourcing, the German 
economy gains only 79 cents, for each dollar of outsourcing 
the U.S. economy realizes 1.13 dollars.  The difference is 
that nearly 70% of the displaced workers in the U.S. found 
new jobs with higher productivity within six months. In 
Germany only 40% do. 
 
6.  (SBU) There are some bright spots on the horizon that 
support even our modest pick up for investment in equipment 
and machinery.  Real interest rates stand at historically 
low levels, bank profitability is going up (suggesting a 
possible increased emphasis in lending to the less marginal 
credit cases) and wage rounds have yielded labor cost 
increases of only 1.5%.  Government efforts to reduce some 
of the institutional rigidities will help next year with 
labor market reform (Hartz IV, i.e., the merger of 
unemployment and social aid programs) and loosening of 
firing restrictions for small and medium-sized enterprises. 
Recent labor agreements add to some cautious optimism, 
resulting in longer hours and more flexible tariff wage 
contracts.  These can help constrain unit labor costs, 
bolstering Germany\'s price competitiveness.  These trends 
will be working against the headwind of managers doubting 
that the global recovery will continue next year, as 
suggested by recent sentiment indicators. 
 
Budget Deficits Continue 
------------------------ 
 
7.  (SBU) A best-case scenario for 2005 puts the government 
deficit at 3.5% of GDP, more than spitting distance from the 
3% Maastricht mark.  The Finance Minister\'s \"Project 3%\" 
will be working full tilt to avoid the European Commission 
from cranking up the Stability and Growth Pact again - this 
time taking up Eichel on his own November 2004 pledge to get 
the deficit below 3% in 2005. 
 
8.  (SBU) The 2005 budget is encumbered with several risks. 
Among these are high-expected revenues from planned 
privatization (15.5 billion euros) and the still-to-be- 
proven heavy truck highway toll (3 billion euros).  The 
costs of merging the unemployment benefit and social welfare 
systems is probably underestimated.  One welcomed feature 
for 2005 should be that the social security programs are 
unlikely to have to draw on the budget. 
 
9.  (SBU) For 2004 the deficit is likely to top 4%.  Poor 
revenue performance from weak domestic demand is the primary 
reason.  Also, rosy revenue scenarios have not panned out as 
dreamed for the highway toll for heavy trucks (zero instead 
of 2.8 billion euros), Bundesbank profit (only 248 million 
euros instead of 3.5 billion euros) and tax amnesty (3-400 
million euros rather than 5 billion euros). 
 
Lower Prices and Gains In Employment 
------------------------------------ 
10.  (SBU) German inflation will decline, despite current 
energy and raw material price rises, as no administrative 
price or tax hikes are expected and assuming oil prices 
moderate.  Labor market statistics will be difficult to 
interpret as 900,000 recipients of social welfare will have 
to register as unemployed to get the new unemployment 
benefits.  No reliable estimates exist as to how many of 
these are already so registered.  Some estimates suggest 
that the number of unemployed might increase by 300,000. 
Employment should increase slightly.  The unemployed should 
be attracted by mini-jobs that will allow them to boost 
their net income by retaining government benefits plus the 
earned income and should be deterred by the prospect of 
losing benefits if they do not accept a job offer. 
 
Investment and Government Demand Side Policies: A Closer 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Look 
---- 
 
11.  (SBU) Investment weakness, a prominent feature of this 
forecast, deserves a bit of a closer look.  Recent wage 
settlements have highlighted the gulf between what workers 
contribute to production and what employers pay.  USB 
Warburg economic research estimates that for the engineering 
industry in 2003 pay for value-added labor was 30,425 euros. 
The firm then paid an extra 37.4% for non-working days (paid 
holidays) and bonuses (the \"thirteenth month\").  Compulsory 
contributions to social security added another 27.2%, 
pension schemes and other supplementary costs accounted for 
another 13.2%.  Total wage costs amounted to 50,095 euros or 
177.8% of the pay for value added labor.  Wage agreements 
and government reforms could help close a portion of this 
divide that contributes to make Germany a relatively less 
attractive investment location. 
 
12.  (SBU) The recent OECD Survey of Germany also points to 
high corporate taxes.  It cites a study by the German 
Council of Economic Experts based on 2003 tax codes showing 
that Germany has the highest average effective taxation of 
returns of investment. 
 
13.  (SBU) Some recent commentators have suggested the 
government could do more to help simulate demand.  The 
government\'s tax reform, a remarkable achievement in its 
time, has dropped the top income tax rate from 53% to 42% 
beginning in 2005.  In 2004 and 2005 together this should 
add 1% of GDP back into consumer\'s pockets, according to 
OECD estimates.  Other fiscal charges or administered price 
increases have eaten away some of those gains offered in 
previous stages of the income tax cut.  Some of gone into 
the higher savings rate, as noted above. 
 
14.  (SBU) Another part of the answer could lie in the 
quality of the government\'s expenditures.  57% of the 
government\'s expenditures in 2003 went to social welfare 
programs and only 3% to investment.  In the 1980\'s the 
government spent 48% of its budget on social systems and 5% 
on investment. 
 
15.  (SBU) Transfers amounting to around 4% of GDP to the 
new states are increasingly ineffective in promoting growth. 
The OECD judges that subsidies to enterprises in the new 
states have not increased productivity but have increased 
dependence on the government and decreased adaptability to 
market forces.  The OECD also estimates that more than half 
the transfers for infrastructure are used for government 
consumption (culture, central administration), with the 
number of government employees per inhabitant in the new 
states exceeding the ratio in financially weak western 
states by 25%. 
 
16.  (SBU) Tax subsidies for construction have contributed 
to overcapacity in office and residential housing that 
continue to weigh against investment.  Government 
procurements, which account for 17% of GDP, are highly 
complex, often broken into small contracts administered at 
the state level and not subject to open competition at the 
EU level, according to an OECD analysis. 
 
17.  (SBU) One theme that runs through discussions on 
investment and government budget policies is \"confidence,\" 
or lack thereof.  Uncertainty about global demand, 
employment, and reforms feed into this lack of confidence. 
Confidence can work wonders.  In that bellwether year for 
German growth, 2000, the business community was optimistic 
about the future when the tax reforms were adopted, only to 
turn sour when new policies were adopted that were not so 
favorable for economic growth. 
 
18.  (SBU) The European Commission points to research 
suggesting that even as a government reduces its budget 
deficits through structural changes, consumers\' and 
investors\' expectations can, and have, improved if they 
sense that the government will pass the gains on through 
lower taxes (or no tax increases).  Consumption goes up and 
investment goes up if there is a clear, consistence 
comprehensive and credible reform plan.  A recent survey for 
the German Financial Times suggested that the majority favor 
reforms.  Confidence could follow.  Less and smarter 
government spending is something that most would understand. 
 
 
                    Forecast for Germany 
 
                              2003      2004      2005 
 
Percent Avg. Annual Growth 
GDP                                -0.1      1.8       1.7 
  of which 
  Consumption                         0.0       0.0 
  1.4 
  Investment                         -2.2      -2.8 
  0.6 
  -construction                 -3.3      -4.1     -2.6 
  -machinery & equipment             -1.4      -1.9 
  4.6 
      Net Exports                  -11.2     36.7      8.8 
 
Consumer Price Index               1.0       1.7       0.9 
 
Employment                         -1.0      -0.3      0.4 
Unemployment Rate (%)              10.5      10.6      10.6 
Fiscal Balance (%GDP)              -3.8      -4.1      -3.5 
 
 
19.  (U) This message coordinated with Embassy Berlin 
 
20.  (U)POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"21739","10/18/2004 16:13","04FRANKFURT8977","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04FRANKFURT6238","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 008977 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR DRL/IL 
USDOC FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICE 
USDOL FOR ILAB*BRUMFIELD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ELAB, EIND, GM 
SUBJECT: GM/OPEL JOB CUTS, LABOR UNREST, AND PLANT CLOSURES 
ON THE HORIZON 
 
REF: A. A) FRANKFURT 6238 
 
     B. B) 03 FRANKFURT 7910 
 
Sensitive but unclassified -- not for internet distribution. 
Contains business-proprietary information. 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: General Motors has announced plans for 
massive job cuts and future plant closures at European 
subsidiary Opel, sparking labor unrest, including a wildcat 
strike at the Opel plant in Bochum beginning October 14, and 
reactions from federal and state ministers.  The Hesse state 
government expressed public concern over the future of Opel\'s 
flagship plant in Ruesselsheim (outside Frankfurt) but made 
no move to offer a rescue package.  For his part, Federal 
Minister of Economics and Labor, Wolfgang Clement, urged 
workers at the Bochum plant to return to work.  However, he 
ruled out any direct federal government support for Opel. 
Opel works council and management opened talks at 
Ruesselsheim October 18.  The announced plans at the second 
largest U.S. investment in Germany comes days after 
announcements regarding plans by Europe\'s largest retailer 
-) Karstadt Quelle -- to lay off as many as 3,000 German 
employees in the coming year.  In private conversations, Opel 
management and labor figures note the larger picture issue of 
continuing stagnant German and European demand for mid-range 
cars.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU) On October 13, GM Europe announced plans to 
eliminate 12,000 jobs in the firm\'s factories, including 
10,000 of Opel\'s 32,000 jobs in Germany by the end of 2005, 
citing the high costs of doing business in Germany.  GM 
Europe President (and former Opel CEO) Carl-Peter Forster was 
quoted saying that if Opel produced in Germany at the same 
wage levels as in France, the company would improve its 
bottom line by over 500 million euros annually (NOTE: GM 
Europe posted a $470 million operating loss in 2003.  END 
NOTE).  GM Europe Chairman Fritz Henderson said the company\'s 
multi-year losses in Europe are beyond any precedent and that 
it must make radical cuts without harming customers (i.e., 
make cuts in production and research divisions). 
 
3. (SBU) Opel workers reacted strongly.  Protesting the 
planned job cuts, workers at Opel\'s Bochum plant have engaged 
in what amounts to a wildcat strike since October 14.  The 
plant works council announced that the stoppages would 
continue until company management guarantees there will be no 
lay-offs for operational reasons, no plant closures, and no 
outsourcing of production.  A European-wide action day is 
planned for Tuesday, October 19, to protest GM plans to lay 
off 12,000 workers at its European plants.  In the meantime, 
Opel\'s works council and management opened talks at 
Ruesselheim, one of Opel\'s four German production sites. 
 
4. (SBU) In a September meeting with EMIN, Opel Works Council 
chairman Klaus Franz (who represents Opel\'s 32,000 employees 
in Germany and serves as deputy supervisory board chairman 
and a member of GM\'s European works council) criticized GM 
managers in Detroit as pitting European plants against each 
other.  Franz said that GM is repeating the mistakes of the 
1990s, destroying improvements in quality and image, reneging 
on agreements between the works council and plant management, 
and running morale into the ground. Franz also noted he is in 
daily contact with his counterpart at GM\'s Trollhatten 
facility in an effort to keep the German and Swedish plants 
afloat.  Nevertheless, Franz stated Germany needs to pursue 
economic reforms -- an area where he disagrees with the IG 
Metall leadership -- and that Germany\'s high wage costs are 
damaging the country\'s international competitiveness.  He 
noted as well a long-standing problem with overcapacity in 
Ruesselsheim and other Opel facilities. 
 
5. (SBU) Frank Klaas, General Director of Communications at 
Adam Opel AG, told EMIN that Russelsheim has long operated at 
no more than 70% capacity.  He blamed continuing soft demand 
levels in Germany and the rest of the EU as a major factor 
for this situation.  Whereas in 1994 Germans bought a new car 
every 3)4 years, today they purchase one every 7)8 years. 
The weak economy, uncertainty over the course of Berlin\'s 
economic reforms and new environmental measures, both real 
and potential, and fears of rising unemployment all deter 
German car buyers.  Germany\'s corporate tax levels and rising 
costs of energy used in producing cars are problems as well. 
Klaas argued the unions are out of date with market realities 
and do not see the need to cut wages.  Opel, as a producer of 
mid-range cars, is in the same straits as Ford Germany and VW. 
 
6. (U) In a visit to the protesting workers on Sunday, 
Federal Economics and Labor Minister Wolfgang Clement had 
urged them to return to work, calling their action 
\"understandable, but not useful for a meaningful solution.\" 
He urged Opel management and works council to begin talks on 
a joint rescue plan, but he ruled out any direct federal 
government support for Opel\'s recovery, including an active 
government role in the negotiations.  Hesse Economics 
Minister Alois Rhiel (CDU/Christian Democrats) called GM 
Europe\'s announcement \"alarming\" and praised Ruesselsheim\'s 
modern technology, highly qualified workforce and optimal 
transportation infrastructure.  In media statements, Hesse 
Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU) called on employees and 
management in Ruesselsheim to agree on wage cuts in order to 
protect jobs.  He cautioned Swedish authorities not to 
support the Trollhattan plant with subsidies and said Hesse 
would challenge such a strategy at the European level.  While 
affirming Opel\'s strategic importance for the Hesse economy 
and the need to \"save what can be saved,\" M-P Koch made no 
concrete offer to support operations in Ruesselsheim. 
BODDE 
"
"21790","10/19/2004 15:02","04FRANKFURT9010","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L FRANKFURT 009010 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/18/2014 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ENRG, GM 
SUBJECT: BUNDESBANK CHEERS REFORMS BUT WORRIES WHETHER 
GOVERNMENT WILL TAKE NEEDED NEXT STEPS 
 
 
Classified By: Consul General Peter Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY.  Bundesbank analysts see tangible results 
coming out of the current labor-market reforms and a modest 
improvement in German competitiveness, but not enough to 
engineer a strong turnaround.  Further reforms are necessary, 
e.g., to expand the number of employed, but the Bundesbank 
fears the political will to proceed is weakening.  Germany 
can readily adjust to higher energy prices as long as 
supplies are assured.  The Bundesbank sees overall financial 
conditions in Germany as good -- with little current threat 
of inflation or deflation -- so the focus must remain on 
structural reforms.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) EMIN and Consulate rep called on Bundesbank Chief 
Economist Willy Friedmann, who opined that general financial 
conditions in Germany are good, including sustained low 
interest rates, but investment remains surprisingly weak. 
The Bundesbank does not/not agree with a recent OECD 
conclusion that German companies have high debt loads, since 
that study looked only at firms listed on stock exchanges and 
not SME\'s (Friedmann argues German companies overall have 
moderate debt-to-equity ratios which have flattened out since 
the end of the stock market boom).  Rather, Friedmann sees 
poor domestic consumer  confidence, high costs of doing 
business, and in particular, uncertainty over which reform 
initiatives politicians will approve and how far they will go 
as reasons for German companies\' reluctance to invest at 
home.  The Bundesbank expects an increase in Germans\' 
consumption spending in the coming year. 
 
3. (C) On economic reforms, Friedmann called the Government\'s 
Agenda 2010 a sound program, but one poorly marketed by 
policy-makers.  Friedmann expects the \"Hartz IV\" reforms 
(lowering payments to long-term unemployed) will lead to 
needed expanded employment in the low-wage sector in 2005. 
Bundesbank data already show more flexibility in labor 
markets.  He noted what other German economic analysts have 
suggested: that the long-term unemployed are going to have to 
move from the east to the western part of the country where 
there are better employment possibilities.  The tendency in 
German wages remains slightly downwards.  Friedmann voiced 
support for agreements reached within companies to expand 
working hours -- frequently with little or no pay increase -- 
and for the opposition\'s proposal to limit the rules 
protecting employees\' jobs (Kundigungsschutz).  These factors 
should boost Germany\'s international competitiveness, 
especially if there is further growth in the German low wage 
sector.  Unfortunately, reform momentum is stalling.  Further 
tax reform is not on the horizon and Germany\'s main political 
parties still tend to espouse differing proposals (the right 
would lessen the burden on companies and investors, while the 
left has proposed to shift more of the tax burden onto 
wealthier Germans).  Pressure from outsourcing is becoming 
more intense:  a German Chamber of Industry and Trade  (DIHK) 
study shows that even medium-sized companies are considering 
moving production out of Germany.  Friedmann said German 
companies are raising money for their foreign investments 
outside Germany and that this explains why German statistics 
do not show large outflows of investment funds. 
 
4. (C) Asked about the potential impact of higher energy 
prices, Friedmann predicted \"Germany can live with $40 
dollars per barrel\" or even $50/barrel -- with only a limited 
impact on the country\'s economic outlook -- as long as supply 
is assured and demand forces are what pushes up energy 
prices.  Germany is now less dependent on oil than during 
previous price spikes, according to the Bundesbank\'s chief 
economist.  The current deceleration of world growth should 
ease demand pressure, and barring a true supply interruption, 
risk premiums and prices should fall.  Since low oil prices 
are probably a thing of the past, Friedmann said Germany and 
other oil-consuming countries will have to absorb a permanent 
negative shift in terms-of-trade. 
 
5. (C) Despite rising energy prices, the Bundesbank sees no 
significant inflationary pressures (meaning core inflation of 
0.5-1.0% excluding administrative price increases). 
Importantly, the risk of deflation has also subsided.  German 
industry has seen modest nominal wage increases this year and 
negative wage drift overall, meaning that Germany will likely 
enjoy a modest boost in competitiveness relative to other 
Euro-zone countries. 
BODDE 
"
"21839","10/20/2004 13:03","04FRANKFURT9039","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 009039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, ECON, SENV, GM 
SUBJECT: LOW-COST CARRIERS GIVE STUTTGART UNEXPECTED BOOM 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  In September 2004, the Stuttgart Airport 
experienced the largest year-on-year growth in its history 
(over 900,000 passengers).  In 2004, airport management 
expects a total of 8.6 million passengers (up 12%).  The 
airport\'s recent boom is largely due to low-cost carriers 
Germanwings and Hapag-Lloyd Express (HLX), both of which 
started local operations in September 2003 and have since 
doubled their destinations.  Stuttgart Airport sources 
expect eventual consolidation in the low-cost carrier (LCC) 
market but remain optimistic concerning the airport future\'s 
growth.  Two important regional airports in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg, the Karlsruhe/Baden Airport and the Bodensee- 
Airport in Friedrichshafen, are also profiting from the LCC 
boom.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  In September 2003, Hapag-Lloyd Express (HLX) and 
Germanwings began operations from Stuttgart Airport to 21 
destinations in Europe.  Stuttgart Airport spokesperson 
Volkmar Kraemer told us that airport management was 
initially reluctant to host low-cost carriers (fearing the 
airport would have to cut prices for its services) but 
eventually realized the potential of LCC\'s to expand the 
airport\'s overall business.  Unlike many airports, Stuttgart 
did not/not offer special rates to HLX or Germanwings (both 
carriers accepted the airport\'s standard fees and 
conditions). 
 
3.  Within a year of beginning operations, HLX and 
Germanwings have doubled the number of destinations served 
from Stuttgart and now account for a fifth of the airport\'s 
traffic.  In that period, passenger traffic through 
Stuttgart increased by over one million persons, one of the 
highest growth rates of any major airport in Germany. 
Kraemer expects Stuttgart\'s 2004 passenger traffic to top 
8.6 million, a new record for the airport.  In September, 
Germanwings expanded its destinations in eastern Europe and 
stationed a second plane and crew in Stuttgart, while HLX 
now offers eight new destinations.  At a recent press 
conference, Germanwings Vice President Andreas Bierwirth 
said that the company\'s Stuttgart operations were profitable 
in their first year (NOTE: a rarity in the airline business 
-- END NOTE) and that the carrier, already the largest LCC 
at Stuttgart, intends to become the low-cost market leader 
in Germany.  The stationing of HLX and Germanwings has also 
had a positive effect on the larger Stuttgart region: 
Bierwirth pointed out that the Germanwings presence created 
over 100 new jobs at the airport and supports about 2500 
jobs in the region. 
 
4. With no catering on board, no travel-agent commissions 
(booking via internet), no overnights for crews and one 
additional round-trip per day (LCC\'s generally do not fly on 
routes longer than two hours), the average break-even point 
for LCC\'s is 80 euros per one-way ticket according to 
Kraemer.  He noted that high fuel prices have had limited 
negative impact on LCC growth since most carriers secured 
fuel contracts through the end of 2004 (before the recent 
spike in fuel prices).  Kraemer expects that LCC\'s will 
remain a force in Germany (as in Great Britain) and will 
expand their domestic flights but that the overall LCC 
market will shrink due to competition leaving only a handful 
of low-cost survivors (including RyanAir, Germanwings, and 
EasyJet). 
 
5.  Low-cost carriers are expanding in other parts of Baden- 
Wuerttemberg, with RyanAir service from regional airports in 
Karlsruhe/Baden and Friedrichshafen (Bodensee Airport). 
RyanAir started operations at the Karlsruhe/Baden Airport in 
September 2003 with two daily flights to London-Stansted and 
has since added destinations in Italy and Spain.  RyanAir 
now accounts for half of passenger traffic at the 
Karlsruhe/Baden Airport, where annual volume has doubled 
from 300,000 to over 600,000 passengers. 
 
6.  COMMENT:  The LCC market continues to boom in affluent 
Baden-Wuerttemberg, helping Stuttgart and other airports to 
break new ground after the industry-wide setbacks related to 
September 2001 and the Iraq conflict.  Although airport 
sources see the LCC boom tapering off in the medium term, 
they remain optimistic about overall growth at the Stuttgart 
Airport, located in a wealthy region with regional 
unemployment of about four percent (well below the 
nationwide average of 10.3%) and a large pool of potential 
travelers.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"21953","10/22/2004 15:24","04FRANKFURT9139","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03Frankfurt10353|04Frankfurt5551","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 009139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Baden-Wuerttemberg Minister-President Teufel 
Expected to Declare Intentions Soon 
 
REF:  A) 03 Frankfurt 10353 B) 04 Frankfurt 5551  C) 04 
 
Frankfurt 6002  D) 04 Frankfurt 6769  E) 04 Frankfurt 7197 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Recent speculation by Baden- 
Wuerttemberg Christian Democrat (CDU) Minister-President 
Erwin Teufel on a possible bid for re-election has added 
fuel to the state\'s smoldering leadership debate.  Several 
party organizations, including the Junge Union (the CDU\'s 
youth organization), have publicly asked Teufel to retire. 
Former national CDU chairman (and longtime Bundestag caucus 
chief) Wolfgang Schaeuble has also asked Teufel to step 
aside.  An October 19 Stuttgarter Zeitung poll showed 73% 
of the state\'s voters as favoring Teufel\'s retirement. 
Insiders predict that Teufel will be forced to decide at a 
CDU executive board meeting on October 30.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) In an October 4 interview with national magazine 
Der Spiegel, Teufel cited his high approval rating and 
expressed optimism that the CDU would receive an absolute 
majority if he ran again. Two days later, the Baden- 
Wuerttemberg Junge Union (JU) became the first major 
executive organization to call for Teufel\'s retirement. 
Several CDU county organizations joined the JU\'s call, and 
CDU labor wing president Christian Baumler also spoke out 
against Teufel\'s re-election.  Although Minister Rudolf 
Koeberle (the state\'s representative in Berlin) and Social 
Minister Tanja Goenner support another term for Teufel, 
Baden-Wuerttemberg Agricultural Minister Willi Staechele 
recently expressed public doubts on Teufel\'s value to the 
CDU in 2006 state elections. 
 
3.  (U) On October 19, the Stuttgarter Zeitung (the state\'s 
leading daily newspaper) published the results of a recent 
telephone poll showing 73% of respondents in favor of 
Teufel\'s retirement and 19% supporting his re-election. The 
poll reflects the continuing downward trend of Minister- 
President Teufel\'s support among the state\'s voters. 
 
4.  (SBU) Former CDU national chairman and Bundestag caucus 
chief Wolfgang Schaeuble recently called for a change in 
leadership during an internal meeting of Baden- 
Wuerttemberg\'s 34 Bundestag deputies.  CDU insiders expect 
the Teufel debate to dominate the party\'s executive board 
meeting in Stuttgart on October 30.  Baden-Wuerttemberg 
press reports predict Minister-President Teufel will be 
forced to put his cards on the table, and some leading CDU 
officials are lobbying for the meeting to be held even 
earlier. 
 
5.  (SBU) COMMENT: Rumors of the crafty and resourceful 
Teufel\'s demise have often been greatly exaggerated. 
However, Teufel\'s mishandling of recent scandals among his 
FDP coalition partners and the granting of lucrative 
private sector jobs to retiring political allies (reftels) 
has accelerated the CDU\'s call for the longtime Minister- 
President\'s exit from office.  CDU insiders compare the 
Teufel struggle to longtime chancellor Helmut Kohl\'s 
decision to run (unsuccessfully) for re-election in 1998 
and fear that it could have similarly negative consequences 
for the national party, especially given Baden- 
Wuerttemberg\'s status as a perennial CDU stronghold.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"21955","10/22/2004 15:25","04FRANKFURT9141","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","03FRANKFURT8335|04FRANKFURT1390|04FRANKFURT567|04FRANKFURT6441","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 009141 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: Hesse Passes Germany\'s Most Far-Reaching Headscarf 
Ban 
 
REF:  A) Frankfurt 567  B) Frankfurt 6441 
      C) Frankfurt 1390 D) 03 Frankfurt 8335 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  The Christian-Democratic Hesse state 
government recently passed legislation banning all civil 
servants from wearing headscarves while on duty, a measure 
that goes far beyond approaches to the issue in other German 
states.  Opposition parties harshly criticized the law and 
predicted it would be declared unconstitutional.  Some 
observers see the bill as a concession to the CDU\'s 
conservative wing.  A constitutional battle over the law 
could have implications beyond Hesse state politics.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) On October 8, the Hesse state parliament passed a 
law barring headscarf use by public officials, the most far- 
reaching headscarf ban in Germany to date.  The CDU caucus 
(which has an absolute majority) unanimously supported the 
law, while opposition parties -- SPD (Social Democrats), the 
Greens, and the FDP (Free Democrats) -- all opposed it. 
Whereas laws recently passed in Baden-Wuerttemberg and other 
states only apply to public-school teachers (refs B-D), the 
Hesse ban applies to all civil servants in their official 
capacities.  CDU caucus leader Franz-Josef Jung justified 
the law in terms of Germany\'s \"Christian and humanistic 
tradition\" and the headscarf\'s negative symbolism (\"We don\'t 
hire civil servants for back offices, but rather to serve 
the state,\" underscoring the public image concerns).  Hesse 
Education Minister Karin Wolff (CDU) claims the law protects 
the separation of church and state (\"[the headscarf) is a 
symbol which rejects the separation of religion and politics 
and the values of our state ... it\'s not just a matter of 
gender equality, but also recognizing the constitution\"). 
It is unclear how Hesse authorities will apply the 
principles of the law to other religions, a point of 
contention in legal action against the state of Baden- 
Wuerttemberg by initial headscarf plaintiff Fereshta Ludin 
(ref C). 
 
3.  (U) SPD and FDP representatives -- who supported a 
limited ban on public-school teachers -- criticized the law 
and predicted it would be declared unconstitutional.  Hesse 
FDP chair Ruth Wagner criticized the CDU\'s \"arrogance\" and 
intransigence for not trying to build consensus on the issue 
before putting it to a vote (NOTE: Baden-Wuerttemberg, 
Saarland, and other states passed more limited headscarf 
laws supported by broad legislative majorities.  END NOTE). 
\"That this law will end up in court again is as sure as the 
night is dark,\" Wagner said.  SPD caucus chief Juergen 
Walter accused the CDU of pandering to its \"Steel-helmet 
wing\" (\"Stahlhelmfluegel\") of hard-line conservatives. 
 
4.  (SBU) COMMENT: The new headscarf ban is a political 
firestorm that will lead to several (potentially successful) 
court challenges.  Furthermore, it highlights the contrast 
in Hesse between an array of nationally-recognized programs 
designed to integrate the state\'s large immigrant population 
and a determination to preserve the \"Christian and humanist\" 
tradition referenced by Jung.  This dichotomy could lead to 
further tensions down the road.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"21963","10/22/2004 16:25","04FRANKFURT9143","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","04BERLIN3547|04FRANKFURT1495|04FRANKFURT5846","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 009143 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/22/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, PGOV, GM 
SUBJECT: RHEINLAND-PFALZ MINISTER-PRESIDENT BECK ASKS FOR 
USG HELP ON BASES AND PLEDGES CONTINUED SUPPORT 
 
REF: A) FRANKFURT 5846 B) FRANKFURT 1495 C) BERLIN 
     1867 (NOTAL) D) BERLIN 3547 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: DCM John A. Cloud; reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY.  In an October 7 meeting with the Ambassador, 
Rheinland-Pfalz (R-P) Minister-President Kurt Beck 
(SPD/Social Democrats) reiterated the state\'s support for 
U.S. troops based there and asked that the USG back efforts 
to minimize damage from the Global Defense Posture Review, 
particularly in the case of Baumholder (ref A). 
Rheinland-Pfalz will continue to support security at US 
installations.  The Ambassador committed to encourage German 
defense authorities to use Baumholder and other facilities 
which may be vacated by the U.S. military.  END SUMMARY. 
 
GLOBAL DEFENSE POSTURE REVIEW/BAUMHOLDER 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador called on Rheinland-Pfalz 
Minister-President (M-P) Kurt Beck, in a meeting centered 
primarily on U.S. basing issues stemming from the USG\'s 
Global Defense Posture Review (GDPR).  Minister-President 
Beck voiced strong support for the continued stationing of 
U.S. servicemembers and their families in Rheinland-Pfalz and 
expressed concern over indications that some installations 
will close as a result of GDPR.  He remarked that 
Rheinland-Pfalz has absorbed the closure of 500 U.S. military 
properties in the past eight years, but closing U.S. Army 
facilities in Baumholder would deal a tremendous blow to that 
community ( where soldiers and dependents outnumber local 
inhabitants) and its surrounding area.  Rheinland-Pfalz 
representatives have floated a proposal (ref A) in Washington 
and Berlin to retain Baumholder as a multi-national training 
center for humanitarian intervention and civil insurgency 
issues.  Rheinland-Pfalz has also presented concrete 
proposals to upgrade housing at U.S. military facilities 
(through privately financed build-to-lease arrangements) and 
to expand activities at Ramstein.  Minister-President Beck 
called for more intense consultations on these proposals and 
related issues. 
 
3.  (C) The Ambassador assured Minister-President Beck that 
we will coordinate closely with German authorities and 
remarked that he had just met with DOS and DOD 
representatives in the context of U.S.-German consultations 
on GDPR.  He assured Minister-President Beck that the 
Ramstein-Kaiserslautern-Landstuehl complex will remain a 
major U.S. basing site and that some activities will continue 
to expand under the Rhein-Main transition agreement (closure 
of the U.S. airbase in Frankfurt).  Spangdahlem AB will 
remain and serve as a back-up for Ramstein AB.  Both Army 
divisions based in Germany (First Armored Division and First 
Infantry Division) will relocate to the U.S. no earlier than 
2006 ( a move which may last until the end of the decade). 
The USG greatly appreciates Rheinland-Pfalz\'s welcoming 
support for these troops and their families -- who love 
living in Germany -- and hopes that this support will 
continue under a reconfigured presence.  Minister-President 
Beck pledged that Rheinland-Pfalz will continue this support, 
particularly on security for U.S. installations. 
 
4.  (C) On Baumholder, the Ambassador pointed out that he had 
just spoken with the mayor of the town of Baumholder and will 
meet the following week with DefMin Struck and Bundeswehr 
General Schneiderhan, encouraging them to give full 
consideration to Rheinland-Pfalz\'s proposal on Baumholder. 
SecDef Rumsfeld committed to DefMin Struck that the USG will 
seek to coordinate its transition with German defense 
transformation so that some facilities vacated by U.S. forces 
could be used by a restructured German military.  On a 
personal note, the Ambassador reflected that Indiana\'s two 
major U.S. installations were both closed during his time as 
Senator, but a coordinated approach by federal, state, and 
local authorities eased the transition and left some Indiana 
communities better off than before the base closures. 
Minister-President Beck thanked the Ambassador for his 
support and understanding and expressed hope that the sides 
can reach a solution that works militarily, fiscally, and for 
local communities. 
 
GERMAN SUPPORT IN IRAQ 
---------------------- 
 
5.  (C) Having just attended a high-profile ceremony 
commemorating the return from Iraq of the First Armored 
Division, the Ambassador highlighted the heroic service of 
U.S. troops in Iraq.  President Bush and Chancellor Schroeder 
are agreed that we should focus on the future stability of 
Iraq and not on past disagreements.  The USG understands that 
Germany is constrained in the military support it can give, 
but we hope Germany will soon do more on peacekeeping, 
reconstruction, training, and/or humanitarian assistance, 
perhaps in the context of NATO engagement.  Failure in Iraq 
would have terrible consequences for the region and for the 
international community. 
 
6.  (C) Minister-President Beck expressed empathy for U.S. 
soldiers in Iraq and their families in Rheinland-Pfalz and 
said he feels there is room for Germany to do more in Iraq, 
provided the U.N. is engaged.  Germany policy towards Iraq is 
likely to be shaped at the European level, unlike during the 
run-up to war when European states were divided on the 
question of intervention.  Minister-President Beck said he 
advocates German engagement in his role as national 
vice-chairman of the SPD, however, there is no scope 
politically for German military involvement (i.e. 
peacekeeping) in this case. 
 
ECONOMIC REFORM AND POLITICS 
---------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Minister-President Beck opined that Germany and its 
ruling parties appear to have turned the corner on economic 
reform after a terrible showing of European and local 
elections in June.  Voters appear now to accept the necessity 
of economic reform and understand both the tremendous burden 
of reunification (annual transfers of 80 billion euros) and 
the challenge of international competition.  Barring 
unforeseen circumstances, Germany\'s export boom should 
stimulate domestic demand in the context of the Schroeder 
government\'s economic strategy combining tax stimulus, 
restructuring of social insurance contributions, incentives 
to take jobs instead of unemployment benefits, and funds for 
innovative companies.  The Rheinland-Pfalz economy is doing 
better than Germany as a whole -- higher growth and lower 
unemployment -- in large part because the state government 
invests in infrastructure projects that help businesses such 
as Frankfurt-Hahn airport ( a former U.S. military base). 
 
8.  (C) Asked about his own political situation, 
Minister-President Beck remarked with satisfaction that polls 
now put the Rheinland-Pfalz SPD neck-and-neck with the CDU 
(Christian Democrats), who are caught up in an acrimonious 
fight over who will be the conservative flagbearer in 2006 
state elections (\"bitter enemies could reach agreement more 
amicably than political friends in this case\").  With a 
stable SPD-FDP (Free Democrat) coalition since 1991 -- and 
strong personal approval ratings, he added -- Beck is 
optimistic about 2006 state elections. 
BODDE 
"
"22084","10/27/2004 13:22","04FRANKFURT9221","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 009221 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS YEREVAN//RSO 
 
PASS USCBP//TEXTILE ENFORCEMENT OPER DIV//JANET LABUDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, ECON, EAID, ETRD, AM 
SUBJECT: SEIZURE BY CBP OF SIX CONTAINERS FROM 
ARMENIA; MEETINGS WITH ARMENIAN OFFICIALS 
 
REF: CABLE DTD 09/01/2004 FROM AMEMBASSY YEREVAN TO DHS 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Six containers with textiles 
represented as being made in Armenia were detained over 
the three month period of July, August, and September by 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP) due to concerns 
related to the country of origin.  Contact with officials 
at CBP Headquarters, Washington, D.C., revealed that a 
decision was made to exclude all six containers. 
Subsequent to the exclusion, the importer of record 
indicated that the goods were going to be exported out of 
the U.S. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
2. (SBU) On September 21 through September 24, 2004, 
Deputy Attach James Ink, Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE), Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 
American Consulate Frankfurt, travelled to Armenia to 
discuss the six containers as well as to meet with 
officials of the Armenian government in order to discuss 
the role of the ICE Attach and areas of mutual interest. 
Accompanying Deputy Attach Ink were two ICE agents from 
the RAC Laredo Office who travelled to Armenia pursuant 
to an investigation that was separate from the seizure of 
the six containers. 
 
ACTIONS ON THE CONTAINERS 
 
3.   (SBU) Information from CBP HQ regarding the six 
containers revealed no certificate of origin was ever 
submitted with the entry.  The country where a factory 
claims that the goods were made normally issues a 
certificate of origin.  While a certificate of origin may 
have been prepared and shown to local officials, none was as 
provided to CBP officials. 
 
4. (SBU) Information from CBP HQ regarding the six 
containers also revealed that when the Armenian 
exporter/producer completed the textile declaration, 
there was strong indication that he was receiving 
component parts from China and assembling them in 
Armenia.  However, when the importer submitted the 
textile declaration he submitted a single country of 
origin declaration, which stated that the fabric was 
produced in Armenia and any cutting and assembling was 
done in Armenia, contradicting the original information. 
 
5. (SBU) Also according to CBP HQ, a request by CBP to 
the exporter/producer for production records, covering 
both cutting and assembly records, was never complied 
with. 
 
ACTIONS OF ICE AGENTS PETERS AND SILVA 
 
6.    (SBU) While in country ICE special agents Andrew 
Peters and Jose Silva, both from the RAC/Laredo Office, 
conducted interviews related to an investigation that did 
not involve the detention of the six containers by CBP. 
As discussed at the meeting with the Ambassador and 
several members of the Embassy staff on 09/23/04, 
information relating to the investigation being conducted 
by special agents Peters and Silva should not be 
discussed or disseminated outside the Embassy, or to 
anyone other than those individuals with a need to know. 
 
MEETINGS WITH ARMENIAN OFFICIALS 
 
7. (SBU) Separate from the above situation, Deputy 
Attach Ink met with representatives of the Ministry of 
National Security, Customs State Committee, and the 
Ministry of Trade and Economic Development.  At all three 
meetings William Mayer, Senior EXBS Program Advisor, and 
Susanna Toroyan, also with the EXBS Program, assisted 
Deputy Attach Ink. 
 
8. (SBU) During the meetings, Deputy Attach Ink advised 
of the role of ICE and DHS, and of the desire ICE had in 
working with the Armenian Government on areas of mutual 
interest.  Additionally, the topics of ICE/DHS sponsored 
training opportunities, a Customs Mutual Assistance ce 
Agreement, and bilateral agreements were discussed and 
met with favorable responses from representatives of all 
three offices mentioned in paragraph 7 above. 
 
ASSISTANCE RECEIVED FROM U.S. EMBASSY 
 
9. (SBU) The ICE Attach Frankfurt appreciates the 
assistance given by the Embassy staff in preparation of, 
during, and after this trip.  Special thanks to Justin 
Otto, Terry Cobble and Christy Brown of the RSO\'s Office, 
and William Mayer and Susanna Toroyan, EXBS. 
 
BODDE 
"
"22131","10/28/2004 13:30","04FRANKFURT9252","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 009252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Baden-Wuerttemberg Minister-President To Step Down 
in 2005;  State Minister Palmer Resigns 
 
REF:  A) 03 Frankfurt 10353, B) Frankfurt 5551, C) Frankfurt 
 
6002, D) Frankfurt 6769, E) Frankfurt 7197, F) Frankfurt 
9139 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution. 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) Minister President 
Erwin Teufel announced October 25 that he will relinquish 
the offices of Minister-President and CDU state chairman as 
of April 2005.  Strife over designating a successor will 
complicate local politics and life for the national CDU. 
Baden-Wuerttemberg State Minister Christoph Palmer resigned 
after a physical altercation with CDU Bundestag member 
Joachim Pfeiffer during an argument over Teufel\'s future. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Baden-Wuerttemberg Minister-President Teufel (CDU / 
Christian Democrats) announced at an October 25 press 
conference that he would step down as minister-president and 
state party chairman as of April 19, 2005.  Teufel will 
retain his mandate in the Baden-Wuerttemberg state 
parliament until the end of the legislative period (May 
2006).  His decision follows months of infighting and 
pressure on Teufel to make way for new leadership (reftels). 
At the press conference, Teufel insisted that his decision 
to retire was personal and voluntary, noting that \"it would 
be unbearable for me if the B-W citizens gain the impression 
that I am glued to my chair.\" 
 
3. (SBU) At the same press conference, State Minister 
Christoph Palmer announced his resignation following a 
physical altercation with CDU Bundestag representative 
Joachim Pfeiffer at a weekend election event for Stuttgart 
Lord Mayor Wolfgang Schuster (re-elected October 24 with 
53.3% of the vote).  At the event, Palmer angrily confronted 
Pfeiffer over his participation in a Bundestag caucus straw 
poll against Teufel (ref F), striking the Bundestag member 
twice in the face.  At the press conference the following 
day, Palmer took responsibility for the scuffle and tendered 
his immediate resignation.  NOTE:  Palmer -- until now 
regarded as a rising force within the B-W CDU -- oversaw 
relations with the U.S. (including U.S. forces) in his role 
as head of the State Chancellery.  END NOTE. 
 
4. (SBU) Teufel\'s resignation is the result of months of 
controversy and mud-slinging which have hampered the 
political process in Baden-Wuerttemberg (reftels).  The 
succession debate is focused on two contenders:  State 
Minister of Culture and Education Annette Schavan and CDU 
caucus chief Guenther Oettinger.  Although Teufel has hinted 
publicly at support for Schavan, Oettinger enjoys the public 
backing of most other groups within the state party.  In an 
October 25 meeting with CG, State Secretary Rudolf Boehmler 
opined that while Oettinger has a strong base within the 
party, Schavan has a higher public profile as state 
education minister since 1995.  The two contenders have 
agreed to put the question to the CDU membership in state- 
wide balloting.  Public opinion polls give Oettinger a small 
lead (favored by 22% of those polled, versus 16% for 
Schavan) but the majority of the public remains undecided. 
Internet polls in the wake of Teufel\'s announcement gave 
Oettinger a wider popular lead of 17 to 20 points. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5. (U) With the succession question still open -- and likely 
to play out in the coming days -- state politics in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg will remain in flux for the near future. 
Moreover, the decision to poll the party membership has 
created a furor within the local and national CDU and with 
the CSU, further complicating the party\'s efforts to resolve 
intra- and extra-mural strife in advance of the CSU and CDU 
party conventions in mid-November and early December.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"22161","10/29/2004 5:55","04FRANKFURT9266","Consulate Frankfurt","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE231686","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L FRANKFURT 009266 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE FOR DS, NEA, M, CA, D, P, S/CT, WHA, EUR, AF, SA, 
EAP, INR AND SES-O. BERLIN AND MUNICH FOR EXEC AND RSO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2014 
TAGS: ASEC, CASC, PTER 
SUBJECT: FRANKFURT EAC CONVENED CONCERNING SECURITY POSTURE 
DUE TO REPORTS OF ARAFAT\'S DETERIORATING HEALTH 
 
REF: SECSTATE 231686 
 
Classified By: Classified by RSO Claude Nebel.  Reason: 1.4 (C,D) 
 
 1.  (C) Frankfurt EAC convened 1500 hrs. 10/29 per request 
reftel to assess post security posture due to reports of 
Chairman Arafat\'s failing health.  Present were CG, DPO, RSO, 
DHS, TSA, Consular, IMO, RSO Berlin, MGMT and ORCA. 
Assessment of the EAC at present is to remain at our current 
security status with a further review after contact with host 
country security couterparts.   EAC ended at 1530 hrs. 
BODDE 
"
"23889","12/10/2004 10:15","04FRANKFURT10386","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED","04Frankfurt6156|04TheHague2864","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 010386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PGOV, SMIG, SOCI, PHUM, GM, NL, EUN 
SUBJECT: Muslim Political Observers On Risk of Extremist 
Violence in Germany 
 
REF:  A) The Hague 2864 B) Frankfurt 6156 (NOTAL) C) Hamburg 
 
60 D) 02 Frankfurt 10187, E) Frankfurt 1390 F) Frankfurt 
9141 G) Frankfurt 0567 
 
Sensitive but unclassified  not for internet distribution 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  Muslim political contacts in Frankfurt\'s 
district see the predominantly secular character of 
Germany\'s largely Turkish Muslim community as a bulwark 
against Islamic extremism but cite the area\'s growing North 
African population and the presence of far-right German 
groups as potentially destabilizing factors.  While 
fragmented religiously and politically, ethnic Turks in 
Germany are united across party and religious lines by their 
support for Turkey\'s entry into the European Union.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Turkish Secularism Makes Extremism in Germany Less Likely 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
2. (SBU) Consulate representatives met with Muslim 
representatives of Germany\'s major political parties to 
assess the danger of Islamist attacks along the lines of 
that against the Dutch filmmaker Van Gogh and potential 
reactionary violence against Germany\'s 3.1 million Muslims. 
Former European Parliament member Ozan Ceyhun (Social 
Democrats/SPD) underscored the largely Turkish and secular 
composition of Germany\'s Muslim population as a safeguard 
against religious extremism.  Ceyhun warned, however, that 
Germany\'s growing North African community (while still 
relatively small) harbors significant religious 
fundamentalist and anti-American elements. 
 
3.  (SBU) Hesse Green Party caucus chief Tarek Al Wazir (of 
Yemeni descent) noted that fundamentalist Muslims -- while a 
minority -- are less inclined to integrate into local 
communities and often retain ties with like-minded groups 
outside Germany, opening the door for extremist influences 
from other parts of Europe and the Middle East.  (NOTE: 
Alleged Al Qaeda Hamburg cell member and September 11 
plotter Mounir el-Motassadeq came from Morocco, while a 
Frankfurt terror cell convicted of plotting to attack the 
Strasbourg Christmas Market in 2000 was of Algerian origin. 
A Frankfurt mosque raided by police in June on suspicions of 
extremist activity received partial funding from the 
Moroccan consulate (refs B-D) END NOTE). 
 
--------------------------- 
Fear of Right-Wing Violence 
--------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Ceyhun expressed fear that right-wing political 
groups could carry out \"reprisal\" attacks against Muslims in 
the wake of the Van Gogh controversy in the Netherlands. 
Local Muslims reacted with alarm to the November 18 
firebombing of a Turkish mosque in Sinsheim near Heidelberg 
(no one was hurt in the attack).  Following the December 3 
arrest of a 17-year old ethnic German of Tajik origin in 
connection with the bombing, however, Baden-Wuerttemberg 
police described the attack as an isolated incident. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Muslim Political Participation On The Rise 
------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Muslim political participation in the region has 
increased significantly in recent years, fueled in part by 
expanded naturalization under the federal citizenship law of 
2000.  Over 700,000 Muslims in Germany now carry a German 
passport, and another 800,000 were born in Germany.  Turkish 
Germans are predominantly Sunni with a significant Alevi 
minority. Although socially conservative, the vast majority 
of Turkish voters (80% in 2002 national elections) back the 
SPD because of its support for Turkey\'s EU membership bid. 
Germany\'s Green Party has also seen a rise in Turkish 
membership because of a platform that is seen as friendly 
towards immigrants and opposes recent anti-headscarf laws 
(refs E-F). 
 
6.  (SBU) Mr. Sina Afra of the Liberal Turkish-German Union 
(a Free Democrat/FDP-affiliated group) estimated that 10-15% 
of Germany\'s Turkish community are non-practicing, while an 
equivalent are deeply religious.  The majority are somewhat 
observant but increasingly participate in German society: 
Afra cited as an example the increasing number of Turkish 
high school graduates in Germany (from only 2,000 in 1989 to 
around 45,000 today).  Ceyhun affirmed the positive trends 
but noted that Muslims integrate into German society at 
varying speeds;  even many with German citizenship live in 
Muslim sub-communities.  Several city governments in SW 
Germany have pioneered successful initiatives to integrate 
their large immigrant populations, particularly Frankfurt\'s 
\"Mama learns German  and Papa too\", a program providing 
German-language instruction to immigrant mothers and fathers 
(ref G). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Support for Turkey\'s EU Entry Trumps Party Affiliation 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Our Muslim interlocutors noted broad and vocal 
support among Turkish Germans for Turkey\'s entry into the 
EU.  Not surprisingly, contacts made the case for Turkey to 
be judged fairly under the Copenhagen agreement, with Al 
Wazir remarking that Germany \"cannot renege on promises made 
to Turkey decades ago.\"  Mr. Meze Zafer of the German- 
Turkish Forum (a Christian Democrat/CDU affiliated political 
group) opined that support for Turkey\'s EU membership tends 
to isolate Turkish CDU members from fellow conservatives and 
hinders progress on other political and religious issues. 
Ceyhun struck a rare discordant note by saying that he 
believed Turkey would end up only with the \"privileged 
partnership\" envisioned by the CDU, painting instead a role 
for Turkey as leader of a group of pro-western states in the 
Middle East (including Egypt, Israel, and Iraq) that could 
partner with the EU on important issues.  Ceyhun voiced his 
disappointment over Turkey\'s tepid participation in the 
coalition supporting a democratic Iraq. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Right-wing German politicians in this largely 
conservative region have used the Van Gogh incident and 
fears of Islamic extremism to score points in Germany\'s 
debate on integration, including Baden-Wuerttemberg 
Education Minister Annette Schavan, who declared that 
Germany should compel Muslim religious leaders to preach in 
German.  Germany\'s Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution (which monitors extremism) estimates that only 
0.1% of Germany\'s Muslims belong to radical Islamic 
movements and believe that the secular and moderate leanings 
of most Muslims in Germany mean that fundamentalist appeals 
are unlikely to gain traction within the community at large; 
although such groups pose an obvious danger. 
 
9.  (SBU) The economic contributions of Germany\'s Muslim 
immigrants (particularly given the country\'s aging workforce 
and dwindling birth rate) are significant; however, recent 
anti-headscarf laws show the country\'s struggle to integrate 
a culture seen by many as incompatible with \"German\" values 
(such as gender equality).  Fear sparked by the Van Gogh 
murder has added a new subtext to Germany\'s continuing 
debate on how to accommodate diversity.  END COMMENT. 
"
"23901","12/10/2004 13:17","04FRANKFURT10393","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 010393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY ALSO FOR IMB, Monroe ICN COX, HULL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT:  Accounting - Bumpy Ride to The Big Deal 
 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Having all 7,000 EU firms listed on EU 
stock exchanges use the same accounting standards will be a 
very big deal for European financial markets.  Investors 
will be able to compare investment opportunities, capital 
will be allocated more efficiently, and supervisors will 
more clearly assess the pan-European spectrum of a firm\'s 
activities. The big deal is due to become a reality starting 
with financial year 2005 when EU listed firms are to prepare 
their accounts using International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) endorsed by the European Commission (EC). 
The transition, however, will be bumpy.  Firms and their 
auditors and regulators will need time to adjust to the new 
accounting rules, some of which are new or still being 
developed.  Starting at the end of the first quarter next 
year, look for an increase in corporate communications 
explaining to shareholders that the company is as solid as 
ever, despite the change in profit and loss accounts due to 
accounting changes. Once through this bumpy transitional 
stretch, the road to more efficient markets should be 
smoother. End Summary 
 
2005: The Big Deal 
------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) Financial year 2005 will be the first in which all 
EU firms listed on EU stock exchanges will be required to 
use IFRS as endorsed by the EC.  This requirement emanates 
from a July 2002 EU regulation. (A regulation takes direct 
effect in Member States in contrast to a Directive that 
requires a lengthier process of transposition into national 
law via national legislation.)  7,000 firms will be affected 
by the measure.  This is a very big deal in creating a more 
integrated EU financial market.  Accounts of firms will be 
comparable across borders, permitting investors to make 
better-informed choices, promoting a more efficient 
allocation of capital, and giving supervisors a better sense 
of operations on a EU-wide basis.  The EC\'s economic experts 
have reckoned that of all the major discretionary policy 
measures that could help knit EU financial markets closer 
together and boost growth, a high quality, uniform 
accounting standard is the most powerful. 
 
3. (SBU) Given the breadth and depth of implications of this 
accounting regulation, it is a wonder that the measure was 
adopted without much fuss.  European financial experts had 
sought for years to agree on common accounting standards, 
then in 2001 settled on the International Accounting 
Standards, now being called IFRS.  The substantive 
implications of this decision did not attract much attention 
at the political level.  Council and Parliament moved the 
measure briskly along to demonstrate that Europe was moving 
quickly on this front against the background of major 
accounting scandals in the United States. 
 
Transition: More Than Bargained For 
----------------------------------- 
 
4.   (SBU) Moving from the political plane to the practical 
has presented challenges.  More are yet to come.  The 
Commission has to endorse the IAS with the advice of the 
Accounting Regulatory Committee (ARC), a committee composed 
of member state representatives.  This endorsement mechanism 
is legally necessary to make the standards binding.  The 
Commission had hoped to have all IAS endorsed quickly, by 
early 2003.  Translation requirements slowed the process 
considerably to late fall 2003.  Accounting standards are 
not literary works, often requiring new words to express 
their very exact concepts hitherto without expression in 
some national languages. 
 
5.  (SBU) The endorsement process is politically important. 
In essence, the EC and member states are relinquishing their 
rights to formulate the accounting standards to a private 
entity, the International Accounting Standards Board.  Thus, 
the Commission and member states in the ARC were to give 
political cover for the use of IAS.  Commission experts 
explained that they had no intention of changing any of the 
IAS, with the understanding that European accounting experts 
participated in their development either directly in the 
IASB or through hearings on IASB proposals. 
 
6.  (SBU) Alas, politics did creep in when French President 
Chirac took up the cause of French banks who felt their 
operations would be unduly prejudiced by IASB proposals on 
the financial reporting standards (IAS 39).  As of the 
beginning of December, the Commission has endorsed all the 
IAS with the exception of two provisions of IAS 39 on 
financial accounting that are still being refined by the 
IASB.  The Commission expects the IASB to conclude work on 
these two provisions so they can be endorsed in 2005. 
 
Implementation:  Bumpy Road 
--------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The more interesting transitional phase will be 
when firms begin reporting under IFRS at the end of the 
first quarter in 2005.  Analysts variously characterize the 
change as an \"accounting reformation,\" \"accounting 
confusion,\" a \"shock wave\" like Y2K, or \"more significant 
than the introduction of the common currency.\"  Some of the 
hype might be attributed to salesmanship by accountants and 
auditors.  Yet there is more than a whiff of uncertainty in 
the air. 
 
8.  (SBU) Fitch Ratings points to several risks:  investors 
will be uncertain as to how to interpret the new 
information; accountants will make errors resulting in 
misstatements; difficulty in applying the new concepts will 
lead to restatements of accounts, particularly in the 
absence of a developed infrastructure on consistency and 
enforceability.  In technical guidelines prepared by the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales 
(ICAEW), the authors note that accountants are used to 
\"incremental change,\" and that some may find \"such major 
conceptual shifts are difficult to absorb and apply 
correctly to complex accounting issues.\" 
 
9.  (SBU) Fitch believes that no one can predict the 
magnitude of these problems, but it is fairly certain they 
will exist and could result in restatements of profit and 
loss accounts.  Fitch does not go so fair as to believe the 
new accounting results will lead to a change in credit 
ratings.  Such changes are possible if they reveal 
underlying problems that hitherto had been camouflaged by 
national accounting rules. 
 
What\'s In the Change? 
--------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) What kinds of changes can be expected in the 
switch from national accounting standards to IFRS?  The 
answer differs from firm to firm.  The ICAEW\'s guideline 
notes that different definitions could result in items being 
placed in different accounting classifications, some items 
recognized as assets or liabilities under national 
accounting principles may not be so recognized under the 
international rules, and more extensive information 
requirements will require greater data capture needs. 
 
11.  (SBU) Experts cite some specific examples. 
Amortization of goodwill on acquisitions will be abolished, 
off balance sheet liabilities will have to be disclosed 
(such as pension plans or derivatives), the performance of 
separate lines of business will be disclosed, and stock 
options will be treated as an expense.  Such changes can 
affect different firms in different ways.  Until accountants 
provide the details, the outcome is not known.  Analysts, 
however, are tying to divine possible outcomes so as to be 
prepared for the day when a firm publishes its new accounts. 
 
12.  (SBU) Societe General equity analysts sought to review 
the potential affects of the accounting rule changes on 50 
European firms.  Generally, overall valuations would not be 
negatively affected, in their opinion, with some exceptions, 
and the quality of disclosure will remain the same or 
improve.  Firms in countries with local accounting rules 
closer to IFRS (e.g. the Netherlands and the UK) are less 
apt to see changes than those in countries with rules that 
are more different (France, Germany and Spain). 
 
13.  (SBU) Merrill Lynch reviewed potential results on UK 
banks and developed three broad conclusions.  Earnings could 
be generally lower at larger banks but higher at mid-sized 
banks as a result of bring additional costs on the profit 
and loss statements (pension charges and equity-based 
compensation).  Capital could be higher based on the 
assumption that general provisions will be added back to 
equity and the year-end dividend accrual is no longer 
accounted for as a liability.  Volatility could increase as 
a result of the new changes taking affect. 
 
Point of Departure 
------------------ 
 
14.  (SBU) The roughness of the ride for some firms will 
depend on the point of departure.  Firms that have been slow 
to prepare might find themselves rushing to meet deadlines. 
A survey of UK, French, German and Dutch firms by ATOS 
Consulting suggested that in the beginning of 2004 only 16% 
judged themselves ready, most (40%) being German, the least 
being UK (2%).  This figure could be misleading.  ICAEW 
notes that some firms that thought they were ready earlier 
in the year now believe they are behind because they 
misjudged the extent of changes necessary to make the 
transition to the new accounting standards.  A more recent 
study by PriceWaterHouse Coopers indicates that two-thirds 
of the smaller, mid-sized European firms do not yet have 
IFRS projects established on only 15% of these firms were 
confident to make the changes on time. 
 
 
15.  (SBU) There is also the question of whether a firm 
thinks the transition is worth the effort - not that they 
can do much about it - but it may color their attitude 
toward preparations.  40% of the firms in the ATOS survey 
indicated that they believe the new accounts will increase 
shareholder value, potentially a built-in incentive to move 
more quickly.  However, 22% thought the effect would be 
negative.  Overall, this meant a net of 18% of the firms 
judged the change to be positive for shareholder value. 
Honing in on the detail reveals a varied picture.  More 
German firms judged the change as positive for shareholder 
value (a net 29%), while the UK firms surveyed were, on 
balance negative (2%). 
 
Consistency is Key: Enter CESR 
------------------------------ 
 
16.  (SBU) The transition will take several years, in 
Fitch\'s opinion.  Interpretations and enforcement will begin 
to answer questions and smooth out differences in accounting 
creativity.  Some accounting experts believe the U.S. 
Securities and Exchange Commission will also play a role as 
firms with listings on US markets will seek SEC accounting 
experts\' council in preparing their new accounts. 
Consistent interpretations at the national level would be 
one challenge; consistent interpretations among all EU 25 
member states is a daunting challenge.  The Committee of 
European Securities Regulators (CESR) has taken it up. 
 
17.  (SBU) CESR has published two standards on financial 
information and coordination of financial activity.  CESR 
will convene European Enforcer Coordination Sessions (EECS) 
to exchange views and discuss enforcement issues including 
decisions on interpretation of a standard by national 
enforcement authorities.  CESR will maintain a database of 
enforcement decisions that national enforcers can consult 
prior to making their own decisions.  Decisions taken by 
national authorities that are in apparent contradiction to 
those taken previously would be discussed by the EECS. 
 
Get the News Out 
---------------- 
 
18.  (SBU) Consulting firms are advising clients that, 
whatever the new accounts look like, firms should be quick 
to explain the results to investors.  CESR has advised firms 
to begin early to explain its transition plans to 
shareholders and to have comparable IFRS accounts for 2004 
as well as a \"bridge\" explaining differences between the 
2003 and 2004 accounts. Different accounting outcomes do not 
mean that a firm has changed in its overall performance, but 
investor\'s perception of that performance can change. 
 
19.  (SBU) Whether the change is for the better or for worse 
will depend, as noted above, upon the firm\'s previous 
accounts.  Analysts at Societe General believe that firms 
may use discretion afforded under IFRS to reduce the affect 
on their profit and loss statements and balance sheets. 
Getting through the transition period for some firms may not 
be easy.  A German accounting professor pointed out that 
uncertainties surrounding such a transition could lead to 
higher costs of capital in the near term.  Rewards at the 
other end, however, could be considerable for some firms. 
For EU financial markets as a whole, firms and investors, 
the gains will be significant. 
 
20.  (U) This report coordinated with USEU, Embassy Berlin, 
London and Paris. 
 
21.  (U) POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"23902","12/10/2004 13:17","04FRANKFURT10394","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 FRANKFURT 010394 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY ALSO FOR IMB, Monroe ICN COX, HULL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT:  Council Agrees on Cross-Border Merger Directive: 
Another Step Toward EU Corporate Governance 
 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The European Council\'s agreement on the 
proposed directive on cross-border mergers concludes a 
nearly 20-year process.  The directive is to facilitate 
cross-border mergers of companies with share capital, 
particularly small and medium-sized enterprises that opt not 
to establish a Societas Europa (SE), a European Company. 
Key to the Council\'s adoption was a compromise on worker\'s 
participation rules which are broadly similar to the rules 
of an SE, albeit slightly less stringent.  Germany was the 
sole holdout for retaining the SE measures.  Commission 
officials are confident that the measure will move swiftly 
through Parliament. 
 
2.  (SBU) While agreement on the measure is a major 
accomplishment for the Commission, the measure may have 
little immediate effect.  By replicating the SE regime it 
broke no new legal ground and the legal issues it did 
address do not seem to impede cross-border mergers, an 
activity that is already robust.  However, like the SE and 
other measures that ensure free movement of capital in 
Europe, it adds to the EU legislation that increases 
competition among various forms of business organization 
that can take place not only among member states but also 
within member states.  These steps, indirectly, could lead 
to more business consolidation.  Risks that the measure 
could get stalled in Parliament are not negligible if the 
directive is perceived as an attack on Germany\'s worker\'s co- 
determination regime.  It would not be the first time 
Germany changed direction on a directive involving corporate 
governance once the measure was in Parliament. End Summary. 
 
Agreement on Cross-Border Mergers 
--------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) On November 25, the European Council reached 
agreement on the European Commission\'s proposed directive on 
cross-border mergers.  The proposed directive would require 
each company participating in the merger to be governed by 
the provisions of its national law on domestic mergers. 
However, common draft terms of the cross-border merger would 
be governed by the new directive, e.g. the name, form and 
registered office of the merging companies, and other 
details of the merger relating to the exchange or allotment 
of securities and application of new accounting rules.  The 
new directive would overcome legal problems in some member 
states where mergers are not legal, e.g. Netherlands, 
Sweden, Ireland, Greece, Germany, Finland, Denmark and 
Austria.  At present, to circumvent this legal obstacle, 
merging enterprises create a third entity that would be 
comprised of the two \"merging\" enterprises, a time-consuming 
and expensive operation. 
 
Long History 
------------ 
 
4.   (SBU) The Commission first proposed the directive in 
December 1984, but withdrew it in 2001.  The major sticking 
point was employees\' participation rules that would be 
adopted by the merged firm.  As a recent European Parliament 
report put it, there was an \"overriding fear concerning 
cross-border mergers that the process might be hijacked by 
companies which, faced with having to live with employee 
participation, might try to circumvent it by means of such a 
merger.\"  In 2001 the regulation and directive were adopted 
for a Statute for a European Company, the Societas Europa 
(SE).  An SE could be a wholly new company, but when created 
out of two merged firms, a special negotiation body is to be 
established to set the terms of employee participation. 
Failure of the body to agree in six months would result in 
adoption of the worker participation rules that apply to 25% 
or more of the total employees of the companies 
participating in the merger.  Generally, this would be terms 
most favorable to the employees. 
 
5.  (SBU) In November 2003 the Commission issued a new 
proposal on cross-border mergers incorporating by reference 
the SE solution on worker\'s participation.  Again the 
sticking point was employee participation.  This time most 
member states wanted to increase the threshold to 50%, 
increasing the possibility that participation rules less 
favorable to the employees would be adopted.  Germany 
resisted.   According to press reports, in German 
Parliamentary hearings on the directive, the German 
government declared the directive would not make it possible 
to \"flee from German co-determination.\"  Germany, however, 
could not muster sufficient votes to retain the SE rules. 
 
6.  (SBU) The compromise is complex.  Basically, where the 
two merging firms have employee participation rules, the 
rules most favorable to the employees will be adopted. 
Where one of the merging entities has no employee 
participation rules a special negotiating body is 
established.  As in the case of an SE, failure to reach 
agreement in the negotiations would mean that employee 
participation rules that apply to at least 33% of the total 
workers in the merging companies would be adopted for the 
entire merged firm.  This is a slightly higher threshold 
than in the SE directive.  Falling under that threshold 
would imply that negotiations would have to produce an 
acceptable result for the merger to proceed.  A new element 
was added with respect to participation on the board. 
Again, if negotiations failed to produce an acceptable 
result, the number of employees represented on the board 
would be at least 33% of the total if, in one of the merging 
entities, employees had at least one-third of the board 
seats.  A German official called the compromise \"fair\" and 
something \"right down the middle.\" 
 
 
On to Parliament 
---------------- 
 
7.   (SBU) The directive now goes to the Legal Affairs 
Committee of Parliament for consideration.  European 
Commission officials are confident that the legislation will 
move \"smoothly\" through the legislative process.  They point 
out that the lead manager in Committee for the legislation, 
Klaus-Heiner Lehne, is \"on board\" and will use the 
compromise produced by the Council.  The measure may pass in 
one reading in the spring, according to a Commission 
official. 
 
Comments: Parliamentary Risks, Broader Implications and a 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Touch of Reality 
---------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Risks that the directive may get stalled in 
Parliament are not negligible.  Mr. Lehne spearheaded the 
German Government\'s weakening of the Takeover Bids Directive 
after the German Presidency had secured agreement in Council 
on the measure.  While Parliament\'s initial report in April 
regarded the proposed directive as \"positive and practical,\" 
it also stressed the need to reduce the risk of  \"lower 
employee participation standards.\"  The Commission staff 
believes that the German Government has run the necessary 
traps to give them confidence there will be no repeat of the 
Takeover Bids saga.  Should the directive gain public 
notoriety as a perceived effort to weaken Germany\'s co- 
determination rules, the politics could change.  Few 
expected the German government to turn against the Takeover 
Directive that it had endorsed earlier. 
 
9.  (SBU) With respect to broader implications, the merger 
directive is another step toward easing rules for cross- 
border business formations and capital mobility within the 
EU.  One was that the SE created the ability for a business 
to establish in any member state using either a unitary 
board responsible for administration and supervision, as 
practiced in the UK, or a two-tier system, such as practiced 
in Germany, with separate management and supervisory boards. 
Another was by a European Court of Justice ruling, based on 
the freedom of capital movements, that held that member 
states have to recognize the legal form of a company 
incorporated in another member state even if not established 
under its own laws.  The Commission\'s planned proposed 
directive on transfer of seat (headquarters) will mark 
another step.  This measure, which the Commission hopes to 
submit early next year, is designed to allow firms to move 
their headquarters to another member state without requiring 
them to wind down their operations that would entail 
substantial tax and other costs. Under continental European 
law, the seat of a corporation is its legal headquarters as 
well as the place it conducts business. 
 
10.  (SBU) Easing firms\' mobility and their choice of 
corporate governance rules suggests more competition among 
forms of business organization and regulation and, 
potentially, tax regimes.  Firms could establish in Germany, 
for example, with only one-tier board system and, 
conceivably, less employee participation than other German 
firms.  Alternatively, a German firm could merge with a firm 
in another EU state and operate under the corporate 
governance rules and tax regime of that other state but 
still have its major base of operation in Germany.  Whether 
such scenarios play out is an open question.  However, the 
possibility they could more readily take place may change 
perceived bargaining positions for new investment decisions. 
 
11.  (SBU) In reality, the merger directive is unlikely to 
spark an increase in cross-border M&A activity which is 
already robust.  According to the October 2004 Mergers and 
Acquisition Note of DG Ecofin, M&A activity in the EU 25 has 
ranged from around 9,000 operations in 1995, peaking at just 
over 15,000 in 2000, then settling back around the 8,000 
level in 2002 and 2003.  Throughout this period, cross- 
border M&A activity within the EU accounted for around 15% 
of the total number of operations. 
 
12.  (SBU) M&A activity is driven by other factors.  EC 
studies suggest that GDP size and financial variables (stock 
market capitalization, credit) and other institutional 
factors (free trade agreements, common language, supply of 
skilled labor) strongly influence M&A decisions.  An EC 
study published in September 2004 also suggests that M&A 
activity (a) is more robust in countries where investor 
protection is better (better institutions, less private 
ownership means a higher willingness to sell); and (b) is 
more likely to occur between companies with different levels 
of investor protection - firms with weaker governance 
targeted by those with stronger governance. 
 
What might these findings mean for cross-border M&A 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
activity within the EU? 
----------------------- 
 
13.  (SBU) A 2000 DG Ecofin study on merger trends might 
provide some insights.  Using 1998-1999 data the study 
measured the relative intensity of EU cross-border merger 
activity by using the ratio of each country\'s share of the 
number of cross-border transactions to its share of EU GDP. 
The top scorers were Luxembourg, Ireland, Sweden, Finland, 
and the Netherlands followed by the UK, Belgium and Denmark. 
The lowest scorers were Italy, Greece and Germany. If the 
merger directive, the SE and other measures contribute to 
increased competition driven by M&A activity, firms located 
in the top scorers are likely to benefit and those with 
lower scores will find increased competition not only from 
corporate governance rules in other member states, but from 
new firms within its home territory. 
 
14.  (U) This report was coordinated with USEU and Embassy 
Berlin. 
 
15.  (U) POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"24356","12/20/2004 15:56","04FRANKFURT10621","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 010621 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, GM 
SUBJECT: Show of Unity in Baden-Wuerttemberg CDU as 
Oettinger Elected Standard-Bearer for 2006 State Elections 
 
REF: A) Frankfurt 5551, B) Frankfurt 6002, C) Frankfurt 
6769, D) Frankfurt 7197, E) Frankfurt 9139, F) Frankfurt 
9252 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) At a special party convention on December 11 in 
Schwaebisch-Gmuend, Baden-Wuerttemberg CDU delegates elected 
Guenther Oettinger as standard-bearer for the 2006 state 
elections (following Oettinger\'s victory in a referendum 
among the 80,000 state party members).  Oettinger\'s 
referendum win (with 60.6% of the vote versus 39.4% for 
state Education Minister Annette Schavan) was a defeat for 
outgoing M-P Erwin Teufel, who had promoted Schavan as his 
successor.  Schavan graciously accepted her defeat, calling 
on convention delegates to unite behind Oettinger.  In the 
latest slight to Oettinger, Teufel declined to encourage 
convention delegates to vote for his designated successor. 
In press statements, State SPD/Social Democrat chairman Ute 
Vogt criticized the \"power vacuum\" of the coming five 
months, branding Teufel an ineffective lame duck 
\"assassinated\" by Oettinger. 
 
2. (U) With 94.7% of delegates, Oettinger has a clear 
mandate from the party.  In his acceptance speech, Oettinger 
set out his key priorities:  consolidating the state\'s 
budget, improving the business climate, better 
transportation links, and expanded day-care.  He also 
indicated that most of Teufel\'s cabinet would stay on and 
thanked Schavan and Teufel for their service. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
3. (SBU) Oettinger\'s strong showing at the state convention 
(with more support than Teufel received in December 2003) 
indicates that most Baden-Wuerttemberg conservatives welcome 
the change of generations and want to bury the hatchet after 
a year of back-biting.  The highly-visible referendum 
strengthened the precedent for direct democracy in choosing 
party leaders (NOTE: the Rheinland-Pfalz CDU also recently 
held a membership referendum to confirm Christoph Boehr as 
standard-bearer for 2006 state elections -- END NOTE). 
Whether the CDU can make up lost ground in one of its 
primary strongholds depends on how the embittered Teufel and 
his successor handle the awkward five months until the 
change of administration in April 2005.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE 
"
"24418","12/21/2004 13:45","04FRANKFURT10640","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 010640 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY ALSO FOR IMB, Monroe ICN COX, HULL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT:  \"King Maker\" Deal For Europe\'s Stock Exchanges: 
Lead or Leave 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.   (SBU) Summary:  The German Stock Exchange\'s (Deutsche 
  Brse (DB)) informal approach to purchase the London Stock 
  Exchange (LSE) has unleashed the next and biggest round of 
  consolidation in Europe\'s capital market infrastructure. 
  Euronext, DB\'s continental rival, reportedly has made its 
  own proposal.  Bringing together two of Europe\'s three 
  largest exchanges would be a \"King Maker\" of a deal. 
 
2.   Although previous overtures to buy the LSE had been 
  rebuffed, now that the LSE is a publicly traded company, 
  purchase of its shares is more a question of price than 
  sentiment.  DB\'s \"hefty\" price at a fifty percent premium 
  for LSE shares and apparent sensitivity not to alter LSE\'s 
  trading structure seems aimed to win pocketbooks as well as 
  hearts and minds.  DB\'s self-proclaimed strategic imperative 
  is to be a global player and to either \"lead or leave.\" The 
  outcome of its bid will reveal which it will be for DB. 
 
3.   Consolidation of share trading would have significant 
  implications for integrating European securities markets. 
  Through the EU Financial Service Action Plan, there is now 
  one EU-wide standard for trading rules, prospectuses, 
  reporting and auditing obligations.  Overcoming barriers to 
  securities trading, clearing and settlement infrastructure 
  through a market-driven process would mark another major 
  step toward unifying EU securities markets.  End Summary. 
 
DB Renews its Proposal for LSE:  Courtship before the Bid 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
4.   (SBU) On December 13, DB confirmed that it had made a 
  proposal to the LSE Board with a view to making a cash offer 
  for the acquisition of all LSE shares.  The LSE rejected the 
  proposal but agreed to engage in talks with DB to \"ascertain 
  whether a significantly improved proposal\" can be agreed. 
  This launches the next major, and possibly the most 
  significant, round of consolidation in European securities 
  trading infrastructure. 
 
5.   (SBU) DB officials report that the private talks began 
  on the December 15th.  Since DB has not made a formal offer, 
  no official process has begun under UK takeover law to 
  accept or reject the offer within a time certain (within 28 
  days of a formal offer, 60 days if only one offer is 
  submitted, the clock is suspended in the event competition 
  authorities decide to review the transaction).  In its press 
  statement DB cautiously declares that there can be no 
  assurance that any offer will be made.  According to one DB 
  official, results are not expected from the private talks 
  until early in the New Year.  He did seem confident that LSE 
  could not afford to ignore the DB overture. 
 
What Makes This Time Different: Being Public and Being 
Sensitive 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
6.   (SBU) Four years ago DB launched an unsuccessful bid to 
  merge with the LSE.  Why should DB be confident of success 
  this time?  One of the biggest differences is that both 
  firms are now publicly traded.  In this particular case it 
  means the financially stronger can buy controlling interest 
  in the financially weaker firm on the open market.  At the 
  end of 2003 DB\'s market capitalization was around euro 4.9 
  billion while, judging from DB\'s bid, LSE\'s was about euro 
  2.2 billion in mid-2004. 
 
7.   (SBU) One factor in LSE\'s rejection of the DB bid four 
  years ago was the large portion of local stockbrokers 
  holding interests in the LSE who were loath to see their 
  exchange sold.  Now LSE shares are predominately held by 
  large institutional investors like Fidelity and Threadneedle 
  and even Deutsche Bank.  These investors are more likely to 
  be driven by the bottom line than some of the emotion that 
  characterized the resistance to DB\'s efforts four years ago. 
 
8.   (SBU) One financial expert recalls the \"ABW\" feeling in 
  London at the time - \"Anybody But Werner.\"  This refers to 
  DB\'s CEO Werner Siefert who is has been described by the 
  local German press as \"fresh-thinking, power hungry and 
  visionary.\"  His brashness and aggressiveness is not 
  everyone\'s cup of tea.  In the view of one London financial 
  expert, Siefert learned from the past and has launched a 
  \"charm offensive\" this time around. 
9.   (SBU) In appealing to these institutional investors\' 
  bottom line instincts, DB was not shy in its proposal, 
  characterized by one analyst as \"hefty.\"  DB indicated an 
  offer of 530 pence per LSE share, a 52 percent premium to 
  the closing share price as October 22 and a 49.6 percent 
  premium to the average LSE share price in the last three 
  months.  The proposal amounts to 2.6 billion dollars.  LSE 
  shares increased 20 percent on news of DB\'s proposal.  \"LSE 
  shareholders will find this hard to resist,\" was the 
  assessment of one DB official. 
 
10.  (SBU) Another factor at play this time is that DB is 
  not seeking a merger to create a new, joint entity, but a 
  takeover.  Rather than recreate the LSE in DB\'s imagine, DB 
  appears to be taking a more sensitive approach.  According 
  to a DB official, DB would respect the LSE\'s \"trading and 
  supervisory environment.\"  Nonetheless, DB states that it 
  aims to drive down trading costs on the LSE.  According to 
  DB\'s annual report, an equity market transaction at DB 
  typically costs 10.2 basis points but 13.7 basis points at 
  the LSE.    Basis points are hundredths of a cent - that add 
  up in huge daily and yearly trading volumes. 
 
11.  (SBU) What all this really means in practice is the 
  subject of talks between DB and LSE officials.  Press 
  speculation suggests that this could mean that the LSE could 
  retain its contracts with its current clearing (London 
  Clearing House (LCH, now called LCH.Clearnet - see below) 
  and settlement (Crest Co.) agents rather than having its 
  equity trades funneled into a \"vertical silo\" of clearing 
  and settlement via DB\'s Clearstream.  However, DB\'s official 
  statement mentions that it would honor \"existing 
  agreements.\"  LSE\'s contract with LCH.Clearnet is renewed on 
  an annual basis.  Some London analysts think that the only 
  way DB can justify the premium it is offering for LSE shares 
  while also promising lower trading costs would be to channel 
  trades to DB\'s clearing and settlement organizations. 
 
 
What This Proposal Is Not 
------------------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) It would be inappropriate to view DB\'s proposal 
  as a stock exchange deal of bilateral interest between the 
  Germans and British.  First, DB is not German.  Since going 
  public its German strategic investors have sold most of 
  their interests.  At present, only 41 percent of DB shares 
  are owned by German firms.  Fifty percent are owned by UK 
  and US institutional investors - some of the same that hold 
  shares in the LSE. 
 
13.  (SBU) Second, DB is not primarily a stock exchange in a 
  generic sense.  Rather DB regards itself as a \"transaction 
  engine,\" in the words of its annual report.  DB uses its 
  technology that can \"trade and settle anything that can be 
  traded and settled at low variable costs.\"  DB\'s computers 
  execute trades performed on the Vienna and Dublin stock 
  exchanges, for example. 
 
14.  (SBU) DB\'s business model is to use its high-tech 
  investments for several lines of business.  DB has balanced 
  sales from equity trading and fixed income/derivative 
  business of Eurex, its joint venture with the Swiss.  It 
  earns nearly as much trading services as it does in post- 
  trade clearing and settlement operations.  And it earns 
  nearly as much on exchange trading as in over the counter 
  business.  LSE, by contrast, is principally an equity 
  trading organization deriving nearly all its sales from 
  exchange trading. 
 
15.  (SBU) What this amounts to is that DB may be flexible 
  in how the final deal is structured, what stays in 
  Frankfurt, what goes to London.  Whether this would mean 
  moving DB\'s headquarters to London is a delicate question. 
  To date, Siefert has only indicated that if LSE generated 45 
  percent of DB\'s business, then 45 percent of its management 
  would be based in London. 
 
Enter Euronext 
-------------- 
 
16.  (SBU) Euronext, the French inspired but legally Dutch- 
  based securities organization, has made its own bid for the 
  LSE, according to press reports.  Euronext\'s equity trading 
  brings together the stock exchanges of Paris, Brussels, 
  Amsterdam, and Lisbon in one trading platform. 
 
17.  (SBU) While market analysts believe that DB can bring 
  more money to the table (DB might have euro one billion cash 
  available compared to an estimated euro 300 million for 
  Euronext), Euronext has been highly successful in 
  integrating itself into the London markets.  In 2002 
  Euronext acquired LIFFE, London\'s derivative exchange, to 
  create Euronext.liffe that competes with DB\'s Eurex.  In 
  2003 the LCH merged with Clearnet, Euronext\'s clearing 
  agent, to create LCH.Clearnet which is 41.5% owned by 
  Euronext.  Finally, Euroclear, Euronext\'s associate for 
  settlement operations, has part ownership in Crest Co the 
  settlement organization for the LSE. So even if it loses LSE 
  to DB, Euronext\'s strong presence in the London market would 
  enable it to offer an alternative-trading venue for LSE 
  listed shares should traders not be happy with new DB 
  management. 
 
Comment: Broader Implications: European Consolidation and EC 
Directives 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
18.  (SBU) LSE integration in one form or another into 
  either DB or Euronext would mark a major step toward 
  integration of European securities markets.  Joining the 
  efforts of two of the three largest European stock exchanges 
  would be a \"King Maker Deal,\" in the words of one observer. 
  The major exchanges in Spain and Italy, the two principle 
  European exchanges that have not aligned themselves with 
  either DB or the LSE, might seriously consider a 
  relationship with the predominate European exchange. 
  Commented a DB official, \"they are sitting on the fence, 
  waiting to see who wins.\" 
 
19.  (SBU) Integration of major European securities markets 
  would benefit European investors and traders by offering a 
  broader, deeper pool of buyers and sellers and potentially 
  seamless back office operations to process their orders. 
  Capital allocation should be more efficient, contributing to 
  investments with higher returns that could contribute to 
  stronger overall economic performance. 
 
20.  (SBU) Such a result is just what the European 
  Commission has been targeting in its Financial Services 
  Action Plan.  Directives on trading execution, prospectuses, 
  reporting requirements, market abuse, accounting and 
  auditing have created the legal basis for EU-wide rules. 
  Integration of securities market infrastructure would be the 
  next major task.  While the Commission has favored proposing 
  a directive on clearing and settlement to push that process 
  along, a market-driven solution would be a better outcome. 
  Competition authorities may give the deal a close look. 
  However, if the EU is to realize its objective of a fully 
  integrated capital market, competition considerations would 
  need to focus not on the takeover itself but on elements of 
  the deal. 
 
21.  (SBU) One of those elements would be the contentious 
  notion of the \"vertical\" silo.  Such a silo exists when an 
  investor makes a trade on an exchange and then is obliged to 
  use that exchange\'s clearing and settlement operations.  DB 
  has such a \"vertical silo,\" arguing that \"straight through 
  processing\" benefits investors by reducing all-in costs. 
 
22.  (SBU) The Commission, however, wants to make sure that 
  investors can pick and use their own clearing and settlement 
  operations.  Commission competition authorities have had an 
  eye on DB\'s vertical model.  DB, knowing this is the 
  Commission\'s objective, could quell concerns by announcing 
  it would permit such switching by investors, according to 
  London\'s perceived wisdom.  Euronext also boasts potential 
  straight-through processing through its clearing agent 
  LCH.Clearnet and its settlement \"associate\" Euroclear. 
  Thus, a directive in this area might serve a public policy 
  interest. 
 
23.  (SBU) From Embassy London\'s perspective, there is also 
  another dimension to the proposed takeover talks that goes 
  beyond the technical benefits and costs.  Some City 
  observers believe a DB purchase of the LSE would remove one 
  of London\'s last independent financial landmarks, thereby 
  weakening London\'s role as the leading financial center in 
  Europe, and it also could strengthen the hand of the pro- 
  euro enthusiasts in the UK. 
 
24.  (SBU) For DB, its takeover of the LSE would represent 
  six years of work to become Europe\'s predominate securities 
  organization.  Failing this time around or winning the LSE 
  but paying a price too dear, could relegate DB to the number 
  two spot in Europe securities operations.  DB\'s annual 
  report explains that exchanges, clearing and settlement 
  organizations need to operate on a global, not national 
  basis.  DB\'s self-proclaimed strategic imperative is \"lead 
  or leave.\"  The outcome of this latest round of 
  consolidation will show which it will be for DB. 
 
25.  (U) This report coordinated with Embassies London and 
  Berlin and USEU. 
 
26.  (U) POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
  wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
  7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"24748","12/29/2004 18:06","04FRANKFURT10842","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

291806Z Dec 04
","UNCLAS FRANKFURT 010842 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
TERREP 
 
DEPT FOR DS, DSS, DS/IP, DS/ICI, DS/DSS/ITA AND DS/ICI/PII 
BERLIN, RABAT, LONDON, CASABLANCA AND MUNICH FOR RSO/PSO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, PTER 
SUBJECT: ALLEGED MOROCCAN PARLIAMENT MEMBER STOPPED BY 
GERMAN BORDER POLICE 
 
 
1.  (SBU) THE GERMAN BORDER POLICE REPORTED TO FRANKFURT 
DHS/ICE DECEMBER 28, 2004 THAT THE FOLLOWING INDIVIDUAL WAS 
STOPPED DURING ROUTINE CHECKS AT THE FRANKFURT AIRPORT: 
 
LAST NAME: EL IDRISSI 
FIRST NAME: ABOUZAID ELMOKRIE 
DOB: 09/19/1960 
POB: MARRAKECH, MOROCCO 
MOROCCAN PPT:  \"OFFICIAL\", A002809 
ISSUED: 11/28/2002, RABAT 
 
2.  (SBU) DURING THE INSPECTION, MR. EL IDRISSI WAS FOUND TO 
HAVE IN HIS POSSESSION SEVERAL ITEMS THAT APPEARED 
QUESTIONABLE TO GERMAN AUTHORITIES INCLUDING A PHOTO OF THE 
UNITED STATES WITH A BLACK \"X\" DRAWN OVER THE PHOTO, SEVERAL 
\"CD ROM\'s\" WHICH HAD BOTH MR. EL IDRISSI\'S PHOTOGRAPH AND 
THAT OF WHOM WE BELIEVE IS THE FOUNDER OF HAMAS IMPRINTED ON 
THE CD\'s, A VISITORS PASS TO THE WESTMINSTER TOWER IN ENGLAND 
ON WHICH MR. EL IDRISSI LISTS HIS OCCUPATION AS BEING WITH 
\"AL JAZERRA\" AND A NUMBER OF DOCUMENTS WRITTEN IN ARABIC 
AGAIN WITH HIS PICTURE THAT RSO IS FORWARDING VIA FAX TO 
DS/ITA FOR TRANSLATION. 
 
3.  (SBU) AS LISTED IN PARA ONE ABOVE, MR. EL IDRISSI HAS AN 
\"OFFICIAL\" MOROCCAN PASSPORT WHICH LISTS HIM AS A MEMBER OF 
THE MOROCCAN PARLIAMENT.  HE ALSO HAS WHAT APPEARS TO BE A 
MOROCCAN PARLIAMENT IDENTIFICATION CARD NUMBER M-62363.  WHEN 
QUESTIONED BY THE GERMAN AUTHORITIES CONCERNING HIS 
ITINERARY, MR. EL IDRISSI PROVIDED HE WAS ON HIS WAY TO SPEAK 
IN THE UNITED STATES (NO KNOWN CITY, STATE OR GROUP WHICH HE 
WAS TO SPEAK IN OR WITH WAS PROVIDED TO GERMAN AUTHORITIES, 
NOR THE TOPIC OF HIS SPEECH) AND STATED HE WAS ISSUED A U.S. 
VISA IN CASABLANCA FOR THE TRAVEL.  UPON REVIEW OF HIS 
PASSPORT, THE FOLLOWING U.S. VISA WAS FOUND: 
 
ISSUING POST: CASABLANCA 
CONTROL NUMBER: 2004310255001 
TYPE:  B1/B2 
SURNAME:  EL MOKRIE EL IDRISSI 
GIVEN NAME:  ABOUZAID 
PPT NUMBER:  A002809 
ISSUED:  11/05/2004 
 
CHECKS THROUGH FRANKFURT CONSULAR SECTION CONCERNING THE VISA 
REVEAL THAT IT WAS ISSUED IN CASABLANCA AND IS VALID. 
 
4.  (SBU) WITH NO REASON TO KEEP MR. EL IDRISSI IN CUSTODY, 
GERMAN AUTHORITIES MADE COPIES OF HIS DOCUMENTS TO INCLUDE 
PASSPORT, PARLIAMENT IDENTIFICATION AND OTHER PAPERS AND 
PERMITTED HIM TO CONTINUE ON TO BAGGAGE CLAIM.  AS FAR AS CAN 
BE DETERMINED AT THIS POINT, MR. EL IDRISSI IS STILL IN 
GERMANY AS HE DID NOT HAVE IN HIS POSSESSION AT THE TIME OF 
INSPECTION AN ONWARD AIRLINE TICKET TO THE UNITED STATES. 
COPIES OF ALL DOCUMENTS HAVE BEEN PROVIDED TO RSO THROUGH 
DHS/ICE AND WILL BE FAXED TO DS/ITA THIS DATE.  IT IS 
REQUESTED ONCE VETTING/TRANSLATION OF THE DOCUMENTS IS 
COMPLETE, COPIES OF THE INFORMATION BE FORWARDED TO RSO 
FRANKFURT.  NO OTHER INFORMATION AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. 
 
BODDE 
"
"25090","1/7/2005 15:30","05FRANKFURT174","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 FRANKFURT 000174 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, HULL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT:  EU\'s Stability and Growth Pact: Tidying Up the 
Books - the Corrective Tonic of Transparency 
 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  In December the European Commission (EC) 
issued several statements for member states under the 
Stability and Growth Pact\'s (SGP) excessive deficit 
procedures (EDP).  For Germany and France, the Commission 
acknowledged that (a) both would get an extra year, to 2005, 
to correct their deficits and (b) their proposed 2005 
budgets might barely do the trick, thanks to one-off 
measures.  For Greece, the EC, weaving through the haze of 
statistical corrections and mid-year budget adjustments, 
declared the draft 2005 budget \"insufficient\" to correct the 
deficit. Similarly Hungary was cited by the EC as having 
taken \"insufficient action\" to put the 2005 budget on a 
trajectory to get the deficit below 3 percent by 2008.  The 
Czech Republic, Cyprus, Malta, Poland, and Slovakia were 
judged by the EC as having put forward 2005 budgets that are 
in line with their respective convergence programs. The 
Council will have to decide what steps to take on Greece and 
Hungary, a difference being that Hungary is not subject to 
the SGP sanctions provisions since it has not yet adopted 
the euro. 
 
2. (SBU) The EC\'s published reports and willingness to 
challenge budget proposals of member states are important 
for the SGP\'s \"soft law\" to be effective.  A recent European 
Central Bank (ECB) paper suggests that the member state 
\"contracting parties\" to the SGP will never act as 
collectively through ECOFIN as an independent enforcement 
agency.  Rather, they are likely to be pressured into 
avoiding big mistakes by the public scrutiny through 
transparency.  The corrective tonic of transparency is, in 
this case, being administered by the Commission.  End 
Summary 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Tidying Up the Books:  Year End Commission Reports 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
3. (SBU) In December the EC published conclusions on the 
2005 budgets for member states subject to EPD.  These 
reports set the stage for ECOFIN\'s meetings in January and 
February.  Two countries are likely to require further 
action by the Council: Greece and Hungary.  A summary of the 
actions follows. 
 
4. (SBU) Greece:  In July ECOFIN recommended that the 
deficit be reduced to 3 percent in 2005. That was before 
statistical revisions due to under-recorded expenditures on 
military equipment and interest expenditures and over- 
estimations on social security. While these pushed up the 
2004 deficit from 3.0 to 4.1 % of GDP, in September the 
Greek authorities reported that the deficit would be 5.3%. 
While the Greek official 2005 budget shows a 2.8% deficit, 
the Commission\'s analysis suggests this is overly optimistic 
on both the revenue and expenditure accounts.  Thus, the EC 
reckons a deficit of 3.6% and is of the opinion that \"there 
has been no effective action\" in response to the Council\'s 
recommendation.  The Commission recommends the Council 
agree. 
 
5. (SBU) Hungary:  In July ECOFIN recommended that the 
deficit should be reduced in line with the Hungarian 
convergence program.  Specifically, that means that the 
deficit is to be under 3% of GDP by 2008, and that the 
Hungarian authorities are to \"introduce additional measures, 
if necessary,\" to hit the 2004 budget target of 4.6%. 
Despite several corrective measures taken by the Hungarian 
authorities in 2004, the deficit officially is estimated to 
be 5.3% of GDP while Commission staff estimate it to be 
5.5%. (Preliminary December revenue data suggest that the 
deficit may hit the government\'s projection).  The 
government\'s budget for 2005 has a deficit of 4.7%, but the 
Commission also waves this off as too optimistic, 
forecasting a deficit of 5.2%. The EC is also critical that 
structural reforms contained in Hungary\'s convergence 
program were not fully reflected in the 2005 budget, thus 
failing to put into place measures that would restrain 
expenditures over the longer term.  In conclusion, the 
Commission believes that the action by Hungarian authorities 
has been \"inadequate,\" and is of the opinion that \"there has 
been no effective action\" in response to ECOFIN\'s 
recommendations.  It recommends that the Council agree. 
 
6. (SBU) Germany and France: ECOFIN recommendations date 
from 2003, January for Germany and June for France.  Both 
called for the excessive deficits to be corrected in 2004. 
The Council\'s conclusions in November 2003 to give both 
Germany and France an extra year were annulled by the 
European Court of Justice in July 2004 on procedural 
grounds.  Nonetheless, the Commission reasons that both 
countries had the \"right to assume\" that the Council 
conclusions were valid and, accordingly, had set a path for 
adjustment in 2005 that \"cannot be ignored.\"  \"In light of 
the unique circumstances created by the Court judgment\" the 
Commission concedes that 2005 should be the target year for 
correcting the deficit. 
 
7. (SBU) The German budget for 2005 aspires to a 2.9% 
deficit.  To get there, the government relies on several one- 
off measures.  These include securitization of pension 
receipts of an off-budget pension fund from the privatized 
Deutsche Post and Telekom  (to the tune of euro 5.45 billion 
or 0.25% of GDP) and the repayment of illegal subsidies by 
state banks to state governments (euro 4.3 billion, around 
0.2% of GDP).  While the Commission is critical of such one- 
off measures, its own calculations suggest the budget 
deficit should drop to 3%, but remains \"vulnerable\" should 
programs or economic growth not materialize as forecast. Its 
conclusion is that the actions by German authorities are 
\"broadly consistent\" with a correction of the excessive 
deficit by 2005 and that \"no further steps are necessary\" at 
this point. 
 
8. (SBU) The French budget projects a deficit of just under 
3% for 2005, an estimate with which the Commission roughly 
agrees.  Deficit reductions are based on one-off measures, 
particularly a payment linked to the transfer of the 
responsibility for pensions in the electricity and gas 
companies to the social security sector (about 0.5% of GDP). 
Thus, the deficit projection is \"vulnerable\" to changes in 
program implementation and economic growth.  Moreover, based 
on an assumption of no policy changes, EC staff forecasts 
the deficit to bounce back up to 3.3% in 2006 in sharp 
contrast to the French government projection of 2.2%. In 
conclusion, the Commission believes that actions by the 
French authorities are \"broadly consistent\" with a 
correction of the excessive deficit by 2005 and that \"no 
further steps are necessary,\" at this point. 
 
9. (SBU) Czech Republic, Cyprus, Malta, Poland, and 
Slovakia:  In July ECOFIN recommended that these countries 
take the necessary steps in 2004 and 2005 to put them on the 
path of their convergence programs designed to correct the 
excessive deficits.  The Czech Republic has taken effective 
action to achieve the 2005 target of 4.7% on the way to get 
under 3% by 2008.  Cyprus has taken action to bring its 2005 
budget under 3%.  Malta has taken effective action, although 
somewhat belatedly, to hit its budget deficit target of 3.7% 
in 2005 and to get it under 3% in 2006.  Poland has taken 
effective action to achieve a deficit of 4.2% in 2005 on the 
way to correct its excessive deficit by 2007.  Slovakia also 
has taken effective action to achieve a 3.9% deficit in 2005 
consistent with its objective of reducing the deficit below 
3% by 2007.  In all cases, the Commission concludes,  \"no 
further steps are necessary at this point.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Next Steps:  Greece and Hungary in the Dock; Germany and 
France on the Hook 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
10. (SBU) ECOFIN will have to decide whether it agrees with 
the Commission\'s recommendations on Greece and Hungary.  In 
both cases, the basic approach would be to revise the 
Council\'s earlier recommendations with alternative, extra 
measures.  For Hungary this would mean a revised convergence 
program, taking account of the Commission\'s assessment. 
Since Hungary has not yet adopted the euro, it is not 
subject to provisions on intensive surveillance and 
sanctions (paragraphs 104(9) and 104(11) of the Treaty, 
respectively). 
 
11. (SBU) For Greece the issues are likely to be more 
complex.  A special Eurostat report for 1997-2003 reveals 
that the deficit has been revised up by an average of 2.1% 
of GDP and was never under the 3% of GDP reference value. 
On December 1 the Commission launched an infringement 
proceeding to ensure Greek authorities address \"a number of 
problems in its reporting and control of deficit-related 
data.\"  This proceeding carries no sanctions but, according 
to Commission staff, applies public pressure on the Greek 
authorities.  ECOFIN\'s own take at its December session was 
that there was blame to be shared by all: Greek authorities, 
Eurostat, the Commission and ECB and the Council itself for 
not paying sufficient attention to the quality of the data. 
 
12. (SBU) Even if the implications of Greece statistical 
problems could be put aside, if ECOFIN agrees with the 
Commission\'s recommendation that insufficient steps have 
been taken to correct the deficit, then ECOFIN will have to 
decide on the next steps.  Commission staff initially had 
suggested that Greece be subject to more intense 
surveillance under paragraph 104(9) of the Treaty, the last 
step before sanctions.  This approach would be consistent 
with the ill-fated Commission recommendations for Germany 
and France in November 2003.  However, this approach did not 
appear in the final Commission report.  A German Finance 
Ministry official suspects that the Commission wants to ease 
ECOFIN along, first agreeing with the insufficient action 
recommendation, then spring the 104(9) recommendations on 
the Council. The Greeks then could take a page out of the 
German book and argue that when the Council made it policy 
recommendations in July 2004, the deficit was only 3.2% and 
that statistical revisions and other extraordinary 
developments (Olympic expenditures) require new 
recommendations under 104(7) rather than ratcheting up the 
procedures to the next level. 
 
13. (SBU) For their part, the Germans would like the Council 
to think more about cutting off cohesion funds to Greece, 
which are around euro 550 million.  In their view, Article 6 
of Council Regulation (EC) No 1164/94 of 16 May 1994 is 
clear: \"In the event of the Council deciding, in accordance 
with Article 104(6) of the Treaty, that an excessive 
government deficit exists in a Member State, and if that 
decision is not abrogated in accordance with Article 104(12) 
of the Treaty within one year or any other period specified 
for correcting the deficit in a recommendation under Article 
104(7), no new projects or, in the case of large multi-stage 
projects, no new stages of a project shall be financed from 
the Fund for that Member State.\" The German Finance Ministry 
recalls that Greece\'s voted against the Council\'s 
conclusions to give Germany an extra year to correct its 
deficit. Germany is a net contributor to the EU budget (an 
expenditure that contributes to its excessive deficit), from 
which the Greek authorities benefit. 
 
14. (SBU) Germany and France are being given a conditional 
pass, but also put on warning.  If their efforts falter, for 
any reason, the Commission staff promise to restart the EDP 
under Treaty articles 104(9).  This approach is just what 
the Council recommended in November 2003.  The EC could 
initiate such proceedings any time, but are likely to wait 
until firm 2005 figures are confirmed in March 2006.  Even 
if France squeaks by in 2005, EC staff believe that unless 
policies change, the deficit will pop back up in 2006, 
putting France back into an active EDP. 
 
15. (SBU) Germany also faces risks.  Eurostat has not yet 
officially ruled whether the securitization of pension 
receipts will reduce the deficit on a sustainable basis.  If 
Germany is merely postponing a liability, the measure would 
not reduce the deficit, according to Eurostat rules.  German 
Finance Ministry experts have engaged directly with Eurostat 
staff and are confident that, in economic terms their one- 
off measure is like France\'s.  But with a difference. 
 
16. (SBU) In France, Eurostat accounting rules mean that the 
transfer of the responsibility for payments of pensions of 
former state employees now working in the privatized 
electricity and gas companies to the social security system 
implies a lump sum revenue inflow for the general government 
in 2005. (Under Eurostat accounting conventions, the 
government can book all of the imputed pension payments that 
would have been made by those companies over the next twenty 
years as income as of the date of transfer of the 
obligation).  Since the government had no liability to pay 
pensions in the privatized firms, it is not getting money 
now that it would have been obliged to repay later. 
However, as the EC points out, the transfer does imply 
additional expenditures in future years for the social 
security system since that system will assume responsibility 
for all of the future pension benefits of these employees. 
Although Eurostat has not formally certified the French 
transaction, the transaction is very similar to a Belgian 
telecom transaction that Eurostat has certified. 
 
17. (SBU) In Germany the pension liabilities of civil 
servants working in the privatized Post and Telekom firms 
were not ceded with the new firms but rather placed in a 
separate \"Post Pension Fund.\"  The government supplements 
that fund from the budget, if necessary.  Last year the 
government paid euro 5.5 billion into the Fund.  However, 
Finance Ministry officials point out that the government has 
no standing liability to the Fund.  Therefore, like the 
French, it is not postponing a liability but at the same 
time is admitting that the Post Pension Fund, like France\'s 
social security system, in the future would bear the full 
cost of those civil servants\' pensions that the government 
will have to supplement.  Eurostat, according to German 
Finance Ministry officials, have reserved judgment until 
details of the transactions are finalized, probably by 
March. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Comments: Obfuscation and Transparency 
-------------------------------------- 
 
18. (SBU) The Commission\'s recommendations set new 
benchmarks for fiscal discipline.  For Greece and Hungary 
the outcomes will likely be new policy recommendations. 
Greece runs the risk of being escalated up to paragraph 
104(9), one step before sanctions unless, like Portugal did, 
it convinces ministers\' that its 2005 budget that pushes the 
deficit down from 5.3% of GDP to 2.8% is solid and/or that, 
in light of all the uncertainty surrounding its statistics, 
it should be given a new set of recommendations under the 
less-threatening paragraph 104(7). 
 
19. (SBU) On Germany and France, the Commission engages in a 
bit of obfuscation.  The issue in both cases was not whether 
the deficits should be corrected in 2004 or 2005.  By 
November 2003 the Commission was painfully aware that the 
deficits would remain above 3% in 2004.  Rather, the issue 
was one of process, whether both countries should be subject 
to more intense surveillance under 104(9), the last step 
before sanctions.  By declaring the 2005 budgets credible, 
the EC takes a pass on this issue, but sets the hook for 
both countries to be caught in 104(9) processes should they 
fail. 
 
20. (SBU) More broadly, the Commission\'s public assessment 
and criticism of the budgets sets in motion more public 
pressure on all the member states with excessive deficits. 
As a recent ECB occasional paper points out, such pressure 
is important in applying the \"soft law\" of the SGP that is 
administered by contracting parties themselves rather than 
an independent body.  While the dynamics of such a mechanism 
conditioned by politics is less than precise, it is likely 
to curb any egregious cases.  In fact, the ECB paper points 
to research that indicates that the recent 2001-2003 
slowdown has witnessed less \"extreme budgetary 
deteriorations\" than in the early 1990\'s. 
 
21. (SBU) The ECB\'s paper also argues that simple rules, 
like the 3% GDP reference value, are easier to monitor and 
more susceptible to applying public pressure than more 
complex rules.  It would be comforting to think that ECOFIN 
Ministers share that view and that it motivated their ruling 
out any changes in the basic framework in the SGP as they 
prepare a Council Resolution for March.  In any event, the 
Commission is doing its job by shining the light on budget 
problems and should let ECOFIN take the political decisions 
on the \"art of the possible,\" in budget matters. 
 
22. (U) This message coordinated with Embassies Berlin, 
Paris, Budapest and USEU Brussels. 
 
23. (U) POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"
"25328","1/13/2005 12:01","05FRANKFURT312","Consulate Frankfurt","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 FRANKFURT 000312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS, EB, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY ALSO FOR ICN COX, HULL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EUN 
SUBJECT:  EU Financial Supervisory Framework: Standing on 
the Edge of the Future 
 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The EU-wide financial supervisory 
framework created and made operational in less than three 
years is about to come into its own.  The three new 
supervisory committees, the Committee of European Securities 
Regulators (CESR), the Committee of European Banking 
Supervisors (CEBS) and the Committee of European Insurance 
and Occupational Insurance Supervisors (CEIOPS) will play a 
central role in implementing recent legislation that has 
basically retooled the EU financial services framework. 
CESR, the oldest of the three, is leading the way.  In one 
paper CESR laid out its implementation activities and, in a 
separate provocative think piece, asks the question, \"What 
if intensifying coordination among national supervisors is 
not effective?\"  One possible answer: give \"the Network\" of 
national supervisors legal and supervisory powers to deal 
with trans-EU issues.  This is like standing on the edge of 
the future. 
 
2. (SBU) The European financial industry has cut through 
practical, legal and political niceties by calling for the 
creation of a lead regulator.  While this has attracted push 
back from CEBS and the European Central Bank (ECB), the 
recently approved Capital Adequacy Directive (CAD III) 
incorporates the concept of \"coordinating supervisor,\" a 
possible step along the way to a lead supervisor.  Ensuring 
political accountability will be essential before the EU 
progresses to a unified supervisor.  The idea, however, is 
irresistible to some.  Deutsche Bank, for example, welcomes 
the current trend and is dusting off its old piece: A 
European Financial Supervisory Authority - A Matter of When, 
Not If.\" End Summary 
 
Committee Creation: Back Waters No Longer 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) In a short three and a half years CESR, CEBS, and 
CEIOPS, each composed of all relevant member state 
supervisors, have been created and become operational.  CESR 
was the first.  Created in June 2001, CESR was conceived 
upon a recommendation by a group of wise men led by 
Alexander Lamfalussy (the Lamfalussy Group).  Lamfalussy, 
who headed up the precursor to the ECB, reasoned that 
knitting European financial markets closer together would 
require a flexible regulatory process to respond to dynamic 
markets and close cooperation among national supervisors to 
ensure uniform implementation on a pan-EU scale.  Finance 
Ministers replicated this basic approach in agreeing at the 
end of 2002 to create CEBS and CEIOPS. Like CESR,  CEBS and 
CEIOPS were matched by regulatory committees composed of 
Finance Ministry representatives.  The Financial Services 
Committee, which reports to ECOFIN, takes an overview and 
sets strategic directions.  Details of CEBS and CEIOPS took 
a while to resolve.  Both opened their doors for business in 
the fall of 2004. 
4. (SBU) Granted, each of these committees had precursors. 
What is different is that they all have a formal role in 
providing advice to the Commission on Financial Legislation 
and Regulation, and in ensuring consistent implementation of 
EU legislation in member states.  The European Council\'s 
Stockholm Resolution that gave birth to CESR states that 
\"national regulators and CESR should also play an important 
role in the transposition process by securing more effective 
cooperation between supervisory authorities carrying out 
peer reviews and promoting best practices, so as to ensure 
more consistent and timely implementation of community 
legislation in member states.\"  Precursor supervisory 
committees were largely voluntary, with no space or only a 
small space in the formal EU regulatory framework.  All this 
is about to change. 
 
Long \"To Do List:\" Implementation Begins 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Implementation of legislation now has become the 
focal point for EU financial services activities.  The 
Financial Services Action Plan has retooled basic elements 
of EU securities legislation and now will have to be 
implemented.  CESR is helping with the implementation of the 
Market Abuse and Prospectus Directives, the Regulation on 
International Accounting Standards, and amendments to the 
Directive on Undertakings in Collective Investments in 
Transferable Securities (UCITS).  In the wings is 
implementation for the more recently adopted Directives on 
Markets in Financial Instruments (MiFID) and on 
Transparency. 
 
6. (SBU) Even though their legislative list is not as long 
as CESR\'s, the other two committees will have responsibility 
for implementing major new directives.  CEBS is beginning 
its implementation work for the Capital Adequacy Directive 
(CAD III) that will fundamentally change risk capital 
assessments for financial institutions.  CAD III is being 
finalized by the Council and is pending in the European 
Parliament.  CEBS is designing a common reporting framework 
for capital requirements and the solvency ratio, has 
published draft guidelines on the supervisory review 
process, and introduced \"prudential filters\" aimed at 
neutralizing the effects of new accounting standards on 
regulatory capital.  CEIOPS is gearing up to provide advice 
for the Commission\'s major rewrite of capital adequacy rules 
for insurance firms (Solvency II).  The Commission is likely 
to make a proposal in 2006 or early 2007. 
 
Implementation:  Where the Rubber Hits the Road 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
7. (SBU) The logic of an integrated financial market is that 
all players to follow the same rules.  This can help ensure 
healthy competition and a relatively efficient allocation of 
capital.  In highly competitive and regulated financial 
markets, this also implies that the rules be enforced in the 
same way.  Lax enforcement might be considered to gain a 
competitive advantage, like an \"off-shore\" financial center. 
Such an approach would put a quick end to \"mutual 
recognition\" of one member state\'s supervisory surveillance 
by another, the cornerstone of the internal market. 
 
8. (SBU) CESR has done the most public thinking on this 
topic.  In a paper released at the end of October, CESR used 
three groups to categorize its implementation functions (so- 
called \"Level 3\" functions, Level 1 being the directives, 
Level 2 being the implementing measures regulations or 
follow up directives, and Level 3 being the nitty gritty of 
issuing rule books and supervisory guidance explaining how 
firms are expected to comply with the directives and 
regulations).  These are: (1) coordinated implementation of 
EU law; (2) regulatory convergence; and (3) supervisory 
convergence. 
 
9. (SBU) Coordinated implementation involves the legal 
transposition of directives into national laws and their day- 
to-day application.  CESR has established a Review Panel to 
carry out peer reviews using correspondence tables detailing 
how directives are being implemented in each member state. 
CESR members are to provide a self-assessment on their 
implementation.  The Review Panel will offer an opinion and 
suggestions for common approaches to implementation.  The 
correspondence tables, assessments and opinions would be 
made public.  To ensure consistent enforcement in all member 
states CESR has recommended that CESR members be granted 
equivalent rulemaking and enforcement powers by their 
respective national authorities. 
 
10. (SBU) Regulatory convergence is defined by CESR as 
creating common approaches.  Each supervisor takes decisions 
that create a body of jurisprudence in its jurisdiction. 
Acting together, CESR notes that its members can decide on 
common approaches that could be memorialized in meeting 
minutes, indicative guidance, or regulatory recommendations. 
These would not have the status of EU law, but be 
implemented on a \"voluntary basis\" by all supervisors. 
Areas that are subject to such regulatory convergence need 
not be covered by EU law, in CESR\'s opinion.  CESR\'s recent 
standards on clearing and settlement developed together with 
the ECB are an example. CESR also has worked on guidelines 
on implementation of the Market Abuse and Prospectuses 
Directive and has begun work on guidance for certain mutual 
fund issues. 
 
11. (SBU) Supervisory convergence relates to how supervisors 
approach the practical operation of rules and legislation. 
This means strengthened cooperation in practical ways.  One 
is to pull together provisions in directives that mandate 
mutual recognition and cooperation into one consolidated 
text.  CESR thinks this would serve as the basis to handle 
all situations requiring cooperation among supervisors.  In 
another practical implementation measure, CESR plans to set 
up a \"mediation mechanism by its peers\" to provide an 
acceptable solution where \"home\" and \"host\" supervisors 
disagree.  Joint supervisory visits and investigations by 
CESR members and compiling \"EU jurisprudence\" in a database 
of national decisions are other CESR initiatives to 
strengthen cooperation and, thereby, supervisory 
convergence. 
 
12. (SBU) CESR develops these ideas further in another, 
provocative thought piece entitled \"Preliminary Progress 
Report: Which Supervisory Tools for the EU Securities 
Markets?\"  This paper, referred to as the \"Himalayas 
Report,\" given its lofty perspectives, elaborates the three 
categories of implementation functions cited above.  CESR 
sets the tone by proclaiming its \"serious objective\" is to 
\"enhance its role as the `supervisor of national 
supervisors.\'\"  In this regard CESR suggests that its 
network of supervisors might consider more systematic peer 
reviews on member state implementation with \"mission teams\" 
making assessments and CESR publishing results where 
implementation is inadequate. 
 
13. (SBU) A more robust mediation mechanism could require 
mediation where there are disagreements or lack of 
cooperation among supervisors. 
 
14. (SBU) In the Himalaya paper CESR ventures onto the area 
of supervision of trans-European activities, such as 
investment firms, raising questions as to whether 
cooperation can be efficiently executed by many separate 
authorities, particularly in a financial crisis situation. 
Other areas demanding a possible pan-EU approach include 
public offerings, standard mutual funds, the application of 
accounting standards for listed companies, the regulation of 
credit rating agencies, and trans-European market 
infrastructures (exchanges and clearing and settlement 
systems).  CESR muses whether its network should take single 
EU decisions on such matters.  Backing up a bit from the 
edge, CESR reflects that a \"trans-national\" option is risky 
and should not be attempted unless the present system cannot 
provide proper solutions to supervisory convergence. 
Different local laws, regulatory powers and jurisdictions, 
and political accountability at the EU level present real 
obstacles to a pan-EU solution. 
 
Industry: Leading the Way to the Lead Supervisor? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
15. (SBU) The European Financial Services Roundtable (EFSR) 
cuts through the worrisome details and recommends that the 
trans-national option be exercised now, calling for a \"lead 
supervisor for prudential supervision of cross-border 
financial institutions.\"  The EFSR proposes that the lead 
supervisor would be the single point of contact for the 
financial institution within the prudential supervisory 
framework, receiving all reports, validating and authorizing 
internal models, approving capital and liquidity allocation, 
and approving cross-border set up of specific functions. 
Local supervisors would be involved in supervision based on 
delegated authority from the lead supervisor.  The lead and 
local supervisors would set up \"colleges\" to advise the lead 
supervisor, and the relevant supervisory committees, such as 
CEBS, could mediate any disagreements. In the Roundtable\'s 
opinion, the lead supervisory regime will not only improve 
the quality of supervision at an acceptable cost, but also 
be an important catalyst for convergence of supervision 
towards best practices. 
 
Dutch Nudge: Just Thinking Out Loud 
----------------------------------- 
 
16. (SBU) The Dutch Presidency gave the notion of lead 
supervision a bit of a nudge.  In a November seminar on 
\"Enhancing Supervisory Convergence,\" Dutch Finance Minister 
Zalm raised questions as to whether present coordinating 
mechanisms were effective, delivering as promised, and 
efficient.  He opined that different supervisory practices 
in different member states can \"cause market distortions.\" 
Good supervisory arrangements, in his judgment, should 
stimulate rather than hamper the integration of European 
financial markets.  Noting that national supervisors can 
only operate under national mandates, he mused whether there 
should be \"thinking about more European solutions for 
supervision of truly European financial groups.  Although we 
should not try to cause a revolution here, we are likely to 
see an evolution towards more European supervisory 
structures.\" 
 
CAD III Coordinating Supervisor:  Planting the Seed 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
17. (SBU) The proposed CAD III contains a potential seed for 
a lead supervisor.  According to the Commission\'s proposal 
draft, the coordinating supervisor is the member state 
authority that has responsibility for supervision of a 
financial institution on a consolidated basis.  This 
supervisor needs to work with other relevant authorities of 
jurisdictions in which the institution is present to 
validate technical aspects of CAD III.  Such aspects include 
the risk-weighted exposure amounts using the Internal 
Ratings Based Approach, the estimates of loss given 
defaults, and the use of Advanced Measurement Approaches 
based on internal risk measurement systems.  However, if no 
agreement is reached within six months among the 
coordinating and other competent supervisors, the 
coordinating supervisor can make its own determination. 
That determination will apply to the entire institution 
throughout the EU. 
 
18. (SBU) This approach encountered opposition.  A member of 
the Bundesbank board, for example, was adamantly opposed, 
citing national responsibility for subsidiaries of parent 
institutions located in other member states.  The ECB, 
however, did not resist.  It observed that there is a large 
gap between what the lead supervisor championed by industry 
and the coordinating supervisor envisioned in CAD III. 
Nonetheless, the challenge is apparent. 
 
19. (SBU) The Chairman of CEBS, Jose Maria Roldan, has taken 
up that challenge.  He does not share EFSR\'s view, 
explaining that rather than having a \"one-stop-shop,\" a 
\"more pragmatic approach is needed\" within the present 
institutional framework.   Indeed, CEBS staff believe that 
their main objective is to show that more intensive 
cooperation is the solution.  German Finance Ministry 
officials, however, believe the coordinating supervisor 
concept in CAD III as a step toward a single EU supervisor. 
A Dutch supervisor put it another way: if a coordinating 
supervisor approach cannot be made to be effective, then the 
option of going straight to an EU supervisory authority will 
gain currency. 
 
Got the Move, But Not the Political Touch 
----------------------------------------- 
 
20. (SBU) In the end, politics hold the key to any trans-EU 
solutions.  The Chairman of the European Parliament\'s 
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee livened up CESR\'s 
December gala by lamented the \"democratic deficit\" of some 
of CESR\'s ideas.  Who is in charge of CESR?  CESR is 
sensitive to this issue.  In its Himalaya paper CESR noted 
that it is \"firmly determined to develop its political and 
democratic accountability links vis--vis the Finance 
Services Committee, the European Commission and the European 
Parliament.\" 
 
21. (SBU) The Inter-Institutional Monitoring Group (IIMG) 
also is cautious about the politics and the EU 
\"institutional balance,\" meaning power sharing between the 
Commission, Parliament and Member States in the Council. 
The IIMG, composed of representatives from all three EU 
institutions, has endorsed coordinated implementation, 
supervisory convergence and CESR\'s proposed mediation 
mechanism.  On regulatory convergence, however, it was \"more 
reserved.\"  The IIMG worried that the \"multiplication of non- 
binding rules at Level 3 should not lead to a gray area 
where legal certainty is absent and political accountability 
is unclear.\" 
 
22. (SBU) The draft Constitutional Treaty addressed some of 
the political questions.  Article 35 would give the European 
Parliament the right to block the entry into force of 
regulations delegated to the Commission in directives, power 
that the Parliament now has only by the grace of a political 
understanding with the Council.  The Constitution also 
states \"where uniform conditions for implementing binding 
Union acts are needed, those acts may confer implementing 
powers on the Commission.\"  There is no mention of 
Parliament\'s role or of the accountability of supervisory 
authorities, so some questions still appear to be open. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
23. (SBU) If process defines outcomes, the implementation 
phase of EU-wide financial service legislation will be an 
interesting process. Getting the politics right is 
essential.  The power of the idea of regulatory convergence 
would seem irresistible for those that wish the EU to be 
truly an integrated financial market.  The questions raised 
by CESR and Dutch Finance Minister Zalm on the limits of 
national supervisors coordinating to oversee pan-EU 
activities are unavoidable.  Officials at Deutsche Bank 
welcome the trend of the current thinking.  They are dusting 
off their old think piece: \"European Financial Service 
Authority - A Matter of When, Not If.\" 
 
24. (U) This report coordinated with Embassies Berlin and 
The Hague and USEU Brussels. 
 
25. (U) POC: James Wallar, Treasury Representative, e-mail 
wallarjg2@state.gov; tel. 49-(69)-7535-2431, fax 49-(69)- 
7535-2238 
 
Bodde 
"