
"19709","8/13/2004 9:59","04RIODEJANEIRO1105","Consulate Rio De Janeiro","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04RiodeJaneiro190","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 RIO DE JANEIRO 001105 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC, WHA/PDA-LGOULD 
NSC FOR MIKE DEMPSEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SOCI, BR, Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: BRZAIL\'S MINAS GERAIS:  PT INCUMBENT COULD 
WIN A TIGHT RACE IN BRAZIL\'S THIRD CITY 
 
Refs:  (A) Rio de Janeiro 00190  (B) Rio de Janeiro 
 
00723  (C) Brasilia 01392 
 
1.  (U)  SUMMARY:  The mayoral race in the capital 
city of Minas Gerais state, Belo Horizonte, one of 
Brazil\'s largest cities in one of the largest 
states, is close, according to the most recent poll: 
38 percent for ex-soccer idol and State Deputy Joao 
Leite (Brazilian Socialist Party/PSB) and 31 percent 
for current mayor Fernando Pimentel (Worker\'s 
Party/PT).  On August 2-3, Poloff visited Belo 
Horizonte to take the pulse in the mayoral election 
in this important economic capital.  We spoke with 
both leading candidates, and others with insights in 
the city.  Despite the fact that Leite has a lead in 
the polls, many political pundits predict that 
Pimentel will successfully hold his seat.  The 
CNT/Sensus poll released August 11 show both 
President Lula\'s and PT Sao Paulo mayoral candidate 
Suplicy\'s approvals have ticked up, and this along 
with the improvement in the economy, will help 
Pimentel as well.  Nonetheless, the PT is pulling 
out all the stops for Pimentel\'s campaign to get the 
polls back to the June level of 41% or higher for a 
clear win of over 50 percent.  The current dip in 
Pimentel\'s popularity could mean, however, that the 
race will be decided by evangelicals who support 
Joao Leite.  Right now, it is too close to call. 
End Summary. 
 
THE POLLS 
--------- 
 
2.  (U)  Recent polling by Instituto EMData shows 38 
percent support for ex-soccer idol and Minas Gerais 
State Deputy Joao Leite (PSB) and 31 percent for 
current Belo Mayor Fernando Pimentel (PT), with a 
margin of error of 5 points.  Election day is 
October 3, and the race is very much in play, as 
July polls showed the two candidates even, but 
earlier numbers showed Pimentel with a substantial 
lead.  The other five candidates together do not 
reach double digits.  Despite Leite\'s current lead, 
political pundits in Belo Horizonte predict the 
Worker\'s Party candidate for re-election will be the 
winner, especially with more PT big shots weighing 
in, such as President Lula.  In addition, Pimentel 
has just hired the public relations firm of Duda 
Mendonca, who helped elect President Lula in 2002. 
It is possible, however, that these political nabobs 
have underestimated the number of evangelical voters 
who support Leite, who may help him clinch the 
election.  (Twenty-five percent of the voters are 
evangelicals and Leite has 70 percent of their 
votes.)  Leite polls particularly well among 
evangelical and working-class voters, while Pimentel 
is the favorite of the more educated and middle 
classes.  If no candidate gets more than 50 percent 
of the vote, the top two vote-getters go to a second 
round on October 31. 
 
HURDLES FOR PIMENTEL 
-------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU)  Pimentel has some hurdles to get over. 
Despite being the incumbent, he is surprisingly 
unknown to the voters.  He was elected Vice Mayor in 
2000, but shortly after, the Mayor suffered a 
stroke.  Pimentel has been Acting Mayor for three 
years, is reportedly an able administrator and \"not 
as radical as some PT members.\"  In anticipation 
that Mayor Castro would recover, he was reportedly 
modest and did not advertise the fact that he was 
mayor, much to his detriment now that he is a 
candidate. 
 
CAMPAGN HEATS UP 
--------------- 
 
4.  (SBU)  Verbal attacks between the front runners 
have heated up the campaign in recent weeks.  The PT 
has been attempting to gain more name recognition 
for Pimentel.  At the end of July, Vice President of 
the Republic Jose Alencar Gomes da Silva (Liberal 
Party/PL) arrived in Belo Horizonte, actively 
participating in Pimentel\'s campaign for re- 
election, as he is for other PT/PL candidates in 70 
cities in the state.  (Alencar\'s name has been 
bandied about as a possible candidate for the 
governorship in 2006.)  Seven federal ministers 
representing one or the other of the federal 
coalition of parties and one federal deputy, in 
addition to Minister of the Casa Civil, Jose Dirceu, 
have also gone to Belo to reinforce their support 
for the PT candidate, much to the outspoken 
displeasure of Leite.  Leite accused Pimentel of 
using the federal machine to bolster his campaign; 
Pimentel riposted that Leite was \"impolite,\" and 
claimed any monies used for any campaigning were 
from the party war chest and not public funds. 
President Lula was in Belo on August 6, conferring 
with Pimentel and announcing tax cuts; Pimentel 
claimed the President\'s announcement of tax cuts had 
nothing to do with partisan politics and everything 
to do with the importance of Belo Horizonte, but 
Leite criticized the President for \"lending himself\" 
to Pimentel\'s campaign:  \"It\'s lamentable,\" Leite 
said.  Pimentel does emphasize his relationship with 
the federal government and President Lula and says 
that as a result, with his election, federal funds 
will continue to come pouring into Belo Horizonte. 
 
THE HEFT OF INCUMBENCY DISADVANTAGES LEITE 
------------------------------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU)  Although Joao Leite is currently ahead in 
the polls, he has reason to be concerned about 
maintaining that lead.  Recent polls indicate that 
the approval ratings of President Lula and state 
governor Aecio Neves are on the rise and may improve 
Pimentel\'s chances by association:  71 percent of 
Belo Horizonte voters approve of the governor, a 
rise of 4 points over two months ago and President 
Lula has risen from 47 percent to 52 percent in the 
same time frame, according to the EMData poll. 
Their popularity may be the most influential element 
in a Pimentel win.  Although Leite was given support 
by the ever-popular Neves (Brazilian Social 
Democratic Party/PSDB) at the end of June, that 
support has been luke-warm and ambiguous.  Neves, 
for the most part, has remained outside the mayoral 
campaign, although he has made occasional 
sympathetic comments about Pimentel and other 
candidates for mayor and has not praised the 
candidate his party supports in coalition with the 
PSB, Leite.  Neves\' distance from the municipal 
elections is read by Neves\' supporters as his 
adherence to the principle of loyalty to the PSDB 
decision to support Leite rather than actual support 
for the candidate - a supposition that Leite is 
having a hard time overcoming, affecting his ability 
to raise funds. 
 
6.  (SBU)  Leite has no way to counter the Pimentel 
claim that federal funds will pour into the city as 
soon as he is elected.  Nor can he compete with the 
tremendous weight that comes with incumbency: where 
Leite\'s campaign headquarters is a loaned, spare 
building in downtown Belo, the governor has the 
formidable city hall as his electoral backdrop and a 
cast of thousands of public employees at his beck 
and call.  Pimentel can point to projects the city 
government has funded, such as the distribution of 
thousands of school books and backpacks, or the 
building of new roads that leave Leite at a distinct 
disadvantage.  Despite the electoral hew and cry, 
however, Pimentel and Leite are little different in 
their campaign platforms:  improving health care, 
building more and better schools, developing 
infrastructure, controlling drug/arms trafficking, 
and job creation.  Both Pimentel and Leite are 
focusing on the 28,642 new voters under the age of 
18, an increase of 115 percent in relation to 2002 
of the number of 16 and 17-year olds.  Currently, 
both principal candidates are filming electoral 
spots for the opening of the TV/radio programs which 
start August 18 and run through September 30. 
 
7.  (SBU)  Among the many people with whom Poloff 
discussed the mayoral campaign, Marcos Coimbras of 
the prominent Vox Populi polling company provided 
the most insight into the election.  He discussed 
the astonishing transformation of President Lula in 
the last year, a man who is getting bigger and 
better than when he began.  Coimbras said the 
Brazilian people are fascinated by the President as 
a statesman, dealing both with national and 
international issues as a political leader rather 
than a party leader, a man capable of governing, a 
\"superLula.\"   Coimbras admitted that Lula\'s 
popularity fell when the Waldomiro scandal broke 
this past spring, but said that the initial euphoria 
of Lula\'s election and the high expectations that 
accompanied his campaign promises were impossible to 
sustain.  The Brazilian people now have more 
realistic expectations of what a government can 
accomplish in a short period of time.  The Worker\'s 
Party, Coimbras said, has not gotten off so easily; 
he said the party is in disarray, with much in- 
fighting and the people are aware of it.  Lula\'s 
increasing popularity will have a distinctly 
positive effect on Pimentel\'s campaign, according to 
Coimbras. 
 
8.  (SBU)  Coimbras predicted, as did many other 
people in the capital, that Pimentel would win the 
mayoralty in a close race.  He declared Pimentel a 
decent administrator who indeed had access to 
federal funds for building roads, etc.  He 
criticized Pimentel for not having the political 
savvy to come forward aggressively once he took over 
as mayor.  Coimbras believes Pimentel has been able 
to maintain an admirable image of PT accomplishments 
for the last year and a half, especially in 
infrastructure development. 
 
9.  (SBU) Coimbras indicated that Leite\'s reputation 
has suffered because he talks too much about 
prisoner rights rather than having sympathy for 
victims of crime and violence in his press 
conferences.  Although Leite defended himself as a 
strong supporter of the police in their battle 
against crime (his father was a Military Police 
officer), he is too easily identified as too much on 
the side of criminals.  With the increasing crime 
wave in Belo Horizonte, crime will probably be the 
central issue in the election.  The perception that 
Leite is soft on crime will play a pivotal 
psychological role in whom voters elect, Coimbras 
stressed.  Another problem Leite has is campaign 
funds: since Leite is not really seen as Neves\' 
candidate, he is also having trouble raising money. 
 
10.  (SBU)  Comment:  The mayoral race in Belo 
Horizonte is too close to call at this point.  Like 
the three previous races for mayor, it will probably 
remain too close to call right up to the day of the 
elections.  Watching the polls once the influential 
television and radio spots begin on August 18 will 
inform on what the effect of the Mendonca publicity 
campaign in conjunction with the participation of PT 
heavy-weights, the incumbency, and the PT war chest 
has in getting Pimentel elected.  The big unknown is 
the evangelical support for Leite, which may turn 
the tide in his favor. 
 
11.  (SBU)  A PT win in Belo Horizonte, the third 
largest city in Brazil, would be an important 
indicator of the success of the Lula administration 
two years into its term.  The recent surge in the PT 
mayoral incumbent\'s popularity in Sao Paulo is also 
a good sign of the people\'s approval of the PT.  The 
improvement in the economy is another plus for the 
administration.  In Rio de Janeiro, however, the 
Liberal Party candidate is likely to win, with the 
PT candidate still in the single digits in the 
polls.  Two out of the three largest cities in the 
country is not bad.   End Comment. 
 
BENESCH 
"
"24922","1/4/2005 17:17","05RIODEJANEIRO19","Consulate Rio De Janeiro","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 RIO DE JANEIRO 000019 
 
SIPDIS 
 
BUENOS AIRES FOR M.HAARSAGAR 
STATE PASS OPIC FOR RGREENBURG, DMORONESE 
STATE PASS EXIM FOR NATALIE WEISS, COCONNER 
STATE PASS USTDA FOR AMCKINNEY 
TREASURY FOR FPARODI 
 
E.O. 12985: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, ECON, EFIN, BEXP, BR 
SUBJECT:  Brazil - Bahia State Growing Faster but Interior 
Still a Problem 
 
Ref:  2003 Rio de Janeiro 1773 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  While the State of Bahia has the sixth largest GDP in 
Brazil and expected growth of 8.6% in 2004, the concentrated 
nature of Bahia\'s economy - both in terms of geography and 
industry - is a challenge for state authorities.  In 
response, the State has developed several special programs 
designed to attract investment and address issues such as 
poverty and infrastructure bottlenecks.  The most obvious 
success story to date is the Ford plant in Camacari; most 
believe the state-conceded incentives were more than worth 
it for the positive impact on the State\'s image alone, 
allowing Bahia to attract future investments at a much lower 
cost.  As for the future, several new investments are 
expected to come on-line in 2006 and tourism - while still a 
relatively small part of the state\'s economy at 4% of GDP - 
is on the rise.  However, while these programs and 
investments may help the coastal region, curing the ills of 
Bahia\'s interior - and its consequent poverty - will not be 
easy. 
 
A Concentrated Economy Poses Challenges 
--------------------------------------- 
 
2.  While the State of Bahia has the sixth largest GDP in 
Brazil (4.7% of the national GDP in 2002) and an estimated 
growth of 8.6% in 2004, the concentrated nature of Bahia\'s 
economy - both in terms of geography and industry - is a 
challenge to overcome.  The developed coastline relies on a 
few sectors such as petrochemicals and agribusiness; 
cellulose, petrochemicals and the automotive industry 
account for 40% of the State\'s GDP.  In the far western part 
of the state, the economy resembles that of Brazil\'s center- 
west - where soy is king - and is doing well; Cargill has a 
presence there and irrigated fruit farming is on the rise. 
However, Bahia\'s largely semi-arid interior is very poor and 
is sustained primarily by transfer payments from the federal 
and state governments, e.g., retirement payments and 
automatic transfers to municipalities. 
 
3.  Curing the ills of Bahia\'s interior will not be easy 
and, according to Bahia\'s State Development Agency 
(Desenbahia) President Vladson Menezes, there is no 
consensus among state economic authorities on an approach. 
Menezes told Rio econoff that he thinks that the State 
should try to stimulate what little economic activity 
already exists in these places, i.e., fruticulture, 
irrigated crops, cotton and castor oil.  Castor oil could 
take on more importance as Bahia\'s biodiesel program 
(sponsored by the state and federal government) gets up and 
running (Note:  Bahia is the largest producer of castor in 
Brazil, accounting for 80% of Brazil\'s national production.) 
 
Long-Term Development Plans 
---------------------------- 
 
4.  Bahia\'s sound financial situation (ref A) and fiscal 
adjustment program have enabled the State to develop several 
programs designed to attract investment.  The first program 
was \"Pro-Bahia,\" which began to offer fiscal incentives, 
such as reduced or prolonged payment of ICMS taxes, as early 
as 1991; at the time, Bahia was one of the few states that 
could afford to engage in this so-called \"fiscal warfare.\" 
The Pro-Bahia program, combined with Bahia\'s proximity to 
the southeast consumers, helped to attract various 
investments throughout the 1990\'s.  Over the last few years, 
the program has progressed from a generic incentive program 
to a targeted sectorally based program, and was used to 
differing levels of success in developing an informatics 
pole in Ilheus and an automotive sector in Camacari. 
 
5.  The State currently has a plan called Bahia 2020, which 
is a statewide program for meeting certain Human Development 
Index goals.  Another key plan for the State\'s economic 
development is \"the State Plan for Transport Logistics,\" 
which is based on a study on the flow of goods throughout 
the state and is meant to be a basis on which state economic 
authorities can rationalize scarce resources to better 
target infrastructure projects that will benefit the State 
most.  The idea is that the private sector would most 
readily partner with the State in these priority areas, with 
or without public-private sector partnerships (PPPs); Bahia 
also has approved a law regulating PPPs. 
 
Ford Plant Was Worth Every Penny... 
----------------------------------- 
 
6.  The most obvious example of the success of Bahia\'s 
incentive programs is the location of the Ford plant in 
Camacari, Bahia, after negotiations broke down with the 
state of Rio Grande do Sul and then Governor Olivio Dutra. 
Most interlocutors in Bahia told econoff that the financial 
sacrifice that Bahia made to attract the Ford plant was well 
worth it for the positive impact on the State\'s image alone, 
which should allow the State to attract future investments 
at a much lower cost.  In addition, the USD 1.9 billion 
operation, which opened in Camacari in October 2001, has had 
a considerable socioeconomic impact on the surrounding area, 
exceeding initial expectations and creating 7,000 direct 
jobs and 70,000 indirect jobs.  (Reftel)  The State also 
received a Ford Design Center as a result of contractual 
commitment for engineering services, bringing 400 engineers 
from Sao Paulo and abroad.  (Note:  This is Ford\'s only 
design center in Latin America; there are only four others 
in the world.) 
 
7.  However, Bahia did \"spend\" a lot to attract the Ford 
plant to Bahia, including conceding Ford a state-constructed 
private port for 20 years, leveling the land, guaranteed 
interest rate stability, some direct financing and tax 
deferments, in addition to several public works required by 
Ford for a minimum quality of life for its workers.  The 
burden got to be too much with the unforeseen spike in 
interest rates in 2002 and 2003 and Bahia was forced to 
\"renegotiate\" with Ford in 2003, essentially doing a bit of 
number juggling and adjusting the payment calendar, which 
allowed the State to evade mandatory spending and transfers 
to municipalities with the stroke of a pen. 
 
New Investments on Horizon 
-------------------------- 
 
8.  Indeed, Bahia\'s \"business friendly\" attitude seems to be 
paying off in other areas, with several new investments 
coming on-line in 2006.  A newly announced Bridgestone tire 
plant, which represents an initial investment of USD 270 
million, should come online in 2006; a cellulose investment 
in southern Bahia by Veracel in conjunction with a Swedish 
company also is expected to come online the same year. 
Additionally - to the annoyance of Rio state authorities - 
Bahia will get a brand new shipyard 300-400 km south of 
Salvador courtesy of the Bahian construction company 
Odebrecht, which has won several contracts for the 
construction of deep-water production platforms for 
Petrobras. 
 
9.  That said, Menezes confided that he thinks that the 
State still lacks a deliberate articulation of its 
priorities.  Jobs are a high priority for the State, yet 
many of the large companies installed in Bahia do not create 
a lot of local jobs; the State\'s principal industries 
contribute 40% of the GDP but only 17% of the jobs in the 
market.  Menezes thinks the State needs to focus on the 
creation of local Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) around 
these \"anchors\" to employ more Bahians, adding that Salvador 
has the highest unemployment (15.8%) of Brazil\'s six 
principal metropolitan areas, according to the IBGE. 
 
Despite Focus, Tourism Still in Initial Stages 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
10.  State and city authorities alike also are focusing hard 
on the potential economic impact of increased tourism, 
despite the fact that it still represents a relatively small 
part of the state\'s economy -- estimated at 4%-8% of the 
State\'s GDP.  (Comment:  Menezes estimates the real number 
is closer to 4% and blames the lack of English speakers and 
qualified workers for the industry, as well as a lack of 
advertising.  End Comment.)  That said, tourism is 
definitely on the rise; spending by tourists was up 10% year- 
over-year in the first 9 months of 2004 and there has been a 
significant increase in the number of tourists traveling to 
Bahia in the last 6-8 years.  A number of joint ventures 
between local and international hotels have raised the 
overall quality level of lodging available; Menezes also 
sees this as positive because he opines that Bahia will get 
more attention from tourists as part of the information 
channels of big hotel chains. 
 
11.  State authorities recently decided that the State 
tourism agency was too focused on Carnival, to the detriment 
of general tourism, and are refocusing efforts to attract 
tourists all year round.  Authorities also are focusing on 
the Unites States\' African-American community as a target; 
Bahia has one of the most vibrant Afro-derived cultures in 
the world and has a multimillion-dollar marketing campaign 
aimed at African-Americans who want to get closer to their 
African roots but may find Africa too distant, expensive or 
dangerous.  Bahia\'s state tourism agency estimates that 60% 
of the 45,000 Americans who visited the region in 2002 were 
African-American. 
 
Atkins 
"
"25005","1/6/2005 10:02","05RIODEJANEIRO30","Consulate Rio De Janeiro","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RIO DE JANEIRO 000030 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/FPP 
DPET PLEASE PASSD TO DHS CIS WASHINGTON (RON THOMAS) 
DEPT ALSO PLS PASS TO DHS ICE BOSTION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFRD, CVIS, ASEC, PINR, MX, BR, Domestic Security & Crime 
SUBJECT: MAYOR-ELECT ACCUSED OF LEADING SMUGGLING RING 
 
 
     SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
     Summary 
     ------- 
 
     1. (SBU)  The respected Brazilian daily Folha de Sao 
     Paulo reports that the mayor-elect of a small city in 
     the Brazilian state of Minas Gerais is leading a family- 
     run smuggling operation that sends Brazilian nationals 
     to the United States via Mexico. According to Folha, 
     the operation is run from a travel agency the mayor 
     owns in Danbury, Connecticut, home to an estimated 
     20,000 - strong Brazilian community. Several persons 
     interviewed in the articles provided details about the 
     operation, including the agency\'s address and 
     description.  A check with DHS revealed that someone 
     with the same name as the mayor-elect, Edson Alves da 
     Souza, listed the travel agency\'s locale as a home 
     address in the US and received a Connecticut driver\'s 
     license (now expired) and US Social Security number. 
     On the other hand, our records show only visa denials. 
     The mayor-elect, interviewed by the newspaper, denied 
     any involvement in alien-smuggling.  Post has passed 
     this information to DHS.  End Summary. 
 
     The Connecticut Connection 
     -------------------------- 
 
     2. (U)  The newspaper reported that the mayor-elect of 
     Divino das Laranjeiras, Minas Gerais (population 5000), 
     has been operating a smuggling ring whereby Brazilians 
     are smuggled to the US overland via Mexico. The mayor- 
     elect, Edson Bodola (real name Edson Alves de Souza) 
     apparently owns a travel agency in Danbury, CT which 
     serves as a front for the operation. The business, 
     Lider Travel Services, functions out of two rented 
     rooms at the back of a clothing store on 255 Main 
     Street in Danbury.  According to the articles, most of 
     those smuggled hail from the Mayor-elect\'s home-town 
     and have relatives in or around Danbury. Divino das 
     Laranjeiras is located next to the city of Governador 
     Valadares, infamous throughout Brazil as a center for 
     the production of fraudulent documents. It is estimated 
     that tens, perhaps hundreds of thousands of Minas 
     Gerais residents have relatives on the US eastern 
     seaboard; US engineers came to Minas after World War 
     II, and many took Brazilian spouses (?) back to the US 
     upon return. 
 
     3. (U)  Relatives of de Souza told Folha that he 
     charges his customers $10,000 per trip, of which twenty 
     percent remains with him as \"commission.\"  Would-be 
     illegal immigrants are first transported to Mexico, 
     where they embark on an overland journey.  The price of 
     the trip is supposed to include transport, food, and 
     housing along the way, but one relative of de Souza\'s 
     who works at the Danbury agency -- her real name did 
     not appear in the article -- criticized him for not 
     taking adequate care of his clients. Apparently, 
     several had been left to fend for themselves while 
     making an arduous trip across the desert; in one case, 
     de Souza allegedly refused to assist a nephew after his 
     release from American detention. He had been captured 
     after a 17-hour desert walk. 
 
     4. (U) The female relative was quoted in the paper as 
     saying the mayor-elect turned over operations to his 
     brother Kiko after winning the municipal election. 
     Edson de Souza, contacted separately by the paper, 
     denied all involvement in any BRAZILIAN ROAD TO U.S.: 
     EASIER THRU MEXICO?smuggling ring but advised the 
     reporter to talk to his brother. 
 
     Family Reunion On Main Street? 
     ------------------------------ 
 
     5. (SBU)  Despite not having received a visa from the 
     Department of State, it is possible that Alves de Souza 
     spent significant time in the U.S. In February 1993, a 
     person using this name presented a fraudulent photo- 
     subbed passport at the Miami airport and was returned 
     to Brazil.  Post reports two other refusals under the 
     subject\'s name, including a P6C1 (misrepresentation) 
     hit entered in April 1998. However, a check with DHS 
     revealed that someone using the name Edson Alves de 
     Souza listed 255 Main Street, Danbury as his home 
     address in the years 2000 and 2001.  This person 
     obtained a CT driver\'s license (#106149996, expired 
     October 23, 2003) and a social security card (044-84- 
     3514). 
 
     6. (SBU) A DHS official also told us that his records 
     show a certain Fernando Cezar Pereira also listing 255 
     Main as his address during that time.  Our records show 
     this individual was denied a visa at US Consulate Rio 
     under ineligibility P6c1 on the same day in 1998 as 
     Edson Alves de Souza.  However, DHS informs us that 
     Fernando Cezar Pereira was issued a valid S-26 card 
     certifying him as a special agricultural worker in 
     2002.  In addition, several other individuals with De 
     Souza/Pereira surnames have listed the Danbury, CT 
     address as their home. 
 
     Comment 
     ------- 
 
     7. (SBU) Such smuggling rings are probably fairly 
     common in Minas Gerais, a state infamous as the 
     epicenter of fraud in Brazil.  Nevertheless, the 
     involvement of a public figure (albeit in a small town) 
     with political ambitions is rare. We have discussed 
     these allegations with the officials from DHS should 
     they decide to take further action. 
 
     ATKINS 
"