
"15375","3/26/2004 12:12","04SAOPAULO493","Consulate Sao Paulo","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRASILIA676","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SAO PAULO 000493 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR MDEMPSEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, CO, BL, CU, VE, BR, UNHCR-1, Bilateral Relations with the US 
SUBJECT: SPECIAL ENVOY REICH\'S MEETING WITH JOSE DIRCEU 
 
REF: BRASILIA 676 
 
Classified By: CG PATRICK DUDDY for reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
1.  (C)  SUMMARY.  White House Special Envoy for the Western 
Hemisphere Otto Reich met with President Luis Inacio Lula da 
Silva\'s Chief of Staff Jose Dirceu on Sunday, March 21 at a 
private residence in Sao Paulo.  During the course of the 
relaxed and open 90-minute conversation, the two touched on 
current events in Venezuela, Colombia, Bolivia, Cuba, Haiti 
and Argentina, and expressed their intent to maintain an open 
channel of communication.  Dirceu said that the Brazilian 
government is deeply concerned about the situation in 
Venezuela and in Cuba, and that the GOB would abstain (as it 
has in the past) on the UNHRC motion on Cuba.  Dirceu 
indicated that he hoped to visit the United States in the 
near future, perhaps as soon as Easter week, or shortly 
thereafter. Reich was accompanied by Special Advisor to the 
Assistant Secretary for Western Hemisphere Affairs William 
Perry and Consul General Patrick Duddy.  Dirceu was 
accompanied by Andre Araujo.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) Following the exchange of opening pleasantries, Amb. 
Reich raised Venezuela, noting that the United States is 
deeply concerned with the deteriorating situation there. 
Dirceu stated that Brazil is also concerned with the 
situation in Venezuela.  He noted that Presidential Foreign 
Policy Advisor Marco Aurelio Garcia was recently in 
Venezuela, and had prepared a report for President Lula on 
his visit.  Dirceu said he had seen it, but had not yet had 
the opportunity to read the report in detail.  He said he 
expected Lula and other senior advisors would discuss 
Venezuela early in the week of March 22.  When asked what he 
thought the U.S. and Brazil could do together on Venezuela, 
Dirceu was non-comittal, reiterating that the GOB would 
discuss the Venezuelan situation in the coming week. 
However, Dirceu\'s comments about Chavez\'s behavior during the 
G-15 meeting in Caracas were quite critical, and he said Lula 
left the meeting early because he \"was uncomfortable.\"  He 
added that Lula had not returned any of Chavez\'s calls since 
then, but that he would probably do so soon in order to keep 
the communication open, as unpleasannt as it may be. 
 
3.  (C) On Bolivia, Reich stressed that the U.S. and Brazil 
have shared interests in that country, and a common interest 
in assisting Bolivia to maintain political stability.  Reich 
noted his concern about the March 18 statement by a Foreign 
Ministry spokesman that Brazil had not attended the most 
recent meeting of the Bolivia Support Group in Washington 
because the GOB considered the meeting a \"waste of time.\" 
Dirceu appeared to be surprised at hearing about the 
spokesman\'s statement, and took notes on Reich\'s points.  He 
said he would talk to FM Amorim about it. 
 
4.  (SBU) Reich thanked the GOB for its willingness to help 
in Haiti, and to contribute peacekeeping forces.  He asked 
Dirceu for clarification that the GOB would only participate 
in a UN Chapter 6 (peacekeeping), rather than a Chapter 7 
(peace enforcement), mission in Haiti.  Dirceu confirmed that 
that was correct.  In response to Reich\'s question on whether 
the Brazilian deployment in Haiti could be moved forward, 
Dirceu was non-committal, noting only that the GOB had had 
financial concerns about the deployment which were being 
resolved.  Dirceu noted that he also expected to speak to the 
President about Haiti during the coming week, and suggested 
that he might get back in touch on the issue. 
 
5.  (C) Reich raised the USG\'s continuing concern with the 
Cuban government\'s harsh repression of dissidents.  Dirceu 
said that the GOB is also concerned about the situation in 
Cuba.  He said, however, that the GOB would not \"change its 
vote\" on the Cuba motion in the upcoming UNHRC session; he 
said the GOB would abstain on the motion, as it has in past 
years.  Dirceu noted that Cuba is a difficult issue for the 
Lula government, and a very difficult issue for him 
personally.  (NOTE:  Dirceu spent much of six years (1969-75) 
in exile in Cuba, after being expelled from Brazil by the 
military dictatorship.  End Note.)  Dirceu acknowledged that 
the Cuban government has not been receptive to private GOB 
overtures on treatment of detainees.  He said the newly 
arrived Cuban Ambassador in Brasilia had refused to entertain 
any discussion of the issue, even in relation to a Brazilian 
citizen who had been arrested in Cuba for complicity in alien 
smuggling.  Dirceu added that Lula had received the mother of 
the Brazilian detained in Cuba.  Asked whether the Lula 
government would consider having Lula receive the mothers of 
detained Cuban dissidents as a gesture of concern, Dirceu 
said he would discuss the idea with others in the GOB, 
including the President.  (COMMENT:  No modalities were 
discussed.  End Comment.) 
 
6.  (SBU) On Colombia, Dirceu noted that the GOB has a good 
relationship with Colombia.  He said that Brazil was 
committed to stepped up military and police presence along 
Brazil\'s northern border, and mentioned the SIVAM Amazon 
surveillance system.  Reich pointed out several indicators of 
progress in the GOC\'s efforts to ensure security in the 
country, including regaining control of all the towns 
previously controlled by rebel groups, significant numbers of 
surrenders by paramilitary members, and resumed economic 
growth of 4 percent in the last year.  Dirceu indicated that 
he was aware of the improvements in the security situation in 
Colombia. 
 
7.  (C) Turning to Argentina, Dirceu commented that part of 
the problem is that it is not clear that the Kirchner 
government has a clear or comprehensive plan for extricating 
the country from its economic woes.  Consequently, the 
government is in the position of having to \"slay a lion\" 
every week to stay out in front of impending crises. 
 
8.  (SBU) Dirceu said that he was planning to make a trip to 
the United States in the near future, possibly as soon as the 
week after Easter.  He indicated interest in identifying an 
appropriate venue for making a speech or other public 
statement while there, as well as in meetings with USG 
officials. 
 
9.  (C) Comment.  The cordial but frank exchange of views 
between Reich and Dirceu advanced the USG effort to maintain 
a robust and cooperative relationship with the GOB.  While no 
immediate action items resulted from the meeting, Minister 
Dirceu said he would consult and get back in touch with 
Ambassador Reich on issues of mutual concern, including 
Venezuela, Cuba and possibly Haiti.  Dirceu\'s comments on 
Haiti and Brazil\'s vote on the Cuba motion at the UNHRC track 
closely with Foreign Ministry UnderSecretary Vera Pedrosa\'s 
comments to Ambassador Hrinak on March 19, reported reftel. 
End Comment. 
 
10.  (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Brasilia 
and cleared by Ambassador Reich. 
DUDDY 
"
"17530","6/4/2004 19:20","04SAOPAULO843","Consulate Sao Paulo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SAOPAULO789","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SAO PAULO 000843 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC FOR MIKE DEMPSEY 
 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR WHA/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, EINV, SOCI, BR, Human Rights, TIP 
SUBJECT: RACE RELATIONS IN BRAZIL: THE AFFIRMATIVE ACTION 
DEBATE 
 
REF: SAO PAULO 00789 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED. 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (U) Affirmative action measures aimed at improving the 
socioeconomic situation of Afro-Brazilians are fundamental 
to the \"Movimento Negro,\" or Black Movement.  Though 
affirmative action remains controversial, even among Afro- 
Brazilians, the controversy itself is drawing public 
attention to the issue of social inequality in an 
unprecedented way.  Advocacy efforts of the Black Movement 
have generally focused on the periphery of society, and thus 
have remained out of the public eye, but the affirmative 
action debate is a mainstream concern.  Whether or not 
advocates overcome numerous challenges to create viable 
affirmative action programs, the increasing visibility of 
race issues has contributed to higher levels of Afro- 
Brazilian political participation and to new legislative 
efforts designed to benefit Afro-Brazilians.  By mobilizing 
the large Afro-Brazilian population in support of specific 
political issues, affirmative action could bring about 
changes in Brazil\'s broader political scene.  This is the 
sec7QQQsUUS QUO 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (U) As explained reftel, self-declared \"black\" and 
\"brown\" Brazilians (a rough measure of self-identified Afro- 
Brazilians) comprise 46 percent of the population, but have 
lower incomes and higher rates of illiteracy than other 
segments of society, and are underrepresented at all levels 
of business, academia, media, and government.  Anecdotal 
evidence also indicates that Afro-Brazilians are not easily 
accepted in the upper echelons of society.  Maria Aparecida 
de Laia, the Sao Paulo State Secretary of Culture\'s Advisor 
for Gender, Race and Ethnicity, told us that professional 
contacts who do not know her tend to ignore her and to 
address her white subordinates when they meet her for the 
first time.  Laia explains such occurrences by saying that 
Afro-Brazilians are \"aliens\" within the circles of the white- 
dominated political and socioeconomic elite. 
 
3.  (U) Change is occurring in small increments.  Before 
soccer hero Pele\'s appointment as the Sports Minister in 
1995, no Afro-Brazilian had ever served as a minister in the 
federal GOB.  In 2003, President Lula appointed 4 Afro- 
Brazilians to his Cabinet, including Matilde Ribeiro as the 
head of the newly created Secretariat for the Promotion of 
Racial Equality.  At the Afro-Brazilian/African-American 
Business Summit in April, Judith Morrison of the Inter- 
American Foundation said that there are 632 black-owned 
businesses in Sao Paulo, and more than 7 million Afro- 
Brazilians in the middle class nation-wide.  \"Raca\" (\"Race\") 
magazine, the first publication aimed specifically at an 
Afro-Brazilian audience, achieved immediate and unexpected 
success when it was launched in 1996, providing an 
indication of the untapped potential of Afro-Brazilian 
buying power and the growing interest in products tailor- 
made for Afro-Brazilians. 
 
4.  (U) Despite these indicators of progress, many Black 
Movement activists contend that the current pace of change 
is much too slow.  Laia told us that the time is ripe for 
Afro-Brazilians to \"take a leap forward\" through affirmative 
action programs designed to expand Afro-Brazilian presence 
in educational institutions and in the senior ranks of 
government and business.  She contends that integrating Afro- 
Brazilians into the economic and political mainstream will 
reduce prejudice.  Many of our contacts expressed the view 
that Afro-Brazilians would not improve their socioeconomic 
status without a stronger presence in government.  Sao Paulo 
City Councilwoman Claudete Alves argues that Afro-Brazilians 
must be involved in the development of public policy because 
it is \"impossible to understand\" Brazilian racism without 
seeing Brazil \"from a black perspective.\"  Jose Vicente, 
president of the Afro-Brazilian advocacy group AFROBRAS, 
told us that he believes that affirmative action measures 
can help to show Afro-Brazilians that \"there is hope.\"  He 
contends that offering black youth educational and 
employment opportunities, as well as positive role models, 
will have a positive impact that \"will be felt throughout 
Brazil.\" 
 
5.  (U) The debate to date has revolved almost exclusively 
around the racial quotas recently introduced in several 
public universities (see septel on race and education 
policy).  Opponents of affirmative action believe that race- 
based programs are misguided, because they view 
discrimination as a matter of social class rather than skin 
color.  They argue that college entrance exams are color- 
blind, and that the low Afro-Brazilian participation in the 
upper echelons of society is not the result of racism.  Some 
point out that Brazil\'s traditional system of racial self- 
identification is inadequate for the proposed quota systems, 
since it provides no objective basis for determining which 
candidates are eligible for programs, but worry that 
officially delineating the Afro-Brazilian community through 
the use of objective physical criteria would only increase 
racial divisions within society.  Despite the objections, a 
public opinion poll conducted by the Sensus Institute in 
May, 2004, found that 61.1 percent of respondents support 
quotas for Afro-Brazilians in public universities. 
 
PUBLIC SECTOR GETTING STARTED 
------------------------------ 
 
6.  (U) Afro-Brazilians are far from achieving equal 
representation in the public sector, but some progress has 
been made in the last decade.  According to Claudete Alves, 
the only Afro-Brazilian woman on the Sao Paulo City Council, 
the mere fact that the government is acknowledging the 
existence of racism is a step in the right direction. 
Economic and social inclusion of Afro-Brazilians has become 
a political concern for the GOB.  In addition to appointing 
Afro-Brazilians to the cabinet and creating a special 
cabinet post for race-related issues, President Lula has 
reached out to the Afro-Brazilian community with such 
visible gestures as visiting a traditional Afro-Brazilian 
community (quilombo).  The Foreign Ministry (Itamaraty) has 
introduced a new program to assist Afro-Brazilians and other 
underprivileged groups to prepare for the rigorous entrance 
exam for the diplomatic service. 
 
7.  (U) Quota systems have been introduced in some 
municipalities in Sao Paulo state.  Both state- and national- 
level institutions are exploring the possibilities for new 
affirmative action programs, some of which would go beyond 
quotas.  The draft Statute of Racial Equality, sent to 
Brazilian Congress in April, would introduce quotas for 
federal workers, and offer incentives for private companies 
with government contracts to implement affirmative action 
programs.  Other proposals include diversity training for 
police, who are often accused of racial profiling and of 
using unnecessary force against Afro-Brazilian suspects. 
 
PRIVATE SECTOR SLOW TO TAKE ACTION 
----------------------------------- 
 
8.  (U) Anecdotal evidence indicates that discrimination in 
hiring practices is widespread, but not openly acknowledged 
or endorsed.  Afro-Brazilian contacts tell us that a job 
announcement that requires a \"nice appearance\" is understood 
to mean that \"blacks need not apply.\"  Recent studies in Sao 
Paulo shopping malls by the researchers of the Inter- 
American Union Institute for Racial Equality (INSPIR) 
estimated that only 2 percent of the employees were \"black,\" 
while another 13 percent were \"brown\" (mixed).  Neide 
Aparecida Fonseca, president of INSPIR, concluded that there 
is \"color and race-related prejudice\" in hiring practices 
for \"positions that are visible or require interaction with 
the public.\"  However, studies of discrimination in 
employment are rare.  Some activists conjecture that 
companies choose not to track their employees\' racial 
identity, because they do not want to be pressured to 
introduce affirmative action measures.  Recently, the 
Colombo clothing company introduced a twenty percent quota 
for Afro-Brazilians, but it is the only major company to 
have done so. 
 
9.  (U) Leaders of the Black Movement would like to see a 
push for affirmative action measures in the private sector. 
They assert that even multinational corporations that have 
affirmative action programs elsewhere have not instituted 
them in Brazil.  At the Afro-Brazilian/African-American 
Business Summit in April, Dr. Sueli Carneiro, President of 
Geledes Institute for Black Women, criticized international 
companies operating in Brazil for \"conforming to Brazilian 
racism,\" rather implementing affirmative action and 
nondiscrimination policies similar to those they use outside 
of Brazil. 
 
LESSONS LEARNED FROM U.S. EXPERIENCE? 
------------------------------------- 
 
10.  (U) The affirmative action debate is seldom raised 
without reference to the U.S. experience.  At the Afro- 
Brazilian/African-American Business Summit, Brazilian and 
U.S. participants were quick to point out that Brazil\'s 
present situation is comparable to that of the U.S. twenty 
or thirty years ago.  Afro-Brazilian activists tend to view 
the current U.S. situation in a very positive light.  From 
the Afro-Brazilian perspective, African-Americans have 
achieved considerable social, economic and political 
empowerment.  Humberto Adami, president of the Institute of 
Racial and Environmental Advocacy, complained that most 
Brazilians do not hesitate to \"import the American way of 
life...as seen on Fox Television,\" but \"complain about 
copying the U.S.\" when it comes to affirmative action. 
 
COMMENT 
-------- 
11.  (SBU) Affirmative action is a relatively new and very 
controversial idea in Brazil.  So far, affirmative action 
has not progressed beyond simple quota systems and attempts 
to increase recruitment of Afro-Brazilians to government 
positions and in a few public universities.  While Brazilian 
authorities have yet to determine how far to carry such 
programs, affirmative action is the issue that has most 
sparked the interest of the general public, generated public 
debate, and drawn attention to the Black Movement in Brazil. 
Only time will tell whether the ambitions of the Black 
Movement on this and other issues will come to fruition, but 
the incipient mobilization of the Afro-Brazilian community 
that it represents could lead to wider changes over time in 
Brazilian politics.  End comment. 
 
12.  (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Brasilia 
and Consulate General Rio de Janeiro. 
 
DUDDY 
"
"19670","8/12/2004 12:39","04SAOPAULO1130","Consulate Sao Paulo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SAO PAULO 001130 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR U/S LARSON, WHA/BSC, AND EB/TPP/ABT 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR WHA/PD 
STATE PASS USTR FOR AJOHNSON 
STATE PASS EPA FOR JANDERSON 
STATE PASS FDA 
USDA FOR U/S PENN 
USDA FAS FOR ADMINISTRATOR ETERPSTRA 
USDA APHIS FOR ADMINISTRATOR RDEHAVEN 
USDA ARS FOR A/ADMINISTRATOR EKNIPLING 
USDA FAS/FAA FOR A/WH AREA FOR JBAILEY 
USDA FAS/ITP FOR PSHEIKH,WESTMAN, BGRUNENFELDER, BFREEMAN 
USDA FAS/CMP/HTP FOR FTARRANT, RKNAPP 
COMMERCEUSDOC FOR 
4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/DMCDOUGAL/ADRISCOLL/JAND ERSON/WBASTION 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCS/OIO/EOLSON/DDEVITO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, ETRD, TBIO, PGOV, KIPR, BR, Trade 
SUBJECT: Two for Two: Brazil\'s Trade Policy Machine Delivers 
Another Hit in the WTO Arena 
 
 
1)   Summary:  From the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(Itamaraty) to the rolling sea of sugar cane on the 
hillsides in the center-west of Sao Paulo state, Brazilian 
agriculture is basking in its second international trade 
policy victory in two months.  Following a WTO Dispute 
Panel\'s findings in favor of Brazil\'s claims against U.S. 
domestic cotton supports in June, another Dispute Panel 
agreed that Brazilian (and Thai and Australian) sugar 
production/export interests were unfairly prejudiced by 
European Union export subsidization.  Now the media is 
asking which will be the next developed country production 
and/or trade policy to be targeted.   End Summary. 
 
2)   According to comments by GOB officials and media 
reports, the preliminary findings are that the WTO\'s 
Ddispute Ppanel agrees in its preliminary findinghas agreed 
with 
Brazil\'s contention that EU export subsidies violated the 
international trade organization\'s rules and denied 
Brazilian, Australian and Thai producers close to $500 
million in export earnings. It is noteworthy that as was 
true with the WTO\'s ruling on U.S. domestic supports for 
cotton growers, Brazil immediately trumpeted the results of 
what is supposed to be a confidential preliminary report 
available only to the concerned parties, thereby ignoring 
WTO rules and tradition. The WTO\'s official judgment on 
Brazil\'s case, for which Australia and Thailand are co- 
plaintiffs, will be formally announced in late September, 
but there is little to no reason to expect a difference 
between what has been preliminarily revealed and the 
official decision.  In view of their success in this case 
and given that Brazil is already the world\'s largest and 
arguably most efficient sugar producer, industry and 
government representatives alike are understandably bullish 
about future production and export prospects. 
 
3)   While most expect the EU to go through the motions of 
an appeal, once to the WTO\'s decision once it\'sis finalized, 
there are expectations thatis essentially no doubt that in 
keeping with what is perceived as the EU\'s increasing 
recognition of the need to curb its producer/trade supports, 
this decision will prompt the EU to expand the process it 
has already begun to reduce contribute to some de- 
subsidization of itsin the EU\'s sugar industry.  And 
Brazilian producers are poised to fill any void created by 
smaller EU output.  Though speculation about eventual EU 
compliance with the WTO decision may be premature with 
regard to the eventual implementation leading from the WTO\'s 
decision, starting as soon as 2005, some Sao Paulo based 
observers are predicting a bounce in Brazilian sugar exports 
of 2-4 million metric tons annually based on the expectation 
that the EU will reduce the volume of its supply available 
for export or, re-export, includingas is the case with EU 
subsidies on sugar sourced from former colonies.  There is 
little to impede a sizable increase in Brazilian sugar cane 
production.  With only 5.5 million hectares currently 
dedicated to this use nationwide, there are millions more 
available that could be converted from pasture, citrus 
groves or other crops in Sao Paulo state and new lands that 
could be brought into production in Brazil\'s northeast, 
albeit at a slower pace. 
 
4)   As a result of its recent WTO successes, the Brazilian 
trade policy apparatus is increasingly confident in its 
mission to promote and protect the interests of its 
producers and those, as in the case of West African cotton 
producers, of the lesser developed countries.  In the media, 
these WTO rulings have taken on a David versus Goliath aura. 
To Brazil\'s agribusiness leadership, these have certainly 
been just and fitting outcomes, and there is already 
speculation about the next developed country commodity 
program Brazil will challenge.  Florida\'s agreement to 
reduce its equalization excise tax on imported orange juice 
concentrate earlier this year led Brazil to withdraw the WTO 
case it had filed, and in view of the recent success of its 
soybean producers, its purported complaint against U.S. 
support for soybean growers has been shelved.  Now, some are 
suggesting Brazil will target U.S. anti-dumping policy as 
applied to Brazil\'s shrimp industry.  On the other hand, 
with the WTO agreement on a framework to advance Doha-round 
negotiations struck in Geneva at the end of July, it is not 
clear what, if anything, Brazil will target next for litigation. 
Duddy 
"
"21964","10/22/2004 17:51","04SAOPAULO1472","Consulate Sao Paulo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04BRASILIA2506","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SAO PAULO 001472 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SOCI, BR, Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: PT AND PSDB GAIN STRENGTH IN BRAZILIAN STATE OF 
SANTA CATARINA 
 
REF: A) BRASILIA 2506 
 
     B) SAO PAULO 1397 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (U) Polls are leaning towards a PSDB win for mayor in 
Florianopolis, the capital of the southern Brazilian state 
of Santa Catarina.  The PSDB candidate, Dario Berger, has a 
16 point lead over PP/PFL candidate, Chico Assis.  State 
Governor Luiz Henrique da Silva (PMDB) has endorsed Berger 
and other PSDB candidates; however, looking towards the 2006 
elections, the Santa Catarina PMDB will have to choose 
whether these alliances will continue to be advantageous for 
the party.  As elsewhere in Brazil, the PT and PSDB have 
both gained political ground at the municipal level in Santa 
Catarina, acquiring both additional mayorships and city 
council members.  Nevertheless, Santa Catarina traditionally 
has a conservative electorate and the PMDB and PP are still 
the leading parties in the state.  As the October 3 
elections showed in several cities, elected positions tend 
to rotate among political parties, particularly after one 
party has held a position for eight years.  The PT lost 
Blumenau to the PFL after eight years of governing, and the 
PP is likely to lose Florianopolis for the same reason - the 
voters want a change.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
PSDB OUTSIDER LEADS IN FLORIANOPOLIS MAYORAL RACE 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. (U) Brazilian Social Democratic Party (PSDB) candidate 
Dario Berger continues to lead in the polls for the mayoral 
election of Santa Catarina state capital Florianopolis. 
Berger won 35 percent of the vote in the October 3 first 
round and now faces conservative Progressive Party (PP) 
candidate Chico Assis, in the second round runoff on October 
31.  A recent poll shows Berger leading 47-31 percent. 
Despite Berger\'s big lead, political commentators have not 
called the race yet, in part because Berger, who was mayor 
of the neighboring city Sao Jose for the past eight years, 
is seen both as something of a carpetbagger and a fresh face 
who might be able to energize the city.  Some 60 percent of 
Florianopolis\'s population is not originally from the city, 
and therefore purportedly not averse to voting for an 
\"outsider\" candidate.  Berger has also picked-up the support 
of Brazilian Democratic Movement Party (PMDB) Governor Luiz 
Henrique da Silva, and some of the smaller parties. 
 
4. (U) Chico Assis is strongly associated with incumbent 
mayor Angela Amin (PP), who after eight years in power still 
has 72 percent approval ratings.  The Liberal Front Party 
(PFL) and Democratic Labor Party (PDT) are also supporting 
Assis.  The Workers\' Party (PT) declared that it will not 
support either candidate, and instead is urging voters to 
leave their ballots blank.  In the past it has been 
difficult for incumbents or their handpicked successors to 
win election in Florianopolis.  Assis will face an uphill 
battle in the last two weeks of the campaign. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
PMDB STRONG, BUT PT AND PSDB ARE BIG WINNERS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) As elsewhere in Brazil, the amorphous/centrist PMDB 
continues to hold the most city halls in Santa Catarina with 
115, up one from 2000.  The party joined PSDB-led coalitions 
in the commercial centers of Joinville and Sao Jose and is 
now supporting the PSDB candidate in Florianopolis.  That 
support from the PMDB likely contributed to the success that 
the PSDB enjoyed in the first round.  The PSDB increased the 
number of city halls it controls from 19 to 25.  However, as 
a political editor of the \"Diario Catarinense\", the state\'s 
main newspaper, noted, the party\'s growth has been very 
localized within Santa Catarina, and it is not yet a 
statewide force.  One of the party\'s most significant 
strongholds is Joinville, where the PSDB candidate, Marco 
Tebaldi, was reelected in the first round.  Tebaldi served 
as Luiz Henrique\'s vice-mayor in Joinville before Luiz 
Henrique was elected governor in 2002.  The Governor 
reportedly invested a great deal of political capital in 
Tebaldi\'s re-election instead of running a PMDB candidate. 
 
6. (U) Also reflecting the nationwide trend, President 
Lula\'s PT gained the most numerically in Santa Catarina this 
year, increasing its mayorships from 13 to 24.  The PT has 
enjoyed a steady growth in Santa Catarina, going from seven 
city halls in 1996 to 13 in 2000.  The PT\'s stronghold is in 
the poorer western region of the state, populated mainly by 
small farmers.  The PT maintains strong ties with the 
Catholic Church and the Landless Movement (MST) in that 
region.  The PT has the largest caucus in the state 
legislature, with nine of the 40 seats. 
 
7. (U) The conservative PP and PFL parties each lost city 
halls in Santa Catarina on October 3.  The PP went from 
running 73 to 70, while the PFL decreased from 58 to 43. 
The PFL\'s power is concentrated in the center of the state, 
dominated by large rural estates. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
THE 2006 ELECTIONS BOUND TO BE HIGHLY CONTESTED 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
8. (SBU) In this month\'s elections, incumbent PMDB Governor 
Luiz Henrique formed coalitions, which cut across the lines 
of his party\'s alliances at the national level and in other 
southern states.  (Note: at the national level, the PMDB is 
part of Lula\'s PT-led coalition, while the PSDB and PFL lead 
the opposition bloc. End Note.)  Most significantly, he has 
strongly backed PSDB candidates in cities where the PMDB did 
not have its own candidates in the race.  A member of the 
PMDB state directorate told Poloff that there is dissent 
among the party leadership over the Governor\'s alliances. 
She said that many party members feel that Luis Henrique has 
gotten too close to the PSDB, noting that the party failed 
to even run candidates in key cities like Florianopolis and 
Joinville.  In many of the state\'s western municipalities, 
the PMDB shares power with the PT, i.e., PT mayors with PMDB 
vice-mayors or vice versa. 
 
9. (SBU) State legislature caucus leaders from both the PT 
and PSDB recognize that Luis Henrique\'s alliances are purely 
of convenience.  PT State Deputy Pedro Baldissera noted that 
the PMDB only forms coalitions with the PT in regions where 
the PMDB is weak.  He remarked that the PT would have to 
take a clear political stand, including on whether to 
continue its alliances with the PMDB in the near future.  A 
Diario Catarinense political editor told us the same thing, 
noting that the PT needs to clarify its identity as a party 
and how the party plans to deal with its links to the MST 
and the workers confederation, CUT, as well as to other 
parties. 
 
10. (U) The 2006 governor\'s race is bound to be contentious. 
Luis Henrique plans to run for reelection for the PMDB. 
PSDB State Deputy and Caucus Leader Jorginho Mello told us 
that PSDB Senator Leonel Pavan would be the party\'s 
candidate for governor in 2006.  Political experts speculate 
that incumbent Florianopolis mayor, Angela Amin, will run 
for governor for the PP.  (Note: Amin\'s husband, Esperidao 
Amin, was governor of Santa Catarina from 1999 until 2003. 
End Note.)  The PT plans to run an as yet unidentified 
candidate.  Potentially complicating the parties\' political 
strategizing even further over the next two years, Senator 
Jorge Bornhausen\'s (PFL) seat will be open in the 2006 
elections, and the powerful senator\'s intentions have not 
been announced. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
11. (U) Politics in Santa Catarina are multifaceted and full 
of intrigue.  Soon after the 2004 municipal elections wind 
down, political maneuvering in preparation for the 2006 
gubernatorial and senatorial elections will begin.  The 
governor\'s seat will be highly contested and the PSDB views 
2006 as an opportunity to strengthen its position in the 
state and nationally.  The center-left PSDB and PT parties 
made the most advances in numerical terms in this year\'s 
municipal contests, while the conservative PP and PFL 
parties, which have traditionally shared political dominance 
in the state with the PMDB, lost several cities in the 
interior of the state.  A PP loss to the PSDB in 
Florianopolis could indicate the beginnings of a shift in 
political power in the state.  However, it is not apparent 
that any clear lessons can be drawn from the outcome of this 
year\'s municipal elections here, in particular about the 
likely impact on the 2006 gubernatorial and presidential 
elections.  Santa Catarina will likely continue to produce 
politicians of national importance, but due to its small 
population, it will continue to have only limited impact on 
the outcome of national elections.  End Comment. 
 
12. (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Brasilia. 
 
DEL VECCHIO 
"
"22286","11/1/2004 20:33","04SAOPAULO1541","Consulate Sao Paulo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SAO PAULO 001541 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR MIKE DEMPSEY 
 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR WHA/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SOCI, BR, Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: MUNICIPAL ELECTION RESULTS IN THE SOUTH:  PT 
LOSSES; PSDB GAINS 
 
REF:  A) BRASILIA 2742; B) SAO PAULO 1527; C) SAO PAULO 
 
1483; D) SAO PAULO 1472 
 
 
1.  Summary.  In Sao Paulo and the South, the PSDB was the 
big winner and the PT the big loser in the second round of 
the Brazilian municipal elections on October 31.  The PT 
lost control of the two biggest prizes in the region, Sao 
Paulo and Porto Alegre, the second of which the party had 
governed for the last 16 years.  Although it defeated the 
PSDB in several important cities in Sao Paulo state, 
overall, the PT lost ground to the PSDB in the 27 largest 
cities in the state.  The PSDB\'s victories in Sao Paulo, 
Curitiba and Florianopolis, capital cities the party has 
never previously governed, will undoubtedly fortify the 
party\'s position in the run-up to the 2006 presidential 
election.  Jose Serra\'s decisive victory (55% - 45%) over 
incumbent PT mayor Marta Suplicy also bolsters PSDB Governor 
Geraldo Alckmin\'s position among the party\'s 
\"presidenciaveis,\" or potential presidential nominees.  In 
Parana state, the PT loss in Curitiba was also a major loss 
for PMDB Governor Roberto Requiao, who had strongly backed 
the PT candidate in that race.  The PPS also gained strength 
in the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul, with victories 
in Porto Alegre and Pelotas. END SUMMARY 
 
SETBACKS IN SAO PAULO AND RIO GRANDE DO SUL 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  The PT lost big in the two states -- Sao Paulo and Rio 
Grande do Sul -- where it traditionally has had its 
strongest base of support.  In addition to losing the 
capitals, Sao Paulo and Porto Alegre, the PT lost ground in 
the major cities in both states.  PT party president Jose 
Genoino acknowledged that the party\'s losses in these states 
were \"very heavy defeats\" for the party, though he denied 
that they indicated that the party was facing a \"crisis.\" 
In Sao Paulo state, among the 27 cities with populations 
over 150,000, the number in PT hands fell from nine to five. 
The results were mixed for the PT in the large industrial 
suburbs (known as the ABC region) of Sao Paulo.  It defeated 
the PSDB in the second round in Santo Andre, Diadema and 
Osasco (which the PSDB has governed for the last eight 
years), and won reelection in Guarulhos in the first round 
on October 3.  The PT defeat of the PSDB in Osasco, the 
hometown of Federal Chamber of Deputies President Joao Paulo 
Cunha (PT), may strengthen Cunha\'s hand in jockeying with 
other PT stars for a spot in Lula\'s cabinet or for a 
gubernatorial run in 2006.  In other ABC cities, the PT lost 
Sao Caetano to the PTB, and failed yet again to win in Sao 
Bernardo, Lula\'s hometown.  PT incumbents did not make it 
into the second round in the key interior cities of Riberao 
Preto, Campinas, Piraciacaba and Sorocaba.  The PT suffered 
an upset second round loss in the important port city of 
Santos, where former PT mayor Telma da Souza had been 
expected to win her bid to return to office. 
 
3.  The PSDB, and specifically Governor Geraldo Alckmin, 
were the big winners in the state.  Alckmin noted that the 
party had the best performance in the state since it was 
founded in 1990.  In addition to the capital, the PSDB took 
Sorocaba, Riberao Preto and Piraciacaba away from the PT. 
The party will now govern 10 of the state\'s largest cities, 
one more than their current total, and twice the number of 
any other party.  Control of these voter rich cities will 
undoubtedly help the party consolidate its position as the 
strongest party in the most populous state in Brazil.  The 
party\'s success helps to burnish Alckmin\'s own standing 
within the party and as a potential player on the national 
stage, though the Governor has little visibility outside his 
home state.  Alckmin threw his own political capital 
strongly behind Serra in the capital, demonstrating his 
effectiveness as a political godfather.  He did the same in 
Sorocaba, where he participated actively in the campaign in 
the first round, supporting both the PSDB and PFL candidates 
to deny the incumbent PT mayor a slot in the second round. 
 
4.  The PT\'s performance in the southern state of Rio Grande 
do Sul was equally dispiriting for the party faithful.  In 
addition to losing Porto Alegre, the first major city 
governed by the PT, where it has been in power for the last 
16 years, the party was ousted from power in Caxias do Sul 
and Pelotas, the state\'s second and third largest interior 
cities.  The party will now govern in only one of the 
state\'s five largest cities.  The PT won reelection in Santa 
Maria in the first round, but failed to dislodge the PSDB 
incumbent from city hall in Canoas.  As in Sao Paulo state, 
while the PT was the big loser, the governor was the big 
winner in Rio Grande do Sul.  Though he remained 
ostentatiously neutral in all of the first round races in 
his state, reportedly to avoid causing difficulties among 
the state\'s governing alliance, PMDB Governor Germano 
Rigotto threw his support to the opposition candidates in 
all three cities with run-off  races.  Though he did not 
campaign actively with Jose Fogaca, the PPS victor in Porto 
Alegre, until the final days of the campaign, he made his 
support for the opposition alliance clear.  In his home city 
of Caxias do Sul, where the incumbent PT mayor remains very 
popular, Rigotto\'s support was instrumental in helping the 
PMDB\'s Jose Ivo Sartori, defeat the PT\'s Marisa Formolo. 
The PMDB will control city hall in 137 of the state\'s 496 
municipalities, the greatest number of any party in the 
state.  Overall, parties that comprise Rigotto\'s governing 
base will hold power in a total of 441 cities.  The other 
winner in the state was the Popular Socialist Party (PPS), 
which in addition to winning in Porto Alegre, also ousted 
the PT in Pelotas and picked up 3 additional cities in the 
first round.  The PPS victories in Rio Grande do Sul, which 
notably were at the expense of the PT, may strengthen the 
\"oppositionist\" wing of the PPS party, which has suggested 
that the party leave the national governing alliance. 
 
THE PSDB BREAKS NEW GROUND IN PARANA AND SANTA CATERINA 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
5. The PSDB\'s victories in Curitiba and Florianopolis, the 
capitals of Parana and Santa Catarina states, will bolster 
the party\'s position in a region where it has not previously 
had much of a presence.  In Curitiba, the PSDB\'s Beto Richa 
convincingly defeated the PT\'s Angelo Vanhoni (55% to 45%); 
Vanhoni had been favored to win until well into the first 
round campaign.  The city is currently governed by the PFL. 
In addition to failing to pick up the capital, the PT lost 
control of two of the state\'s three largest interior cities. 
The losses in Parana\'s big cities will more than offset the 
PT\'s success in more than doubling the number of small to 
medium sized cities it governs in the state.  Along with the 
PT, the big loser in Parana is PMDB governor Roberto 
Requiao, who bet heavily on Vanhoni in Curitiba and the 
defeated PT incumbents in Ponta Grossa and Maringa.  In an 
indication of how closely the polemical Governor had become 
identified with the PT candidate in Curitiba, the victory 
celebration by Richa supporters took place outside the 
governor\'s palace, rather than at one of the more 
traditional political gathering points in the city.  Former 
Governor Jaime Lerner was among many who blamed Requiao for 
Vanhoni\'s defeat, stating that the Governor succeeded in 
\"burying Vanhoni\'s candidacy, and that the vote represented 
a veto of the Governor\'s \"arrogance and authoritarianism.\" 
 
6.  In Santa Catarina, Dario Berger\'s win over PP candidate 
Chico Assis in Florianopolis will help firm up the PSDB\'s 
still tentative foothold in the state.  The PSDB incumbent 
won a first round victory in Joinville, the state\'s largest 
city.  In both cities, the PSDB candidates benefited from 
the active support of PMDB governor Luiz Henrique da Silva, 
who thus emerges from the municipal elections strengthened 
vis-a-vis the PP\'s Angela Amin, the outgoing mayor of 
Florianopolis and one of his most likely opponents in the 
2006 race for governor. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  The PT\'s electoral setbacks in the South loomed so large 
that even party president Jose Genoino made no attempt to 
hide his dismay.  The party lost Sao Paulo and Porto Alegre, 
the two largest state capitals in the South, and the two 
most important cities the PT governs.  At the national 
level, the PT will undoubtedly spin the election results in 
the major cities of Sao Paulo and the South by focusing on 
the party\'s gains in smaller cities and regions outside its 
traditional base.  It will not be able, however, to disguise 
the fact that it suffered serious setbacks, in particular by 
losing control of Sao Paulo and Porto Alegre.  The PT will 
undoubtedly be picking through the entrails of its defeats 
there for some time to come.  Among the fall-out we 
anticipate from this self-examination are a further 
weakening of the influence of the leftist gaucho wing of the 
party on the national party leadership and the Lula 
government, and a heated competition for the PT 
gubernatorial nomination in Rio Grande do Sul in 2006.  The 
PT gubernatorial selection process in Sao Paulo state will 
also likely become more complicated, as Marta Suplicy may 
well mount an effort to dislodge PT Senator Aloizio 
Mercadante from his perch as the reputed party favorite for 
the nomination.  The PSDB emerged from the elections 
energized not only in Sao Paulo but in the southern states 
of Parana and Santa Caterina.  END COMMENT. 
 
8.  This message was coordinated with Embassy Brasilia. 
 
DUDDY 
"
"24280","12/17/2004 17:59","04SAOPAULO1745","Consulate Sao Paulo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SAOPAULO1870","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SAO PAULO 001745 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2014 
TAGS: BR, ELAB, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, Human Rights, TIP 
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS:  VISIT OF AMBASSADOR 
MILLER TO BRAZIL 
 
REF: SAO PAULO 1870 
 
Classified By: This message has been classified by Labor Officer 
Patric 
 
k Del Vecchio.  Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 
 
1. (C) Begin Summary:  Special Ambassador John Miller visited 
Brazil November 29-December 3 to survey Brazilian efforts to 
combat trafficking in persons.  Ambassador Miller found that 
Brazilian efforts to educate and raise awareness have been 
outstanding in many areas, but more needs to be done 
(including changes in legislation) to arrest, convict and 
imprison traffickers.  Brazil also is in the process of 
improving its efforts for offering counseling, education and 
vocational education for victims.  Ambassador Miller had a 
receptive audience for his arguments that international 
cooperation and changing attitudes among those who frequented 
prostitutes were necessities in dealing with trafficking. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (C) Special Ambassador John Miller visited Brazil November 
29-December 3 to survey Brazilian efforts at combating 
trafficking in Persons.  Program officer Linda Brown 
accompanied Ambassador Miller during visits to Foz do Iguacu, 
Sao Paulo, Goiania and Brasilia.  Subsequently a DOJ/DHS team 
led by Anne Estrada visited Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Belo 
Horizonte, Recife, Fortaleza, Goiania, Brasilia and Foz do 
Iguacu during the period December 1-11 (reported septel). 
 
-------------- 
Foz do Iguacu 
------------- 
 
3. (C) In Foz on November 30, Ambassador Miller visited one 
of the Sentinela centers for sexually abused and exploited 
minors.  The center serves as a reference center for children 
and adolescents, who are evaluated and then given counseling, 
medical attention, and other services.  Later, Ambassador 
Miller met with the Committee to Combat Abuse and Sexual 
Exploitation of Children and Adolescents in Foz.  The 
Committee outlined the way government and non-governmental 
organizations in Foz work together to prevent the commercial 
sexual exploitation of minors (nearly always trafficked). 
Ambassador Miller also saw a presentation by an educational 
outreach group that carried an awareness campaign concerning 
trafficking into schools. 
 
--------- 
Sao Paulo 
--------- 
 
3. (C) December 1, Ambassador Miller visited the newly 
established Sao Paulo State Office to Combat Trafficking in 
Persons.  The State of Sao Paulo established the office after 
several conferences bringing together NGOs, media, 
government, and international experts on the problem of 
trafficking.  The Public Affairs section of the Consulate 
played a key role in helping get the office up and running, 
both supporting the two meetings and providing an initial 
grant of 20,000 dollars to the office.  Ambassador Miller 
toured the office and learned that among other activities, it 
has arranged for the Federal Police to insert a leaflet in 
each new issued passport warning of trafficking, and that the 
office 
will have a reference center at the Sao Paulo international 
airport for victims who have been trafficked internationally 
and are returning to Brazil. 
 
4. (C) Ambassador Miller also met with the State Secretary 
for Justice, Rafael Moreira, and subsequently held a joint 
press conference (covered by five national media outlets). 
Ambassador Miller and the State Secretary emphasized the need 
for international collaboration in ending the problem and 
cited the office as a good example of the kind of cooperation 
that can make a difference--as the office resulted from 
efforts from the Sao Paulo State Government, the Federal 
Ministry of Justice, the USG and the NGOs.  At a lunch with 
NGO representatives and public prosecutors, among others, 
Ambassador Miller learned of some of the difficulties of 
prosecuting trafficking cases in Brazil, given the relatively 
weak legislation.  Ambassador Miller also met with consular 
representatives of various destination countries to learn 
their perspectives on the trafficking. 
 
------ 
Goiania 
------ 
 
5. (C) December 2 in Goiania Ambassador Miller called on the 
newly established State Office to Combat Trafficking in 
Persons.  The Ministry of Justice selected the state of Goias 
as one of its four pilot states for offices to combat 
trafficking because many women from Goias have been 
trafficked to Europe, especially Portugal and Spain.  The 
State Prosecutor Laura Bueno explained that the office is in 
the process of setting up, and will be conducting outreach to 
warn potential victims.    The Federal Police officer in 
charge of Immigration in the state, Luciano Dornelles 
explained that he had an on-going investigation involving a 
ring trafficking to Spain, and that he would be making 
arrests soon.  (As noted reftel, he made the arrests the next 
day.)  He said traffickers took women from Goias exclusively 
to Europe, and that though smuggling of people including 
children into the US existed, he had not discovered 
trafficking of women. 
 
6. (C) Also in Goiania Ambassador Miller visited the 
headquarters of the Pastoral Land Commission (CPT) to met 
with representatives of the Commission and Catholic Relief 
Services (CRS).  The CPT representatives outlined the problem 
of trafficking men to plantations where they work as forced 
labor.  CRS will execute one of the projects under the 
President\'s 50 Million Dollar Initiative, designed to raise 
awareness concerning trafficking in the locales where 
recruiters work, to increase legal representation for workers 
who have been trafficked and liberated, and to begin to 
generate other employment opportunities for these workers. 
 
-------- 
Brasilia 
-------- 
 
7. (C) In Brasilia, Ambassador Miller met with 
representatives of the office of the National Secretary for 
Justice.  They clarified Brazilian trafficking laws, 
explaining that the Brazilian penal code outlaws only the 
international trafficking of women for sexual exploitation, 
and not any form of internal trafficking, including of 
workers for forced labor.  (Forced labor per se is outlawed, 
but trafficking for that purpose is not specificly punished.) 
 These laws made prosecuting and convicting traffickers 
difficult.  The Ministry of Justice has proposed changes that 
would make all types of trafficking subject to criminal 
penalties.  The Brazilian Congress now has the legislation 
for consideration.  The Director of the Labor Inspectorate, 
Ruth Vilela, confirmed the difficulty of prosecuting 
traffickers in forced labor, but noted that the government 
had found other ways to punish them, including denying any 
form of government-based credit to farms and plantations 
where forced labor had been found.  The Foreign Ministry 
representative stressed that Brazil regarded trafficking as a 
serious problem and that the MFA had strengthened the effort 
to reach out 
to trafficking victims in Brazilian embassies and consulates 
located in destination countries.  Ambassador Miller 
concluded by giving an interview with Folha de Sao Paulo, 
Brazil\'s largest circulation daily newspaper.  He stressed 
the need for international cooperation, the importance of 
changing attitudes toward prostitution, and highlighted some 
of the on-going efforts to combat trafficking in Brazil and 
other parts of the world. 
DEL VECCHIO 
"
"24799","12/30/2004 15:41","04SAOPAULO1795","Consulate Sao Paulo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SaoPaulo1659","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SAO PAULO 001795 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC FOR MIKE DEMPSEY 
 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR WHA/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ETRD, EINV, BR 
SUBJECT: GOVERNOR ALCKMIN LAUDS RESULTS OF MUNICIPAL 
ELECTIONS; TELLS AMBASSADOR 2006 PRESIDENTIAL RACE WILL BE 
BETWEEN PT AND PSDB 
 
REF: A) Sao Paulo 1541; B) Sao Paulo 1659 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  Sao Paulo Governor Geraldo Alckmin told 
the Ambassador during a December 14 courtesy call that he 
was confident the country was on good economic and political 
footing, and said he expected continued healthy growth in 
GDP and exports in both the state and Brazil during 2005. 
Alckmin noted the importance of foreign direct investment 
(FDI) to the Sao Paulo state economy, citing U.S. firms and 
the AmCham in particular as good partners.  The Governor 
expressed satisfaction with the outcome of the recent 
municipal elections, suggesting that the gains by opposition 
parties were good for democratic balance in Brazil.  He 
predicted that the 2006 presidential election would end up 
as a race between the PT and the PSDB, the principal 
opposition party.  Alckmin concurred with the Ambassador 
that conclusion of the FTAA negotiations was important, and 
expressed reservations about the GOB\'s decision to grant 
market economy status to China.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) During Ambassador Danilovich\'s December 14 call on 
him, Sao Paulo Governor Geraldo Alckmin stressed his 
interest in maintaining an active partnership with the U.S. 
business community and with the USG.  He said that 
investment by U.S. and other multinational firms was 
essential to ensuring economic growth and employment in the 
state.  He noted that the Sao Paulo AmCham was an important 
partner, and that he receives representatives of U.S. 
businesses doing business, or interested in doing business, 
in the state nearly every day.  He noted that the state 
government had recently signed an agreement with Ford under 
which Ford would reinvest about USD 300 million in state 
sales tax (ICMS) rebates on exported products to modernize 
its production plants in Taubate and Sao Bernardo dos 
Campos, Sao Paulo. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Alckmin expressed confidence that Brazil\'s export- 
led economic recovery would continue into 2005.  He noted 
that Brazil had enjoyed a 31% increase in export sales 
during 2004, while exports from Sao Paulo state had grown by 
nearly 37%.  He also noted that while the overall Brazilian 
economy had expanded by 5% during 2004, the state had seen 
7% growth.  He praised Finance Minister Palocci\'s macro- 
economic management, and said he expected healthy stable 
growth to continue next year. 
 
4.  (SBU)  Turning to the results of the October municipal 
elections, Alckmin said that the outcome was good for 
democratic balance in the country.  He said that the 
Brazilian electorate had been wise to avoid concentrating 
power in the hands of one or two political parties.  In 
2002, the electorate gave the federal government to the 
Workers Party (PT) of President Lula, but did not elect PT 
governments to any large states.  Now the electorate had 
\"taken the major cities away\" from the PT as well, ensuring 
a good balance of power.  He suggested that the outcome of 
the municipal elections reflected voter unhappiness with the 
PT model of government, which he said was too centralized 
and authoritarian.  He noted that Lula had 36 Cabinet 
ministers, \"too many\" in Alckmin\'s estimation.  The Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso (PSDB) government had been more open than 
the Lula government, he claimed.  Alckmin noted that his own 
party, the PSDB, had done well in the municipal elections, 
in particular in Sao Paulo state.  (See ref A).  At the 
national level, the PSDB, he said, was a constructive 
opposition, and supported many of the important reforms 
supported by the Lula government. 
 
5.  (SBU) Alckmin predicted that the 2006 presidential 
election would end up as a face off against the PT and the 
PSDB, though he avoided any mention of who the PSDB standard- 
bearer would be.  (Comment.  Alckmin is widely seen as a 
likely frontrunner for the PSDB presidential nomination, 
though he always attempted to deflect such speculation in 
his public statements, suggesting that it is \"too early\" to 
speculate on the composition of the 2006 race.  End 
Comment.)  He said that the first round of the 2006 election 
would be \"all about Lula,\" who would undoubtedly make it 
into the second round, but was not \"unbeatable\" in the 
second round. 
 
6.  (SBU) On trade, Alckmin agreed with the Ambassador that 
progress on negotiating the Free Trade of the Americas 
(FTAA) agreement was essential.  He noted that Brazil needed 
to take advantage of the benefits a hemispheric trade 
agreement could bring, acknowledging that the U.S. was 
Brazil\'s largest trading partner.  Alckmin expressed 
reservations about the GOB\'s recent decision to grant China 
market economy status; it was too soon for such 
recognitions.  He added that the Sao Paulo private sector 
was \"preoccupied\" with the decision, which it fears will 
result in unfair competition from Chinese products dumped on 
the Brazilian market.  (Comment.  We have heard similar 
comments directly from private sector contacts; ref B.  End 
comment.) He added that as Brazil\'s third largest export 
destination, China was also an important trading partner. 
 
7.  (SBU)  Comment.  Governor Alckmin was very relaxed and 
forthcoming, stressing the importance he places on 
partnership with the private sector, both local and 
multinational. Notably, while he credited the Lula 
government for good macro-economic management, he also 
suggested that the PSDB would have a reasonable shot at 
regaining the Presidency in 2006.  End Comment. 
 
8.  This cable was coordinated with Embassy Brasilia. 
 
DUDDY 
"
"25008","1/6/2005 10:08","05SAOPAULO21","Consulate Sao Paulo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SAO PAULO 000021 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC FOR MIKE DEMPSEY 
 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR WHA/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, BR, Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: SERRA\'S HONEYMOON CUT SHORT 
 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY.  Jose Serra of the Brazilian Social 
Democratic Party (PSDB) was inaugurated as Mayor of Sao 
Paulo on January 1, in a ceremony that took on the tone of a 
PSDB political festival.  Virtually all the stars of the Sao 
Paulo wing of the PSDB party, including former President 
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, were in attendance.  The party 
was cut short, however, as the newly inaugurated Sao Paulo 
city council handed Serra his first defeat the same 
afternoon, when his choice for city council president was 
defeated by a PSDB dissident with the support of the Workers 
Party (PT) and other opposition parties.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Jose Serra, who defeated outgoing PT Mayor Martha 
Suplicy in the October 31 municipal run-off election, took 
office January 1 in a two-stage inaugural ceremony.  He was 
officially sworn in at the City Council chambers, along with 
the 55 city council members; the formal, public ceremony 
took place immediately afterwards at City Hall.  Breaking 
normal protocol, Serra gave a short speech at the city 
council ceremony, stressing the need for the executive and 
legislative branches of the city government to work together 
in the public interest and the priority his administration 
would place on ethical behavior.  His remarks reportedly 
were greeted with enthusiastic applause by council members 
from allied parties and stony silence from the opposition. 
 
3.  (U) The Sao Paulo PSDB leadership was out in force at 
the public inaugural ceremony at City Hall.  Many were 
recognized from the podium, giving the event an air of a 
PSDB homecoming celebration (though the PSDB has never 
before governed Sao Paulo city).  In addition to former 
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Sao Paulo Governor 
Geraldo Alckmin, several members of the Sao Paulo 
Congressional delegation and several members of President 
Cardoso\'s cabinet, including former Foreign Minister Celso 
Lafer, Education Minister Paulo Renato Souza and Social 
Communications Minister Andrea Matarazzo, were in 
attendance.  Former President Cardoso was enthusiastically 
cheered by the partisan audience.  The PFL also sent several 
of its local stars, including Vice Governor Claudio Lembo, 
the president of the Sao Paulo PFL.  Serra\'s vice mayor is 
PFL Federal Deputy Gilberto Kassab.  Justice Minster Marcio 
Thomas Bastos represented the Lula administration. 
 
4. (U) A number of local PSDB stars also found a home in 
Serra\'s cabinet, which was sworn in at the same ceremony, 
and among his senior subcabinet level advisors.  PSDB 
Federal Deputies Walter Feldman and Aloysio Nunes Ferreira 
were named to the key positions of Coordinator for Regional 
Deputy Mayors and Secretary for Government, respectively. 
Three former Cardoso Cabinet Ministers were named to senior 
advisory positions.  Andrea Matarazzo will oversee the 
continued revitalization of Sao Paulo\'s historic center as 
regional deputy mayor for the downtown region; former 
Minister of Justice and National Human Rights Secretary Jose 
Gregori will head the municipal Commission on Human Rights, 
and former Sports Minister Caio Luiz de Carvalho will head 
Sao Paulo\'s tourist and convention bureau.  Two key 
municipal cabinet slots -- Housing and Education -- went to 
Vice Mayor Kassab\'s PFL.  The Popular Socialist Party (PPS) 
and Green Party (PV), which supported Serra in the second 
round of the election, each got one seat.  Environment 
Secretary Eduardo Jorge (PV) served as Health Secretary 
 
SIPDIS 
during the first two years of the Suplicy administration. 
Retired diplomat Helena Maria Gasparian was named as 
International Relations Secretary, a position Serra had 
initially said he would abolish.  Serra\'s 20 member cabinet 
includes three women and one Afro-Brazilian. 
 
5.  (U)  Within hours of his inauguration, Serra was faced 
with the first political crisis of his administration when 
the city council rejected his preferred candidate for city 
council president.  By a razor thin margin -- 28 to 26 -- 
the council elected PSDB maverick Roberto Tripoli over the 
PSDB\'s own nominee, Ricardo Montoro.  In last minute 
maneuvering, Tripoli garnered support for his candidacy from 
the PT caucus along with that of the loose coalition of 
council members from the PMDB, PP, PTB and PL parties that 
calls itself the Centrao, or Big Center.  Tripoli, who 
reportedly was passed over for a cabinet seat or as 
government leader, insisted that he agreed to stand for 
election only after being told by opposition members that 
Montoro could not attract enough opposition votes to win the 
election. (NOTE.  The PSDB and the PT each have 13 seats on 
the council.  In addition to the PSDB, Serra\'s governing 
coalition includes the PFL and 5 smaller parties with a 
total of 10 additional seats.  The 18 members of the Centrao 
thus are well positioned to act as power brokers on key 
issues; four Centrao members broke ranks to support Serra\'s 
candidate.  END NOTE.)  The outraged PSDB caucus has 
demanded Tripoli\'s expulsion from the PSDB.  According to 
press reports, Tripoli is expected to join the Green Party, 
which is allied with the PSDB in the governing coalition. 
The Sao Paulo city council controls the fourth largest 
public budget in Brazil, after the federal government and 
the states of Sao Paulo and Minas Gerais. 
 
6.  (U) While Serra\'s team has downplayed the significance 
of Montoro\'s defeat at the hands of Tripoli and the 
opposition, publicly observing only that the legislature is 
an independent branch of government, the press has 
highlighted it as a major defeat for the new administration. 
The story trumped coverage of the inauguration itself; the 
front page headline in major daily Estado de Sao Paulo on 
January 2 was, \"Serra Begins with Defeat.\"  Press reports 
have focused on the city council election result as an 
indication of fissures within the local PSDB party, which 
could complicate Serra\'s relationship with the City Council 
and the effectiveness of his administration.  This is the 
first time since the start of Mayor Luiza Erundina\'s term in 
1987 that the City Council has not ratified the incoming 
mayor\'s choice as council president; Luiza Erundina (then- 
PT) had a notoriously stormy relationship with the city 
council. 
 
7. (U) In one of his first official acts, Serra ordered the 
suspension of all procurement actions initiated by the 
Suplicy government, and a review of all on-going service 
contracts signed by her government.  Serra indicated that 
this was an austerity move, intended to bring municipal 
expenditures into line with resources. 
 
8. (SBU) COMMENT.  The turn out of the PSDB party glitterati 
at Serra\'s inauguration, and the presence of a number of 
nationally prominent PSDB and PFL figures among Serra\'s 
senior advisors suggests that the Sao Paulo wing of the PSDB 
sees Serra\'s win in Sao Paulo as both partial vindication 
for his and the party\'s loss to Lula in 2002 and as an 
important step in reestablishing the party as the principal 
alternative to the PT nationally.  With control of the state 
and city governments and a PSDB president in the state 
assembly, the party also will likely use Sao Paulo as a 
launching pad for its 2006 national campaign.  While 
Governor Alckmin continues to publicly demur about his own 
plans for a presidential run, others in the party are far 
less discrete, and the Governor is clearly enjoying being 
the object of speculation.  The city council\'s rejection of 
Serra\'s candidate for council president put a damper on the 
PSDB festivities.  While it could prove to be momentary and 
localized set-back, it could also prove to be an early 
warning sign that the Sao Paulo wing of the party needs to 
ensure its own house is in order before setting out on the 
national campaign trail.  END COMMENT. 
 
DUDDY 
"