
"22130","10/28/2004 12:46","04CALCUTTA427","Consulate Kolkata","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CALCUTTA 000427 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP SALLY NEUMANN AND MARK TAYLOR 
NEW DELHI FOR INL OFFICE AND USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KCRM, KWMN, EAID, IN, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: U.S.-FUNDED NGO TARGETED IN COURT 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  The Indian Supreme Court has issued a notice to 
the West Bengal Government on a petition alleging that the NGO 
Sanlaap, in collusion with the police, has been running a racket 
to exploit minor girls as a means to obtain foreign donor 
funding, according to an October 28 report in the Hindustan 
Times.  The USG has provided funding to Sanlaap for several 
years to assist it with rescue and rehabilitation of victims of 
trafficking.  We have strong reason to believe that the case is 
without merit and has been filed simply as a means to discredit 
Sanlaap but, given the USG involvement, we will follow 
developments closely as they develop.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  The Calcutta edition of the October 28 Hindustan Times 
supplement, \"HT Kolkata Live,\" filed a report alleging 
impropriety on the part of the anti-trafficking NGO, Sanlaap. 
In discussion with ConGen FSN, the author admitted that he had 
not researched the facts of the case but was only presenting the 
allegations raised by the plaintiff in the court case.  The case 
alleges that Sanlaap has been collecting \"only beautiful minor 
girls\" in collusion with the police who first accuse \"poor and 
illiterate women\" of indulging in prostitution and then use this 
to remove their daughters from them in order to hand the minor 
girls over to Sanlaap\'s custody.  The article alleges that 
Sanlaap receives money from foreign donors based on the number 
of girls it has in custody.  Simla Singh filed the petition 
claiming that she had been separated from her minor daughter 
Juhi after the police arrested Singh allegedly in a false case 
and handed Juhi over to Sanlaap.  According to the petition, the 
home was only intended to have temporary custody for one month, 
but Juhi was kept at the Sanlaap for over a year in an \"uncared\" 
condition and her education discontinued.  Other Calcutta 
dailies also carried the item in lesser detail. 
 
3.  According to press reports, and confirmed by the police and 
Sanlaap, Simla Singh and Juhi were picked up from the Calcutta 
red light district Sonagachi in 2003 by the city police\'s 
immoral trafficking section and Simla was charged under Section 
373 of the Indian Penal Code for keeping Juhi for the purpose of 
prostitution.  The two were produced before the Additional Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate who, in response to petition by Sanlaap, 
gave the NGO custody of the child.  In fact, according to 
Sanlaap, the police specifically asked the NGO to file this 
petition as Sanlaap runs a home under the government\'s \"Swadhar\" 
scheme for rescued victims of trafficking.  In July 2004, Singh 
appealed against the order but her plea for restoration of the 
daughter\'s custody to the mother (and reportedly that of another 
woman claiming to be the girl\'s mother) was turned down.  The 
basis of the refusal was a 1997 Supreme Court ruling that there 
should be no children in red light areas and that they should be 
rescued and kept either in a state-run rescue center or in the 
care of a well-established NGO, such as Sanlaap.  Singh then 
moved the case to the apex court. 
 
4.  Police contacts say the State Home Secretary, to whom the 
notice was reportedly issued, has not yet approached them.  The 
Director of Sanlaap also said that she had not yet heard 
anything directly from the legal authorities.  Both said that 
Singh was not a \"simple housewife\" as she claimed but rather a 
married woman living in two rooms inside an \"upmarket\" brothel 
(owned by someone else) and dealing in young girls.  According 
to Sanlaap, Singh belongs to the \"Agrawali\" community (from 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh) that culturally 
practice prostitution.  The recent trend, she said, is that they 
buy almost newborn children and bring them up in their tradition 
for supply to brothels.  The Sanlaap Director acknowledged that 
Juhi, who is ten years old, had probably not yet been 
prostituted at the time of her rescue.  Sanlaap also has three 
Agrawali sisters in its care, one of which is the biological 
daughter of the sex worker from whose premises the three were 
rescued, while the other two were \"adopted.\"  Unlike in Delhi 
and Mumbai, the Calcutta police never carry out random raids on 
red light areas to look for minors, but only act with prior 
information -- an approach that local antitrafficking NGOs, 
including Sanlaap, have been trying to change. 
 
5.  COMMENT.  The news item is an unresearched story sourced 
only to the allegations made in the court case.  Sanlaap is 
Calcutta\'s lead NGO actively pursuing the rescue of minors in 
the city\'s red light areas, thereby drawing the ire of those 
whose income depends on the trafficking and sexual exploitation 
of children.  For these reasons, we believe that the court case 
is probably without merit and the newspaper story yet another 
attempt to inhibit and impede Sanlaap\'s activities.  One 
element, at least, is completely erroneous:  USG funding for 
Sanlaap has been project based and is not connected directly to 
the number of girls in Sanlaap\'s custody.  However, while 
skeptical about the credibility of the allegations against 
Sanlaap, Post cannot completely rule out the possibility that 
some parts of the case may have merit, or that the Supreme Court 
may eventually rule for the plaintiff.  In Calcutta, as 
elsewhere in India, the wheels of justice tend to turn slowly. 
Given the USG involvement with this organization, we will 
monitor the case closely and report accordingly. 
 
SIBLEY 
"
"22173","10/29/2004 9:10","04CALCUTTA428","Consulate Kolkata","UNCLASSIFIED","04NEWDELHI4249|04NEWDELHI4452","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS CALCUTTA 000428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL AND SA/INS 
STATE ALSO FOR G/TIP -SALLY NEUMANN AND MARK TAYLOR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PHUM, SOCI, KWMN, IN, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: NEPALESE MINORS RESCUED FROM A CIRCUS IN EASTERN INDIA 
 
REF: A) NEW DELHI 4452, B) NEW DELHI 4249 AND PREVIOUS 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  On October 6, the District Magistrate of Madhubani 
District in north Bihar handed over five minor Nepali girls to 
the Nepalese NGO Maiti Nepal.  The girls were rescued from a 
circus performing in the district.  This is the first instance 
in eastern India wherein an NGO, the state Labor Department and 
the district administration collaborated to intervene in order 
to rescue and repatriate minors, closing down the circus, and 
prosecuting the offender for violating child labor norms.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
2.  On October 6, the District Magistrate (DM) of Madhubani 
District, near the Nepal border in the eastern Indian state of 
Bihar, handed over five Nepalese minor girls to the NGO Maiti 
Nepal for rehabilitation.  A local NGO, Gram Vikas Parishad 
(GVP), had rescued the girls from a Kolkata-based circus holding 
shows in and around the district.  GVP had taken photographs and 
video taped around 12 minors performing in the circus and 
reported it to the district administration.  With the help of 
the local authorities and instructions from the Bihar Labor 
Commissioner, the circus premises were raided during an 
afternoon show.  While five minors (all less than 12 years of 
age) were rescued, seven others were whisked away in the crowd 
by the circus staff.  The girls were repatriated on the basis of 
their statements regarding place of origin, and that they were 
with the circus for 3-4 years, paid paltry sums, not allowed to 
meet their parents, and that they wanted to go home.  The state 
government notified the Nepalese Embassy in New Delhi who in 
turn informed Kathmandu and the DM/Police of the girls\' area of 
origin and obtained their consent to having Maiti Nepal take 
charge of the children. 
 
3.  Legal proceedings have been initiated against the 
owner/manager for violations under the Indian Child/Bonded Labor 
Act and the Minimum Wages Act and the circus has been closed 
down.  However, no arrests were made because, the DM claimed, 
the offenses were bailable.  Madhubani is an extremely 
impoverished region ravaged by annual floods.  For this reason 
the DM was concerned that any stringent police action against 
the circus would have drawn public sympathy as small businesses 
had developed around it and the circus also had local political 
patronage.  The DM said that he was \"determined\" to pursue the 
two court cases filed against Mohammad Akbar Hussein, Western 
Circus, 50B Elliott Road, Kolkata.  The circus was able to get 
the first court closure notice vacated and reopened within ten 
days, but following a second more stringent order, at the behest 
of the DM, it closed and moved to an adjoining district.  GVP is 
keeping an eye on the circus and has been assured all assistance 
by the local authorities.  The group is also in touch with Maiti 
Nepal for updates regarding the rehabilitation of the rescued 
girls.  According to GVP, the state action was nudged along by 
P.M. Nair, formerly on deputation to the National Human Rights 
Commission, but now back in his cadre state of Bihar. 
 
4.  COMMENT:  Circus performances are extremely popular in 
Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa and elsewhere in India, particularly in 
the rural areas where there is a paucity of other entertainment. 
 Children are very much a part of these operations, largely 
drawn from poor families in Bengal and the southern states. 
They are brought up within the circus environment and trained 
practically from the cradle to perform tricky, dangerous and 
often life threatening feats.  (Reftels describe a previous case 
of child rescue from circuses.)  While West Bengal may have lost 
its penchant for the circus, its ruling left parties regularly 
organize high profile \"melas,\" or festivals, in the cities and 
districts where children are also utilized to perform precarious 
acts.  A couple of state NGOs claim to be working to draw the 
administration\'s attention to this aberration and create 
awareness.  The Madhubani incident, however, is the first we 
have heard of in eastern India where an NGO, the state Labor 
Department, and the local administration worked together to 
directly intervene to close down the circus, file cases against 
the owner on child labor charges, and rescue Nepali minors for 
repatriation.  END COMMENT. 
 
SIBLEY 
"
"22895","11/16/2004 15:07","04CALCUTTA445","Consulate Kolkata","UNCLASSIFIED","04NEWDELHI7211","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CALCUTTA 000445 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS AND EB 
COMMERCE FOR U/S JUSTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EINV, ECON, ELAB, AMGT, IN, Indian Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION STRIKES IN WEST BENGAL LEAVE GOVERNMENT 
RED-FACED 
 
REF: A) NEW DELHI 007211 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  In the coming three weeks, starting on November 
17, West Bengal will witness three general strikes planned by 
different political parties protesting the recent hike in 
petroleum prices by the central government.  West Bengal\'s Left 
Front government, eager to establish its business-friendly 
image, is not supporting these actions, but nor has it 
energetically and vociferously opposed them, probably due to its 
own extensive past use of this tactic.  However, until the 
culture of protest declines in West Bengal this will remain a 
hindrance to productivity and a disincentive for investors.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  Three political groups in West Bengal have seized the issue 
of energy price hikes to grasp the spotlight on the state\'s 
political stage.  The result:  Three days of likely disruption 
of civic life.  The political groups come from across the 
ideological spectrum, but all are opposed to West Bengal\'s 
ruling Left Front Government.  These actions have nothing to do 
with how difficult social and economic choices are made in the 
face of rising global oil prices and everything to do with 
seizing a political issue that may inspire populist support. 
The Socialist Unity Center of India (SUCI), a regional party, is 
organizing the first general strike - bandh in local parlance -- 
on November 17.  The SUCI -- not part of West Bengal\'s ruling 
Left Front -- has organized movements against the state and 
central governments in the past. 
 
3.  The second general strike, organized by the ultra-Left 
Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) [CPI-ML], will 
follow on November 22.  Finally, West Bengal\'s main opposition 
party, the centrist Trinamul Congress (TMC), is organizing the 
third bandh on December 3.  TMC officials privately admit there 
had been some dissension within the party -- between TMC-backed 
elected representatives and its party managers -- over whether 
they should add their voices to this chorus of protest, but the 
bandh supporters eventually carried the day. 
 
4.  West Bengal has a long history of organizing strikes.  All 
political parties have used these as a weapon of mass political 
action that leads to the loss of working days and substantial 
economic losses.  Ironically, it is the CPM - the dominant Left 
Front member - that has the worst track record in organizing 
strikes, whether in government or out of it.  By backing violent 
and disruptive political action - either on its own or through 
its affiliated labor organizations - the CPM is itself largely 
responsible for the image of delinquency that West Bengal has 
acquired in India\'s corporate and administrative circles. 
 
5.  No matter who organizes them, the legacy of general strikes 
is now hurting West Bengal\'s economy and the Left Front 
government has recognized this.  Chief Minister Buddhadeb 
Bhattacharjee and his team are eager to attract domestic and 
foreign investment to pull the state out of three decades of 
industrial decline.  The state government has just started to 
attract large IT companies to Calcutta.  In an effort to have 
the bandhs disrupt as little as possible, the West Bengal 
political and administrative leadership are taking modest 
actions to ensure that Calcutta is not overly affected by the 
strikes.  For the IT industry, with call centers reliant on 
24-hour coverage, there is supposed to be an amnesty as it has 
been declared an \"essential service.\"   For government 
employees, the Calcutta High Court has directed that the state 
government deduct a day\'s pay if its employees do not report for 
duty on the day of the strike without a satisfactory reason. 
The state government will risk contempt of court if it tries to 
soft-pedal anti-strike measures.  Nonetheless, the government 
has not spoken out clearly and loudly against this tactic and, 
in the past at least, it has not used the police to prevent 
coercive action by the strikers. 
 
6.  Media surveys over the past two days have revealed that 
Calcutta\'s citizens are not in favor of losing three working 
days in a span of three weeks.  But such surveys also indicate 
that people are frightened of the possibility of violence and 
that factor, more than any support of the cause, may force many 
to stay indoors.  The reality of past violent action to enforce 
work stoppages, although rare in recent times, makes this a 
reasonable fear. 
 
7.  For our part, the U.S. Consulate will remain open for 
business during all three bandhs.  Employees are strongly 
encouraged to come to work, but those who fear for their 
personal safety are granted permission to stay at home.  They 
will be charged for a day of annual leave in that case. 
 
8.  COMMENT:  The West Bengal Government is trying hard to sell 
Calcutta as a preferred investment destination, especially for 
information technology.  In our discussions with the state 
government - most recently during Commerce Under Secretary 
Kenneth Juster\'s visit -- we have encouraged the Left Front to 
dissociate itself from the politics of disruption so as to win 
investor confidence and build a business-friendly image.  We 
have pointed out that West Bengal is in a global competition for 
capital and that investors will be put off by the lost 
productivity inherent in the state\'s culture of protest.  There 
are clearly signs that the state government is attempting to 
maintain a degree of normalcy on these occasions, but a more 
robust effort is needed to assuage investors\' concerns. 
Otherwise, West Bengal and its rulers will continue to be 
saddled with image problems of their own making.  END COMMENT. 
 
SIBLEY 
"
"23015","11/19/2004 3:58","04CALCUTTA449","Consulate Kolkata","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS CALCUTTA 000449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS, EAP/IMBS AND INR 
NEW DELHI FOR POL AND DAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, PINS, PGOV, BM, IN, GOI, India-Burma 
SUBJECT: MANIPUR: INDIAN ARMY PRESSURE NEAR BURMA BORDER 
 
REF: A) CALCUTTA 0337, B) CALCUTTA 0294, C) CALCUTTA 0135 AND PREVIOUS 
 
1. (SBU) On October 26, the Indian Army launched a 
counter-insurgency exercise in the Chandel and Churachandpur 
districts of Manipur, a Northeast Indian state bordering Burma. 
Remaining initially tightlipped, an Army spokesman finally 
announced on November 6 that more than 100 rebel bases had been 
attacked and that the Army had re-established control over Sajik 
Tampak, where about 2,000 rebels had been camping.  The Manipuri 
separatist insurgent camps bordering Burma belong primarily to 
the United National Liberation Front (UNLF), the People\'s 
Liberation Army (PLA) and the Peoples\' Revolutionary Army of 
Kangleipak (PREPAK).   On the Burmese side of the border, these 
and other Northeast Indian insurgent outfits are believed to 
have bases.  Press reports suggest that Burmese troops are 
maintaining a heightened state of vigilance on their side of the 
boundary, to check militants from entering the country. 
 
2. (SBU) A leader of the Manipur Congress, the ruling party in 
Imphal, Manipur\'s capital, told post that the Army operation 
aims at \"cleansing\" the border area by driving away or detaining 
militants, while keeping casualties to a minimum.    Officials 
estimate about a couple of dozen militants killed, although some 
contacts said the tally may be even less.  On November 9, the 
UNLF issued a statement dismissing Army claims as propaganda. 
The outfit said that insurgents had successfully fought off 
attempts by the military to infiltrate their bases.  The UNLF 
also claims to have inflicted heavy casualties on security 
forces in Churachandpur on November 13, killing 12 Army 
personnel.  In turn, the Army has denied this. 
 
3. (SBU) On November 20, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh is 
scheduled to visit Manipur, a state torn by insurgency and 
popular resentment against the GOI.  Singh\'s program includes 
formally vacating the historic Kangla Fort in Imphal, occupied 
since 1949 by the Assam Rifles forces, and handing it over to 
the state government.  The occupation of the fort has been a 
source of much popular anguish, and Singh\'s move is intended to 
engender goodwill.  (Septel will report in greater detail on the 
ongoing internal problems in Manipur.) 
 
4. (SBU) COMMENT:  Although highly detailed information is 
difficult to come by, so far the Army exercise appears low-grade 
despite the \"propaganda war\" by both the security forces and the 
militants.   Army personnel first moved into the forested, 
mountainous Sajik Tampak area as long ago as April, on the eve 
of Parliamentary elections (Reftels).   Significantly, the 
launch of the current operation coincided with Burmese General 
Than Shwe\'s October 25-29 India visit.  The exercise also 
precedes PM Singh\'s scheduled tour, as well as the Indo-ASEAN 
car rally -- to be inaugurated on November 22 -- with as many as 
60 teams competing on a route that starts in Guwahati, Assam, 
exits India through Manipur\'s border checkpoint at Moreh, and 
continues through Southeast Asia to the finish line in 
Singapore.  The GOI is hoping this rally will showcase a 
significant new trade route into the northeast, and they 
recognize that any security incidents could be a severe setback 
to these ambitions.   END COMMENT. 
 
SIBLEY 
"
"25129","1/10/2005 5:56","05CALCUTTA7","Consulate Kolkata","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS CALCUTTA 000007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PHUM, IN, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: SENIOR POLICEMAN AMONG SEVEN KILLED IN MAOIST BIHAR BLAST 
 
REF: 04 CAL 450, 04 CAL 0143, 01 CAL  0156 
 
1. Prior to the approaching state assembly elections in Bihar 
and Jharkhand, a district police chief of Munger in Bihar, K.C 
Surendrababu, along with six other policemen, were killed on 
Wednesday January 5th, when their vehicle was blown-up by a 
remote-controlled landmine. The landmine was allegedly planted 
by the newly formed ultra-Left -- the Communist Party of India 
(Maoist). The Maoists removed the firearms of the slain 
policemen after they died in the blast. 
 
2. The Maoists served a warning to the Bihar government after 
the later banned their proposed rally at the capital city Patna 
in the first week of December 2004. The Bihar police had 
arrested about 300 Maoists sympathizers, who had gathered at 
Patna to attend the rally. Following this, the Maoist had 
launched several attacks in December on Bihar and Jharkhand 
railway stations. Sources in the Bihar Police told Post that the 
Wednesday\'s incidence could be termed as one of the first major 
events by the CPI (Maoist) after its formation in September last 
year following the merger of Maoist Communist Center and the 
Peoples War. 
 
3. (SBU) According to our consulate contact in the Bihar police, 
the slain district police chief, along with his staff, had gone 
to supervise a joint operation, with the help of neighboring 
Jamui district police, in connection of the looting of guns and 
ammunitions from the police posted at Railway station. State 
Home Secretary, Girish Shankar, said that the blast took place 
in the evening in which the vehicle they were returning in was 
thrown-up several feet above the ground due to the three 
explosives embedded on the road. There were no survivors and all 
the bodies have been recovered. Surendrababu, who was a native 
of Andhra Pradesh and was the 1997-batch Bihar-cadre Indian 
Police Service (IPS) officer, died on the spot along with his 
bodyguard, driver, and four other policemen. This is the second 
incidence in Bihar in which an IPS officer has been killed in a 
landmine blast operated by the Maoists. In October 2000, 
Logardagga (now in Jharkhand, then Bihar) district police chief 
Ajay Kumar Singh was also killed in the same manner along with 
eight other policemen. 
 
4. As against Andhra Pradesh the Bihar government has ruled-out 
all possibilities of offering talks with the Naxalites. The 
Bihar Chief Secretary K.A.H. Subramanian has categorically said 
-\"the blast is only targeting the policemen and it has forced us 
to rethink how to tackle the Naxalite menace. The present 
atmosphere is not conducive for holding talks with the 
Naxalites.\" Keeping in view that the state government is now 
planning to set-up a special Naxal cell in the police 
headquarters at Patna. \"We have an Inspector General of Police 
who supervises operations against insurgency, but we will soon 
have a full-fledged Naxal cell to effectively check this 
menace,\" said the Chief Secretary. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: As the state assembly elections draws close, 
such incidents in Bihar and Jharkhand are likely to go up. At 
the same time, this incident has adversely affected the moral of 
Bihar police. \"It could just be a curtain raiser,\" said a 
high-level police contact in Bihar. He added -\"the Maoists, 
normally always oppose polling and they have shown their 
displeasure through violence in the past\". During the 2004 
general elections about 29 policemen were killed in a single 
incident in April in Jharkhand. Both the states -- Bihar and 
Jharkhand, are to go to the polls in three phases on February 3, 
15 and 23. End Comment. 
 
 
 
 
 
SMITH 
"