
"7865","5/6/2003 15:20","03BRUSSELS2375","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002375 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/PC; DOJ FOR OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AINF, KCRM, KJUS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPOL - U.S. COOPERATION 
 
1. Summary.    The mission of Europol (the European Police 
Office) has steadily expanded from its initial focus on 
fighting drugs to encompass all serious crimes, including 
terrorism, illicit migration, trafficking in persons, child 
pornography, money-laundering and counterfeiting of the Euro. 
 Within the last year and a half the U.S. has signed two 
cooperative agreements with Europol.   While it is expected 
that the initial flow of information will largely be from the 
USG to Europol, these agreements will allow the U.S. to 
develop a deepening cooperative relationship as Europol grows 
in stature within the EU and acquires a more expansive role 
in police work.  This is being submitted as part of the 
Mission\'s reporting plan.  End summary. 
 
Mission and Function of Europol 
 
2.  Europol is an evolving police institution of the European 
Union whose primary mission at this time is to facilitate the 
coordination and cooperation of member states in the field of 
criminal law enforcement.  At the present time it has limited 
operational authority and its personnel do not arrest people 
or engage in searches and seizures.  Europol operates under 
its own Convention which came into force on October 1, 1998. 
Europol commenced its full activities on July 1, 1999. 
Membership in Europol is part of the acquis; accordingly, all 
accession countries will be members of Europol as part of 
their obligation to adhere to the EU institutions and 
principles.  Through the pooling of information and data 
concerning those aspects of crime which affect two or more of 
their members, Europol is able, in theory at least, to 
provide all members with better insight into the crime 
problem they face and how best to respond to it.  Europol\'s 
\"added value\" to member states, in theory, lies in its 
ability to perform critical analysis and to render 
coordinative assistance to member states in fighting 
primarily transnational organized crime and terrorism.  Under 
the Europol convention, all members must assign one or more 
\"liaison\" officers to Europol headquarters in The Hague and 
ensure that these officers have access on line to the various 
police databases maintained by their respective country. 
Noteworthy is the fact that member states are not pooling 
their databases but merely making them potentially accessible 
in one centralized location in The Hague.  Within a 
relatively short period of time, Europol has evolved from a 
small entity with jurisdiction limited to the drug area to 
its present jurisdiction over all serious crimes, including 
terrorism, illicit migration, trafficking in persons, child 
pornography, and money-laundering, with primary jurisdiction 
over counterfeiting of the Euro.  Europol is funded by 
contributions from the EU Member States according to their 
GNP.  Its 2003 budget is Euro 55.5 million.  There are 
currently 386 staff members from all Member States.  Of 
these, 59 are Europol Liaison Officers representing a variety 
of law enforcement agencies (police, customs, gendarmerie, 
immigration services, etc.)   The Directorate of Europol is 
appointed by the Council of the European Union.  The 
Directorate currently consists of Director Jurgen Storbeck 
(German) and Deputy Directors Willy Bruggeman (Belgium) and 
Mariano Simancas (Spain). 
 
3.  Europol has improved its international law enforcement 
cooperation by signing bilateral agreements with the 
following non-EU states and international organizations:  the 
European Central Bank, the European Monitoring Center on 
Drugs and Drug Addiction, Iceland, Norway, and the World 
Customs Organization.  It is currently in negotiations with 
Canada. 
 
Europol\'s Weakness 
 
4.  The Europol Convention is an extremely complex 
instrument.  It contains precise and cumbersome rules 
concerning the handling of personal data, reflective of the 
Union,s collective fears of massive human rights violations 
by police organizations, which are not usually closely 
controlled.  While obviously a worthy objective, the rules 
are so stringent with respect to the handling of personal 
data as to make it extremely difficult for the organization 
to function effectively.  It is suggested that the same 
objectives could be accomplished in a more efficacious 
fashion so as to strike a more appropriate balance between 
the security needs of the nation and the protection of human 
rights. 
 
5.  Europol depends on others to provide it with the raw data 
which form the basis of its analytical work.  However, a 
critical tenet of the Convention is that member states retain 
control over their own data and dictate what is to be shared 
with Europol and with member states through the Europol 
process.  Thus member states can and do withhold information 
from Europol, which impedes its ability to perform its 
assigned tasks.  Nowhere is this more dramatically seen than 
in the field of terrorism where, following the September 11 
attack, the JHA ministers publicly criticized their own 
organizations for not sharing critical data on terrorism with 
Europol.  Europol can only propose investigations to member 
states but cannot compel such inquiries.  Europol cannot send 
out its officials to conduct interviews, perform searches or 
make arrests.  Europol is generally disliked if not despised 
by many EU member police organizations.  These organizations 
tend to resent Europol,s existence and view it as criticism 
of their own efforts at coordination, which they maintain, 
have worked effectively over the years.  In this regard, it 
should not be forgotten that Europol is a political creation 
and its establishment was not driven by perceived needs of 
law enforcement but rather the political desire for greater 
integration in the JHA arena.  The JHA ministers are 
consistently conferring more and more jurisdiction on 
Europol.  It is likely that the new EU Constitution (due to 
be unveiled in June 2003) will provide Europol with some 
limited operational role as well as the authority to order a 
country to commence an inquiry.   Over time, Europol could 
evolve into the nucleus of a federal EU police structure. 
 
Relations with the United States 
 
6.  In a relatively short period of time we have been able to 
conclude and put into effect two agreements with Europol 
which provide a legal basis for exchanging all forms of 
information, including personal data.   An outgrowth of the 
events of 9/11, the initial agreement between the U.S. and 
Europol was signed in Brussels in December, 2001, to enable 
the sharing of strategic data and to facilitate cooperation 
on joint threat assessments.  The logical next step was a 
follow-on agreement to allow the exchange of personal data. 
The stringent data privacy restrictions imposed by Europol\'s 
Convention, monitored by its Joint Advisory and Management 
Boards, tempered assessments of the potential success of the 
negotiations.   These concerns were eventually addressed to 
the satisfaction of Europol\'s data protection counselors and 
the second agreement was signed in Copenhagen in December, 
2002. 
 
7.  We are in the process of implementing these agreements 
with all U.S. law enforcement agencies.  Last year the JHA 
ministers directed that Europol open a liaison office in 
Washington.  In August, two officers arrived in Washington to 
take up this assignment.  The precise terms of reference for 
these officers are being developed on an interagency basis. 
There is agreement within the USG that the National Crime 
Bureau (NCB) in Washington should be the point-of-contact for 
Europol.   However, tensions still exist regarding the 
exchange of information concerning terrorism; Europol wants 
access to more case-related information.  The U.S. does not 
have a liaison officer assigned to Europol. 
 
8.  Comment.    Europol\'s critical analysis of transnational 
crime data coming from two or more EU Member States is an 
\"added value\" to  bilateral law enforcement agreements which 
can provide information from only a single national 
perspective.   At least in the short run, it is anticipated 
that U.S. agencies will be providing more data to Europol 
than it will provide us.  Nevertheless,  the two U.S. 
agreements will allow us to develop a deepening cooperative 
relationship with Europol as it grows in stature within the 
EU.   This will prove useful in our joint fight against 
terrorism.  End comment. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"8858","6/19/2003 14:52","03BRUSSELS3186","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","03ATHENS2081|03HAVANA9549|03STATE163468|03VILNIUS758|03WARSAW2299","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, CU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU CUBA POLICY: EMPHASIZING THE \"CRITICAL\" IN THE 
EU\'S \"CRITICAL DIALOGUE\" 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 163468 
     B. B) ATHENS 2081 
     C. C) WARSAW 2299 
     D. D) VILNIUS 758 
     E. E) HAVANA 9549 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Todd Huizinga, 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) This is an action message. See para 10. 
 
2. (C) Summary: On June 18, Poloff delivered reftel 
demarche (ref a) and discussed the EU\'s announced 
reevaluation of its common position on Cuba.  Karl Buck 
(protect) of the EU Council Secretariat, said that the 
visit to Cuba of the Austrian Justice Minister 
Boehmdorfer (ref a) was in line with the EU\'s announced 
policy of limiting, but not banning, high-level EU visits 
to Cuba.  Buck said that he was drafting a reevaluation 
of EU Cuba policy that was slated to serve as the basis 
for a new common position to be approved by EU foreign 
ministers at the July 22 General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC).  He said his recommendation 
would likely be to continue the EU\'s \"critical dialogue\" 
with Cuba, but with a greater emphasis on the \"critical.\" 
With the policy revision just beginning, Department may 
want to urge EU member states and institutions via 
political-level demarches to formulate a Cuba policy that 
foresees real consequences for Cuba\'s continued flouting 
of international norms.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
EU Secretariat: Austrian Cuba Visit 
Puzzling, But In Line with 
Restrictions on High-Level Contacts 
----------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Karl Buck (protect), Head of the Latin America 
Division in the EU Council Secretariat, told Poloff that, 
while he was somewhat puzzled that an EU member-state 
minister would visit Cuba at this moment, the EU\'s 
limitation of high-level contacts with Cuba did not 
preclude Boehmdorfer\'s visit.  In fact, Buck stressed, 
the Austrians had consulted him on that very question to 
be sure they would not be breaking with the EU decision. 
Buck said that, although he had not been privy to 
Boehmdorfer\'s talking points, he was certain that 
Boehmdorfer would deliver a firm message to the GOC 
reiterating that the recent crackdown and the June 12 
public denigration of Berlusconi and Aznar were 
unacceptable.  However, Buck allowed that the USG view as 
expressed in reftel demarche made sense from our 
perspective, and promised to share the USG points with 
his counterparts in member-state ministries. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
New Common Position Planned for July 22: 
Continued Critical Dialogue Likely 
---------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Buck said he would be the principal drafter of a 
proposed revised common position on Cuba.  His paper is 
due for presentation to the EU Latin America Working 
Group (COLAT), which coordinates working-level policy 
formulation among member states, on July 1.  In mid-July, 
a COLAT-revised version will then go to the Political and 
Security Committee (PSC) to prepare it for final approval 
by EU FonMins at the July 22 GAERC. 
 
5. (C) Cautioning that he was just beginning to draft, 
Buck said the paper would have two main sections.  One 
part would examine whether current EU development 
assistance activity in Cuba was effectively promoting EU 
objectives there (peaceful transition to democracy, 
economic reform, respect for human rights).  That 
section, said Buck, would be drafted by EU member-state 
development officials.  Buck added that he had \"no idea 
what each of the member states is doing on development in 
Cuba.\" 
 
6. (C) Buck said the section he is preparing would 
propose restructuring the EU\'s critical dialogue with 
Cuba so as to promote more effectively the EU\'s unchanged 
objectives there (see para 4 above).  When pressed for 
specifics, Buck remained vague.  It appears, though, that 
Buck is planning to suggest, when all is said and done, 
more of what the EU has announced in recent statements: 
a tougher line on GOC repression and specific signals of 
the EU\'s disapproval of Cuba\'s actions within the 
framework of a continued EU-Cuba \"critical dialogue.\" 
The three measures announced on June 5, limiting high- 
level governmental visits, reducing the profile of member 
states\' participation in cultural events, and inviting 
Cuban dissidents at national day celebrations may be 
reiterated, but Buck did not share specifics of any new 
ideas. 
COLAT Consensus:  Don\'t Isolate Cuba 
------------------------------------ 
7. (C) Buck noted his impression that the Cuban attempt 
to humiliate Aznar and Berlusconi had brought the member 
states closer together in mutual support, regardless of 
\"opinions you or I may have about Berlusconi.\"  He said 
that, while he perceived shades of difference among 
member states on how tough they wanted to get with Cuba, 
\"no one\" had advocated cutting off dialogue.  He said the 
sense remained within the COLAT that isolating Cuba would 
only play into the hands of the regime\'s hardliners. 
 
------------------------------ 
EU Approach to Remain Distinct 
From That of U.S. 
------------------------------ 
 
8. (C) Several times, Buck averred that USINT Havana\'s 
recent tough criticism of the regime had provided Castro 
with a cover and a justification for his actions.  (Buck 
did not specify which actions.)  His impression was that 
some U.S. \"hardliners\" thought that the EU might be 
coming around to an approach more supportive of the U.S. 
embargo.  He stressed that that was not the case, and 
implied that part of the EU motivation for reevaluating 
its Cuba policy was to avoid getting squeezed between 
\"hardliners in the U.S. and hardliners in Cuba\" towards 
cutting lines of communication with Cuba. 
 
9. (C) Buck said, however, that he believed that the 
statement of the EU\'s revised common position would avoid 
criticism of the U.S. embargo.  He said he doubted that 
the statement would mention any third parties at all, but 
that if the U.S. were mentioned, it would likely not be 
in name, but indirectly in an assertion of the EU\'s 
intention to work together with its partners to promote 
democracy in Cuba. 
 
------------------------------ 
Comment:  USG May Want to Push 
for Tougher EU Cuba Policy 
------------------------------ 
 
10. (C) The EU has repeatedly taken a tough line toward 
Cuba recently, culminating in declarations on June 5 and 
June 16 limiting contacts with Cuba and declaring Cuban 
behavior toward the EU unacceptable.  As USINT Havana 
points out (ref e), the GOC\'s recent taunts of the EU 
virtually dare it to take a stronger position against the 
regime.  Nonetheless, it appears that the new common 
position on Cuba could well become, for all practical 
purposes, more of the same:  continuation of EU dialogue 
with Cuba interspersed with regular, perhaps harsher but 
basically inconsequential, declarations condemning GOC 
repression.  With the reformulation of EU Cuba policy in 
its beginning stages, this may be the time for us to push 
the EU to back up its words with actions.  To that end, 
post asks Department to consider approaching member and 
accession states and EU institutions at the political 
level to urge them that their common position on Cuba 
include real consequences for Cuba\'s continued failure to 
live up to international norms.  With the regime\'s anti- 
EU antics, with Italy taking up the EU presidency on July 
1, and with many of the Central European EU accession 
states expressing strong aversion to GOC actions (refs c 
and d), a high-level demarche could carry considerable 
weight.  End comment. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"8916","6/23/2003 12:43","03BRUSSELS3231","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/23/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU PARLIAMENT U.S. RELATIONS RESOLUTION MIXED 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, 
FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary: On June 19 the European Parliament (EP) 
passed a resolution on \"A Renewed Transatlantic Relationship 
for the Third Millenium.\"  Foreign Relations Committee Chair 
Elmar Brok, a German Christian Democrat and strong advocate 
of close transatlantic ties, drafted the resolution and timed 
it to appear on the eve of the June 25 U.S.-EU summit.  The 
intent was constructively to point the way to renewed U.S.-EU 
ties, and most MEP\'s believe (or would want to believe) the 
resolution did that.  Despite the positive intent, however, 
the final resolution is replete with passages chiding the 
U.S. for its stances on the International Criminal Court, the 
Kyoto Protocol, the death penalty, etc.  For the majority of 
MEPs, the desire to assert a European voice on these 
hot-button issues, especially after Iraq, remains strong.  In 
that context, the fact that the strongest pro-Americans in 
the EP voted against the resolution only served to illustrate 
their isolation.  On a positive note, the EP resolution did 
affirm the importance of good U.S.-EU relations.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
The Saga of a Resolution: 
From A Call for a New Start to 
a Model of Ambivalence 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) We first learned in early May that the resolution was 
under consideration and that the drafter was British 
Conservative MEP James Elles, the Foreign Affairs Committee\'s 
Rapporteur on relations with the U.S.  Elles responded 
positively to our suggestion that a resolution expressing 
goodwill towards the U.S. in the wake of tensions over Iraq 
provided an opportunity for the EP to be noticed and 
appreciated. 
 
3. (C) On the basis of this discussion with Elles and the 
office of EP President Pat Cox, we engaged to see if the EP, 
or Pat Cox himself, could make some kind of additional 
statement about how the U.S.-EU relationship could move 
forward again.  Cox was interested in having such a statement 
in hand to present in the run-up to the June 25 U.S.-EU 
Summit.  Despite the intentions of our EP interlocutors, 
however, the efforts of the EP leaders got caught in the 
prevailing ambivalence of most MEPs towards the U.S.  First, 
the resolution was not ready to be passed by early June.  In 
May, drafting responsibility shifted from Elles to Foreign 
Affairs Committee Chairman Brok, and the new target date 
became approval in Committee on June 11 followed by final 
approval in plenary on June 19.  Second and more importantly, 
the resolution changed into a lengthy laundry list of 
complaints about the U.S. instead of the originally desired 
gesture of good will. 
 
---------------------- 
The Resolution Itself: 
A Mixture of the 
Good and the Bad 
---------------------- 
 
4. (U) After the usual series of clauses referring to earlier 
declarations, treaty articles and the like, the resolution 
begins with solid affirmations of the importance and salutary 
effects of strong transatlantic ties, such as:  \"reaffirming 
(the European Parliament\'s) commitment to the democratic 
values which are the foundation of...the transatlantic 
community;\" \"balanced EU-US relations are important to global 
peace and stability;\"  \"stressing...the positive results 
achieved in the field of external relations when a common 
approach...(is) developed;\"  \"in economic terms, Europe and 
the USA are the two most closely bound regions in the world;\" 
 \"by acting together Europe and the United States could 
develop solutions to global challenges;\" and many similar 
passages. 
 
5. (SBU) The resolution goes on to advocate the creation of 
additional structures to underpin U.S.-EU dialogue, and to 
assert that a stronger EU is essential to progress in 
transatlantic relations.  Some of the relevant passages 
include:  \"whereas the EU and the USA have treaties and 
agreements with almost every State in the world, but not with 
each other; whereas a new common framework could be created 
in economic and trade policy...;\"  \"whereas greater 
involvement of legislators on both sides of the Atlantic is a 
fundamental prerequisite for enhancing the whole 
transatlantic process;\"  \"stresses that the EU will only be 
recognized as a partner if (it has) a real CFSP and that this 
requires the extension of qualified majority voting in the 
Council to...the field of the Foreign and Security Policy, 
the establishment of a European common diplomatic service, 
enhanced cooperation in defense policy...;\" \"underlines that 
EU-USA relations need a project aimed at enhancing...the 
partnership and that a...EU-US Framework Treaty...could be 
such a project;\"  \"underlines...that the existing 
interparliamentary exchange should be gradually transformed 
into a de facto \'Transatlantic Assembly\'\". 
 
6. (SBU) However, there are numerous clauses chiding the U.S. 
for not agreeing with the majority of the EP on a panoply of 
issues, including the death penalty, GMO\'s, international 
instruments on the rights of the child, and \"safeguarding the 
treatment of prisoners of war in the wake of the recent 
conflicts.\"   One clause implicitly makes U.S. agreement with 
the EU on the Kyoto Protocol and the ICC a pre-condition of 
better transatlantic relations: \"responding along the same 
lines to...global warming (i.e., by ratifying and 
implementing the minimum standards f the Kyoto Protocol) and 
that of global justice (i.e. the functioning of the 
International Criminal Court)...must become a priority in the 
reinforcement of transatlantic relations.\"  The resolution 
also contains a rather verbose swipe at American 
neo-conservatives:  \"(The EP) expresses concerns that the 
EU-US partnership could be undermined...by the apparently 
growing influence of those neo-conservative currents in US 
politics which emphasize unilateral, and often military, 
solutions to global problems at the expense of the traditions 
of more than 50 years of US internationalism and 
multilateralism....\" 
 
---------------------------------- 
Strong Support from Conservatives, 
Liberals, Socialists 
---------------------------------- 
 
7. (U) The resolution was passed by a vote of 303 in favor, 
109 against and 47 abstentions.  A roll-call of the vote was 
not published, but we confirmed that among those voting in 
favor were large majorities of the Social Democrats (PSE), of 
the Liberal Democrats (ELDR)and of the European People\'s 
Party (EPP--Christian Democrats and Conservatives), except 
the British Conservatives. 
 
---------------------------- 
MEPs and Staffers:  Goodwill 
Should Not Silence Critique 
---------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Jacques Lecarte, ELDR Foreign Affairs staffer, told 
us that the consensus among both ELDR and PSE MEP\'s was that 
the resolution was a balanced mix of statements on the 
strengths and importance of the relationship with the U.S. 
and an honest assessment of the problems in the relationship. 
 The EPP view was similar, he said.  In response to our 
observation that the British Conservative group within the 
EPP voted against it, Lecarte laughed and said, \"as always.\" 
 
9. (C) German PSE MEP Erika Mann told us during preparation 
of the resolution that she, as an Atlanticist Social 
Democrat, was against tabling the resolution.  She predicted 
that it would contain significant anti-U.S. content.  After 
the final vote, Mann\'s staffer told us that Mann\'s concern 
had been validated -- that the resolution contained too much 
critique of the U.S. to be understood in the U.S. as the 
goodwill gesture that many in the EP want it to be. 
 
10. (C) ELDR Secretary-General Alexander Beels told us that 
the ICC \"had to be in there\" because of European anger at 
American pressure on EU accession states to sign Article 98 
agreements and thereby undermine the ICC.  Carlo Chicco, the 
head staffer of the Transatlantic Legislative Dialogue, 
averred that \"American arrogance,\" such as in \"threatening to 
move NATO out of Belgium\" because of the Belgian Universal 
Competence law, rendered it impossible for MEPs representing 
angry European citizens to refrain from critical comments on 
America\'s rejection of the ICC. 
 
--------------------------- 
The Strongest Pro-Americans 
Voted Against 
--------------------------- 
 
11. (U) The generally most fervent Atlanticists in the EP, 
the British Conservatives and the Dutch Calvinist Alliance 
(VU), voted against the resolution as not positive enough 
towards the United States. 
 
12. (C) Vice-Chairman of the EP Subcommittee on the U.S., Bas 
Belder of the VU, and British Conservative Geoffrey Van Orden 
together tabled amendments striking all of the language 
critical of the U.S.  All of these amendments were rejected 
overwhelmingly in the Foreign Affairs Committee.  After 
talking with us, Belder had made a plea in a plenary session 
on June 4 that renewing transatlantic relations would require 
that Europeans approach the U.S. with an attitude of trust 
rather than suspicion.  He added that the resolution should 
not include a laundry list of European complaints that would 
cloud the message of friendship towards the U.S. 
13. (U) British Conservative MEP Charles Tannock sent us the 
Explanation of Vote he had drafted for his party group.  It 
declares that, despite the \"good in this resolution - a 
commitment to act together to develop common solutions to 
global problems...\", the British Conservatives are forced to 
vote against the resolution because of references which are 
not helpful to good relations.  The language following is 
specific on unilateralism and the ICC and a ringing 
condemnation of anti-Americanism in Europe:  \"There is (in 
the resolution) a reference to unilateral approaches to 
problems that is offensive and which ignores the pre-eminent 
role which the United States as the world\'s largest and most 
powerful country must inevitably play if the values to which 
we subscribe are to be upheld.  The insistence that the U.S. 
share Europe\'s view on the ICC is also made plain - despite 
the problems that an unamended statute would cause for the 
U.S. at present.  We cannot expect the Americans to be 
multilateralist and engaged in the world and to risk 
malicious prosecution of their civilian and political leaders 
in the way that Europe requires.  Equally there is no need 
for Europe continually to seek disagreement with the U.S. 
over the death penalty which remains legal in international 
law.  We need to respect their difference of opinion, not 
attempt to raise it as a symbol of European moral superiority 
over the U.S.  We need to co-operate together, not brandish 
sticks.  There has been too much anti-Americanism in Europe 
recently and Europe needs to remember what it owes to 
America.\" 
 
14. (C) Comment: The EP resolution is not a surprise.  It 
reflects the current disposition in Brussels (and Strasbourg, 
where the EP holds its monthly sessions) to take America to 
task for disagreeing with Europe on the hot-button issues 
such as the ICC and global warming. Most disheartening is 
that, even while attempting to send a positive signal and 
bring U.S.-EU relations forward, the EP did not seriously 
consider lowering the volume of their complaints.  It is 
clear that we have a lot of work to do with the EP, 
especially as it gains new power under the Convention in the 
Justice and Home Affairs area, which could complicate, inter 
alia, management of homeland security concerns where the EP 
has been sharply critical.  End comment. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"8928","6/23/2003 16:13","03BRUSSELS3243","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03BRUSSELS614","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/PC MAREN BROOKS; DEPARTMENT PASS ONDCP 
CHARLOTTE SISSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, KCRM, PREL, SNAR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: CENTRAL DUBLIN GROUP MEETING: JUNE 2003 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 0614 (NOTAL) 
 
1. This cable contains an action request.  See para. 9. 
 
2. Summary.  In a productive June 9-10 meeting in Athens, the 
members of the Central Dublin Group reviewed regional reports 
from Central Asia (Italy), Eastern Europe (Germany), 
Southwest Asia (UK) and Southeast Asia and China (Australia). 
 Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou addressed the Group 
in connection with the thematic discussion of the \"Balkan 
route.\" Europol, UN Office of Drugs and Crime (ODC) and the 
U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) made presentations.  In 
connection with the 2004 Olympics to be held in Athens, there 
was a brief presentation on sports and doping by officials of 
the Olympic Committee.  It was noted that Spain and the 
United States would switch regional chairs for the next two 
years: Spain would be responsible for the regional report on 
South America and the U.S. for Central America.  The reports 
would be due at the next meeting of the Central Dublin Group 
in December/January 2004.  On the margins of the meeting, the 
Italian delegation asked if the U.S. Embassy in Bishkek could 
take the lead on formation of a Mini Dublin Group in 
Kyrgystan.  This was the first meeting of the Group attended 
by EU accession state members who were there as observers. 
USEU NAS Frank Kerber, INL/PC Program Analyst Maren Brooks, 
and Embassy Athens JHA officer Alfred Schandlbauer attended 
the meeting.  End Summary. 
 
General Discussion 
------------------ 
 
3. The thematic discussion of the \"Balkan route\" was opened 
by Jorge Molling, Deputy Head of the Europol Drugs Unit.  He 
divided the Balkan drug trafficking route into three primary 
sectors: the northern, central and southern routes.  The 
northern route, in turn, could be divided into three: 1) 
Turkey-Bulgaria-Romania-Hungary-Poland; 2) 
Turkey-Bulgaria-Romania-Germany; and 3) 
Turkey-Bulgaria-Serbia-Croatia-Slovenia.  The central route 
is Turkey-Bulgaria-FYROM-Bosnia-Italy. The southern route is 
Turkey-Greece-Albania-Italy).  He noted that 75 percent of 
the heroin in Europe is processed in Turkey by organized 
criminal groups.  Fifteen percent of the Balkan economy is 
based on the illicit drug trade.  The UNODC presentation was 
given by Vladimir Femepetov. He noted that 75 percent of the 
heroin in Europe is processed in Turkey by organized criminal 
groups, and that 15 percent of the Balkan economy is based on 
the illicit drug trade.  Tony Ballas, DEA representative at 
Embassy Athens, said that the Balkan route for contraband, 
illegal narcotics and human trafficking is the prime gateway 
to the Western Europe market.  In addition, the Balkans have 
become a major transfer and storage point.  There has been a 
proliferation of clandestine labs along the route for the 
manufacture and/or synthesis of heroin and synthetic drugs 
like Ecstasy.  The French delegate gave a summary of the 
recommendations of the Ministerial Conference on drug 
trafficking routes from Central Asia to Europe hosted by 
France on May 21-22, 2003. 
 
4. Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou addressed the 
Group, stressing that the interrelation between supply and 
demand for narcotics \"should prompt us to examine how we can 
contribute to combating criminalty and whether it is possible 
for drug users to stay away from criminal circles.\"  He 
stressed the great importance attached by the Greek 
Presidency to problem of drug trafficking, as well as to all 
security issues relating to narcotics smuggling, while 
underlining the need for the EU to formulate a common policy 
on the issue.  Papandreou noted the \"polarization\" between 
more lenient policies in some European countries and those in 
favor of the present legal structure.  He said it is 
important to hold a continuous dialogue on drug policy with 
all regions of the world, including the U.S., \"the leader in 
the area of anti-narcotics policies.\"  On harm reduction, the 
Foreign Minister said: \"I continue to believe that it is a 
justified approach.  There is some ambiguity which allows 
certain misconceptions and criticism by international 
narcotics control agencies of the practices adopted in 
certain (European) countries, as well as hesitation on the 
part of other countries  (read U,S,) to adopt measures which 
have proven effective.\"   Finally, he called on the EU to 
promote an open dialogue on how to deal with the growing 
problem of cannabis use. 
 
Regional Reports 
---------------- 
 
5. The members reviewed regional reports from Central Asia 
(Italy), Eastern Europe (Germany), Southwest Asia (UK) and 
Southeast Asia and China (Australia).  It was noted that 
Spain and the United States would switch regional chairs for 
the next two years: Spain would be responsible for the 
regional report on South America and the U.S. for Central 
America.  The reports are due at the next meeting of the 
Central Dublin Group in December/January 2004.  On the 
margins of the meeting, the Italian delegation asked if the 
U.S. Embassy in Bishkek could take the lead on formation of a 
Mini Dublin Group in Kyrgystan. 
 
Other Business 
-------------- 
 
6. The chair (Raymond Yans, Belgian consul in Luxembourg) 
announced that the next meeting of the Central Dublin Group 
would be held in Brussels in December or January 2003, 
depending on the availability of meeting rooms at the EU. 
The thematic discussion at this meeting will be the 
toxicological impact of cannabis use.  In this connection, 
the chair asked if the U.S. could provide a scientific expert 
on the subject. 
 
7. The chair noted that several EU ambassadors, including 
Germany and The Netherlands, had asked about the harmful 
health and environmental impact of the U.S. eradication and 
fumigation program in Central and South America.  He asked 
whether the U.S. could provide an expert to discuss this 
issue at the next meeting. 
 
Accession States 
----------------- 
 
8. This was the first meeting to which the EU accession 
states were invited.  Only Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech 
Republic sent observers.  The accession states will continue 
in observer status at the winter meeting, but will assume 
full membership at the summer 2004 session.  These countries 
have converted from their previous status as the subjects of 
Mini Dublin regional reports to that of Dublin Group members 
solely by virtue of their accession to the EU next year. 
Kiyokazu Ota, Minister at the Japanese Mission to the UN in 
Vienna, and Elizabeth Day, Second Secretary at the Australian 
Mission to the UN in Vienna, expressed their concern 
privately to the USDEL that inclusion of all ten accession 
states clearly weighed Central Dublin Group membership in 
favor of the EU (25 to 5), with the U.S., Canada, Japan, 
Australia and Norway the only non-EU members.  They indicated 
their intention to press for a discussion of \"Dublin Group\" 
membership criteria at the next meeting. 
 
9. Action request.  Please advise whether the U.S. intends to 
provide experts on the health impact of cannabis use as well 
as the U.S. eradication and fumigation program in Central and 
South America at the winter Dublin Group meeting.  Request 
also department thoughts on membership criteria for Dublin 
Group. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"10383","8/28/2003 18:10","03BRUSSELS4143","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","03BRUSSELS3917","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004143 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RPM, IO/UNP 
DEPT. ALSO FOR S/P - DAVID VAN CLEVE, AND NP/RA - MARK 
FITZPATRICK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/28/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PINS, MARR, MCAP, FR, IT, PL, UK, DA, GM, SP, NATO, UNSC, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: FIRST STEPS TOWARD AN EU USE-OF-FORCE DOCTRINE: 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE U.S. 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 3917 
 
     B. BRUSSELS 3210 
     C. BRUSSELS 2769 
     D. BRUSSELS 3263 
     E. ROME 3823 
 
Classified By: USEU PolOff Van Reidhead; reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
------------------- 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
 
1. (C/NF) The draft European Security Strategy (ESS), which 
will be discussed at the September 5-6 informal \"Gymnich\" 
meeting of EU Foreign Ministers (ref. A), provides the U.S. 
with an early opportunity to engage on this emerging EU 
security doctrine.  Born of the divisions over Iraq, the ESS 
is an attempt to frame the EU debate about how the EU should 
see security, in conscious if incomplete imitation of the 
U.S. National Security Strategy.  An important element is the 
debate about when and under what conditions the EU might 
resort to the use of force.  The ESS also invites discussion 
of the utility and effectiveness of multilateralism with 
regard to international security affairs.  Logically, the 
discussion could require that EU leaders ask the question: 
How much linkage should there be between the UNSC and an EU 
use-of-force doctrine?  In this respect, the ESS could 
challenge the EU to examine closely its devotion to 
multilateralism and the institutional status quo. 
 
2. (C/NF) Comment: This is the very early stage in a 
discussion that could play out over years.  But even at this 
early moment there is value in engagement, with an emphasis 
on developing a shared strategic view.  We recommend a quiet 
dialogue with our friends in the EU (i.e. in the Council 
Secretariat), the UK, Italy, Spain, Denmark and Poland.  They 
 
SIPDIS 
are closest to our views and can provide early warning of any 
move in a problematic direction.  At this point, our interest 
should be avoiding a premature resolution of the ESS debate, 
because a near-term resolution would almost certainly favor a 
strong UNSC role in any EU use-of-force doctrine.  End 
Comment.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------- 
Pushing the Envelope 
-------------------- 
 
3. (C/NF) The 15-page ESS (full text at ref. B; also 
available online at http://register.consilium.eu.int/ 
pdf/en/03/st10/st10881en03.pdf) defines the main threats to 
European security as terrorism, WMD proliferation, and failed 
states and organized crime.  The ESS argues that as a global 
actor, the EU should share responsibility for global 
security, and should be ready and able to work with others, 
especially the U.S., to combat the new threats.  Key to this 
readiness and ability is a credible use-of-force doctrine. 
Our interlocutors have told us that one purpose of the ESS is 
to push the EU toward a discussion of how far it is prepared 
to go in considerations of the use of force.  The discussion 
will be controversial, because the draft implies the 
possibility of resorting to the use of force without full 
multilateral institutional support -- in other words, without 
recourse to the UNSC. (Note: See ref. D for more background 
on the ESS.) 
 
----------- 
First Steps 
----------- 
 
4. (C/NF) As EU High Rep. Solana and numerous senior EU and 
member state interlocutors have made clear from the beginning 
of the drafting process, the ESS is just the first step in 
developing an EU consensus on the parameters of European 
security.  It will represent a set of broad consensual 
assumptions and a flexible framework within which the EU can 
try to construct security policy.  Our interlocutors tell us 
the paper had to be \"broad and soft\" in order to accommodate 
the widely divergent views held by EU member states on how to 
deal with the threats defined in the paper.  It also had to 
be detailed and comprehensive enough to lend it at least some 
credibility.  But the EU\'s larger goal was to create a set of 
common principles to reduce the chances of another Iraq-like 
split, not to create an operational doctrine for security and 
defense.  In that at least, the Council Secretariat believes 
it has succeeded. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
An EU \"Lesson Learned\" from Transatlantic 
Differences Over Iraq 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5. (C/NF) Interlocutors acknowledge that the effort to 
produce a security strategy was sparked by the desire to 
avoid a repetition of the corrosive internal divisions the EU 
experienced over the use of force in Iraq.  During the Iraq 
crisis, the EU was torn apart, and marginalized itself.  The 
crisis was viewed as a debacle for the EU\'s fledgling Common 
Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).  The pain -- and 
humiliation -- of the EU\'s marginalization was felt keenly in 
both Brussels and capitals.  The U.S.-EU relationship 
suffered as member states fought out their Iraq differences 
in public.  The current flurry of CFSP integration efforts is 
the logical solution from an EU perspective.  These efforts, 
among which the ESS stands as a sort of guiding directive, 
will continue as the EU seeks the ability to act with 
consequence when faced with international crises. 
 
------------------- 
But is it Credible? 
------------------- 
 
6. (C/NF) But doing something about the new security threats 
requires at some level consideration of the use of force. 
The ESS posits the need for exactly that.  If the EU is to 
become the international force envisioned by the ESS, then it 
must be able to legitimately use military force.  This is a 
difficult concept for many member states who strongly prefer 
that the EU focus instead on issues such as \"addressing the 
root causes of conflict\" and shoring up existing 
international organizations and regimes.  These are easier 
for the EU to respond to because they rely heavily on 
civilian instruments and \"soft\" power, and appeal above all 
to Europe\'s sense of magnanimity, inclusive universalism, and 
the importance of multilateralism.  For many, the \"hard\" 
power issue of legitimate military force cuts close to the 
sovereign bone. 
 
7. (C/NF) Moreover, considerations of the use of force 
suggest the controversial possibility of the EU becoming a 
security organization.  In response to our query about that 
possibility, Council Director-General and principal ESS 
drafter Robert Cooper asserted that yes, the EU will become a 
security organization in time.  He argued that that 
eventuality had been evident since the 1998 Franco-British 
declaration at Saint Malo (the bargain whereby France agreed 
to filter European security through NATO while the UK agreed 
to support an EU security identity).  But even Cooper 
acknowledges that giving EU security policy \"teeth\" through 
the development of a common EU policy on the use of force 
will not be easy. 
 
------------------------------- 
Toward a Use of Force Doctrine? 
------------------------------- 
 
8. (C/NF) As ESS discussions move forward the EU will 
inevitably be forced to address a number of difficult 
questions, with important implications for transatlantic 
relations: How far is the EU prepared to go in articulating a 
use-of-force doctrine?  Will EU leaders adopt a flexible 
doctrine that leaves options on the table and promises force 
credibility?  Or will they define legitimate use of force in 
such a way as to constrain or limit the EU\'s participation 
except in very narrow circumstances?  How strictly will the 
EU separate humanitarian and military assets when responding 
to complex humanitarian emergencies (ref. C)?  Will members 
want to spend more time defining when force cannot be used 
than in defining a policy that addresses the core issues -- 
i.e. how to deal with countries that do not play by the 
rules?  Specifically, will EU leaders require recourse to the 
UNSC?  Or will they perhaps be willing to take multilateral 
cover under a broader, more flexible body of international 
law?  The answers to these questions will be of critical 
importance to U.S. interests, and will determine both the 
extent and pace of EU evolution as a security organization -- 
a development with important implications for NATO. 
 
---------- 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
9. (C/NF) Robert Cooper tells us that the EU has taken the 
use of force question as far as it can for now, and will 
devote its near-term efforts to further defining the 
strategy\'s less controversial aspects.  Toward that end, the 
EU is planning to discuss the ESS at different venues 
throughout the fall.  Between the informal Gymnich 
ministerial on September 5-6 (where the discussion will be 
limited mostly to reaching agreement on the path ahead) and 
the December EU Summit (where a revised strategy will be 
presented to leaders), the EU will convene three small ESS 
workshops.  The first of these will take place September 17 
in Rome, under the aegis of the Aspen Institute.  The 
workshops are intended to further the ESS discussion by 
bringing together representatives from all 25 current and 
future EU member states, plus think tank and academia experts 
(ref. E).  (Note:  Cooper tells us that U.S. academics and 
think tanks would be welcome to attend the workshops if their 
expertise were relevant.)  ESS discussions will also take 
place at the PSC and COREPER levels during the run-up to the 
December Summit.  Cooper anticipates completing the new ESS 
draft by mid-November. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Comment: Opportunities for the U.S. 
----------------------------------- 
 
10. (C/NF) Beyond the \"First Pillar\" issues of economic and 
social affairs, the EU has not yet reached a stable consensus 
on what it is and how sovereignty will be shared among 
Brussels and national capitals.  This creates both 
frustration and opportunity: frustration because 
understanding and predicting EU behavior is very difficult, 
but an opportunity because this open-ended state of affairs 
invites dialogue.  We cannot yet tell how member states will 
line up on the issue of using force, and we don\'t see the 
debate ending anytime soon.  But we see three groups lining 
up for the long march ahead: First, there will be member 
states who balk at the notion of using force under any 
circumstances.  These relatively few states -- among whom 
Germany may be emerging as a leader -- will have to be either 
accommodated or circumvented.  Second will be the larger 
group who are not opposed to the use of force per se, but who 
will only want to consider it in the context of a UNSC 
resolution.  Finally, there are countries such as the UK -- 
and perhaps France -- which have already shown a willingness 
to bypass the UNSC when it is in their interest to do so.  If 
the EU is to develop a positive security identity these 
countries should be engaged to ensure that they protect the 
EU\'s right to act independently of the UNSC. 
 
11. (C/NF) In the case of France, however, we fear that 
engaging too soon and too directly could be 
counterproductive.  The current French administration may 
feel compelled to support a strong UNSC role in European 
security policy, even if it contradicts certain French 
interests, in an attempt to constrain U.S. power and 
influence.  Emboldened by its own recent rhetoric about the 
need to check American power, France might be willing to 
constrain itself, through an EU strategic link with the UNSC, 
in order to constrain the U.S.  Any such linkage would limit 
the ability of our European allies within the EU to act in 
concert with us.  For now, we should let others -- notably 
the UK -- engage France on the need to protect member state 
and EU autonomy with regard to the UNSC. 
 
12. (C/NF) In this context, we believe U.S. interests lie in 
supporting those member states and institutional elements who 
favor legitimating force under a broader body of 
international law, and under new forms of multilateral 
initiatives.  Now is the time to quietly engage our friends 
in the EU on our views of the ESS and any potential for an EU 
use-of-force doctrine.  The UK, Italy (which holds the EU 
Presidency), the Council Secretariat, Denmark, Spain and 
Poland are all good access points.  All are sympathetic to 
U.S. views and are able to influence the debate, some 
considerably.  Our goal should be to prevent any premature 
resolution of the ESS and use of force debates.  The 
political climate in Europe is such that any near-term 
resolution would come down in favor of a stronger UNSC role 
in international security.  Therefore, our goal should be to 
ensure that the debate continues.  And we should take 
advantage of the process to discuss our views of the ESS and 
the potential for an EU use-of-force doctrine during upcoming 
UN and security consultations.  We might also use the topic 
as a thread that we can weave through relevant regional 
troika consultations.  Our interlocutors, including Robert 
Cooper, have said on numerous occasions that the EU would 
welcome such dialogue -- \"anytime, anywhere,\" as Cooper put 
it.  We should accept the offer.  End Comment. 
"
"10756","9/16/2003 10:12","03BRUSSELS4424","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","03BRUSSELS4143","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004424 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PREL, UNGA, UN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EC ON UN: A COMMITMENT TO \"MILITANT 
MULTILATERALISM\" 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 4143 
 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 3263 
     C. C) BRUSSELS 3210 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: On September 10, the EC issued a policy 
paper on the \"European Union and the United Nations: The 
Choice of Multilateralism.\" The paper is meant to \"catalyze\" 
debate within the EU, and to dovetail with the European 
Security Strategy (reftels) now being developed.  Full of 
genuflection to \"global governance\" and projects such as the 
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the Kyoto Protocol, 
the EC paper advocates what it terms \"militant 
multilateralism.\" EC officials confirm that one of the 
Commission\'s ultimate, but long-term, objectives is to become 
a full, voting member of all UN bodies that handle issues 
over which the Commission has jurisdiction within the EU.  We 
see little new in the paper that would have immediate effect 
on U.S. interests, although it confirms European support for 
a concept of multilateralism that could ultimately be a 
hindrance to the pursuit of U.S. foreign-policy interests if 
the UN system fails to act.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------- 
MULTILATERALISM IS THE KEY 
-------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) On September 12, Poloff met with three officials from 
the European Commission\'s External Relations 
Directorate-General, Office of UN Affairs:  Willy Kempel, 
Klas Nyman and Thomas Huyghebaert, to discuss the 
Commission\'s Policy Paper, or \"Communication.\"   These 
officials affirmed that the purpose of the paper was twofold: 
 not only to enhance the EU\'s role in the United Nations, but 
also to strengthen the UN and thereby the \"multilateral 
system.\"  They pointed to passages to that effect from the 
paper\'s introduction:  \"The European Union\'s commitment to 
multilateralism is a defining principle of its external 
policy....  The EU has a clear interest in supporting the 
continuous evolution and improvement of the tools of global 
governance....  Europe\'s attachment to multilateralism - and 
to the United Nations, as the pivot of the multilateral 
system - will help determine whether, and how, the 
institutional architecture (of multilateralism)...can 
continue to serve as the bedrock of the international 
system....  An active commitment to an effective 
multilateralism means...promoting a forward-looking agenda 
that is not limited to a narrow defense of national 
interests.\" 
 
--------------------------- 
PAPER REFLECTS EU CONSENSUS 
--------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Although the prerogative of formulating the EU\'s 
Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) lies with the 
member states and the Council -- not with the Commission -- 
our interlocutors predicted that the member states would not 
criticize the Commission for overstepping the bounds of its 
authority in this paper.  The ideas expressed, they said, 
reflect a widely held consensus in the EU on the importance 
of the UN, the multilateralist approach, and of the EU\'s role 
in strengthening multilateral institutions.  They said that 
member states had not been consulted during the more than 
year-long process of drafting the paper, but added that, by 
definition, a Commission Communication is an internal 
Commission paper.  Member states, they said, are never 
consulted during the drafting of a communication. 
 
------------------------------ 
PAPER MEANT TO SPARK DEBATE... 
------------------------------ 
 
4. (C) The ideas in the paper are meant to stimulate debate, 
not to be the final word, according to our Commission 
interlocutors.  Now that the communication has been released, 
they said, the Commission wants the member states and the 
European Parliament to bring their views into the mix.  Our 
interlocutors said various EU working groups (which are made 
up of member-state and Commission officials and meet monthly 
to provide input on foreign-policy issues) would discuss the 
paper and provide input in the period from October to 
December.  Then, they said, EU Foreign Ministers or heads of 
government were expected to release formal conclusions at the 
end of the Italian EU presidency in December. 
 
------------------------- 
AND FEED INTO ESS PROCESS 
------------------------- 
 
5. (C) Our interlocutors added that the paper is also meant 
to support the European Security Strategy (ESS), which is 
currently being drafted and may be approved at the EU Summit 
capping the Italian EU Presidency in December.  They noted 
that one of the three strategic objectives of the ESS is 
\"building an international order based on effective 
multilateralism.\"  This policy paper, they said, contains the 
Commission\'s thoughts on how to build that order. 
 
-------------------------- 
GOOD OR BAD NEWS FOR U.S.? 
-------------------------- 
 
6. (C) Some of the language in the paper gives rise to 
concern regarding its possible ramifications for U.S. 
interests in the UN.  The promotion of the Kyoto Protocol and 
the creation of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for 
example, are highlighted as examples of important EU 
accomplishments in the multilateral system, and the paper 
claims to aim at adoption of a \"militant multilateral poise\" 
for the EU.  The paper states that \"the role of the UN and in 
particular the UNSC as a final arbiter on the consequences of 
non-compliance as foreseen in multilateral regimes - needs to 
be effectively strengthened.\"  In this sense, the Commission 
paper is somewhat in conflict with the ESS drafted by 
Solana\'s staff in the Council.  The latter document suggests 
there may be times when action is needed when the UN fails to 
face up to a problem.  The Commission\'s document, which is 
replete with loosely defined terms such as \"global 
governance,\" implies a greater commitment to action only 
through the UN system -- and may define more correctly the 
prevailing view among EU member states. 
 
7. (C) Our contacts asserted that the paper should be good 
news for the U.S.  They said that the paper aimed at:  (1) an 
effective, efficient UN, which would be good for all of the 
UN\'s members; (2) a unified EU voice in the UN, which would 
make the EU a more reliable and efficient partner of the 
U.S.; and (3) early and transparent coordination with the 
EU\'s partners in the UN (above all, with the U.S., they said) 
on key issues.  They said that, in order for the strategy to 
work, the EU would have to be zealous at getting U.S. ideas 
early on and bringing them into EU deliberations. 
 
------------------------------- 
ADDITIONALITY LONG-TERM EC GOAL 
------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) The paper also refers to the desirability of pursuing 
full EC membership in UN-system agencies dealing with areas 
for which the EC has responsibilities within the EU (such as 
the FAO and the Codex Alimentarius, in which the EC, 
respectively, has or soon will have full membership).  Our 
contacts responded that \"the long-term objective\" was to 
achieve full voting membership for the Commission in all such 
UN agencies, apart from the question of whether EU member 
states would also retain voting membership in the same 
agencies.  They hastened to add, however, that additional 
voting rights for the Commission were not a principal 
near-term objective of Commission UN policy. 
 
9. (C) COMMENT:  We do not expect this policy paper to have 
much effect in the near term.  The ideas and recommendations 
in the paper reflect a well-known consensus within the EU on 
the importance of the UN and the multilateral approach, and 
the desire within the EU to strengthen the EU\'s role in the 
UN.  Member-state views on the specifics of the paper are not 
yet clear, but we suspect it will receive broad support. 
What the paper illustrates is that an important EU 
institution, the European Commission, is committed to a 
multilateralist approach that often tends to assert UN 
primacy over \"narrow\" national interests or unilateral (read 
\"U.S.\") actions.  Also, the Communication\'s timing to 
coincide with the EU debate on the ESS may bolster the aspect 
of the ESS that, while coming to an assessment of global 
security threats similar to that of the USG and stressing the 
importance of the transatlantic alliance, pays homage to a 
concept of \"international order based on...multilateralism\" 
that many in the EU have interpreted as an effort to broaden 
and strengthen binding international agreements, such as 
Kyoto and the ICC.  The EC desire to enhance its status in 
certain UN organizations is one we need to follow closely. 
There may be organizations where EC funding is crucial to 
achieving our objectives (UNHCR comes to mind) in which a 
status above simple observer might be in our interest, but in 
other organizations a stronger EC role would be inappropriate 
-- and even harm our ability to work bilaterally with one or 
more EU member states to achieve our objectives.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"10924","9/23/2003 11:04","03BRUSSELS4518","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE254587","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR NP, T, EUR, EAP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2013 
TAGS: KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: RFG: SHOULD THE EU BE INVOLVED WITH PSI? 
 
REF: A. STATE 254587 
 
     B. ROME 3926 
     C. ROME 3368 
     D. PARIS 6747 
     E. USEU TODAY 9/12/03 
     F. USEU TODAY EXTRA 9/11/03 
 
Classified By: USEU Polmiloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.5 (b), (d) 
 
1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see para 10. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
2. (C) At the September 16 meeting of the EU\'s Political and 
Security Committee (PSC), PSC Ambassadors broadly supported 
the case for EU involvement in, or association with, the 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI).  They requested a 
Council briefing -- to be delivered at the September 29 
Brussels GAERC (meeting of EU FMs) -- on PSI and the EU\'s 
role in that initiative.  Council officials have requested 
our view on including the EU in PSI.  Department guidance 
requested para 10.  End Summary 
 
------------------------------ 
EU Says it Needs a Role in PSI 
------------------------------ 
 
3. (C) Key non-proliferation experts in the Council and 
Commission say that the EU and member states support the PSI 
principles (ref. A), see them as conducive to the EU\'s draft 
non-proliferation Principles, and believe the EU should 
somehow have a role in the new initiative because it has 
competencies unavailable to EU member states on a bilateral 
basis.  Italian MFA DG for Political Affairs Giancarlo 
Aragona made similar points to U/S Bolton on August 27 (ref. 
B).  On September 10 in Brussels, Solana\'s senior foreign 
policy advisor, Council DG Robert Cooper, told EUR PDAS Ries 
that he wants to work with the U.S. on finding ways to permit 
all EU member states to \"buy into\" the PSI, without making 
PSI membership too unwieldy.  The option currently favored by 
Cooper\'s principle policy planners, Antonio Tanca (Council 
Secretariat\'s chief non-proliferation policy expert) and John 
 
SIPDIS 
Mattiussi (UK FCO non-proliferation policy expert seconded to 
the Commission, but working also for Cooper), calls for an EU 
observership which would allow the EU to consult with PSI on 
Commission and Council Secretariat competencies, and assist 
dual EU-PSI members to meet their PSI commitments.  Tanca and 
Mattiussi -- who also attended the September 3-4 Paris PSI 
meetings as nominal members of the Italian delegation -- 
request USG views as they begin drafting their 
recommendations. 
 
4. (C) The EU supports PSI and the Statement of Interdiction 
Principles because they align in the EU\'s eyes with its Basic 
Principles for an EU Strategy Against the Proliferation of 
WMD, released at the June 2003 EU Summit in Thessaloniki. 
Mattiussi described the relationship between the PSI 
Principles and EU Principles as \"operationally consistent,\" 
and observed that the participation of EU member states in 
PSI is adding momentum to the EU\'s own nonproliferation 
objectives.  (The EU\'s nonproliferation Principles are 
available online at http://ue.eu.int/en/summ.htm)  Moreover, 
eight of the eleven PSI members are also EU member states 
(Poland is acceding).  This represents almost three-quarters 
of the PSI, half of the EU at 15, and one third of the EU at 
25.  This significant numerical overlap means that PSI is a 
high profile issue for the EU.  It also means that EU norms 
and exclusive institutional competencies will be important 
factors in the success or failure of PSI, particularly once 
interdictions begin. 
 
5. (C) Dual EU-PSI members are reportedly pushing the EU on 
inclusion in part because they fear any potential for 
conflict between EU and PSI commitments.  Interlocutors 
stress that EU institutions have regulatory authority and 
competencies in policy areas that make full PSI participation 
by EU member states difficult without EU assistance.  They 
argue, for instance, that \"Community\" competencies in trade 
and border management could impact the outcome of certain 
interdictions -- perhaps not in the Pacific, but certainly in 
and around European waters and in transit points like Malta 
and Cyprus.  \"The effectiveness of PSI members in the EU is 
decreased if the EU is not involved,\" Tanca said, \"because 
the EU has competencies in many areas affecting the ability 
of EU members to fulfill PSI commitments.\"  Italian MFA DG 
Aragona also underscored this point to U/S Bolton during 
their August 27 meeting in Rome (ref. B). 
 
6. (C) Mattiussi, who was present at the September 16 PSC, 
reports that only a few of the \"smaller states\" were \"more 
cautious\" about an EU role in PSI.  (Cooper said that some 
non-PSI member states had \"lingering suspicions\" about the 
initiative.)  But Mattiussi assessed that these states would 
come over to the majority view once they better understood 
PSI and the issues at stake.  Otherwise, all the EU\'s more 
influential states and institutional organs were unanimous in 
their desire to see the EU somehow involved in PSI.  Asked 
whether any of the EU-25 preferred universal PSI inclusion 
for all EU member states bilaterally, instead of or in 
addition to EU institutional involvement, Mattiussi said that 
during the September 16 PSC discussion, member states \"did 
not raise the idea of 25 EU members in PSI.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Delivering 25 Countries With Only One Observership 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
7. (C) The perception of Tanca and Mattiussi is that the PSI 
group \"is almost too large already.\"  Cooper agrees, and has 
tasked Tanca and Mattiussi with drafting a paper on how to 
get all EU member states on board without making the 
membership too unwieldy.  In their internal consultations 
with EU and member state officials, Mattiussi and Tanca are 
therefore stressing the U.S. concept of PSI as \"an activity 
rather than an organization\" (Mattuissi says the UK also 
adopted this phrase in a recently circulated paper).  They 
say that one purpose of the paper is to pre-empt any 
suggestions that all 15(25) EU member states should be 
included in PSI by instead focusing on PSI as an activity and 
supporting observer status for the EU Troika (comprised of 
current and upcoming Presidency countries, the Council 
Secretariat, and the Commission).  They seek a role for the 
 
SIPDIS 
EU that could deliver results from the EU-25 without adding 
25 new delegations to PSI.  The extent to which others share 
this sentiment, however, is unclear.  Tanca reports that in 
recent non-proliferation coordinating group meetings, 
Denmark, Finland, Sweden and Hungary -- \"among others\" -- 
have all asked EU partners when they would be invited to join 
PSI. 
 
8. (C) In the forefront of options being discussed is the 
possibility of granting PSI observer status to the EU.  Many 
believe that as an observer, the EU could add value to PSI by 
serving as a clearinghouse of EU competencies and a 
facilitator of dual PSI-EU member capabilities.  Tanca and 
Mattiussi argue that this option would allow the EU to assist 
dual EU-PSI members in meeting PSI commitments.  They suggest 
also that EU institutional elements involved in PSI would be 
able to see pending PSI-EU conflicts in advance, and work 
quietly within the EU and/or PSI contexts to smooth them over 
before they become apparent to non-PSI insiders.  The EU 
would also be in a position to coordinate the 
counter-proliferation efforts of non-PSI EU members, in 
accordance with EU rules, and EU and PSI Principles. 
 
----------------- 
How it Might Work 
----------------- 
 
9. (C) The current favored option foresees something like a 
two-thirds EU observership.  When one of the 7(8) dual EU-PSI 
members holds the EU presidency, the EU would observe and 
consult in PSI proceedings as part of the EU presidency\'s 
delegation.  The precedent for this was set in Paris by the 
participation in the Italian PSI delegation of Tanca and 
Mattiussi (who alternated attendance).  After the EU grows to 
25 member states in May 2004, this would work one-third of 
the time (when one of the enlarged EU\'s eight dual EU-PSI 
members serves as EU Council Presidency).  The remaining 
two-thirds of the time the EU would have its own 
Troika-format observer status in PSI.  Other options have 
been floated, but as PSI position drafters, Mattiussi and 
Tanca favor this one because it puts what they see as a 
minimal EU footprint on PSI while also allowing the EU to add 
value. 
 
--------------------- 
RFG: USG Views Sought 
--------------------- 
 
10. (C) RFG: Tanca and Mattiussi are asking for USG views on 
any form of EU participation in PSI, especially in the manner 
outlined here.  They appear to be acting on Cooper\'s 
commitment to work with the USG as the EU explores ideas for 
an EU role in PSI.  Mission requests Department guidance on 
what we can tell the EU about its bid for PSI participation. 
Schnabel 
"
"11684","10/28/2003 8:14","03BRUSSELS4996","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03BRUSSELS4564|03STATE280875","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004996 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR DEA, CUSTOMS AND NARCOTICS OFFICERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AF, KCRM, SNAR, IR, RS, XD, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: PARIS PACT ROUNDTABLE ON IRAN 
 
REF: A) BRUSSELS 04564 B) STATE 280875 
 
1. Summary.  The second roundtable convened by the \"Paris 
Pact\" for countries affected by the Afghanistan Opium Economy 
was held at the headquarters of the World Customs 
Organization in Brussels on October 15.  This meeting was a 
considerable improvement over the first roundtable on the 
Balkans held in September for two reasons: the focus on a 
single country rather than a region, and the presence of a 
knowledgeable Iranian who contributed greatly to the 
discussion. The primary task of the upcoming Consultative 
Group meeting in Rome on November 21 must be to decide 
whether the level of specificity (or generality) of the 
recommendations produced by these first two roundtables meets 
the original objectives of the Paris Pact.  It is unlikely 
that future roundtables will ever produce more specific 
recommendations, nor will potential donors use these meetings 
to sign up for funding identified assistance gaps. One of the 
outcomes of the Iran roundtable was the unprecedented 
invitation to send a mission of international experts to Iran 
to evaluation its anti-drug efforts and the opportunities for 
regional cooperation in combating drug trafficking.  The 
meeting may also eventually lead to the posting of western 
DLO\'s in Teheran.  While not among the original objectives of 
the Paris Pact, this is certainly a happy outcome and perhaps 
justifies giving the Paris Pact further opportunities to 
prove its value.  End Summary. 
 
2. The second roundtable convened by the \"Paris Pact\" for 
countries affected by the Afghanistan Opium Economy was held 
at the headquarters of the World Customs Organization in 
Brussels on October 15.  The U.S. delegation to the meeting 
included USEU/NAS Frank Kerber, DEA/Brussels James C. Kabel, 
and DEA/Istanbul Jim Allen.  About 30 persons attended the 
five-hour meeting which was again chaired by Bernard Frahi, 
Chief of the Partnership in Development Branch, UN Office on 
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in Vienna.  Delegations included the 
European Customs Organization, World Customs Organization 
(WCO), the EU Directorate for External Relations, and 
national delegations from Iran, Greece, Turkey, France, UK, 
Italy, Germany, Spain, the Netherlands, and Ireland. 
(Comment. Interpol, which had attended the Balkans Route 
Roundtable in October, was absent.  Significantly, Europol 
has not attended either meeting. End comment.) 
 
Overview of the Problem 
----------------------- 
 
3. The meeting began with the UNODC\'s overview of the 
problem: the primary entry and exit routes into and out of 
Iran, data on drug seizures, and Iranian efforts to staunch 
the drug flows.  This was followed by a brief presentation by 
the Iranian representative, Police Colonel Mazoud Rezvani, 
Drug Liaison Officer (DLO) to Pakistan resident in Islamabad. 
 Reznavi confirmed the drug routes outlined by the UNODC.  He 
said the southern sea route through the Gulf States had been 
discussed at a recent meeting he had with the Pakistani Coast 
Guard.  Iranian efforts to staunch the drug flows include 
construction of 212 border posts, 205 watch towers, 22 
concrete barriers, 290 km of canals, and the forced 
evacuation of Iranian villages used by drug traffickers on 
the Afghan border.  The greatest seizures within Iran have 
been opium and hashish.  Drug seizures of heroin, morphine, 
opium, and hashish have been greater in the first six months 
of 2003 than in all of 2002.  There are 1.8 million drug 
addicts in Iran.  Morphine only transits the country, while 
opium and heroin are consumed by the population.  Harald 
Frohlich, head of the Regional Intelligence Liaison Office 
(WCO and ZKA), said that seizure reports coming out of Iran 
do not give a clear and reliable picture.  There is a clear 
lack of national and regional coordination and a regional 
intelligence strategy.  Iran has invested one billion dollars 
to control the drug routes through its territory.  Customs 
departments focus on the legal trade routes, not the illegal 
routes used by traffickers.  Reznavi countered that the 
national drug intelligence unit in Teheran, which brings 
together officers from the Ministries of Health, Education, 
Interior, Intelligence, the judiciary and police, coordinates 
Iranian anti-drug efforts.  This anti-narcotics center 
maintains regular contact with Turkey, the Gulf States and 
Pakistan.  Joint training programs with Pakistan have been 
sponsored by the UNODC.  The UNODC summarized this overview 
with the following points: 
 
--  Drug entry routes into Iran from Afghanistan are through 
poor and remote areas of the country. 
--  Internal checkpoints within Iran are producing seizure 
results. 
--  A currently minor exit route through Iraq deserves 
attention now as instability there could allow this route to 
flourish. 
--  There are clearly gaps in reporting and coordination. 
--  Need for Customs in Iran to distinguish between 
legitimate and illegitimate trade. 
 
Review of Multilateral and Bilateral Assistance 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
4. The next agenda item was a review of current multilateral 
and bilateral anti-trafficking assistance to Iran.  The UNODC 
CIRUS Project (Combined Interdiction Unified Strategy) with a 
total budget of Euro 8.5 million is one of the largest UNODC 
anti-trafficking projects in the region.  Most of the funds 
are used for equipment, including vehicles, night vision 
devices, heavy-duty construction equipment for border 
fortifications, narcotics and chemical drug precursor testing 
kits, drug detection equipment, and radio communication 
equipment, . Smaller bilateral assistance efforts are being 
funded by Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Spain and the 
UK.  The EU assistance has been targeting at demand reduction 
and institution building.  The EU assisted in setting up the 
Drug Intelligence Unit in Teheran. Drugs are a high priority 
in the EU-Iran cooperation agreement currently being 
developed.  The UNODC\'s assessment is that assistance is 
needed to control sea traffic to the Gulf States 
(particularly the ports of Chabahar and Bandar Abbas), on the 
northern Iraq border, and on the borders with Azerbaijan and 
Turkmenistan.  Reznavi countered that Iranian resources are 
primarily directed at staunching the drugs flows into Iran 
along the Afghan and Pakistan borders where drug seizures 
have been the greatest and not on the exit routes.  This 
policy is unlikely to change, given limited Iranian resources 
for this effort.  The UK mentioned its long-term interest in 
posting a Customs/DLO (drugs liaison officer) in Teheran. 
USDEL agreed that DLO\'s from donor countries stationed in 
Teheran would greatly assist the coordination effort and 
produce more reliable intelligence on the drug trafficking 
through the country.  While not responding to the call for 
DLO postings in Teheran, Reznavi responded that Iran, 
Pakistan and the Gulf States were meeting December 8-9 in 
Islamabad to review anti-drug cooperation and repeatedly 
invited the Paris Pact to come to Iran to assess its efforts 
first-hand.  Delegations welcomed a report on the December 
Islamabad meeting. 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
5.  The chair noted that the results of the two roundtables 
on the Balkans and Iran would be presented to the Paris Pact 
Consultative Group meeting in Rome on November 21.  He 
invited the delegations to submit suggestions on the agenda 
as well as attendees.  The next roundtable would be on 
western Russia and would be held in Moscow during the first 
quarter of 2004.  Future roundtables could focus on such 
areas as Central Asia, the Caucasus, Pakistan, the Gulf 
States, Albania, or Montenegro,  Whenever possible, future 
roundtables will be held in the region, rather than in 
Brussels. 
 
6. Frahi closed the meeting by noting that the purpose of the 
Paris Pact was to identify assistance gaps in combating drug 
trafficking from Afghanistan to Europe.  The two roundtables 
held to date had identified gaps, but it was unclear whether 
the intended level of specificity was attained.  Further, 
donors had not been identified to fill the gaps.  He appealed 
to the delegations to send both experts and policy-makers to 
the next roundtable to ensure that both gaps and funding are 
addressed. 
 
7. Comment.  This meeting was a considerable improvement over 
the first roundtable on the Balkans held in September for two 
reasons: the focus on a single country rather than a region, 
and the presence of a knowledgeable Iranian who contributed 
greatly to the discussion.  DEA agents on the delegation also 
found the meeting interesting and informative since they do 
not have a presence in Iran and must rely on third-country 
reporting.  If nothing else, the Paris Pact provided a 
multilateral forum to deal with the Iranians on an issue on 
which we agree, but at a politically-charged time in our 
bilateral relationship. Perhaps we should suggest future 
roundtables be held on other countries who might similarly 
feel more comfortable dealing with us in a multilateral 
setting.  The next roundtable on western Russia in Moscow 
gives us the opportunity to field an experienced delegation 
for a straightforward discussion with Russian drug policy 
makers.  The Iran roundtable clearly demonstrates the value 
of closer coordination among our like-minded partners in the 
Paris Pact before the meetings and better communication and 
direction for UNODC, which appears desperate for guidance. 
 
8. The primary task of the upcoming Consultative Group 
meeting in Rome must be to decide whether the level of 
specificity (or generality) of the recommendations produced 
by these first two roundtables meets the original objectives 
of the Paris Pact.  It is unlikely that future roundtables 
will ever produce more specific recommendations, nor will 
potential donors use these meetings to sign up for funding 
identified assistance gaps.  One of the outcomes of the Iran 
roundtable was the unprecedented invitation to send a mission 
of international experts to Iran to evaluation its anti-drug 
efforts and the opportunities for regional cooperation in 
combating drug trafficking.  This mission may also eventually 
lead to the posting of western DLO\'s in Teheran.  While not 
among the original objectives of the Paris Pact, this is 
certainly a happy outcome and perhaps justifies giving the 
Paris Pact further opportunities to prove its value.  End 
comment. 
SCHNABEL 
"
"11719","10/29/2003 8:23","03BRUSSELS5015","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","03BRUSSELS3211","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 005015 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/PC MAREN BROOKS, L/LEI FOR KEN PROPP; DOJ FOR 
OIA/KEN HARRIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC, KCRM, KJUS, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: STATUS OF BILATERAL PROTOCOLS ON EXTRADITION AND 
MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 03211 
 
 1.  The U.S.-EU Agreements on Extradition and Mutual Legal 
Assistance were signed at the Summit in Washington on June 
25, 2003.  Before these agreements can be sent to Congress 
for ratification, protocols to existing bilateral extradition 
and MLATs must be negotiated.  In the limited instances where 
there are no existing bilateral treaties on the subject, new 
agreements will be necessary to create a bilateral obligation 
to bring into force the U.S-EU Agreement.  The U.S.-EU 
Agreements and the bilateral protocols will then be sent 
forward as a package for ratification. 
 
2. The first three sets of bilateral protocols with 
Copenhagen, Italy and Ireland were largely completed October 
29-30 in Brussels.  The next tranche of countries (Austria, 
Greece, Germany, Finland, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and 
possibly Belgium) will be addressed the week of November 17. 
Negotiations with the balance of the current EU member states 
(those considered to be potentially the most difficult) will 
be held in January 2004.  It is hoped that the protocols with 
the ten accession states can also be concluded prior to 
submission of the package to Congress.  However, if this is 
not likely, those protocols can be submitted at a later date. 
 
3. The intent of the bilateral protocols is to formally 
incorporate the updated provisions of the new U.S.-EU 
Agreements into the existing treaties.  Where no extradition 
or MLA treaty exists, the U.S.-EU Agreements form the initial 
bases for bilateral cooperation.  Bilateral treaty articles 
not addressed in the U.S.-EU Agreements are unaffected and 
continue in force.  It is intended that each protocol will 
have an annex in which the specific changes to the bilateral 
treaties are spelled out.  Italy presented draft annexes in 
the form of a \"consolidated\" text; i.e., those bilateral 
articles affected by the U.S.-EU Agreements.  Articles not 
affected by the U.S.-EU Agreement are, however, not 
incorporated but remain in effect. USDEL welcomed these 
drafts and will urge the adoption of this approach whenever 
possible in all future negotiations. 
 
4.  There is an unresolved issue with the Irish extradition 
protocol. Under Irish law there is an 18-day deadline for 
production of extradition request documentation to the Irish 
court in order for a suspect who is being held provisionally 
to continue under arrest.  Without the extradition request 
being in the court, the suspect must be released on the 18th 
day.  The U.S.-EU Extradition Agreement specifies, however, 
that documents delivered to the Irish Embassy in Washington 
within this deadline meet the requirement.  On the contrary, 
the Irish delegation thought the necessary documentation had 
to be in the hands of the courts by the deadline, not the 
Irish Embassy.  They agreed to inquire whether certification 
by the Ministry of Justice that documentation was received by 
the Irish Embassy in Washington meets the deadline 
requirements. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"11933","11/6/2003 11:00","03BRUSSELS5113","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","03BRUSSELS5073","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005113 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CCA KEVIN WHITAKER, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PGOV, CU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ON CUBA: WHAT IS TO BE DONE? 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 5073 
 
     B. B) NIGRO-WHITAKER E-MAIL 10/24/03 
     C. C) STATE 306443 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 4451 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) Summary:  On November 5, Poloff discussed EU Cuba 
policy with Karl Buck, Latin America Division Chief in the EU 
Council Secretariat.  He said the EU Latin America Working 
Group (COLAT) had affirmed unanimously on November 4 the 
punitive measures the EU had announced in June in response to 
Cuba\'s March crackdown.  Buck said the EU was unsure of how 
to react to Cuba\'s current restriction of EU diplomats\' 
access to Cuban officials.  Buck said the U.S. ideas of (1) 
common U.S.-EU approaches to third countries on Cuba; and (2) 
restricting Cuban officials\' visits to Europe found little 
resonance in the EU.  Buck reported that a European 
Parliament committee had invited Cuban dissident Oswaldo Paya 
to Brussels.  This conversation and the November 4 EU 
Explanation of Vote on the Cuban anti-embargo resolution at 
the UNGA strengthen our impression that we must keep pressure 
on the EU to remain firm in its condemnation of the Cuban 
human rights situation.  End Summary. 
 
EU: DISSIDENTS TO NATIONAL DAY CELEBRATIONS 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Poloff asked Buck how EU members had reacted to the 
decision of the Austrian embassy in Havana not to celebrate 
Austria\'s national day so as not to have to act upon the 
agreed EU policy of inviting Cuban dissidents to such 
occasions (ref B).  Buck reported that the EU Latin America 
Working Group (COLAT) had affirmed unanimously on November 4 
the punitive measures the EU had announced in June in 
response to Cuba\'s March crackdown, including the policy of 
inviting dissidents to national day celebrations of EU 
embassies in Havana.  Buck said the COLAT agreed that the 
measures needed to be implemented by all EU member states so 
as not to allow Cuba to render EU policy ineffectual. 
 
EU STYMIED BY CUBAN FREEZE 
-------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Continuing his report of the November 4 COLAT 
discussion, Buck said the EU was unsure of how to react to 
Cuba\'s restriction of EU diplomats\' access to Cuban 
officials.  He said some member states\' Havana embassies were 
being granted almost no access at all to Cuban authorities, 
and the EU was worried that that would weaken its influence 
in Cuba.  Here, Buck stressed that EU policy was to work 
toward a democratic transition through dialogue not only with 
civil society, but also with the Cuban government.  Buck said 
the COLAT was considering possible \"legal or political\" 
measures in response to the Cuban access restrictions, but 
did not specify further.  He said there was some disagreement 
on this among member states, with some advocating an 
escalation of EU measures against Cuba and others 
recommending a cautious approach.  Buck offered his own view 
that the June punitive measures had been announced without 
thinking carefully enough about the possible consequences. 
Now, he said, the EU found itself between the rock of needing 
to react to the Cuban freeze and the hard place of not 
wanting to provoke even harsher Cuban measures. 
 
EU WOBBLY ON U.S. SUGGESTIONS 
----------------------------- 
 
4. (C) On possible common U.S.-EU measures discussed at the 
U.S.-EU Latin America consultations September 19 (ref A), 
Buck said the ideas of common U.S.-EU approaches to third 
countries on Cuba and of restricting Cuban officials\' visits 
to Europe found little resonance in the EU.  He said that 
COLAT members found \"no plusses\" for the EU in common 
approaches to third countries, especially in reference to 
Latin American countries.  He implied that the EU was worried 
that such common approaches would blur the line of 
demarcation between the U.S. and the EU that the EU wanted to 
maintain in its interaction with Latin American countries. 
He added the comment, \"And if the Latin Americans say no, 
what then?\" 
 
5. (C) On restricting Cuban officials\' visits to Europe, Buck 
said that the COLAT feared such a policy would only lessen 
Europe\'s influence over Cuba and possibly strengthen the 
Cuban resolve to freeze access of EU diplomats to GOC 
contacts in Havana. 
 
BUCK: GREEKS WON\'T KEEP CASTRO FROM OLYMPICS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) In the context of Cuban visits to Europe, Buck 
volunteered his view on whether Greece was likely to refuse 
to invite Castro to visit the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens 
(ref C).  He said the Greeks saw the spirit of the Games as 
being a \"global truce,\" and opined that they, in that spirit, 
would not refuse to welcome Castro to Athens. 
 
PARLIAMENT INVITES PAYA 
----------------------- 
 
7. (C) Buck reported that the Chairman of the European 
Parliament (EP) Foreign Affairs Committee, Elmar Brok, had 
invited Cuban dissident Oswaldo Paya Sardinas to attend a 
Foreign Affairs Committee meeting in Brussels on December 1. 
Buck said that Brok had done this, as far as he knew, without 
consulting anyone outside of the EP.  Buck went on to say 
that helping dissidents, which per se remains a good 
possibility for U.S.-EU cooperation, had been rendered more 
difficult since the GOC had managed to sew doubt as to 
whether those who purported to be dissidents were actually 
agents of the GOC (ref D). 
 
BLAND EU EOV ON CUBAN ANTI-EMBARGO RESOLUTION 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Buck supplied Poloff a copy of the November 4 EU 
Explanation of Vote (EOV) on the Cuban anti-embargo 
resolution at the UNGA, saying that all member states had 
agreed that the EOV should strongly condemn the human rights 
situation in Cuba.  (EU member states voted unanimously in 
favor of the resolution condemning the U.S. embargo.)  The 
EOV concentrates its criticism of the Cuban human rights 
record in two paragraphs out of the ten-paragraph EOV:  \"The 
European Union strongly condemns the serious deterioration of 
the human rights situation in Cuba.  The increase in 
violations of human rights has raised an international wave 
of protests and condemnations and has increased the concern 
of the European Union about the political situation in 
Cuba....The European Union urges the Cuban authorities to 
bring about speedy, lasting and substantial improvements in 
the situation, in particular with a view to ensure the full 
respect for all human rights.  In that connection, the 
European Union calls for the immediate release and full 
re-integration into society of all prisoners of conscience. 
We appeal to the Cuban authorities to cooperate fully with 
international human rights bodies and mechanisms.  The 
European Union reaffirms its declaration made by the 
Presidency on 5 June 2003.\"  One paragraph also addresses the 
need for economic reform in Cuba, another outlines the 
objectives of the EU Common Position on Cuba, and another 
paragraph criticizes the GOC restrictions imposed on EU 
embassies. 
 
COMMENT:  EU WAVERING, WE SHOULD WEIGH IN 
----------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) It is clear to us that EU Cuba policy is still captive 
to differences among member states and somewhat immobilized 
by uncertainty about how to react to Cuban measures against 
EU diplomats.  The EU\'s natural discomfort about getting 
tough with Cuba has been exacerbated by the Cubans\' harsh 
response to the EU punitive measures announced in June. 
Although the injunction to invite dissidents remains in 
place, the Austrian decision in Havana not to celebrate its 
national day is an indication that EU embassies on the ground 
may have different views.  It appears also that the EU has 
rejected the idea of adding to the punitive measures by, for 
example, restricting Cuban official visits to Europe.  That 
said, the EU has reaffirmed publicly and privately its 
intention to continue its retaliatory response to the March 
crackdown.  We should (1) work with sympathetic member states 
such as Spain and Italy to consolidate the little bit of 
progress made by the EU since June; and (2) take advantage of 
the EU\'s current uncertainty by offering them specific ideas 
on working with us to help dissidents while also continuing 
to push them -- carefully -- to increase incrementally their 
pressure on Cuba.  END COMMENT. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"12499","12/3/2003 12:37","03BRUSSELS5469","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03BRUSSELS5457","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005469 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DRL/IL; LABOR FOR ILAB AND ODEP; FOR LABOR 
REPORTING OFFICERS AND LABOR ATTACHES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: USEU LABOR/SOCIAL AFFAIRS HIGHLIGHTS 
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 5457 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (U) This is first cable in new series designed to provide 
labor reporting officers and attaches with a review of recent 
key EU actions in the areas of labor affairs and social 
policy as well as a look-ahead of what to expect in coming 
months. This report will highlight areas of US/EU 
dialogue/cooperation on labor affairs as well as labor 
related issues that we currently are tracking. USEU will 
continue to provide a separate monthly report on EU 
unemployment statistics (reftel). 
 
US/EU Seminar on Disabled in the Workplace 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2. (U) US Department of Labor Assistant Secretary Dr. Roy 
Grizzard (Office of Disability Policy) headed an USG/private 
sector delegation here November 17-19 attending an US/EU 
Seminar on Access of People with Disabilities to Employment. 
Conference highlights included mutual recognition that both 
sides of the Atlantic face a very high unemployment rate - 
about 70%- among their disabled -- and that the EU has no 
equivalent of an Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). EU 
NGO participants were especially interested in developing ADA 
protections for EU workplaces.  To our pleasant surprise, 
there were no expressions of an alleged European superiority 
over the US on the treatment of the handicapped; in fact, 
most Europeans agreed that there was much that Europe could 
learn from the US. Adding urgency to EU concern is the high 
rate of disabled workers (25 percent) among the forthcoming 
ten new EU members; among the current 15 members, 15 percent 
of their workforce is disabled. 
 
EU Commissioner trip to the US: hits and misses 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
3.  (SBU) EU Commissioner for Labor and Social Affairs Anna 
Diamantopoulou traveled to NY and Boston November 20-24. She 
stunned some of her staff when she decided to cancel the 
Washington leg of her trip allegedly because of difficulties 
in getting appointments on the Hill.  According to one of her 
closest advisors, the highlight of her trip was meeting with 
UNSYG Kofi Annan where the central topic of their 
conversation was what the EU is doing in the area of 
Corporate Social Responsibility.  In Boston, she argued at a 
Kennedy School speech that Europe can learn from the US and 
that the transatlantic relationship is too important to let 
it break up. Of particular note is that during most of her 
speech, she sounded more like the Commissioner for foreign 
relations than a Commissioner for Labor and Social Affairs - 
but it is open secret in Brussels that the Diamantopoulou is 
very interested in pursuing a political career back in Greece 
once her term on the Commission expires next October 31. 
 
EU Commissioner to G-8 Labor Ministerial 
---------------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Secretary of Labor Chao has agreed to a request from 
Diamantopoulou for a bilateral meeting (December 15) at the 
G-8 labor ministerial in Stuttgart later this month. 
According to the Commissioner\'s deputy chief of staff, the 
Commissioner will be interested in talking about labor 
standards, corporate social responsibility, and the impact of 
enlargement on the EU work force. 
 
Labor Experts Gloom on Meeting Lisbon Goals 
------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) For the last half year, former Dutch PM Wim Kok has 
chaired a committee of labor market experts on how EU member 
states are meeting the three Lisbon employment goals of 70 
percent labor force utilization; 60 percent utilization of 
female workers and 50 percent utilization of older workers 
(defined as 55-64). In their report released November 26, the 
experts note that the EU is meeting none of these goals - 
unlike the US.  The reports cited inflexible labor market 
policies as a particular problem and argued that Europe 
should not respond just to the current slowdown, but also 
needs to more effectively address the structural challenge of 
globalization and the rapid aging of its population.  USEU 
Labor Counselor participated in a November 27 panel 
discussion on the report (sponsored by the European Voice) in 
Brussels called \"2010: a Work Odyssey: Shaping the European 
Employment Market.\"  The discussion was somewhat gloomy 
because of fear that with enlargement, the EU is more likely 
to go even further backwards in meeting their Lisbon 
employment goals. 
 
US/EU Labor and Social Affairs Task Force 
----------------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) On November 18, USEU attended the first-ever DVC of 
the US/EU working group on employment and labor related 
issues (between USDOL and DG-Employment). Main purpose of the 
meeting was to lay out a joint work plan for 2005 and confirm 
2004 work plan. Future projects include joint seminars on 
Information and Communication Technology outsourcing, 
immigration and labor market integration, and a possible 
joint conference/seminar on anti-discrimination in 2005. Also 
discussed were follow-up projects from the disability seminar 
(above) and an earlier joint US/EU occupational safety and 
health seminar in Greece. 
 
US Department of Labor visitor 
------------------------------ 
 
7.  (SBU) USDOL/ILAB European Area Advisor Bill Brumfield 
visited Brussels 11/20-21.  We met with EC, Union of 
Industrial and Employers\' Confederations of Europe (UNICE), 
European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC) and International 
Confederation of Free Trade Union (ICFTU) officials.  We had 
a key meeting with Tom Jenkins, the newly arrived 
international affairs advisor to ETUC secretary general John 
Monks.  Under Monks, the ETUC is much more receptive to 
working with the ICFTU and us than the previous standoffish 
leadership. Our ICFTU interlocutor previewed ICFTU interest 
in hearing more about how the US will handle the labor 
aspects of its forthcoming G-8 presidency. 
 
What we\'re tracking 
------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) ICFTU plans/projects for Iraq labor unions, EU 
assessment of its \"2003: the European Year of People with 
Disabilities,\" Irish EU Presidency Plans for Labor and Social 
Issues; Commission concerns on the impact of the enlargement 
on the EU labor market; potential impact of EU 
Intergovernmental Convention (IGC)/Constitution process on 
labor and social issues. 
Foster 
"
"12556","12/5/2003 14:12","03BRUSSELS5510","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","03ROME5184","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/05/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PARM, KNNP, EAID, KS, CH, KN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU TROIKA DEC 9-12 VISIT TO PYONGYANG 
 
REF: ROME 5184 
 
Classified By: USEU poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C)  Summary.  Senior EU officials will visit Pyongyang 
December 9-12 to convey EU support for the Six Party Talks; 
EU interest in improving ROK-DPRK relations in order to 
coordinate peninsular development; the need to respect human 
rights; and the need to begin a process of economic reforms. 
The visiting EU \"Troika\" will be led by Italian Asia Director 
General Guido Martini (other EU participants listed para 5). 
Pyongyang\'s draft schedule for the EU centers on a \"Political 
Dialogue\" meeting with not-yet-named officials.  The EU 
Troika will also meet with FM Pak Man Sun, Vice FM Kung Sok 
Yung, General Ri Chan Bok, among others.  The Troika will 
round out its trip with visits to an information technology 
project and a pharmaceutical joint venture, and will hold 
consultations with aid organizations.  They will wrap ut the 
trip with consultations in Seoul, and would be open to 
debriefing US Embassy officials (see para 4).  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
EU to Focus on Six Party Talks, Economic Reform, 
Peninsula Development, Human Rights 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. (C) Poloff discussed the EU visit to Pyongyang with 
Council Secretariat trip participant Bruno Hanses December 
4-5.  According to Hanses, the EU wants to deliver four 
strong messages to the North Koreans: 
 
-- On the DPRK\'s nuclear weapons program, the EU will say 
that it shares fully the concerns of the U.S. and 
International Community, and that it supports the Six Party 
talks aimed at reversing North Korean nuclear ambitions.  The 
EU is keen for Pyongyang to understand that European concerns 
about the situation are serious and indigenous, and not just 
a reflection of U.S. concerns.  The EU will be willing to 
engage with Pyongyang at a more substantive level only when 
the current situation is resolved.  Hanses said the EU wants 
to lend its full support to the Six Party talks, while at the 
same time \"absolutely avoiding any impression of having a 
mediating role.\"  The visiting Troika intends to press firmly 
for DPRK cooperation in the Six Party context, but will not 
offer any mediating or facilitating services. 
 
-- On economic reform, the EU will continue its push for 
Pyongyang to take meaningful steps to reform its economy and 
liberalize its markets.  The EU will encourage the DPRK to 
speed up its reform efforts by cooperating with the ROK on 
liberalizing projects and policies.  Hanses reported that the 
EU is also considering the idea of offering technical 
assistance on economic reform to Pyongyang, if and when the 
nuclear situation is resolved.  Hanses described it as a 
preliminary idea for EU assistance in the future, pending 
positive developments on the ground.  He said the EU will 
not/not broach the subject with the North Koreans during the 
December 9-12 visit. 
 
-- The EU wants to add human rights to the agenda of the 
December 9-12 talks, but Hanses reports that Pyongyang has 
not responded to the request.  If human rights make the 
agenda, the EU will push for North Korea to sign up to 
international human rights conventions and begin 
demonstrating greater respect for human rights in general. 
The Troika will also press Pyongyang on allowing UN Human 
Rights Rapporteurs to have access to the country. 
 
-- The EU will press for greater DPRK-ROK coordination on 
\"development of the peninsula,\" to include such things as 
economic liberalization, humanitarian activities, and 
infrastructure development. 
 
-------------- 
Draft Schedule 
-------------- 
 
3. (C) The EU Troika will hold pre-visit consultations in 
Beijing Monday December 8 before proceeding to Pyongyang 
December 9.  Pyongyang has proposed the following schedule to 
the EU: 
 
December 10 
-- Meeting with Protocol Vice FM Kung Sok Yung 
-- Political Dialogue session; DPRK officials unnamed 
-- Director Kim Chun Guk 
-- Visit to Piintec information technology project 
-- Meeting with the Vice President of the Presidaeum of the 
Supreme People\'s Assembly 
-- Meeting with General Ri Chan Bok 
-- Meeting with Song Kilnan 
-- Dialogue and reception with aid and humanitarian 
organizations 
 
December 11 
-- Briefing on the Pyongjsu pharmaceutical project 
-- Trip to Anju and Pukchang 
-- Meeting with FM Pak Man Sun 
-- Reception with DPRK officials 
 
December 12 
-- Drive to Seoul for consultations (the EU troika was given 
permission to drive across the DMZ). 
 
----------------------------- 
Debriefing for U.S. in Seoul? 
----------------------------- 
 
4. (C) When asked about the possibility of a post-trip 
debriefing for USG officials in Seoul, Hanses said that it 
sounded like a good idea and asked that we have Embassy Seoul 
coordinate with the Italian Embassy to see if it could be 
arranged.  USEU believes this would be a valuable opportunity 
to get a first-hand account of the talks from EU participants 
while it is still fresh in their minds, and before they 
return to their offices in Rome, Dublin and Brussels.  If 
desired, Embassy Seoul should contact the Italian Embassy in 
Seoul to arrange a meeting with the Troika on December 12. 
 
---------------------- 
EU Troika Participants 
---------------------- 
 
5. The Italian EU Presidency will be represented on the visit 
by Asia Director General Guido Martini.  The upcoming Irish 
Presidency will be represented by Asia Director Cleona 
Mannehan.  Deputy Director General Anastassios Vikas and Desk 
Officer Bruno Hanses will attend for the Council Secretariat. 
 East Asia Director Percy Westerlund and Desk Officer Maria 
Castilo will represent the Commission. 
 
Foster 
"
"12581","12/8/2003 10:25","03BRUSSELS5525","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 005525 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, TS, AG, MO, SR, BK, AL, MK, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU COTER CONSULTATIONS ON COUNTERTERRORISM 
DECEMBER 3 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified, entire text, please protect 
accordingly. 
 
Summary: Revising the COTER Guidelines 
-------------------------------------- 
 
1.  The U.S. and EU COTER held their quarterly 
counterterrorism coordination meeting on December 3.  The 
U.S. was represented by S/CT,s Senior Advisor for 
Multilateral Affairs, Chris Ensley, DOJ senior counsel Mark 
Richards, Econoff Kim Gagne and NAS Frank Kerber.  The EU 
COTER delegation was chaired by Giampaolo Cantini of the 
Italian presidency and included delegates from the incoming 
Irish presidency, the European Commission, and the European 
Council.  The December 3 meeting was the first U.S.-EU COTER 
exchange to be held under revised guidelines that focus work 
on identifying areas of possible cooperative diplomacy 
including encouraging countries to implement their 
international obligations under UNSCR 1373 and the 12 
international counterterrorism conventions.  The U.S. and EU 
established these guidelines after the September U.S.-EU 
COTER exchange in an effort to make the dialogue more action 
oriented and agreed to discuss two regions ) North Africa 
and the western Balkans ) at this meeting.  End Summary. 
 
Terrorism Trends Overview 
------------------------- 
 
2.  Italy opened the session by presenting an overview of 
trends in global terrorism with special focus on al-Qaida and 
associated networks.  Cantini pointed to recent attacks as an 
indication of the terrorist network,s apparent shift to 
softer targets and expressed concern over the movement of 
al-Qaida-related terrorists to Iraq to undercut coalition 
activities there.  The U.S. concurred with the thrust of 
Italy,s assessment. 
 
Implementing UNSCR 1373 in the Western Balkans: 
A U.S. Assessment 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
3.  Moving to the core of the revised dialogue, the U.S. 
delegation presented a detailed picture of implementation of 
UNSCR 1373 and the 12 international counterterrorism 
conventions in the western Balkans (i.e., Albania, Bosnia, 
Croatia, FYROM, and Serbia-Montenegro and Kosovo) based on 
the much appreciated assessments from U.S. embassies in the 
region.  Overall, the U.S. delegation said that the Balkans 
nations are strong supporters of the war against terrorism, 
but lack the institutions, training, and resources necessary 
to fight and prevent terrorism as effectively as possible. 
The EU delegation agreed and pointed out that U.S. and EU 
assistance programs have room for both more assistance and 
better coordination of our mutual assistance activities.  In 
discussions of specific areas for cooperative diplomacy in 
the Balkans, the U.S. and EU agreed to consider two specific 
measures: 
 
--A coordinated approach to Serbia and Montenegro encouraging 
it to adopt the four international counterterrorism 
conventions it has not so far, as well as a request that the 
republican governments ensure that republican laws and 
regulations harmonize with the international commitments 
adopted under the international conventions. 
 
--A similar coordinated approach to FYROM urging it to speed 
up the ongoing (but very slow) adoption process for 
un-ratified international conventions, especially those 
related to terrorist financing and terrorist bombings. 
 
If the EU and the U.S. agree to these recommendations, the 
Department and the EU presidency will coordinate the details 
of the approaches. 
 
Implementing UNSCR 1373 in North Africa: An EU Assessment 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
4.  The EU followed up on the U.S. presentation by making its 
own on the Northern African nations of Algeria, Morocco, and 
Tunisia.  Italian and Irish delegates agreed that all three 
countries fully recognize the threat that terrorism 
represents to them and aggressively pursue counterterrorism 
measures internally.  Nonetheless, they suffer from capacity 
shortfalls similar to those faced by the Balkan nations.  The 
Italian presidency also expressed concern that the three 
sometimes confront terrorism in a heavy-handed manner, 
agitating population bases that terrorists are already 
seeking to exploit.  The U.S. delegation shared concern over 
the need for all governments to fight terrorism with full 
respect for the rule of law and human rights.  The United 
States was working generally with these three countries to 
bolster democracy and good governance, and incorporated human 
rights components into its counterterrorism training for law 
enforcement services. 
 
5. The European Commission then raised one area in which it 
might seek U.S. diplomatic assistance.  The EU has been 
trying to encourage judicial reform in Tunisia and has 
offered to provide relevant assistance.  Tunis, per the 
European Commission delegate, has rebuffed EU offers by 
trying to narrow down the possible reforms to be considered. 
Although the EU is considering whether to drop its efforts 
(rather than proceed with a &flawed8 program), if it 
decides to make another go at Tunis, it may ask for the U.S. 
diplomatic assistance in persuading the GOT to accept the 
idea of broader judicial reform. 
 
Anticipatory Crime Laws, Terrorist Finance, 
and Enhanced intra-EU Coordination 
------------------------------------------- 
 
6. After a brief review of wider counterterrorism assistance 
efforts, including the November 17 Counterterrorism Action 
Group (CTAG) meeting in Paris, both sides raised issues of 
mutual interest.  The U.S. DOJ representative gave an 
overview of an analysis of G-8 member states, anticipatory 
crime laws (e.g., laws that inter alia outlaw material 
support for terrorist groups or payment to individuals to 
conduct terrorist operations) that identified a key gap in 
G-8 members, ability to cooperate when one country,s 
national security information would be useful to another,s 
ability to prosecute potential terrorists.  He then asked if 
the EU would consider conducting a similar survey of its 
member states.  The EU side took the idea on board. 
 
7. The U.S. side also encouraged the EU to be more assertive 
in its efforts to block the assets of terrorists and their 
supporters.  We applauded the EU,s designation of Hamas but 
asked it to strongly consider designating the Hamas charities 
and individuals that the U.S. has already designated. 
Stopping the flow of money to Hamas and other Palestinian 
terrorist groups will be a crucial part of U.S. and EU 
efforts to get peace efforts between Israel and the 
Palestinian Authority moving forward.  Similarly, as the EU 
has already designated the Kurdistan Workers, Party (PKK) as 
a terrorist group, it should move quickly to designate the 
same organization now operating under a different name.  The 
PKK has not changed its views on the use of terrorism and 
should not &get off the hook8 by simply changing its name. 
 
8.  Finally, upon hearing that the EU COTER had conducted a 
joint assessment of North African terrorist networks with the 
EU,s Justice and Home Affairs, Terrorism Working Group 
(which addresses internal EU police cooperation against 
terrorists in the EU), the S/CT representative asked whether 
there were plans for the various EU organizations involved in 
counterterrorism activities to cooperate more closely. 
Although the COTER delegation agreed that more expansive 
intra-EU cooperation would be helpful, organizational issues 
made moving in that direction a very slow process.  The U.S. 
delegation acknowledged the unique characteristics of the EU 
but urged COTER to continue with the effort.  In the long 
run, EU security would benefit from better coordination of 
the many elements involved in fighting terrorism just as the 
United States is benefiting from cooperation between the 
State Department and the Departments of Justice, Homeland 
Security, and Treasury. (Comment: S/CT,s Senior Advisor, who 
was invited to participate as an observer at the JHA,s 
Terrorist Working Group meeting on December 2, made a similar 
pitch for greater intra-EU counterterrorism cooperation 
there, as well. End Comment.) 
 
Toward Joint or Parallel Diplomatic Action 
------------------------------------------ 
 
9.  In closing, the U.S. and EU agreed that the new 
guidelines for the dialogue were effective in focusing the 
discussions on concrete counterterrorism issues and provided 
an avenue for identifying areas for joint or parallel 
diplomatic activity to encourage full implementation of 
international counterterrorism requirements.  The incoming 
Irish presidency asked to continue operating under these 
guidelines and suggested that we focus on the Gulf states 
(GCC members plus Yemen) at the next meeting.   Ireland also 
proposed holding the next meeting on February 13.  The U.S. 
side agreed to get back to the Irish quickly on both 
suggestions. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  Although the U.S.-EU COTER dialogue will remain somewhat 
limited in its scope of action by EU internal structures, the 
new guidelines that focus work on areas of agreed-upon 
international counterterrorism standards affords some room to 
produce useful outcomes on the diplomatic front.  USEU and 
the Department would welcome comments from posts discussed in 
the sections on the Balkans and North Africa, especially on 
the cooperative diplomatic proposals mentioned in paras 4-5. 
 The U.S. should continue to encourage the EU to break down 
bureaucratic walls barring effective EU counterterrorism 
coordination.  Not only would more intra-EU cooperation on 
counterterrorism measures improve its counterterrorism 
abilities, it could present the United States with a more 
effective overall counterterrorism interlocutor and partner. 
 
Sammis 
"
"12649","12/11/2003 14:50","03BRUSSELS5593","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 005593 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR SA, EUR/ERA 
PLEASE PASS USAID FOR ANE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PTER, AF, PK, IN, CE, NP, XD, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: A/S ROCCA CONSULTATIONS ON SOUTH ASIA WITH EU 
COMMISSION 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (C) On December 8 in Brussels, SA A/S Christina Rocca met 
with EU counterparts at the European Commission to discuss 
ongoing developments in South Asia (participants listed para 
11). 
 
--On Afghanistan, interlocutors said at this time they could 
identify only euros 20 million in available Commission and EU 
member state funds to assist the 2004 elections.  The U.S. 
and EU should consider holding a donors\' coordination meeting 
on the margins of the ADF early in 2004 
 
--The EU is encouraged by recent steps toward normalizing 
India-Pakistan relations.  Interlocutors agreed the next best 
step would be a Musharraf-Vajpayee meeting, and that it would 
be important to encourage a positive outcome of the SAARC 
meetings. 
 
--The EU denied the existence of a split between U.S. and EU 
positions on Nepal, and promised to correct the problem that 
caused the Commission\'s Kathmandu delegation to release a 
statement on human rights without consulting the U.S. 
 
--On Sri Lanka, the EU stated that time is running out for 
Colombo to get its house in order so that peace talks can 
resume. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Afghanistan: Ramping Up for Elections 
------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) A/S Rocca opened the meeting with an assessment of 
continuing international efforts to enhance security and 
accelerate reconstruction and development in Afghanistan. 
She delivered a strong message that the donor community was 
coming up short on its commitment to fund the June 2004 
elections.  Donors need to demonstrate their commitment to 
Afghan democracy, she said, by finding a way to adequately 
fund the 2004 elections.  The U.S. has committed USD 15 
million to the election process, but UNAMA\'s estimated 
funding requirements for registration and polling would be 
around USD 78 million and USD 40 million, respectively. 
European Commission (EC) interlocutors, led by Deputy 
Director General for External Relations Herve Jouanjean, said 
that the EU put the figures needed for elections at euros 70 
million for registration and euros 20 million for polling. 
In either case, they said, a straw poll of EC and member 
state pledges shows only euros 20 million available for 
elections.  The cost would go up if there were ultimately two 
rounds of elections.  EC staff suggested that one idea might 
be to use funds in the ARTF recurrent budget -- although EC 
Asia Director Fokion Fotiadis urged caution and said that 
such a maneuver should be considered only as a last resort. 
 
3. (C) Jouanjean and EC External Relations Cabinet member 
Barbara Brandtner recommended that it might be a good idea to 
hold a donors\' coordination meeting on the margins of the ADF 
early in 2004 (note: this was first discussed with the 
Secretary during his November 18 meeting with the EU Troika 
 
SIPDIS 
in Brussels).  Donors could use the opportunity to coordinate 
pre-election support and discuss ways to bring forward 
multi-year reconstruction pledges.  Fotiadis noted that the 
World Bank would be releasing its needs assessment around the 
same time.  We should be careful, he said, to ensure that any 
coordination meeting does not coincide with the report\'s 
release, because the report is sure to highlight the 
inadequate level of overall international support for Afghan 
reconstruction. 
 
4. (C) A/S Rocca described how the USG envisions spending the 
USD 50 million authorized by Congress for FY 2004 
counternarcotics programs in Afghanistan.  Rocca\'s 
interlocutors said the EU, which has become increasingly 
alarmed at the rapid increase in Afghan poppy production, was 
very grateful for Congress\' decision to provide such a sum. 
 
5. (C) On PRT deployments, A/S Rocca conveyed U.S. plans for 
fielding new PRTs in the southeast concurrent with Karzai 
taking steps to improve central authority in that region.  At 
the same time, the U.S. will step up its cooperation with 
Pakistan to clamp down on cross-border Taliban incursions in 
the region.  A/S Rocca encouraged the EU and member states to 
continue their support for PRTs.  The EC staffers agreed that 
increasing security and central authority in the southeast 
was a critical next step for Afghanistan.  EU member states 
were continuing to evaluate possible PRT contributions, and 
the EC regularly tells NGOs that they should do a better job 
working with, not against, PRTs.  They noted that the EC 
would be briefing CARE on December 9 to explain the need for 
greater NGO-PRT coordination. 
6. (C) The EC reiterated Commissioner Patten\'s November 18 
statement to the Secretary that the EC prefers presidential 
and parliamentary elections to be held simultaneously, as 
envisioned in the Bonn process.  This would give more 
credibility to the outcome.  A/S Rocca agreed that it was 
preferable to adhere as much as possible to the Bonn 
timetable but that the Constitution might provide some 
breathing space with respect to the parliamentary elections. 
 
------------------------------------ 
India-Pakistan: Encouraging the Thaw 
------------------------------------ 
 
7. (C) Jouanjean said that the EU\'s November 29 summit with 
India had been very productive (joint EU-India communique 
available at http://europa.eu.int/comm/ 
external relations/india/intro/index.htm).  The EU sensed a 
new Indian optimism and confidence in the future.  The EU is 
worried, however, that India is not paying enough attention 
to the economic and developmental inequities that will 
increase between Indian states as India continues its 
developmental ascension.  Reflecting the new confidence, 
Jouanjean said the Indians were more moderate than ever about 
Pakistan.  There was no \"Pak-bashing\" as in the past, he 
said.  The Indians, including PM Vajpayee, were \"softer and 
more open\" than before.  (Note: The EU will hold a 
Ministerial with Pakistan the first week of February 2004.) 
 
8. (C) A/S Rocca said the U.S. and EU should keep pushing for 
progress on normalizing India-Pakistan relations.  We should 
keep up the pressure and provide positive reinforcement for 
the positive steps being taken.  Jouanjean said the EC 
agreed, and would do what it could to support a 
Vajpayee-Musharraf meeting on the margins of the regional 
summit in Islamabad next month.  A/S Rocca stressed that it 
would be important to get both sides to prepare carefully for 
the SAARC summit and any possible bilateral meeting so that 
the outcome is positive and will lead to continuing thaw 
between the two countries. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Nepal: Singing from the Same Sheet 
---------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) A/S Rocca conveyed growing U.S. concern over the 
apparently irreconcilable differences between the King and 
the political parties.  Nepal was at risk of heading the way 
of failed states; in order to prevent that, it would be 
necessary for the U.S., EU, India and other involved parties 
to coordinate very closely on preventing further 
deterioration.  Rocca expressed concern that the EU was 
drifting from the U.S. position on Nepal, and cited the 
recent EU statement on human rights that was released without 
prior U.S. consultations.  It would be extremely dangerous 
for the Maoists and other spoilers to see any daylight 
between U.S. and EU positions.  The EC interlocutors reacted 
with surprise, and denied the emergence of a gap between U.S. 
and EU positions.  Jouanjean apologized for the oversight of 
its delegation in Katmandu, which released the statement. 
The EC was unaware that the delegation had not consulted with 
the U.S. Embassy.  Jouanjean promised to backtrack the error 
with the EC delegation and the German Ambassador, who 
represents the EU Presidency\'s interests in Kathmandu, to 
ensure it doesn\'t happen again.  Interlocutors agreed with 
Rocca that it was important that the Maoists not see any 
exploitable daylight between US and EU positions.  Rocca 
agreed that we should consider a suggestion made by Fotiadis 
that engaged parties convene an international conference to 
stress a united message on Nepal. 
 
-------------------------- 
Sri Lanka: No Time to Lose 
-------------------------- 
 
10. (C) A/S Rocca stressed that the LTTE must not be treated 
as co-equal with the GOSL.  The one is a designated terrorist 
group while the other is a legitimate, if divided, 
government.  Rocca\'s interlocutors listened politely, but 
avoided a discussion that would force them to defend 
Commissioner Patten\'s recent visit to the LTTE\'s northern 
headquarters to meet with LTTE commander Probakharan.  Rocca 
and the EC agreed that for the peace process to be 
successful, the President and PM would need to move fast to 
resolve their stalemate. 
------------ 
Participants 
------------ 
 
11. (U) U.S. Participants: 
A/S Christina Rocca 
USEU Development Counselor Patricia Lerner 
USEU Poloff Van Reidhead (notetaker) 
 
EU Participants: 
EC External Relations Deputy Director General Herve Jouanjean 
EC External Relations Cabinet Member Barbara Brandtner 
EC External Relations Asia Director Fokion Fotiades 
EC External Relations Asia Head of Unit Julian Wilson 
EC External Relations Asia Head of Unit Laurence 
Argimon-Pangratis 
 
12. (U) Kabul minimize considered. 
 
13. (U) A/S Rocca has cleared this message. 
 
Foster 
"
"12690","12/15/2003 10:06","03BRUSSELS5619","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","03Brussels5469","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOL FOR BLS AND ILAB 
TREASURY FOR IMI 
STATE FOR DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU \"SOCIAL SUMMIT\" STRESSES JOBS AND LABOR 
MARKET FLEXIBILITY 
 
REF: Brussels 5469 (notal) 
 
1.  Summary: The Prime Ministers and Employment and 
Social Affairs Ministers of the EU Troika (Italy, 
Ireland, and the Netherlands) gathered with EU-level 
trade union and employers organization leaders 
December 11 to review the employment situation in 
Europe.  The \"Social Summit,\" co-chaired by European 
Council President Berlusconi and Commission 
President Prodi, heard a presentation by former 
Dutch PM Wim Kok in his capacity as head of the 
Employment Task Force, which recently underlined the 
need to press reforms to boost both employment and 
productivity levels in Europe through increased 
training and flexibility.  Together with the EU 
Action for Growth approved by the December 12 
European Council, the \"Kok report\", as it is known, 
highlights the gap facing the EU in its efforts to 
meet the employment targets set under its \"Lisbon 
strategy\" for turning the Union into the most 
competitive economy in the world by 2010 (reftel). 
End Summary 
 
EU SOCIAL PARTNERS\' VIEWS 
------------------------- 
 
2.  Berlusconi told the post-Social Summit press 
conference that the Kok report was received 
\"positively by a very large majority of 
participants.\"  He noted that the report called for 
solutions to the EU jobs crisis at the level of the 
individual Member States.  Commission President 
Prodi said all participants agreed on the \"clear 
objectives\" of the Kok report, although the 
employers and unions had \"differences\" on the 
\"instruments\" proposed, he said without going into 
details.  The President of the Union of Industrial 
and Employers\' Confederations of Europe (UNICE), 
Jrgen Strube, expressed hope that the EU Summit 
over the weekend would be the \"Summit of the Wise, 
that will give us a Constitution that will above all 
allow business to develop\".  The Secretary-General 
of the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC), 
John Monks, asked for his part for \"a strong 
Constitution for a strong Europe, and a strong 
social Europe.\" 
 
COMMISSION VIEWS 
---------------- 
 
3.  In his address to the Social Summit, Prodi said 
the report clearly showed that reforms were \"both 
possible and necessary, and that they must be 
introduced urgently to support the economic upturn.\" 
Areas for action identified by the report were 
\"fully consistent with\" the European Employment 
Guidelines adopted this year.  Prodi called for 
better dissemination of innovation, more stress on 
R&D, developing strategies for dealing with an aging 
population, stepping up preventive and active labor- 
market policies, more investment in human capital, 
and, lastly, more affordable and accessible 
childcare.  Prodi stressed that \"In all these areas, 
the Social Partners have a key role to play,\" and 
that the ability of governments to build up \"reform 
partnerships,\" as the Report puts it, would be 
\"crucial for the success\" of such policies. 
 
NEXT STEPS 
---------- 
 
4.  The leaders of the EU-25 in their December 12 
European Council meeting subsequently welcomed the 
Kok report as well as the outcome of the Social 
Summit.  Berlusconi used his December 12 press 
conference to reiterate his views in favor of 
freeing European business, using the image of 
\"Gulliver being chained by red tape.\"  In its 
conclusions, the Summit stressed that, in accordance 
with the view of the Task Force, improving the EU\'s 
employment performance in the context of the 
Employment Strategy depends on meeting four 
essential requirements: 
 
--   Increasing adaptability of workers and 
     enterprises; 
 
--   Attracting more people to the labor market, 
--   More and more effective investment in human 
     capital; 
 
--   Ensuring effective implementation of reforms 
     through better governance. 
 
5.  The European Council tasked the Commission and 
Council to consider the Kok report in preparing 
their Joint Employment Report to be submitted by the 
to the 2004 Spring European Council.  The Report 
would also be valuable for the Commission when 
preparing its country-specific employment 
recommendations next spring.  As the EU work program 
in the area is directed toward the March European 
Council, no concrete results emerged from the 
Summit.  However, the social partners in a joint 
declaration said they were sharing the sense of 
urgency conveyed by the Kok report to meet the 
Lisbon employment targets. 
 
6.  The holding of this three-way Summit reflects 
concern expressed by some Member States (France, in 
particular) about the current economic and 
employment situation in Europe. The upcoming Irish 
Presidency and the Commission have already started 
to prepare, in consultation with the social 
partners, the EU Summit of March 2004 that will 
focus on sustainable growth, the aging of the 
working population, as well as such concerns raised 
in the Kok report as competitiveness and 
productivity, social protection and mobility. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"12726","12/16/2003 12:23","03BRUSSELS5635","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","03BRUSSELS5520","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 BRUSSELS 005635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA MICHAEL DIXON, AND H; H PLEASE PASS TO 
HIRC HILLEL WEINBERG AND FRANK RECORD, AND TO CHRIS 
CONNELLY, CHIEF OF STAFF OF CONG. JO ANN DAVIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/16/2013 
TAGS: PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: TRANSATLANTIC LEGISLATORS\' DIALOGUE MEETING 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 5520 
 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 3619 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The biannual Transatlantic Legislators\' 
Dialogue (TLD) meetings were held in Williamsburg, Virginia 
on November 13-16 (list of participants in paras 20-21).  The 
six members of Congress and ten members of the European 
Parliament (MEP\'s) reviewed the draft EU Constitutional 
Treaty, and held a broad discussion on current political a 
security issues where US and European views frequently 
conflict, including Iran, Iraq, the Middle East, the war on 
terror, and Guantanamo.  The TLD also offered opportunities 
to increase engagement with the European Parliament (EP) on 
important issues to the USG where the EP plays an important 
role, such as USG access to Passenger Name Record (PNR) data, 
EU chemicals policy, and international corporate governance. 
The next TLD meeting is tentatively scheduled for the spring 
in Dublin.    End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Draft EU Constitutional Treaty 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) The discussion centered around a debate among the 
MEPs on whether a draft constitutional treaty would transfer 
sovereignty from the EU member states to the Union to a 
significant degree, and whether such a development would be a 
positive one.  Swedish Conservative MEP Charlotte 
Cederschioeld averred that the EU was based on pooling the 
sovereignty of the member states, and that the constitutional 
treaty\'s purpose was to make the EU more transparent, 
efficient and democratic.  UK Conservative Philip Charles 
Bradbourn countered that the constitutional treaty proposed a 
massive transfer of power to the EU at the expense of the 
member states.  He deplored, for example, the fact that the 
EU Charter of Fundamental Rights had been incorporated into 
the draft treaty as justiciable, whereas originally it had 
been only declaratory.  UK Conservative Caroline Jackson 
stressed that the treaty did not represent \"a Philadelphia 
moment.\"  She said \"it\'s not a constitution, it\'s a 
constitutional treaty...and it\'s a dreadful mess.\"  UK 
Liberal-Democrat Sarah Ludford, in contrast, lauded the 
constitutional treaty as an attempt to consolidate all the 
previous EU treaties into one document and set explicit 
limits on the power of the EU, preventing Brussels \"mission 
creep\" at the expense of the national capitals.  Rep. J. 
Randy Forbes asserted that, if history were a guide, the 
constitutional treaty, once passed, would become a 
constitution.  He, along with Rep. Darrell Issa, wondered 
whether EU member states were fully prepared for the possible 
ramifications of a constitutional treaty. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
3. (SBU) MEP Bastiaan Belder (Dutch Calvinist Party) stressed 
the EU\'s desire to work constructively with the U.S. on Iraq 
reconstruction and reiterated the EU position that 
sovereignty, and in the shorter term key aspects of 
sovereignty such as certain policing and military tasks, be 
given to the Iraqis themselves as soon as possible.  Rep. 
Phil English replied that, as a representative of a 
congressional district with many Iraq expatriates, he 
understood the need to encourage a speedy transition to 
independence for Iraq.  English added that the West needed to 
give Iraq the investment it desperately needs, to emphasize 
grants rather than loans for reconstruction aid, and to help 
Iraq become a model of democracy in a battered region. 
 
---- 
Iran 
---- 
 
4. (U) Belder laid out the EP view that the EU should develop 
closer trade and economic ties with Iran only if Iran made 
visible progress on respect for human rights, cooperation 
with non-proliferation regimes, stopping support for 
terrorism and not undercutting the Middle East peace process. 
 He stressed EP support for U.S.-EU cooperation on Iran, 
especially in the areas of non-proliferation and Iranian IAEA 
obligations, and in pressing Iran to cut off its support to 
Hamas and Hizbollah. 
 
------------------------- 
Middle East Peace Process 
------------------------- 
 
5. (U) Cautioning that he had voted against it because of 
what he saw as its anti-Israeli slant, Belder reviewed the 
October 9 EP resolution on \"Peace and Dignity in the Middle 
East.\"  The resolution affirms that implementation of the 
roadmap is the solution to the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. 
It stresses that Palestinian terror is unacceptable, but also 
condemns pre-emptive attacks by Israel and resulting civilian 
casualties, as well as the Israeli security fence.  Belder 
stressed that in his view the resolution did not give enough 
weight to the destabilizing influence of neighboring 
countries, especially Iran and Syria.  In this regard, Belder 
decried the expected completion of the European Commission\'s 
association agreement with Syria (ref A) as a false signal 
that would encourage Syria to expect no negative fallout if 
it continues destabilizing activities such as support for 
Hezbollah.  He lamented that the EU had not sufficiently 
pressured the Palestinian Authority (PA) to make internal 
reforms, and that Arafat was still in control of the PA 
security services.  Belder noted that an EP working group on 
possible misuse of EU aid funds to the PA was due to deliver 
a final report on its investigation soon. 
--------------------------------------------- - 
War on Terrorism, Guantanamo, anti-Americanism 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
6. (SBU) After Belder\'s comments the discussion centered on 
cultural issues related to the war on terrorism, such as 
European attitudes towards the U.S., the root causes of 
terrorism and European views of U.S. policy towards the 
Guantanamo detainees.  MEP Ludford averred that one must 
attack the \"root causes of terrorism as well, such as poverty 
and alienation.\"  Also, she warned that \"competing images of 
the United States\" in the world were hindering U.S. 
effectiveness against terror, and that the U.S. had to be 
more careful to promote an image of the U.S. as a beacon of 
democracy and the rule of law.  As an example, Ludford said 
U.S. policy on holding detainees without trial in Guantanamo 
was doing immense damage to the reputation and image of the 
U.S. in Europe.  Ludford raised the October-November 
Eurobarometer poll, \"Iraq and Peace in the World,\" in which 
more respondents (from EU member states) designated Israel as 
a threat to peace in the world than any other country, with 
the U.S., Iran and North Korea tied for second place. 
Ludford said that, while the results should not be taken at 
face value, they were reactions to \"particular policies being 
pursued at a particular time.\" 
 
7. (C) U.S. TLD Chair Rep. Jo Ann Davis responded that she 
had been to Guantanamo and could testify that the detainees 
were being treated well with full respect for their human 
rights.  She said she had seen a BBC documentary on 
Guantanamo on a recent trip to Rome, and was struck by how 
inaccurate it was.  Rep. Issa, who had also visited 
Guantanamo, concurred, saying Bush had boldly stepped into 
unprecedented territory to deal with the unprecedented threat 
of global terror.  Rep. English added that, by any objective 
standard, U.S. policy in Guantanamo met the standards of 
international law and respect for human rights.  Rep. Cliff 
Stearns specified that U.S. actions in Guantanamo, including 
methods of interrogation and possible future military 
tribunals, were in compliance with the Geneva Conventions. 
 
8. (C) Rep. English took exception to the idea of \"root 
causes of terrorism.\"  He said that he believed there was a 
cultural division behind Islamist terrorism that was based on 
a strain of Islamic fundamentalism that was anti-Western, 
anti-Israel and anti-capitalist.  This phenomenon had to be 
confronted, and the U.S. and the EU needed to confront it 
together. 
 
------------- 
NATO and ESDP 
------------- 
 
9. (SBU) MEP Belder and Rep. Davis concurred in their concern 
regarding a possible EU military planning headquarters 
separate from NATO and a mutual defense clause in the draft 
constitutional treaty that could be divisive to the NATO 
alliance.  Rep. Davis said that more NATO capabilities were 
needed, not more structures that would duplicate or compete 
with NATO.  UK Conservative MEP James Elles said that the 
discussion about these issues was fluid, but that U.S. 
concerns were being taken into account.  He opined that, in 
order to avoid an EU caucus within NATO, a strengthened 
U.S.-EU dialogue was needed to discuss issues before they 
reached NATO. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Passenger Name Recognition (PNR) 
-------------------------------- 
 
10. (U) MEP Cederschioeld assured her U.S. counterparts that 
the EP recognized the U.S.\'s right to have information about 
people entering its borders, and expressed general optimism 
that a compromise could be reached that solved the remaining 
problems regarding purpose of data collection, data retention 
time and the number of data fields to which the U.S. could 
have access.  Cederschioeld suggested that the U.S. and EU 
should have mutual watch lists and share them with each 
other.  She invited Congress to send members to visit the EP 
Citizens Rights Committee to talk about the issue. 
 
11. (C) Rep. John Mica concurred that there had been a 
mellowing on both sides on PNR, and reiterated that the U.S. 
side shared the EU concern about data protection.  He said 
the watch list idea was an important one, and pointed out 
that the U.S. has more than eleven agencies involved in this 
issue and that, despite a statutory requirement, these 
agencies had not yet succeeded in preparing a consolidated 
list.  Mica said that agreed and mutually recognized 
transatlantic standards for security requirements and 
measures were also lacking, and that the standardization of 
passport and travel document information was lagging behind. 
Mica said that the U.S. side might take Cederschioeld up on 
her invitation sometime in the spring, and invited 
Cederschioeld to send him an e-mail detailing EP concerns 
about PNR. 
 
--------------- 
WTO post-Cancun 
--------------- 
 
12. (C) UK Labour MEP Arlene McCarthy said a far-reaching 
reform of the WTO was needed in view of the frustrating 
breakdown of talks in Cancun, and announced that the EP had 
asked the European Commission to make proposals on how to go 
about WTO reform.  McCarthy specifically stressed the 
importance of upholding the Doha agreement on access to 
medicines.  Rep. English said the failure of Cancun was a 
result of the tactics of the G-21 countries, whose 
unwillingness to compromise was not shared by the U.S. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Financial Services, Corporate Governance 
---------------------------------------- 
 
13. (C) UK Labour MEP Peter Skinner said the EU was 
determined that the financial sector be a key factor in the 
development of a transatlantic market.  On the Sarbanes-Oxley 
audit-firm registration issue, Skinner said the EU\'s 
number-one imperative was still to achieve mutual recognition 
between the PCAOB and competent European authorities, so that 
EU and national laws would be respected.  Skinner said 
congressional pressure on the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) was needed to achieve this.  (Note:  Skinner 
appears to have been kept in the dark by DG Internal Market 
officials who have been discussing this issue with the PCAOB. 
 Internal Market Commissioner Bolkestein reported to member 
state finance ministers in September that a mutual 
recognition agreement was not in the cards.  End note.) 
Skinner also expressed the line of the European stock market 
lobby that SEC failure to grant foreign exchanges 
better-than-national treatment to operate their electronic 
trading terminals in the U.S. under exemption from SEC 
regulation was in fact a protectionist device aimed at 
keeping EU-based exchanges out of U.S. markets.  In order to 
rectify this situation as well, he said, congressional 
pressure on the SEC would have to play a crucial role. 
(Note:  Skinner also met with SEC officials during this 
visit.  End note.) 
 
14. (C) Rep. Stearns expressed frustration with the 
difficulty of solving the problem of corporate corruption if 
the perpetrators are sufficiently determined.  Remarking that 
the U.S. approach was law-based and the EU\'s principle-based, 
he said he was interested in EU views on corporate 
governance.  Skinner decided on that basis that he would 
explore starting a high-level dialogue involving MEPs, 
members of Congress and business leaders, among others, on 
corporate governance and related regulatory issues. 
---- 
GMOs 
---- 
 
15. (C) MEP Caroline Jackson said the EU legislation of July 
2003 on tracing and labeling of biotech food and feed was 
necessary, despite its absurdities, because of European 
consumers\' concerns.  Rep. Issa replied that he believed that 
the legislation was costly and burdensome, and that, if 
consumers were worried, they could choose themselves whether 
or not to buy GMO products.  Rep. English added that GMO 
technology was very important for the developing world.  He 
said the U.S. was still taken aback about Zambia\'s having 
rejected U.S. food aid in the summer of 2002, although 
Zambians were facing starvation, because of concerns that 
accepting GMO foods from the U.S. would negatively affect 
trade with the EU.  To Rep. Issa\'s comment that the EU 
legislation was \"unabashed protectionism,\" Jackson replied 
that it might be more accurate to call it \"unabashed 
cowardice.\" 
 
--------- 
Chemicals 
--------- 
 
16. (C) MEP Jackson said that the proposed European 
Commission chemicals regulation -- Registration, Evaluation 
and Authorization of Chemicals (REACH) -- had been \"watered 
down\" after comments from industry had come in, and there 
would be further analysis of the cost of the proposed 
regulation.  Rep. Stearns greeted that news, and Rep. Davis 
said that, in the event of a new cost analysis, the relevant 
congressional and EP committees should coordinate to ensure 
that there was a mutually understood basis for analyzing the 
costs.  Jackson agreed, and staff on both sides agreed to 
follow up. 
 
---------- 
Open Skies 
---------- 
 
17. (C) Dutch Christian-Democrat MEP Peter Pex expressed a 
basically positive outlook on the ongoing U.S.-EU open skies 
negotiations.  However, he lamented U.S. legislation limiting 
the flexibility of U.S. negotiators to move on foreign 
ownership of airlines, and criticized the Fly America policy 
for official USG travel. (\"I took a U.S. carrier to come to 
this meeting, because I am a free man!\")  Rep. Mica said that 
opening markets was difficult when so many U.S. carriers were 
struggling.  He asserted that some progress had been made on 
legislation on opening up cabotage services in the U.S. to 
European carriers. 
 
---------------------- 
Bilateral Trade Issues 
---------------------- 
 
18. (U) Participants discussed mainly FSC and steel, with 
members of Congress exhorting their MEP counterparts to argue 
for patience and moderation in EU retaliation, so as to avoid 
unnecessary escalation of the conflicts.  MEP James Elles 
opined that bilateral trade issues came under the rubric of 
the Transatlantic Market which had been endorsed by the TLD 
in Rome in June (ref B).  The question, said Elles, was how 
to manage the trade disputes over the course of the next 
eighteen months during which there would be elections on both 
sides.  He suggested that the TLD ask for a benefits analysis 
of the Transatlantic Market within the next year, perhaps 
getting endorsement for such an analysis from the next 
U.S.-EU summit. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
U.S. Industry on EU Medical-Device Regs 
--------------------------------------- 
 
19. (U) Rep. Stearns raised, on behalf of the Advanced 
Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), concerns about a 
draft EU directive up-classifying all shoulder, hip and knee 
joint implants and thereby requiring manufacturers to submit 
to a costly review process by European regulators.  Skinner 
said he would pass on U.S. concerns to appropriate colleagues 
in the EP and the European Commission. 
 
--------------- 
TLD Delegations 
--------------- 
 
20. (U) U.S. Members of Congress participating were: 
 
Jo Ann Davis (R, VA) 
Phil English (R, PA) 
J. Randy Forbes (R, VA) 
Darrell E. Issa (R, CA) 
John L. Mica (R, FL) 
Cliff Stearns (R, FL) 
 
21. (U) MEP\'s participating were: 
 
James Nicholson (UK, Ulster Unionist) 
Bastiaan Belder (NL, Calvinist Party) 
Charlotte Cederschioeld (SW, Conservative) 
Caroline Jackson, (UK, Conservative) 
Peter Pex (NL, Christian-Democrat) 
James Elles (UK, Conservative) 
Baroness Sarah Ludford (UK, Liberal-Democrat) 
Philip Charles Bradbourn (UK, Conservative) 
Arlene McCarthy (UK, Labour) 
Peter Skinner (UK, Labour) 
 
22. (C) Comment:  This TLD was useful in creating 
opportunities for Congress to increase its engagement with 
the EU in areas of particular interest: (1) a possible 
congressional visit to Brussels to discuss PNR; (2) possible 
cooperation on a cost analysis of REACH; (3) targeted 
dialogue on corporate governance and related issues; and (4) 
possible launching of a joint analysis of the benefits of the 
existing transatlantic (U.S.-EU) market.  Post is ready to 
provide support in these and other areas of congressional 
interest.  End Comment. 
 
23. (U) This message was not cleared by CODEL members. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"13031","1/5/2004 14:09","04BRUSSELS14","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 BRUSSELS 000014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/P - DR. REISS 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RPM, S/CT, NP, IO/UNP 
NSC FOR KURT VOLKER AND TRACY MCKIBBEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/17/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, PARM, KNNP, MARR, MCAP, EAID, SOCI, NATO, OSCE, UNSC, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN SECURITY STRATEGY IN CONTEXT: ANALYSIS 
AND COMMENT 
 
REF: A. USEU TODAY 12/11/03 
 
     B. USEU TODAY 12/05/03 
     C. USEU TODAY 10/30/03 
     D. USEU TODAY 10/24/03 
     E. USEU TODAY 10/09/03 
     F. 03 BRUSSELS 5594 
     G. 03 BRUSSELS 5520 
     H. 03 BRUSSELS 4424 
     I. 03 BRUSSELS 4143 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
------------------ 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: The final draft of EU HiRep Javier Solana\'s 
European Security Strategy (ESS) -- adopted by EU heads of 
state at their December 12-13 Brussels Summit -- envisages a 
world of dangerous but preventable threats, multilateral 
solutions, and stabilizing partnerships.  The ESS identifies 
five (up from the earlier draft\'s three) primary threats: 
terrorism, WMD proliferation, regional conflicts, state 
failure, and organized crime.  The strategy highlights 
\"effective multilateralism\" as the key to dealing with these 
challenges, and recommends that the EU become more active, 
more capable and more coherent in its approach to new 
security challenges, and that it work more with key partners, 
especially the U.S.  The revised ESS -- formally titled \"A 
Secure Europe in a Better World\" -- also recognizes the 
central role of NATO in European security, and highlights 
Berlin Plus as a valuable framework for NATO-EU strategic 
relations.  As Secretary Powell said at the December 4 
NATO-EU Ministerial, the ESS is a good basis for future 
cooperation. 
 
2. (C) SUMMARY CONTINUED:  The revised ESS leaves unanswered 
the tough question of what to do when international rules are 
broken and multilateral efforts fail.  It avoids, as did the 
earlier text, any discussion of when and under what 
conditions the EU would resort to the use of force (ref. I). 
Rather than address the issue head on, the EU hopes to avoid 
it altogether through \"preventive engagement\" and by 
strengthening the international system so that rules either 
will not or cannot be broken.  But the EU still recognizes 
that this is only a partial, stopgap response.  The ESS hints 
at what will surely be a contentious future debate by saying 
that Europe \"must be ready to act\" when the rules are broken. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
3. (C) COMMENT:  This is the first time the EU has tried to 
develop an over-arching security concept, and reflects the 
sense after the Iraq crisis that the EU needed a better 
strategic framework for developing common positions to 
emerging crises.  But the Iraq crisis only accelerated a 
process that was probably inevitable.  The EU, while far from 
supranational, is considerably more than an international 
organization or a customs union.  It is a union of states 
which, having already pooled sovereignty on a wide range of 
vital economic and commercial interests, now wants to speak 
with unity and credibility on security affairs.  EU 
interlocutors, including Political and Security Committee 
Ambassadors and Council DG Robert Cooper, have told us time 
and again that among its other hats, the EU is fast becoming 
a security organization. 
 
4. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED:  The ESS represents the current, if 
not ultimate, limit of European consensus on security. 
Wiggle room remains in the details, but for now, the EU has 
found its strategic voice: The EU is not yet ready to commit 
to pre-emptive use of force; the EU will renew its commitment 
to multilateral solutions, while recognizing the need to make 
them more effective; the EU will continue in partnership with 
the U.S., and honor its arrangement with NATO.  We expect the 
EU to be increasingly assertive with its newfound strategic 
vision, and less nervous about its disagreements with the 
U.S. 
 
5. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED:  If a crisis like Iraq were to 
erupt again now, Europe would be no less divided than it was 
last year.  But in five, ten or twenty years\' time, the ESS 
and the common ground it represents can provide a foundation 
for a more united Europe -- even in a crisis like Iraq. 
Whether a united EU would agree with our position or not is 
unclear.  We have an opportunity, however, to influence the 
outcome.  A strategic security dialogue with EU policy 
planners, as offered by Secretary Powell at the November 18 
U.S.-EU Ministerial, represents a valuable opportunity to 
influence the development of an increasingly assertive EU 
role in the world.  While forcefully arguing our own 
positions -- on NATO, on responses to terrorism, 
proliferation, and regional crises -- we should also accept 
that the EU now has the elements of a distinctly European 
strategic worldview -- one that will usually if not always 
agree with our own, and one that will only strengthen over 
time.  END COMMENT. 
 
Note: The revised ESS is now available at 
http://ue.eu.int/pressdata/en/reports/78367.p df 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Threats: Remembering the Old with the New 
----------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) The revised ESS retains the original text\'s 
description of terrorism and WMD proliferation as 
unprecedented and qualitatively different sorts of threats 
than the world has henceforth known.  But it departs from the 
original by discussing in more depth the continuing danger 
posed by three conventional threats: state failure, organized 
crime, and regional conflict.  The revised ESS underscores 
the role of the conventional threats in facilitating the new 
ones (terrorism and proliferation thrive on organized crime 
and failed states; regional conflict breeds extremism; and so 
forth).  Senior Solana Advisor Niall Burgess tells us that 
the coming year will see further work to break down the 
concept of state failure into a taxonomy of failure -- i.e. 
weak, failing, failed -- that the EU can use to create 
targeted approaches for each stage (ref. E). 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Confronting the Threats and the Use of Force 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) The international press has made much in recent days 
of the ESS\' substitute of the term \"pre-emptive engagement,\" 
used in the first draft, for \"preventive engagement,\" favored 
in the final (ref. B).  Pundits lined up to claim the EU has 
watered down its security strategy by backing away from the 
more forceful word.  Not wanting to sound too soft, the EU 
maintains that this semantic variation means nothing (an EU 
Troika told EUR/DAS Bradtke December 10 that it helps with 
translation into some EU languages).  This is a debate over 
the lightest shades of gray.  The widely variant defense 
doctrines and strategic traditions of EU member states 
ensured that both drafts of the ESS would be \"soft.\" 
Possibly not until Europe faces an existential peril -- such 
as a devastating terrorist attack, or a WMD-armed rogue state 
in its neighborhood -- will the EU be able to join consensus 
on the tough questions surrounding justified use of military 
force. 
 
8. (C) But having for the time being ruled out serious 
consideration of conditions for the use of force, what then 
is left for a security doctrine to discuss?  What does the 
ESS mean when it says that the EU \"needs to develop a 
strategic culture that fosters early, rapid, and when 
necessary, robust intervention?\"  How can the EU convince 
rule-breaking states that their actions will have serious 
consequences?  How can Europe deter would-be proliferators 
and combat terrorism so that the devastating attack never 
happens? 
 
9. (C) For the Europeans, the answer lies in \"effective 
multilateralism\" and assertive, full-spectrum engagement -- 
an approach for which the ESS says \"the EU is particularly 
well equipped.\"  To combat terrorism, the ESS calls for a 
\"mixture of intelligence, police, judicial, military and 
other means\" (the earlier draft said \"intelligence, 
political, military and other means\").  To counter 
proliferation, the EU should focus on export controls and 
political and economic pressures, while also tackling \"the 
underlying political causes\" of proliferation.  (Note: The 
insistence on export controls and external pressures 
generally tracks with our own views, but the latter element 
problematically implies that proliferation is a justifiable 
response to regional insecurity.)  Reflecting recent EU 
developments in nonproliferation policy, the revised ESS also 
says the EU is committed to universalizing and strengthening 
multilateral nonproliferation regimes. 
 
10. (U) The ESS calls for political solutions to regional 
conflicts, but recognizes that military and police assets, as 
well as economic instruments and civilian reconstruction 
expertise, may be needed in the post-conflict stage.  Failed 
states require a similar mix of instruments.  On organized 
crime, the revised strategy picks up where the earlier draft 
left off by acknowledging the special problem of criminal 
networks originating in the Balkans.  The solution, it says, 
is democracy, good governance, and cooperation with local 
authorities. 
 
---------------------------- 
More Multilateralism, Please 
---------------------------- 
 
11. (C) The strategy makes a bold pitch for the EU to take a 
larger role in world affairs (commensurate with its role in 
economic and trade matters), and lays claim to the EU\'s 
self-ascribed comparative advantage in combined 
civil-military and post-conflict operations.  Most 
importantly, it calls for threats to European security, new 
and old alike, to be addressed through \"effective 
multilateralism\" whenever possible. 
 
12. (C) For the EU, the United Nations is the embodiment of 
legitimate multilateralism, so it comes as no surprise that 
the ESS calls the UN Charter \"the fundamental framework for 
international relations.\"  At the December 12-13 EU Summit, 
which adopted the ESS, European leaders went further by 
reaffirming \"the deeply rooted commitment of the EU to make 
effective multilateralism a central element of its external 
actions, with at its heart a strong UN.\"  The EU can be 
expected to enhance its collective position in the UN by 
leveraging the combined influence, and votes, of EU member 
states.  Much of this effort is likely to arise from 
recommendations put forth in a European Commission paper 
released in September (and welcomed by heads of state at the 
December 12-13 EU Summit).  That paper, titled \"The European 
Union and the United Nations: The Choice of Multilateralism,\" 
calls on the EU to work for a more effective and efficient 
UN, to deepen the EU-UN relationship, including on peace and 
security issues, and to promote the EU\'s values and interests 
in UN debates (ref. H).  The September EU-UN Joint 
Declaration on cooperation in crisis management provides 
early evidence of this rapidly deepening partnership. 
 
13. (C) Unfortunately, the ESS fails to address adequately 
the question of what the EU should do if multilateral efforts 
fail.  The Europeans still find it difficult to answer the 
question of how to deal with states or non-state actors that 
defy the international community, or seek to circumvent 
accepted rules of behavior.  As we saw in their approach in 
Iraq, and are seeing again in Iran, the Europeans advocate 
carrot-and-stick diplomacy that is heavy on the carrot but 
extremely reluctant to use the stick. 
 
14. (C) Nevertheless, the ESS stands firm where it can by 
declaring that the EU \"must be ready to act when the rules 
are broken... Those who are unwilling (to play by the rules) 
should understand that there is a price to be paid, including 
in their relationship with the European Union.\"  This is a 
small step, but one in the right direction.  And for a union 
ruled by consensus, which has sometimes seemed to view 
multilateralism as both a means and an end, the assertion, no 
matter how mild, that forceful measures may sometimes be 
needed represents an evolving worldview that would have been 
all but unthinkable just a year or two ago. 
 
------------------------- 
What About the Neighbors? 
------------------------- 
15. (U) As with the earlier draft, the revised ESS devotes 
considerable attention to the problems of Europe\'s neighbors. 
 Along with countering the new threats through effective 
multilateralism and preventive engagement, building a ring of 
security around the enlarged EU stands as a key European 
strategic objective.  This is not new.  For some years the EU 
has recognized that its expansion would bring it closer to 
the troubled areas of Eastern Europe, the Balkans, and the 
Mediterranean rim.  In response, the EU created mechanisms to 
promote stabilization, reform and development in these 
regions (the Wider Europe Initiative for Eastern and 
Southeastern Europe, the Stability and Association Process 
for the Balkans, and the Barcelona Process for the 
Mediterranean). 
 
16. (C) The ESS broadens Europe\'s definition of neighborhood 
to include the Southern Caucasus and possibly even the 
Greater Middle East.  New language in the revised ESS calls 
on the EU to \"take a stronger and more active interest in the 
problems of the Southern Caucasus.\"  Interlocutors in 
Solana\'s Policy Planning Unit and on the Council 
Secretariat\'s Southern Caucasus desk speak of a new EU 
 
SIPDIS 
willingness to consider near-term inclusion of the Southern 
Caucasus in the EU\'s Wider Europe Initiative (long a U.S. 
objective for EU action) (ref. A). 
 
17. (C) On the Middle East, the EU\'s first priority is to 
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, then to wrestle 
with other regional problems.  Reflecting growing European 
frustrations over the stalled Roadmap, the revised ESS adds 
new language committing the EU to \"remain engaged and ready 
to commit resources to the problem until it is solved.\"  At 
the same time, the EU is developing a regional strategy for 
the Middle East that recognizes, much like our own, the need 
to promote reform throughout the Greater Middle East (ref. 
F).  EU leaders welcomed this effort at the December 12-13 
Summit, and asked HiRep Solana, along with the Council and 
Commission, to present a \"joint report, within the 
implementation of the European Security Strategy,\" by March 
2004.  We expect this to be a high priority for the EU in the 
coming months. 
 
------------------------------- 
More Active, Capable, Coherent? 
------------------------------- 
 
18. (C) The ESS section on policy implications for Europe 
represents a call to action for European governments.  The 
ESS argues that to address the threats the EU must become 
\"more active, more coherent and more capable.\"  EU 
governments need to act before situations deteriorate, and 
develop the will to increase defense spending and procurement 
coordination to ensure interoperability and avoid 
duplication.  The ESS highlights planning for the EU 
armaments agency -- slated to begin work in 2004 -- as a good 
first step.  This will have a positive impact as long as it 
is coordinated well with NATO and doesn\'t lead to a \"Fortress 
Europe\" procurement approach.  The ESS also calls for greater 
civilian capacity to address the needs of crisis and 
post-crisis situations, and to increase intelligence sharing 
and diplomatic coordination among member states. 
 
19. (C) There is also positive potential in the strategy\'s 
call for greater coherence.  The EU\'s CFSP (foreign) and ESDP 
(defense) policies have thus far grown in awkward, disjointed 
ways.  \"The challenge now,\" the ESS argues, \"is to bring 
together the different instruments and capabilities: 
European assistance programs, military and civilian 
capabilities from Member States and other instruments such as 
the European Development Fund.\"  To the extent that this 
represents a willingness to link political, aid and trade 
relations to security concerns, it is positive.  This is 
already underway with regard to nonproliferation: on November 
17, the Council adopted a position requiring that all EU 
relations with third countries be linked to progress on 
upholding international nonproliferation norms (septel). 
Commission officials tell us that Syria, with which the 
Commission initialed an Association Agreement in December, 
will be the first country to sign the EU\'s new 
\"nonproliferation clause\" (ref. G). 
----------------------------------------- 
Transatlantic Relations, NATO, and Russia 
----------------------------------------- 
 
20. (C) The ESS acknowledges that the U.S. remains Europe\'s 
greatest ally and most valuable partner.  The revised text 
calls the transatlantic relationship \"irreplaceable,\" and 
says that \"(the EU\'s) aim should be an effective and balanced 
partnership with the U.S.A.\"  The call for an effective and 
balanced partnership, new to the revised ESS, reflects the 
European desire to enhance credibility by boosting (mostly 
military) capabilities; in so doing, the Europeans hope to 
earn a stronger voice in Washington. 
 
21. (C) The revised ESS also adds positive new language on 
NATO: \"The EU-NATO permanent arrangements, in particular 
Berlin Plus, enhance the operational capability of the EU and 
provide the framework for the strategic partnership between 
the two organizations in crisis management.  This reflects 
our common determination to tackle the challenges of the new 
century.\"  The positive decision to clarify NATO\'s role in 
European security, and to highlight Berlin Plus in 
particular, reflects what Solana Advisor Burgess described as 
a \"widespread view that we got it wrong\" in the first draft 
(ref. D).  In that text, NATO was characterized as a 
reflection of the transatlantic relationship.  In the final 
version, the Alliance is afforded an independent identity, 
reflected in the language above. 
 
22. (C) The ESS paints a three-tier picture of the EU\'s 
strategic partnerships -- with the U.S. on top; Russia, 
China, India, Japan and Canada in the middle; and everybody 
else on the bottom.  The revised ESS differs from the draft 
by separating the EU\'s relations with Russia from the rest of 
the middle tier.  According to Burgess, member states agreed 
that the first draft failed to recognize the qualitative 
differences between the EU\'s relations with Russia and its 
relations with the other four (ref. C).  Thus the revised ESS 
says of Russia: \"We should continue to work for closer 
relations with Russia, a major factor in our security and 
prosperity.  Respect for common values will reinforce 
progress towards a strategic partnership.\" 
 
Foster 
"
"13057","1/6/2004 14:15","04BRUSSELS36","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS14","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 000036 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA, T, AC, NP, NP/PPC (CHRIS MURRAY) 
NSC FOR SUSAN KOCH 
OSD FOR STEVEN SCHLEIEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, KNNP, PINS, UNSC, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ADOPTS NEW NONPROLIFERATION STRATEGY 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 14 
 
     B. 03 USNATO 124 
     C. 03 BRUSSELS 5520 
     D. REIDHEAD-MURRAY ET. AL. E-MAIL 12/05/03 
     E. 03 BRUSSELS 4518 
     F. 03 BRUSSELS 4424 
     G. 03 BRUSSELS 4143 
     H. 03 BRUSSELS 3263 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
------------------- 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: EU heads of state and government adopted an 
\"EU Strategy Against Proliferation of WMD\" at their December 
12-13 Summit in Brussels.  The strategy expands and 
integrates the various pieces of the EU\'s existing 
nonproliferation policies -- notably the nonproliferation 
Principles and Action Plan adopted at the June 2003 
Thessaloniki EU Summit (ref H).  The strategy calls for the 
integration and strengthening of EU instruments, including 
export controls, CTR programs, external leverage over third 
countries (including aid and trade), interdiction, and 
\"coercive measures\" as a last resort.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) COMMENT: But the EU is not yet able to answer the 
tough question of when and under what conditions it would 
resort to the use of force.  EU member states do not want to 
limit their options, nor are they ready to stray too far from 
the comforting legitimacy of the UNSC.  That said, the EU 
nonproliferation strategy represents an energetic commitment 
from a major global partner to cooperate on countering the 
development and spread of WMD.  We should welcome the overall 
commitment, work together where we find common ground, and 
engage on points of disagreement.  END COMMENT. 
 
(Note: EU documents mentioned in this cable are available at 
http://ue.eu.int/en/summ.htm) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Effective Multilateralism: 
Keeping the Baby, Tossing the Bathwater 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) The cornerstone of the EU\'s nonproliferation strategy 
is \"effective multilateralism,\" a concept discussed at length 
in the European Security Strategy (refs A, F, G).  Developed 
partly in response to perceptions of increasing U.S. 
unilateralism, the EU\'s concept of effective multilateralism 
envisions shoring up the existing nonproliferation regime and 
strengthening the role of the UNSC in nonproliferation. 
While Europeans largely share our view of the threat posed by 
WMD (Eurobarometer polling in 2002 found that over 70% of EU 
citizens fear WMD proliferation.), and agree that the 
existing regime is unacceptably flawed, they fear the U.S. 
intends to dismantle it altogether, effectively throwing the 
baby out with the bathwater.  To hedge against that outcome, 
the EU has become increasingly keen on reforming 
international institutions and security regimes to make them 
more effective. 
 
4. (U) To make the multilateral treaty regime work, the 
nonproliferation strategy commits the EU to strengthening 
compliance, enforcement, and detectability of violations, and 
to work toward criminalizing state violations, presumably 
under the UNSC.  The strategy calls on the EU to strengthen 
verification mechanisms, and to create new ones where needed, 
and says \"the EU is prepared to enhance, as appropriate, its 
political, financial and technical support for agencies in 
charge of verification.\" 
 
5. (SBU) Parallel with these efforts, the EU will \"pursue the 
implementation and universalization of the... NPT, the IAEA 
Safeguard agreements and protocols additional to them, the 
CWC, the BTWC, the HCOC, and the early entry into force of 
the CTBT.\"  Reflecting the importance the EU places on 
multilateralism -- and on presenting a united EU front in 
international fora -- EU FMs adopted a Common Position on 
universalizing and reinforcing multilateral nonproliferation 
agreements at the November 17 Council meeting, one month 
before adopting the strategy that would formally call for it 
(ref D).  The Common Position outlines in general terms how 
the EU intends, largely through diplomatic action, to go 
about strengthening and universalizing the above agreements. 
It is designed to \"serve as a yardstick in the negotiations 
of EU positions in international fora,\" and as such, 
represents the positions we should expect from the EU in all 
relevant international organizations and in U.S.-EU 
consultations. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Regional Stability: They Just Need More Help 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) The EU strategy describes regional insecurity as the 
underlying cause of WMD proliferation, and says \"the EU will 
foster regional security arrangements and regional arms 
control and disarmament processes\" to address the problem. 
(Note: The EU is generally supportive of the concept of 
regional Nuclear Weapons-Free Zones (NFZs), especially in the 
Middle East and Mediterrannean Basin.)  While also 
acknowledging \"there can never be any justification for 
proliferation,\" the strategy overall paints a picture of 
proliferation as an understandable, if regrettable, result of 
\"real and legitimate security concerns.\"  The strategy makes 
reference to the utility of both positive and negative 
security assurances, but leaves little doubt that the EU is 
more comfortable with the former than the latter. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Conditioning EU Relations on Nonproliferation Commitments 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
7. (C) Notwithstanding the EU preference for carrots over 
sticks, the EU has recently toughened in a positive way by 
endorsing the principle of conditionality in external 
relations (ref D).  On November 17, EU FMs adopted a policy 
requiring inclusion of a \"nonproliferation clause\" in all EU 
agreements with third countries.  The clause will be 
considered an \"essential\" element of agreements, meaning that 
it conditions the political and economic-commercial benefits 
under the agreement as a whole on satisfactory adherence to 
international nonproliferation norms.  Failure by any party 
to uphold its obligations under the clause could result in 
punitive action, including as a last resort suspension or 
termination of the agreement as a whole.  (It is not yet 
clear whether or how this conditionality principle will be 
applied to countries like Israel, Pakistan or India.)  Syria, 
whose association agreement with the EU was concluded in 
December, is the first country to sign the clause (ref C). 
 
8. (SBU) The conditionality policy is intended to apply both 
to future and existing \"mixed agreements\" (i.e. involving a 
combination of member state and Community competencies) with 
third countries.  In the case of existing agreements, 
amendments will be sought to include a nonproliferation 
clause.  Most meaningful EU agreements with third countries, 
including all framework agreements such as Trade and 
Cooperation Agreements (TCA) and Partnership and Cooperation 
Agreements (PCA), fall into the mixed category. 
Commission-only agreements are omitted from the new policy 
because EU treaties bar the Commission from including 
political clauses in Community-only agreements with third 
countries (i.e. for development assistance).  EU FMs 
therefore asked the Commission to look for ways -- read, 
legal loopholes -- to also link Community assistance programs 
to nonproliferation. 
 
9. (SBU) The EU\'s nonproliferation clause for inclusion in 
third country agreements reads: 
 
\"Countering Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
 
The Parties consider that the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction and their means of delivery, both to state 
and non-state actors, represents one of the most serious 
threats to international stability and security.  The Parties 
therefore agree to co-operate and to contribute to countering 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their 
means of delivery through full compliance with and national 
implementation of their existing obligations under 
international disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and 
agreements and other relevant international obligations.  The 
Parties agree that this provision constitutes an essential 
element of this agreement. 
 
The parties furthermore agree to cooperate and to contribute 
to countering the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction and their means of delivery by: 
 
-- taking steps to ratify, or accede to, as appropriate, and 
fully implement all other relevant international instruments; 
-- the establishment of an effective system of national 
export controls, controlling the export as well as transit of 
WMD related goods, including a WMD end-use control on dual 
use technologies and containing effective sanctions for 
breaches of export controls. 
 
The Parties agree to establish a regular political dialogue 
that will accompany and consolidate these elements.\" 
 
--------------------- 
Working with Partners 
--------------------- 
 
10. (C) The new strategy highlights the EU\'s nonproliferation 
partnerships with the U.S., Russia, Japan, Canada and NATO. 
With regard to the latter, the document says, \"The EU will 
ensure, in particular, exchange of information and analysis 
with NATO, within the agreed framework arrangements.\"  Recent 
interest in enhanced EU-NATO cooperation on proliferation and 
terrorism -- sparked on the EU side by Council DG Robert 
Cooper, and on the NATO side by former SYG Robertson -- 
reflect the growing European desire to better coordinate 
continental and allied approaches to dealing with post-Cold 
War threats.  USEU and USNATO view this as a positive step 
which, despite initial French reluctance (ref. B), promises 
to improve strategic cooperation between the two 
organizations.  We will begin work soon on a joint NATO-EU 
security statement, hopefully for agreement at the June 2004 
NATO and EU Summits. 
 
11. (SBU) On cooperation with other, less capable partners in 
the fight against proliferation, the strategy says the EU 
should offer \"a program aimed at assisting these countries in 
improving their procedures, including the enactment and 
enforcement of implementing penal legislation.\"  It adds that 
such assistance should be conducted in a confidence-building, 
\"collaborative spirit.\"  The strategy leaves unsaid how or 
whether this sort of (Community-only) assistance would be 
related to the EU\'s new conditionality policy. 
 
------------------- 
U.S.-EU Cooperation 
------------------- 
 
12. (C) The strategy notes that EU cooperation with the U.S., 
above all other partnerships, is necessary for the successful 
outcome of the fight against proliferation.  The U.S. 
warrants its own point among the list of actionable items in 
the strategy\'s third chapter, where, under the heading 
\"Cooperating closely with the United States and other key 
partners,\" it says the EU will work at \"Ensuring adequate 
follow up to the EU-US declaration on non-proliferation 
issued at the June 2003 summit.\"  This is welcome text, and 
reflects the determination of HiRep Solana\'s new WMD Rep, 
Annalisa Giannella, to breathe renewed energy into the EU\'s 
collaboration with the U.S. on nonproliferation initiatives. 
We will continue to work with Giannella and others to ensure 
that implementation of the joint summit statement remains a 
matter of priority for the EU (progress will be reported 
septel). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Actionable Measures Include New Support for Interdiction 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
13. (U) The strategy\'s third chapter reorganizes and updates 
the EU\'s 22-point nonproliferation Action Plan, adopted along 
with the nonproliferation Principles at the June 2003 
Thessaloniki Summit.  As such, it supercedes the Action Plan 
and is now the document of record for the EU\'s actionable 
nonproliferation objectives. 
 
14. (U) Billed as a \"living action plan,\" the third chapter 
will be updated every six months, and implementation will be 
monitored by a proliferation monitoring center, to be housed 
in the Council Secretariat.  Once operational, the monitoring 
center will also be responsible for collecting information 
and intelligence, in collaboration with the EU Situation 
Center. 
15. (U) The third chapter is divided into four priority 
areas, linked to the EU\'s strategic objectives: Rendering 
multilateralism more effective by acting resolutely against 
proliferators; Promoting a stable international and regional 
environment; Cooperating closely with the United States and 
other key partners; and Developing the necessary structures 
within the Union.  It contains several items not previously 
included in the Action Plan, such as the point on U.S.-EU 
collaboration mentioned in para 12 above. 
 
16. (C) The other notable new entries fall under a 
sub-category titled, \"Strengthening identification, control 
and interception of illegal trafficking.\"  New language says 
the EU will consider \"measures aimed at the identification, 
control and interception of illegal shipments,\" and will 
\"support international initiatives\" aimed at the same.  These 
new points seem aimed mostly at the Proliferation Security 
Initiative (PSI), to which eight EU member and acceding 
states belong as founding partners.  The EU supports the PSI, 
has sought an institutional role for itself in the 
initiative, and sent Council and Commission staffers to PSI 
meetings in Paris and London as members of the Italian 
(then-EU Presidency) delegation (ref E).  While the EU bid 
for some form of PSI inclusion appears to have abated for the 
time being, the EU\'s new nonproliferation strategy makes 
clear that overall EU support for interdiction of illegal 
shipments is growing.  We expect the Council Secretariat and 
Commission to spend considerable energy in 2004 examining 
ways the EU can contribute to this expanding area of 
international counter-proliferation activity. 
 
Foster 
"
"13143","1/9/2004 10:53","04BRUSSELS87","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 000087 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR UNDERSECRETARY LARSON, EUR A/S JONES AND 
PDAS RIES, AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, EFIN, ETRD, EAID, EI, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: OUTLOOK FOR THE IRISH EU PRESIDENCY: KEEPING 
TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONS ON COURSE 
 
REF: 03 DUBLIN 1744 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (U) As our engagement with the Irish Presidency picks up 
momentum with next week\'s Task Force and Political Directors\' 
meetings in Dublin, it is important to keep in mind the 
political and institutional changes that will buffet the EU 
during the next several months.  The Irish have a fuller 
plate of largely unwanted internal issues (IGC, Stability 
Pact) to lead on than they had planned (REFTEL), and both the 
European Parliament and the Commission are increasingly lame 
ducks.  A looming round of elections (including Greece, Spain 
and EU-wide for the EP) could also limit the EU\'s appetite 
and ability to focus on many new initiatives.  While the 
lengthy Task Force and PolDir agendas underscore the breadth 
of our transatlantic ties, it will be important to quickly 
sort out our most important priorities for concerted work 
between now and the June US-EU Summit.  Our short list would 
include: developing a joint approach to the Greater Middle 
East and sustaining EU support for reconstruction in 
Afghanistan and Iraq; keeping the ESDP-NATO relationship on 
an even keel as the EU prepares for a follow-on to SFOR in 
Bosnia; harnessing Ireland\'s self-proclaimed emphasis on 
sustainable development to develop broader cooperation with 
the EU on Africa; containing potential trade and economic 
strains caused by a strong euro, slow growth, and pending WTO 
actions; improving coordination on counterterrorism and 
homeland security measures; and pressing for a solution on 
Galileo.  One new initiative that could get some traction is 
exploring the possibilities for launching a Transatlantic 
Research Area.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2004 - A YEAR OF INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE IN THE EU 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
2. (U) Despite its professed emphasis on transatlantic ties, 
the Irish Presidency will be judged within the EU on two or 
three principal tasks -- whether or not it decides to attempt 
resolution of the EU\'s Constitutional Treaty debate; the 
selection of the next generation of EU leaders (President of 
the European Commission, High Representative for Foreign 
Policy, and Deputy Secretary General of the Council); and 
what might be done to pick up the pieces of the Stability and 
Growth Pact.  While the U.S. has interests in how all of 
these debates turn out, none will directly impact on the 
US-EU agenda for the semester. 
 
3. (U) At the same time, 2004 is a year of institutional 
turnover for the EU.  The Union will grow to 25, and the 
Council itself will officially incorporate the ten new Member 
States with full voting rights on May 1.  The European 
Parliament will end its term the first week of May.  Until 
then, the focus on trying to finish outstanding legislative 
work will be buffeted by pre-election posturing by all the 
major parties.  Parliament will then spend considerable time 
after the June elections organizing itself, choosing its 
leadership, and focusing on confirmation of a new Commission. 
 The Prodi Commission\'s term ends on October 31, and much of 
that body\'s legislative activity is already beginning to wind 
down.  The deal-making and horse-trading involved in 
composing a new Commission (with one Commissioner from each 
Member State) and divvying up portfolios, will go on all 
summer.   Looming over all of this (and potentially 
complicating the Constitutional debate in particular) will be 
the beginnings of the EU\'s battles over it\'s 2007-2013 budget 
framework, which will determine the broad outlines of the 
EU\'s spending priorities for that period. 
 
4. (SBU) Further, after something of a hiatus in 2003, 
electoral politics, beginning with Greece and Spain in the 
spring, and followed by June EP elections in all 25 Member 
States, will distract leaders from any initiatives needing 
high-level political attention and could impinge on effective 
EU decision-making. 
 
5. (SBU) All of the above means that the Irish, and the EU as 
a whole, are not seeking out opportunities to begin any other 
major initiatives during the coming six months.  But while 
the EU\'s internal calendar is full of distractions, there are 
a number of key events in the transatlantic calendar over the 
next six months where we will need to demonstrate progress on 
key issues.  These begin with the US-EU Ministerial on March 
1, and continue through to the G-8, NATO, and US-EU Summits, 
all in June.  Given the many distractions, it will be 
important to quickly whittle down the impressively long 
agendas for the Political Directors and NTA Task Force 
meetings to focus on a few key deliverables.  Our short list 
includes: 
COORDINATING ON THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST 
--------------------------------------- 
6. (SBU) At the working level the EU is in the throes of 
developing its thinking on a more comprehensive approach to 
the issues in the Middle East and the broader Muslim world. 
Certain Member States still cling to the Barcelona Process, 
but there is an emerging consensus that more must be done. 
We will begin a process of engagement on this next week with 
the visit of Alina Romanowski of NEA and, we hope, NEA DAS 
Satterfield soon thereafter.  Ideally, we should follow these 
up with Policy Planning talks in February as promised by the 
Secretary last fall, with the goal of both influencing the EU 
 
SIPDIS 
process as well as seeing what might be done together in the 
Summit context.  These efforts will also provide a context 
for our continuing work to sustain and deepen EU support for 
reconstruction in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
 
KEEPING ESDP ON AN EVEN KEEL 
---------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) After a rough patch, ESDP developments have taken a 
more positive turn in the past months.  We believe the Irish 
are determined to, and capable of, keeping things headed in a 
good direction.  But important decisions will need to be 
worked on during the Irish (and Dutch) Presidencies.  Most 
important will be ensuring that planning for an EU follow-on 
mission to SFOR goes smoothly, an issue where the UK, as the 
EU\'s lead nation, should play the central role.  Other key 
developments will include work on setting up the EU Armaments 
Agency to meet the target date of end 2004, and 
implementation of the EU\'s paper on strengthening of planning 
capabilities including an EU cell at SHAPE and NATO liaison 
office at the EU Military Staff. 
 
BROADENING COOPERATION ON AFRICA 
----------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU)    The Irish have indicated they will make 
sustainable development a priority of their presidency, with 
a focus on Africa.  This provides opportunities for synergies 
with initiatives we are pursuing on the continent, including 
African peacekeeping, and HIV/AIDS. 
 
CONTAINING ECONOMIC AND TRADE TENSIONS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) While the vast economic relationship has been an 
important stabilizer, managing U.S.-EU economic issues this 
year will continue to require high-level political attention. 
 With the depreciation of the dollar against the euro, 
macroecomic issues could become more contentious than they 
have been for over a decade.  Further appreciation of the 
euro could threaten the eurozone,s fragile economic 
recovery, prompting more strident European criticism of U.S. 
budget and current account deficits as the root cause of 
global imbalances. 
 
10. (SBU) Without the possibility of real progress on the 
Doha round, the trade agenda risks being dominated by an 
array of contentious disputes.  Our immediate focus should be 
on preventing the EU from retaliating on March 1 if Congress 
fails to act on a replacement for the FSC.  We need to work 
with the Irish Presidency to ensure the EU flexibly 
interprets its internal directive to retaliate. 
 
11. (SBU) Containing the potential damage from trade disputes 
would enable the EU and the United States to focus on the 
important areas where we can make progress on our 
&positive8 economic agenda.  These include liberalizing 
transatlantic aviation, deepening financial market 
integration, and strengthening the dialogue among ourregulatory agencies.  We 
also need to pay attention to 
discussion within the Transatlantic Business Dialogue (TABD) 
on building a business consensus on areas that we think can 
move ahead. 
 
INCREASING THE DIALOGUE ON CT AND HOMELAND SECURITY 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
12. (SBU) Direct negotiations between Secretary Ridge and 
Internal Market Commissioner Bolkestein have largely resolved 
differences over airline passenger data and container 
security.  They have also built some trust between the U.S. 
and EU.   Nonetheless, we will continue to see U.S. action 
like recent decisions on placing air marshals on 
transatlantic flights that could generate intense opposition 
here absent careful groundwork and prior consultation.  In 
this context, exploration of launching a broader, more 
comprehensive dialogue on counterterrorism and homeland 
security concerns, which would bring in relevant Commission 
directorates, the Council and the Presidency to discuss 
issues like biometrics, exchange of watch lists, exchange of 
information on stolen passports, and border management, could 
smooth EU cooperation.  At the same time, we should be 
prepared for possible complications related to accession by 
ten new member states, who could use Commission mechanisms to 
challenge our differentiated treatment of EU nationals under 
the visa waiver program. 
 
RESOLVING GALILEO 
----------------- 
 
13. (SBU) The Europeans continue to negotiate assuming they 
must launch the first satellite by early 2005, and the EU 
position on Galileo is unlikely to change with the new 
Commission.  We have tabled a win/win scenario on frequency 
placement for the Open System, and it is important that we 
use the Summit deadline to drive this deal to closure. 
 
EXPLORING A TRANSATLANTIC RESEARCH AREA 
--------------------------------------- 
 
14. (U) Cooperation on science and technology tends to be an 
orphan in the US-EU relationship.  Yet better science is the 
key to resolving some of our most contentious disputes in the 
energy and environmental area.  The Department\'s Science 
Advisor has been laying the groundwork for a program of 
enhanced exchange between our universities and research 
centers.  Financial and intellectual property issues need to 
be worked out, but this is exactly the kind of new initiative 
that can capture the public imagination and provide some 
practical benefits. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"13245","1/14/2004 6:47","04BRUSSELS139","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","03BRUSSELS3243","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 000139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/PC MAREN BROOKS AND EUR/SE SUZANNE 
YOUNTCHI; INL/AAE FOR LEON WEINTRAUB; USUNVIE FOR HOWARD 
SOLOMON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EU, KCRM, PREL, SNAR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: CENTRAL DUBLIN GROUP MEETING: JANUARY 2004 
 
REF: 03 BRUSSELS 03243 
 
1.  This cable contains an action request.  See para. 8. 
 
2.  Summary.  During its January 9 meeting, the members of 
the Central Dublin Group reviewed regional reports from the 
Baltic states (Norway), Central Europe (Netherlands), 
Northern Africa (Spain), Africa - apart from North Africa 
(France), the Caribbean (France), South America (Spain) and 
Central America/Mexico (U.S.).  This was the first time the 
U.S. has served as regional chair for Central America and 
Mexico, having agreed to a temporary switch with Spain for 
South America.  This was also the last time regional reports 
will be submitted for the Baltics and Central Europe as these 
countries will be joining the European Union on May 1.  Two 
scientific presentations on the neurotixicity of cannabis 
were presented, one by Dr. Steven Childers of Wake Forest 
University.  Members discussed the request by Turkey to join 
the Dublin Group, but took no action.  Instead, they decided 
to develop criteria for the admission of new members, to be 
discussed at the next meeting of the Central Dublin Group in 
June.  Raymond Yans of the Belgian MFA agreed to extend his 
tenure as Dublin Group Chair for another year.   EU accession 
state members were present at the meeting as observers but 
will become full participating members at the next meeting. 
U.S. rep to the meeting was USEU/NAS Frank Kerber.  End 
summary. 
 
Technical Presentations 
----------------------- 
 
3.  Dublin Group chair Raymond Yans opened the meeting with 
two technical presentations on the neurotoxicity of cannabis. 
 The presentations were made by Dr. Steven Childers of the 
Wake Forest University School of Medicine and Dr. Thomas 
Lundqvist, associate professor and clinical psychologist at 
the Drug Addiction Treatment Center, Lund University 
Hospital, Sweden.  Dr. Childers addressed the recent 
scientific findings on the actions of cannabinoids on the 
brain, and Dr. Lundqvist spoke about the practical behavioral 
and cognitive effects of short-term and long-term use.  While 
no policy implications were drawn by the two experts, Dr. 
Childers opined that medicinal use of marijuana perhaps 
resulted in more negative effects than positive, and that 
direct administration of THC might be preferable to inhaling 
the drug (just as medicinal use of heroin as a painkiller is 
preferable to smoking opium). 
 
Regional Reports 
---------------- 
 
4.  The members reviewed regional reports from the Baltic 
states (Norway), Central Europe (Netherlands), Northern 
Africa (Spain), Africa - apart from North Africa (France), 
the Caribbean (France), South America (Spain) and Central 
America/Mexico (U.S.).  (Reports will be pouched to INL/PC.) 
This was the first time the U.S. has served as regional chair 
for Central America and Mexico, having agreed to a temporary 
switch with Spain for South America.  This was also the last 
time regional reports will be submitted for the Baltics and 
Central Europe as these countries will be joining the 
European Union on May 1.  The U.S. report was well received 
and the recommendations contained in the report were adopted. 
 
 
Paris Pact 
---------- 
 
5.  Bernard Frahi of the UN Office of Drugs and Crime (UNODC) 
in Vienna presented a draft paper on the Paris Pact.  The 
Paris Pact examines the opium route from Afghanistan to 
Western Europe.  He asked that comments on the proposals 
contained in the paper be submitted quickly so that the final 
version could be distributed to Pact members.  The Italian 
delegation distributed an EU paper on the Paris Pact and 
stressed that demand reduction analysis should be considered 
in the second round of technical \"rooundtables\".  (The EU 
paper has been sent to USUNVIE and to INL/AAE).  Frahi 
acknowledged the EU desire to include demand analysis be 
included in Paris Pact deliberations, but asked for 
\"pragmatism\" given that no additional funding is available 
for the Paris Pact initiative.  USDEL seconded this position. 
 Noting that UNODC projected 2004 roundtables to be held in 
Moscow, Tashkent, Albania, USDEL reminded the group that the 
Pact consultative  meeting in Rome in November had considered 
the possibility of focusing the roundtables on the countries 
immediately surrounding Afghanistan rather than scattering 
its deliberations too widely.  He also reminded the group of 
Iran\'s unexpected invitation for the Pact to meet in Teheran. 
 
Turkey\'s Application for Membership 
----------------------------------- 
 
6.  The chair noted that Turkey had approached all the 
members regarding its request to join the Central Dublin 
Group.  He and the Commission deplored Turkey\'s past 
unwillingness to cooperate with a Mini-Dublin Group in Ankara 
- most recently in 1995.  The Commission denied that it had 
offered membership in the Central Dublin Group to Turkey in 
2001.The Japanese delegate noted that there were no 
agreed-upon criteria for the admission of new members and 
recommended that such criteria be developed.  USDEL seconded 
this recommendation and noted the UNODC threshold for 
membership in \"major donors\" might perhaps be included among 
the criteria.  The chair invited members to submit 
suggestions for membership criteria for consideration at the 
next meeting.  Meanwhile, Italy may approach Turkey to assist 
with its Central Asia regional chair responsibilities.  The 
issue of whether to try again to establish a mini-Dublin 
Group in Ankara will be taken up at the next meeting of the 
Central Dublin Group. 
 
Next Meeting 
------------ 
 
7.  The next Central Dublin Group meeting will be held in 
Brussels either June 22-23 or July 6-7.  It was agreed that 
one and half days were required for this meeting.  Belgian 
MFA Raymond Yans agreed to extend his tenure as Dublin Group 
Chair for another year. 
 
 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
8.  The U.S. report on Central America and Mexico contained 
several recommendations for each country in the report 
(Panama, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras, Costa Rica, 
Guatemala and Mexico).  Mini-Dublin Group chairs are expected 
to submit an interim follow-up report at the following 
meeting which summarizes events that have occurred since the 
report was written and action taken on the recommendations. 
The interim report should be submitted no later than two 
weeks before the meeting, i.e., June 8. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"13660","2/2/2004 4:22","04BRUSSELS416","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE19360","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 000416 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2014 
TAGS: PREF, IZ, AF, EUR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EC ON IRAQI REFUGEE RETURN AND INTEGRATION 
STRATEGY: LESSONS LEARNED FROM AFGHANISTAN 
 
REF: STATE 19360 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary.  The EC agrees with reftel strategy of 
concentrating first on the return of Iraqi refugees from 
neighboring countries.  It has no plans at present to promote 
the return of Iraqis from EU Member States.  An EC attempt to 
return Afghans to their country in 2003 was unsuccessful 
because many Afghans feared the conditions in Afghanistan 
were not adequate to sustain reintegration.  The EC would 
like to participate in the February 15 - 16 meeting in Amman 
to map out a strategy for the return and reintegratation of 
Iraqi refugees.  ECHO is currently funding an NGO to help 
return Iraqi refugees from Iran.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
DG JHA: No Plan to Return Iraqis from EU 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) On 1/30, PRMOff met with Christian Klos, DG Justice 
and Home Affairs (JHA) officer in charge of return policies, 
to convey reftel points on the proposed refugee return and 
reintegration strategy for Iraqis.  Klos said that the 
European Commission (EC) had no plans to begin returning 
Iraqis from EU Member States, primarily because the present 
safety and security conditions in Iraq did not seem to 
warrant such.  He said internal EU discussions about Iraq 
remain contentious and that the EC would rather focus its 
return efforts on a country where there is broad consensus. 
 
3. (SBU) Klos reviewed failed EC efforts to carry out a 
voluntary return program for Afghans.  Based on estimates 
supplied by IOM, the EC allocated 7 million euros to fund an 
initiative which was projected to return approximately 5000 
Afghans per month beginning in April 2003.  These JHA funds 
from the B7-667 budget line were intended to help the Afghan 
government improve capacity for handling returns, including 
the construction of reception centers and transportation 
inside the country, provide mine awareness training for 
returnees and also some vocational training and income 
generating programs.  However, very few Afghans were willing 
to return, possibly because of lack of security in many parts 
of Afghanistan, particularly outside the capital. 
 
4. (C) Klos welcomed the strategy laid out in reftel and said 
that the JHA funding could be used for Iraqis, if Member 
States agreed, along the lines described in paragraph 3 for 
Afghans.  Klos said that the incoming-Dutch Presidency has 
indicated interest in exploring the possibility of returning 
Iraqis, but he doubted that the situation on the ground in 
Iraq would allow for this during the Dutch Presidency (second 
half of 2004). 
 
----------------------------- 
ECHO: Onboard to Further Regional Returns 
----------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) PRMOff also conveyed reftel points to ECHO Head of 
Unit Ruth Albuquerque.  She agreed with the proposed strategy 
to facilitate refugee returns from neighboring countries 
first.  Albuquerque expressed interest in the February 15-16 
planning meeting in Amman and said she would like her 
Amman-based officer Paul Filler to attend.  To date, ECHO\'s 
return efforts have been focused on refugee returns from Iran 
to southern Iraq via its implementing NGO partner Accion 
Contre la Faim (ACF). 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"13683","2/3/2004 4:19","04BRUSSELS432","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS346|04DUBLIN135","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 000432 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, MASS, ETRD, IR, CH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU HUMAN RIGHTS AGENDA PREVIEW: CHR-60 AND CHINA 
 
REF: A. A) DUBLIN 135 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 346 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: Further to ref A, European Council human 
rights experts stressed the importance of earlier bilateral 
consultations on country-specific resolutions, while noting 
that a number of EU member state human rights experts 
continue to have trouble dealing with the US \"thematics\" 
paper. Recent EU discussions on lifting the EU arms embargo 
on China (ref B) have led to some internal discomfort among 
some EU human rights experts.  End Summary 
 
China 
----- 
 
2. (C)  The EU Secretariat has decided to split its internal 
February 4 COHOM session into two meetings. In the morning, 
the human rights experts will meet by themselves.  In the 
afternoon, in an unusual step, EU COHOM experts will be 
joined by EU Asia experts (COASI) (agendas below). This is 
being driven by recent thinking in the EU to lift the arms 
embargo on China and the need to consider how to deal with 
China at CHR-60.  This is leading to unhappiness among some 
Brussels-based EU human rights experts who are being subject 
to human rights NGO pressure. 
 
3.  (C) One of our interlocutors noted that discussion about 
lifting the Chinese arms embargo is being conducted in the 
Political and Security Committee (PSC) without COHOM 
participation.  She said that the Irish Presidency/PSC had 
asked for three papers on China from the Council: codes of 
conduct, overall EU/China relations and China human rights. 
She said that she had written the human rights paper and has 
said while China is making progress on economic rights, it is 
difficult to argue that progress is being made in political 
and civil rights in China.  EU support for a CHR resolution 
this spring is going to be very difficult to see, she opined, 
but in any case, it is highly unlikely that the EU will agree 
to anything until after the next round of the EU/China human 
rights dialogue in Dublin February 26-27.  Furthermore, 
anything that is decided on EU support for a CHR resolution 
on China will most likely come from the Council of Ministers 
(heads of state) level. We note that the Council 
Secretariat\'s draft agenda (below) proposes China/human 
 
SIPDIS 
rights as a separate item to discuss with the US. 
 
Draft US/EU COHOM agenda; Internal EU COHOM Agendas 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
4. (SBU) The Council Secretariat has suggested to the Irish 
Presidency that the agenda for the February 11 US/EU COHOM 
meeting cover: 1) CHR-60 prep (including the thematics 
package); 2) CHR membership reform; 3) Corporate Social 
Responsibility; 4) China/Human Rights; 5) \"Caucus of 
Democracies\"; 6) Death Penalty. The Irish have agreed to this 
proposed agenda and we can be expect to be asked for our 
reaction before the February 4 EU human rights experts 
meeting. 
 
5. (U) The EU agenda for their internal meeting is: 1) Review 
of draft norms for Transnational Corporations; 2) CHR-60 
preparations with a focus of getting agreement for countries 
that EU will seek resolutions or lesser measures; 3) US/EU 
troika meeting (including an effort to get a response to the 
US thematics paper); 4) preparation for other troikas 
(EU/Canada experts meet in NY February 10); 5) internal 
review of overall EU human rights policy; 6) Implementation 
of guidelines on children in armed conflict; 7) Death penalty 
in Belize, and 8) draft juvenile amicus curiae brief. The 
last item would be to review a proposed EU friend of the 
court brief in US courts opposing the application of the 
death penalty against minors. For the second, joint 
COHOM/COASI, meeting February 4 (afternoon), the EU will also 
discuss 1) CHR-60, 2) preparing for the next round of the 
EU/China human rights dialogue, and 3) implementation of EU 
guidelines on torture. 
 
EU/Iran human rights dialogue remains stalled 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) One of our EU interlocutors confirmed that the 
Iranians still have not replied to an EU request to go ahead 
with a next round of the EU/Iran human rights dialogue (which 
had been scheduled for March 8-9).  Currently the EU is not 
pushing for a response, we were told, pending what happens in 
the February 20 Parliamentary election in Iran. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"13778","2/6/2004 13:31","04BRUSSELS526","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 000526 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/RUS, EUR/UMB AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2009 
TAGS: PREL, ETRD, RS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU LAUNCHES FAST-TRACK ASSESSMENT OF RELATIONS 
WITH RUSSIA 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  Frustrated by an increasingly sterile 
dialogue with Moscow, and deeply embarrassed by Italian PM 
Berlusconi\'s fawning defense of Putin at last November\'s 
EU-Russia summit in Rome, the EU is conducting an 
\"assessment\" of its relations with Russia.  The goal is 
two-fold.  First, to systematically analyze the growing list 
of contentious, unresolved issues that increasingly 
characterize the EU-Russian relationship, and identify 
possible recommendations for action.  The second goal is 
damage limitation:  to impose stricter policy discipline on 
member states to prevent future EU presidency leaders from 
repeating Berlusconi\'s freelancing.  The EU hopes to complete 
this exercise by the time of its May summit with Russia.  The 
EU is open to U.S. ideas, but the window is short:  a first 
draft of the assessment could be ready for EU Foreign 
Ministers to consider at the February 23-24 GAERC.  End 
Summary. 
 
Rome Summit:  Catalyst for Policy Review 
------------------- 
2.  (C)  According to Kees Van Rij (protect), Solana\'s policy 
advisor for the CIS, and Council Secretariat Russia analysts 
Sofia Moureira de Sousa and Carl Hartzell (also protect), 
last year\'s EU-Russia summit in Rome drove home the need to 
reassess EU policy toward Russia in two major ways.  First, 
the EU found Putin and the Russians increasingly intransigent 
and hard-headed on a wide range of issues -- from Chechnya to 
EU enlargement to Kyoto.  EU frustration on this score is, 
according to our contacts, matched only by that of Russia, 
which feels the EU is ignoring its concerns.  Second, Italian 
PM Berlusconi\'s shameless defense of Putin during the summit 
press conference last November took the teeth out of an 
agreed EU policy to press Russia to address human rights 
concerns about Chechnya, promote internal political and 
economic reforms, and engage constructively on issues such as 
the frozen conflicts in Moldova and the Caucasus. 
 
EU Ministers Criticize Italy; seek policy discipline 
---------------- 
3.  (C) According to our contacts, at the December GAERC 
following the Rome summit with Russia, EU Foreign Ministers 
criticized Italy for having undermined agreed EU positions 
and abandoned its obligations to subsume bilateral views to 
those agreed among members.  The ministers called for the EU 
to assess its Russia policy prior to the May 2004 EU-Russia 
summit.  Privately, our EU contacts tell us that other EU 
member states were furious over Berlusconi\'s performance at 
the Rome summit, which press reports indicated led to renewed 
calls to eliminate the EU\'s current six-month rotating 
Presidency.  Kees Van Rij has often expressed to us his 
frustration that every EU presidency since Putin was elected 
-- with the notable exception of Denmark on the issues of 
Chechnya and Kaliningrad -- has talked tough on Russia right 
up to the summit meeting, when they have unceremoniously 
dumped all tough language and have sought to woo Putin.  For 
Van Rij, though, Berlusconi went over the top.  Thus, one 
purpose of reassessing EU policy towards Russia is to 
reinforce internal EU discipline in order to limit future 
presidency countries\' ability to depart from agreed policy at 
Russia-EU summits. 
 
EU frustration at long list of issues going nowhere 
--------------------- 
4.  (C) The second stimulus behind the EU\'s review of its 
Russia policy also arose at the Rome summit.  At Rome, the EU 
found the Russians to have adopted much tougher positions 
than previously on a wide range of issues.  The increasingly 
sterile dialogue has led to a growing list of outstanding, 
contentious issues between the EU and Russia.  These include: 
 
--  Enlargement:  The Russians continue to press for 
\"compensation\" from the EU for what it claims will be the 
economic costs of EU enlargement.  This issue is a 
non-starter for the EU, whose officials view enlargement as 
bringing a huge lucrative market to Russia\'s doorstep, and 
who assert that every study they\'ve seen shows enlargement 
will result in a net economic benefit for Moscow. 
 
-- Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA):  As a 
consequence of enlargement, the EU has called on Russia to 
ratify the PCA with the ten accession countries.  Russia has 
delayed, seeking to link the extension to visa free travel 
for Russian citizens to EU countries, or to easier WTO 
accession terms.  The EU contends that unless this issue is 
resolved by May 1, the existing PCA will not be valid, and 
the EU will have no basis for formal relations with Russia. 
Russia has recently indicated it is considering a temporary 
extension of the PCA after May, pending resolution of the 
\"compensation\" issue.  EU exasperation on this issue cannot 
be overestimated -- Van Rij commented that continued Russian 
insistence on this issue will force the EU to choose between 
relations with Russia or EU enlargement.  \"What\'s more 
important?\" he asked, \"If we are forced to choose, we\'ll 
choose EU enlargement.\" 
 
-- Chechnya:  The EU has gotten nowhere with its repeated 
demarches to Moscow on the need, at a minimum, to facilitate 
delivery of EU-funded humanitarian aid to Chechen refugees. 
The Russians allege that NGO\'s in the region are sympathetic 
to the separatists and their mission is anything but 
humanitarian. 
 
-- Near Abroad:  Russia resists all attempts by the EU to put 
issues related to Belarus, Moldova, Ukraine or the Caucasus 
on the bilateral agenda.  On Belarus, the Russians tell the 
EU to trust in Russian influence to civilize Lukashenko.  On 
Moldova, the Russians do not acknowledge that the common EU 
border that will result from enlargement (after Romania and 
Bulgaria join in 2007) gives the EU a legitimate interest -- 
and voice -- in resolution of the Transnistrian conflict. 
 
-- Kyoto:  Russia\'s announcement in Rome that it does not 
intend to ratify Kyoto pulled the rug out of EU efforts to 
bring the protocol into force, and is a major setback for one 
of the EU\'s highest-profile environmental policy goals. 
 
EU objectives and timetable 
------------------------ 
5.  (C)  Moreira de Sousa said the purpose of the assessment 
is to catalogue and analyze the challenges to the 
relationship -- the list of outstanding issues -- set 
objectives and, if possible, develop recommendations on how 
to engage Russia to achieve EU goals in each area.  The 
timetable is short:  to be ready for the next EU-Russia 
summit in May, EU officials are scrambling to have a paper 
for ministers to consider at the February 23-24 GAERC.  They 
acknowledge this deadline may be missed, but certainly by the 
March 22-23 GAERC the EU will have completed its assessment. 
EU goals for the exercise are threefold:   to resolve 
outstanding enlargement issues; develop a positive dialogue 
with Russia on the near abroad, and to manage the EU\'s trade 
and WTO related issues with Moscow. 
 
Frozen conflicts:  what about Northern Ireland? 
--------------- 
6.  (C)  For example, Moreira de Sousa told us recently, when 
the EU raises issues such as Moldova/Transnistria, the 
Russians say they want to put Northern Ireland and Cyprus on 
the agenda.  The EU has resisted this, but the Irish 
presidency agreed earlier this year to discuss Northern 
Ireland with Russia, if only to remove this as an excuse for 
Russia not to engage on issues in the near abroad. 
 
EU open to U.S. influence 
-------------- 
7. (C)  EU officials are open to engaging with the U.S. as 
they assess their relations with Russia.  U.S.-EU COEST 
Troika talks on February 9 (Caucasus and Central Asia) and on 
March 16 (Russia, Ukraine, Moldova and Belarus) offer 
opportunities to do so, but our window is relatively short. 
Working back from the May summit, the outlines of the EU\'s 
approach will have to gel by late February or early March. 
 
Comment: Venus and Mars 
------- 
8.  (C)  In spite of the current hiccups in EU-Russian 
relations, keeping the relationship on an even keel is too 
important for both sides to allow a major disruption.  The EU 
is Russia\'s largest trading partner, and Russia provides 
15-20 percent of Europe\'s energy supplies.  Both of these 
indicators will increase with enlargement.  However, both 
sides are frustrated by the extra level of effort required to 
maintain an increasingly sterile dialogue.  The EU sees 
enlargement as an internal issue and a fait accompli that is 
coincidentally beneficial to Russia, and thus expects nothing 
less than Russian acquiescence.  The Russians appear to view 
their acceptance of EU enlargement as a major concession and 
expect the EU to offer a quid pro quo.  With enlarged borders 
that join Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and soon Moldova, the EU 
considers its stake in the stability of these countries to be 
equal to Russia\'s.  Russia has not accepted this.  EU 
Enlargement is shifting the economic and political balance of 
power in the EU-Russian relationship in ways neither side has 
fully grasped. We expect both sides will seek to come to 
terms, one way or another, with the immediate impact of 
enlargement during the May summit.  But enlargement means 
that the EU\'s horizons have moved eastward -- and now overlap 
plenty of areas the Russians consider their natural zones of 
influence -- so tensions similar to those we are seeing now 
will persist for some time. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"13914","2/12/2004 14:19","04BRUSSELS631","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 000631 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DOL FOR BLS AND ILAB 
TREASURY FOR IMI 
STATE FOR DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  THE NEXT EU COMMISSION: A BRUSSELS PREVIEW 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) The EU rumor mill is already full of 
possible candidates for the succession of Romano 
Prodi as Commission President in November 2004.  EU 
leaders are expected to pick a President-designate 
at their June 17-18 Summit (European Council) 
meeting in Brussels, shortly after the June 10-13 
elections to the European Parliament (EP).  Powerful 
voices in the EP insist Prodi\'s successor must come 
from whichever political family emerges from the 
June EP elections with the most seats.  As things 
stand, this could induce leaders to pick up a 
candidate closely associated with the European 
People\'s Party (EPP), thus giving Luxembourg PM 
Juncker, former Belgian PM Dehaene or Austrian 
Chancellor Schuessel the best chances to win the 
nomination, though some (Juncker, in particular) 
might hesitate to leave national politics.  The 
designation will be followed by the intricate 
process of choosing the other 24 Commissioners from 
each of the remaining Member States, and allocating 
portfolios among them. END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) This next generation of EU officials will be 
key interlocutors for the U.S. on the whole range of 
issues filling the US-EU agenda.  Not just the new 
Commission President, but also those Commissioners 
who hold key portfolios such as Trade, External 
Relations, Competition, Internal Market or others 
will play central roles in our efforts ranging from 
WTO negotiations to border security measures and 
assistance coordination. 
 
WHO WILL SUCCEED PRODI? 
----------------------- 
 
3. (U) The mandate of EU Commission President Prodi 
and his colleagues in the college of Commissioners 
will expire at the end of October this year. 
President Prodi is expected to return to Italian 
politics.  The Brussels rumor mill is already full 
of possible candidates for Prodi\'s succession, a job 
that involves running the EU executive, initiator of 
legislation in key economic areas and manager of EU 
trade and competition policies, all areas of crucial 
interest to the USG. 
 
4. (U) The nomination of Prodi\'s successor is a 
matter for the EU leaders, who will make their 
choice at their June 17-18 Summit in Brussels, less 
than a week after the elections to the EP.  The 
decision, in which the current Irish Presidency (PM 
Ahern) is expected to play the role of honest 
broker, will likely be made by consensus, although 
Nice Treaty rules now allow it to be made by 
qualified-majority voting.  The EP must then confirm 
the Commission President-designate.  Thereafter, as 
we move into the Dutch Presidency (starting on July 
1), the President-designate will have contacts with 
all EU governments to draw up the list of the other 
members of the new Commission, based on proposals by 
each government (one Commissioner per Member State, 
including the President-designate).  It will fall to 
the new Commission President to allocate portfolios 
in the new team. 
 
5. (SBU) Powerful voices in the EP insist Prodi\'s 
successor must come from whichever political family 
emerges from the June elections with the most seats. 
The largest EP group currently is the European 
People\'s Party (EPP), made up of Christian-Democrats 
and Conservatives.  Based on the current grouping of 
party affiliates, the only other group that might 
win a larger number in the next Parliament is the 
center-left Party of European Socialists (PES), 
although there are possible candidates for top jobs 
from smaller party groups, especially the Liberals. 
 
6. (SBU) Nationality is another key factor: with de 
Hoop Scheffer at NATO, no Dutchman can reasonably 
set his hopes on the Commission; if Solana is 
reappointed High Rep in the fall, Spain is unlikely 
to win another EU top job, etc.  It is not 
conceivable that the new President would be chosen 
from any of the ten new Member States, but there 
might be interest in appointing someone from outside 
the EU\'s \"founding six\" as only one previous 
Commission President (UK\'s Roy Jenkins) has come 
from outside this group of France, Germany, Italy 
and the Benelux.  Here is what we have gleaned in 
the EU corridors, although the fluid nature of the 
issue at this stage means the list cannot be 
considered exhaustive: 
 
TOP CONTENDERS: 
 
--Jean-Claude Juncker (Luxembourg PM, EPP): veteran 
  of the EU leaders club, said to be favored by 
  France and Germany; chances weakened by Jacques 
  Santer\'s 1999 debacle as last Luxembourg PM to 
  serve as Commission President; has repeatedly 
  expressed preference for another term as PM 
  (national elections to coincide with the Euro- 
  elections); 
 
--Jean-Luc Dehaene (Belgian former PM, EPP): failed 
  to win the job in 1995 (due to UK veto); able to 
  master detail and to forge compromises; served as 
  Vice-President of the Convention that drafted the 
  EU Constitution; 
 
--Wolfgang Schuessel (Austrian Chancellor, EPP): 
  his nationality and political affiliation may 
  prove assets; his coalition with Haider\'s party is 
  definitely a minus; 
 
--Paavo Lipponen (Finnish former PM, PES): openly 
  interested in the job; strong defender of the 
  Commission and the small states; 
 
--Costas Simitis (Greek departing PM, PES): managed 
  not to make enemies during Greece\'s EU Presidency 
  in 2003; soon to be available. 
 
OTHER POTENTIAL CANDIDATES: 
 
--Guy Verhofstadt (Belgian PM, Liberal): not willing 
  to admit his ambitions; may be tempted to take the 
  EU path if his coalition government gets into 
  trouble; 
 
--Pat Cox (Irish, EP President, Liberal): very 
  effective speaker; would probably do well to bring 
  the EU closer to its citizens, but seen as lacking 
  government experience. 
 
DARK HORSES: 
 
--Antonio Vitorino (Portuguese, JHA Commissioner, 
  PES): efficient Commissioner with good knowledge 
  of the EU machinery, has received public support 
  from the current EPP-led Portugese government; 
 
--Guenther Verheugen (German, Enlargement 
  Commissioner, PES): Chancellor Schroeder wants him 
  to stay in Brussels with another portfolio; his 
  handling of enlargement could make him a popular 
  candidate among new Member States; 
 
POSSIBLY, BUT MAY NOT BE INTERESTED? 
 
--Anders Fogh Rasmussen (Danish PM, Liberal): very 
  effective during 2002 Danish EU Presidency; 
 
--Peter Sutherland (Irish, former Commissioner and 
  WTO Director-General, Chairman of BP and Goldman 
  Sachs); 
 
--Joschka Fischer (German FM, Green): has European 
  vision; probably cannot leave Berlin; 
 
--Jose Maria Aznar (Spanish departing PM, EPP): said 
  he was not interested. 
 
THE NEXT COMMISSION: WHO IS IN, WHO IS OUT? 
------------------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) As regards the subsequent task of 
assembling a new Commission, among the safest 
conclusions we can make at this point is that the 
ten Commissioners who will join the Prodi team on 
May 1 from the new Member States will all, or nearly 
all, stay on in Brussels as part of the next 
Commission for its 2004-2009 term.  The ten, who 
will serve with full voting rights but with no 
portfolio of their own for the interim May-October 
period, should be: 
 
--Czech Republic:  Milos Kuzvart, former Environment 
  Minister; 
 
--Cyprus:  Marcos Kyprianou, Finance Minister; 
 
--Estonia: Siim Kallas, former PM, Foreign and 
  Finance Minister; 
 
--Hungary: Peter Balasz, Ambassador to the EU, 
  formerly State Secretary and representative in the 
  Convention on the Future of Europe; 
 
--Latvia: Sandra Kalniete, Foreign Minister; 
 
--Lithuania: Dalia Grybauskaite, Finance Minister; 
 
--Malta: Joe Borg, Foreign Minister; 
 
--Poland: Danuta Huebner, Minister for European 
  Integration; 
 
--Slovenia: Janez Potocnik, Minister for European 
  Affairs; 
 
--Slovakia: Jan Figel, Parliament Foreign Affairs 
  Committee chair, former chief EU negotiator. 
 
8. (SBU) For the other 15 Member States, things are 
less clear: 
 
--Austria: Franz Fischler (Agriculture and 
  Fisheries) has said he will leave Brussels.  If 
  Schuessel is not named Commission President, one 
  possibility is FM Ferrero-Waldner; 
 
--Belgium: Philippe Busquin (Research) would be 
  interested in another term, but his fate depends 
  on a decision by Francophone Socialist party 
  leader Di Rupo.  An EP seat would be a second 
  choice; 
 
--Denmark: Poul Nielson (Development and 
  Humanitarian Assistance), a Socialist, is not 
  expected to be re-nominated by the Liberal-led 
  government in Copenhagen; 
 
--Germany: Chancellor Schroeder would like 
  Enlargement Commissioner Guenther Verheugen (also 
  a dark horse candidate for President) to stay on, 
  possibly with an internal economic portfolio such 
  as Competition or the Single Market.  Verheugen\'s 
  own interests more likely to be in Trade or 
  External Relations.  Budget Commissioner Michele 
  Schreyer (Green) will not stay on, as Germany and 
  other big states will only have one, rather than 
  two Commission seats; 
 
--Greece: Anna Diamontopoulou (Employment and Social 
  Affairs) is leaving Brussels to join the PASOK 
  campaign for March 7 Greek elections (septel).  If 
  PASOK wins upcoming elections, she might join new 
  government in Athens, if PASOK loses she will not 
  be nominated by the new Greek government.  Who 
  might replace her must await the outcome of the 
  Greek elections; 
 
--Finland: Erkki Liikanen (Enterprise and Info 
  Society) will likely leave Brussels, as he is not 
  seen as close to the current Finnish government; 
 
--France: Michel Barnier (Regional Policy) is said 
  to be interested in another term, but in a higher 
  profile job than his current one.  As France is 
  one of the countries losing its second Commission 
  seat, there is no chance Pascal Lamy (Trade, 
  Socialist) will be staying in the Commission; 
 
--Ireland: David Byrne (Health and Consumer 
  Protection) might be interested in another term; 
 
--Italy: Mario Monti (Competition) may be willing to 
  stay if assured of the Economic and Monetary 
  Affairs portfolio.  A possible replacement is 
  Rocco Buttiglione, Italian Minister for European 
  affairs; 
 
--Luxembourg: Viviane Reding (Education and 
  Culture), whose name is not on any of the 
  candidate lists for upcoming national or EP 
  elections in Luxembourg, would be interested in 
  another term.  Her future is uncertain, however, 
  due to possible candidacy of PM Juncker for 
  Commission President; 
 
--The Netherlands:  Frits Bolkestein (Internal 
  Market) is openly interested in another term; 
 
--Portugal:  Antonio Vitorino (Justice and Home 
  Affairs) is a dark horse candidate for Commission 
  President.  Even if not in that job, he could 
  still be Portugal\'s Commissioner, although he is a 
  Socialist coming from a country with a center- 
  right government; 
 
--Spain:  Both Loyola de Palacio (Transport and 
  Energy) and Pedro Solbes Mira (Economic and 
  Monetary Affairs) are expected to leave the 
  Commission; 
 
--Sweden:  Margot Wallstroem (Environment) is 
  reportedly on the outs with Socialist PM Persson 
  and thus considered unlikely to be renominated. 
  One rumored replacement might be Carl Bildt, 
  former center-right PM.  However, given 
  Wallstroem\'s popularity back home with Swedish 
  Socialists, some in Brussels think Persson might 
  see it as convenient to keep her Brussels; 
 
--UK:  Both Neil Kinnock (Administration) and Chris 
  Patten (External Relations) will be leaving the 
  Commission.  Britain\'s lone Commissioner in the 
  next term could be Blair-confidant Peter 
  Mandelson. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"13965","2/13/2004 15:39","04BRUSSELS666","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 000666 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/SNEC, EUR/CACEN, EUR/ACE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KZ, KG, TI, TX, UZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: US-EU COEST CONSULTATIONS PART 1: CENTRAL ASIA 
 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On February 9 in Brussels, EUR DAS Lynn 
Pascoe -- accompanied by EUR/ACE Deputy Dan Rosenblum and 
EUR/ERA Director Kathy Allegrone -- discussed US-EU 
cooperation in Central Asia and the South Caucasus with the 
EU\'s COEST Troika.  This cable covers the Central Asia 
portion of the consultations.  The South Caucasus portion 
will be reported septel. 
 
-- Kazakhstan: Country remains relative bright spot in 
region, but still needs outside pressure to continue reforms; 
immediate priority is for US and EU to coordinate closely on 
the ground during run up to parliamentary elections. 
 
-- Uzbekistan: EU shares US concerns about new NGO 
registration procedures; EU considering how to respond to 
UNHRC resolution; wants to be firm on HR without pushing 
Karimov away. 
 
-- Kyrgyzstan: EU is pleased with Kyrgyzstan\'s extension of 
death penalty moratorium, but sees progress on new election 
code as insufficient; new Commission office in Bishkek will 
provide opportunity for enhanced US-EU pre-election 
coordination. 
 
-- Tajikistan: Commission soon to open office in Dushanbe; 
will emphasize border controls and counternarcotics in 
upgraded dialogue with Tajikistan. 
 
-- Chinese Policies: EU keen to hear US views on Chinese 
regional policies; glad to learn US views them as generally 
non-threatening with regard to Central Asia.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
Regional Comments 
----------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Irish Presidency rep Barbara Jones said she had 
recently met with the Russian Ambassador to the OSCE in 
Vienna, who did not see the US/EU/OSCE as having a role to 
play in the democratization of the region.  Jones concluded 
from this that much of the U.S. and EU effort would therefore 
be bilateral, as Russia would limit the OSCE\'s role in the 
region.  Commission Central Asia and Caucasus Director Kurt 
Juul said he has noted increased Russian and Chinese interest 
in Central Asia; the EU will continue its focus on regional 
programs but the challenge is for the countries of Central 
Asia to take concrete steps on political and economic 
reforms.  Commissioner Patten plans to visit Central Asia in 
March.  Since the last COEST Troika, Juul said that the EU 
has initialed a partnership and Cooperation Agreement with 
Tajikistan. 
 
Turkmenistan 
------------ 
 
3. (SBU) Juul said the EU has noted an increased desire on 
the part of Turkmenistan for a dialogue with the EC. 
Following the EU\'s recent formal trade and cooperation 
meeting with the Turkmen, an informal discussion was held 
that included an extensive review of human rights issues. 
The EU, Juul said, was encouraged and is prepared to test the 
waters with Ashgabat and engage the Turkmen further. 
 
Kazakhstan 
---------- 
 
4. (SBU) Juul termed events in Kazakhstan as reflecting an 
increasingly \"normal\" development, with some positive 
movement on human rights issues.  He said that European 
companies remain excited about the business potential of 
Kazakhstan,s increasing role as a major energy supplier. 
While serious concerns about the business environment 
persist, European companies seemed committed to continuing 
their engagement with the GOK, he said.  Juul noted that 
Russian companies also seemed increasingly interested in 
investing in the Kazakh private sector. 
 
Pascoe agreed that Kazakhstan,s energy assets and early 
reform efforts pointed toward a brighter future than most of 
its neighbors, but cautioned that we should continue pressing 
Nazarbayev to consolidate the positive changes and follow 
through on his reform commitments.  Jones pointed out that 
Nazarbayev,s apparent effort to crown his daughter for 
presidential succession did not bode well for ongoing 
political reforms.  Pascoe agreed that it bore watching, but 
noted that Kazakhstan had a large pool of competent 
progressive officials who would work for progress.  The 
immediate priority, he said, was for the US and EU to 
coordinate closely on the ground during the run up to 
parliamentary elections to ensure a positive pre-election 
environment and broader political representation in the new 
parliament.  Jones emphatically agreed, and said she would 
push for the same kind of close coordination that we have 
benefited from in Ukraine.  She would also support a 
Brussels-Washington link if it helped with coordination on 
the ground, but noted that field coordination would, as 
usual, be most fruitful. 
 
Uzbekistan 
---------- 
5. (SBU) The EU agreed with Pascoe that Uzbekistan posed a 
particular challenge because on the one hand it remains a 
notable human rights violator while on the other it continues 
to make progress ) albeit grudging and halting ) on 
political reform.  Uzbekistan has not strayed from its 
determination to do just enough to keep the West off its 
back.  Karimov had yet to realize that political and economic 
reform was necessary for Uzbekistan,s development, Pascoe 
said.  Yet firm pressure works in Central Asia, Juul 
observed, and should be maintained; but we must also be 
careful to recognize the positive steps as they are taken. 
Both sides agreed that the key challenge was to maintain a 
firm line with Karimov while also not pushing him away from 
the table. 
 
6. (SBU) Jones said the EU shared US concerns about 
Tashkent,s new NGO policy, and did not accept FM Safayev,s 
explanation that the transfer of NGO monitoring authority 
from the Foreign to the Interior Ministry was a technical 
shift only. Irish COEST Deputy Chair Peter McIver said that 
Safayev told the EU at Cooperation Council meeting on January 
27 that the government made the change because the Foreign 
Ministry could only assign one staffer to the NGO office, 
while the Interior Ministry had more resources and could thus 
do a better job.  The EU found the assertion laughable, Jones 
said, but their overall impression of Safayev had been 
positive.  The Council Secretariat,s Michael Swann said that 
Human Rights Watch (HRW) had visited his office the day after 
the Cooperation Council meetings.  HRW claimed that Safayev, 
while slick and well-spoken, was no better than the others, 
and had been sent because Karimov thought his considerable 
charm could woo the West.  HRW said it would accuse the EU of 
backpeddling if the Conclusions issued by January\'s meetings 
were any softer than those of earlier EU-Uzbekistan meetings. 
 
7. (SBU) Jones said the EU is still discussing how to handle 
a resolution on Uzbekistan in the UNHRC this year.  The EU 
felt bound to call Tashkent on its abuses, but was also keen 
not to do anything that might disrupt Uzbekistan\'s grudging 
progress.  Pascoe said the US shared the dilemma.  He also 
noted that Karimov has lately been asking for support on 
education reform.  Donors should consider how to take 
advantage of this opening.  Jones said the EU would consider 
its options.  Jones closed by observing that March and April 
would be active months for Uzbekistan, with UNHRC and visits 
to the country by the EBRD and Commissioner Patten (March 
14).  Jones and Pascoe agreed that it would be useful to 
regroup and together assess next steps after these events. 
 
Kyrgyzstan 
---------- 
 
8. (SBU) Dutch Deputy Director Renette van der Waal conveyed 
a mixed EU assessment of Kyrgyz progress.  The EU was pleased 
with Kyrgyzstan\'s extension of the death penalty moratorium, 
but thought that insufficient progress was being made on the 
new election code.  Juul said the EU would meet with Akayev 
in March and would discuss progress on human rights, civil 
society and economic reform.  Pascoe agreed with the mixed 
assessment, but said that the mix leaned more heavily to the 
positive side than the negative.  Kyrgyzstan is undertaking 
some good reforms, he said, but the efforts are hampered by 
Kyrgyzstan\'s poverty and lack of resources and experience. 
Jones said she would task the German Embassy (representing EU 
interests) and the soon to be opened Commission delegation in 
Bishkek to begin coordinating pre-election activities as soon 
as possible with the US Embassy. 
 
Tajikistan 
---------- 
 
9. (SBU) Pascoe said political stability and the drug trade 
continued to be Tajikistans\' biggest challenges.    Our main 
push is to help the country to normality.  Pascoe also said 
the US was pleased that the Commission had decided to open a 
delegation in Dushanbe.  Juul said the EU\'s upgraded dialogue 
with Tajikistan would emphasize border controls and 
counternarcotics.  Swann echoed Juul\'s statement and pointed 
out that countering drugs and organized crime was moving up 
the EU\'s international agenda in light of the recently 
adopted European Security Strategy. 
 
China,s Central Asia Policy 
--------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Pascoe fielded several questions from Troika 
members keen to hear US views on China,s Central Asia 
policy.  In response, Pascoe said that China,s actions 
appeared fairly transparent, and motivated by obvious 
security and energy interests.  Asked about the Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (SCO), Pascoe said that the SCO 
appeared hobbled by a lack of financial support from anywhere 
save Beijing.  The US had expressed an interest in observer 
status, but neither the Chinese nor the Russians seemed 
enthusiastic about this.  (COMMENT: The EU did not offer a 
view of its own, seeming instead to be in search of 
information that would help the EU determine if it should be 
concerned about China,s increasing interest in its western 
neighborhood.  Several Troika members appeared relieved to 
learn that the US did not view China,s engagement in Central 
Asia, including the SCO, as a major threat.  END COMMENT.) 
 
Dushanbe minimize considered. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"14111","2/20/2004 8:37","04BRUSSELS728","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 000728 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, UNGA, UN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: KOFI ANNAN AND THE EU: MULTILATERALISM, MONEY AND 
MIGRATION 
 
REF: A. A) USEU TODAY 1/30/04 
 
     B. B) STATE 15070 
     C. C) BRUSSELS 14 
     D. D) USMISSION USUN 79 
     E. E) 03 BRUSSELS 5126 
     F. F) 03 BRUSSELS 4424 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: UNSYG Kofi Annan used his January 28-30 
visit to Brussels to lecture the EU in public on the need to 
have more open migration policies, while holding private 
talks on a range of world hotspots.  The EU showcased its 
commitment to a policy of \"effective multilateralism\" 
centered around the UN.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------- 
ANNAN TO EU: WHAT CAN YOU DO NOW? 
--------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Our interlocutor in the UN Affairs Office of the 
Commission\'s External Relations Directorate-General told us 
that Annan\'s meeting with the European Commissioners was 
largely a tour d\'horizon of Iraq, Afghanistan, Iran, Middle 
East peace process, and Cyprus.  Annan asked for a greater EU 
contribution to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis 
and Malaria (GFATM).  He also said the EU should play a 
leading role in the Global Commission on Migration.  Annan 
welcomed the EU commitment to multilateralism as expressed in 
the recently approved Commission White Paper on the UN (refs 
E-F), and thanked the Commission for its desire to support 
the High-Level Panel on UN Reform.  All in all, though, our 
source said Annan was more interested in what the EU could do 
for the UN here and now than in the EU\'s more ambitious, 
long-range ideas on \"effective multilateralism.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
ANNAN SPEECH CRITICIZES EU MIGRATION POLICIES 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) On January 29, Annan received the European 
Parliament\'s Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, in 
special honor of the UN officials who died in Iraq.  To the 
surprise of a nearly full chamber of MEPs, Annan\'s address 
focused on Europe\'s need to manage immigration better.  While 
praising Europe in the speech\'s introduction for pursuing 
\"the path of peace through multilateralism,\" Annan did not 
mince words on the need to integrate immigrants while 
accepting their diverse backgrounds: \"Migrants need Europe. 
But Europe also needs migrants.  A closed Europe would be a 
meaner, poorer, weaker, older Europe.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
EU OFFICIALS: UN GLOBAL APPLICATION OF EU MODEL 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
4. (U) Annan\'s discussion of migration notwithstanding, EU 
officials used the award to promote the EU\'s \"effective 
multilateralism\" strategy.  EC Ambassador to the UN John 
Richardson argued at a roundtable discussion that a 
strengthened UN would follow the example of the EU: \"EU and 
UN goals are congruent -- peace, stability and prosperity 
throughout the world....For the EU, the UN is the global 
application of what the EU believes in internally: collective 
action through international institutions.\"  Richardson added 
that the EC\'s current UN observer status would become 
insufficient if the final EU constitutional treaty gave the 
EU legal personality and established the post of EU Foreign 
Minister. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
UN AT CENTER OF SOLANA SECURITY STRATEGY 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) At the same event, Jim Cloos, EU HighRep Javier 
Solana\'s Director for Transatlantic Relations, UN Affairs and 
Human Rights, emphasized that the essence of Javier Solana\'s 
European Security Strategy (ESS) (ref C) was effective 
multilateralism.  He said 21st century security challenges 
could be met only by the \"international community with the UN 
at its center.\" 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
EU\'S EFFECTIVE MULTILATERALISM GATHERS STEAM 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Coming at a time that coincided with the Commission 
White Paper on the EU in the UN, the EP report on the same 
topic, and EU leaders\' endorsement of both the ESS and the 
Commission paper, the visit has built considerable momentum 
for the latest Brussels catchphrase, \"effective 
multilateralism.\"  The EU institutions are working on keeping 
the momentum going:  the Commission has started regular 
dialogues between regional Commission and UN desk officers to 
increase working-level cooperation, for example, and the EU 
has invited Deputy UNSYG Louise Frechette to Brussels in 
March to discuss operational follow-up to Annan\'s visit. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
COMMENT: EU COMMITTED TO UN-BASED APPROACH 
------------------------------------------ 
 
7. (C) Annan\'s visit underlined yet again the strong 
commitment of EU elites to a UN-centric approach to world 
affairs.  This commitment will clash from time to time with 
U.S. interests, especially since some in the EU see the U.S. 
as standing for the opposite paradigm of \"unilateralism.\"  We 
continue to tell our EU interlocutors that the US is equally 
committed to effective multilateralism, but that we prefer to 
put the emphasis on effectiveness, and must be prepared to 
act in the protection of US national interests with 
like-minded partners in the absence of multilateral 
consensus.  END COMMENT. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"14122","2/20/2004 11:37","04BRUSSELS733","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS542|04ROME561|04STATE24530","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 000733 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR P RICHARD MILES, WHA/AND SUSAN BELL, EUR/ERA TOM 
LERSTEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, SNAR, PHUM, EAID, ETRD, CO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU VISIT GIVES URIBE LITTLE 
 
REF: A. A) ROME 561 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 542 
     C. C) STATE 24530 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  Colombian President Alvaro Uribe\'s February 
9-10 EU visit resulted in a cooperation and information 
sharing agreement between Colombia and Europol. He got little 
from the Commission on an EU/Andean trade pact, or a 10 year 
GSP extension. EC officials said  that they would have no new 
aid for Colombia until 2006 but did not rule out a possible 
pledging meeting before then.  The EU did express misgivings 
about Uribe\'s anti-terrorism statute and some members of the 
European Parliament walked out when he addressed them.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------- 
TRADE AND AID 
------------- 
 
2. (C) An EC interlocutor from the European Commission\'s 
Directorate-General for External Relations told us that 
Uribe\'s priorities were getting Commission agreement for a 
donors\' meeting in Brussels and improving trade.  EC 
President Prodi, Commissioners Lamy (trade) and Patten 
(foreign relations) said that, while they want to help 
Colombia where possible, they had not a euro to pledge until 
2006.  The Commissioners suggested that a donor meeting might 
be possible if packaged as a follow-up to the July 2003 
London Meeting on International Support for Colombia. 
 
3. (C) On trade, Uribe pressed for progress toward an 
EU-Andean Community Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and for a 
ten-year extension of Colombia\'s Generalized System of 
Preferences (GSP) trade benefits.  The EC said that the 
Andean Community needs to make more progress toward regional 
integration by measures such as the introduction of a common 
external tariff and reducing non-tariff trade barriers.  The 
Commission has extended the GSP trade benefits for one year, 
until December 31, 2005.  (They had been set to run out on 
December 31, 2004.)  Our source told us that he believed the 
EU would find a way to extend the GSP benefits for a full ten 
years, despite the Indian complaint at the WTO challenging 
the legality of the benefits. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
SOLANA MEETING: EUROPOL-COLOMBIA COOPERATION 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Uribe also met with EU HighRep Javier Solana, after 
which a cooperation and information-sharing agreement between 
Europol and Colombia was signed.  Our Commission interlocutor 
reported that Solana\'s primary message to Uribe was the same 
as the Commissioners\': political support for Uribe\'s efforts 
to build democracy and fight terrorism. 
 
------------------------- 
EU PARLIAMENT A MIXED BAG 
------------------------- 
 
5. (U) In his address to the plenary and an additional 
meeting with the Foreign Affairs Committee, Uribe defended 
his anti-terrorism policies and responded ably to criticism, 
as he reportedly had at a separate meeting with human rights 
NGOs in Brussels.  However, some Greens and Leftist members 
of the European Parliament (MEPs) wearing scarves with the 
inscription, \"peace and democracy in Colombia\" walked out 
when he spoke. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"14156","2/23/2004 4:50","04BRUSSELS752","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE29074","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 000752 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/ANE - RWARD; E - ADERSE; EUR/ERA - 
KALLEGRONE; NEA; DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID - ANE AND DCHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2014 
TAGS: KPAL, PREF, EAID, UNRWA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EC FUNDING FOR UNRWA AND PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY IN 
2004: DEMARCHE RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 29074 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF Marc J. Meznar.  Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  The European Commission (EC), through 
funding mechanisms in ECHO, DG RELEX and EuropeAid, will 
continue to provide substantial funding for vulnerable 
Palestinians, as well as for the Palestinian Authority, in 
2004.  However, it does not have immediate plans to respond 
to UNRWA\'s emergency appeal.  The EC has long advocated that 
UNRWA incorporate the repeated \"emergency appeals\" into its 
core budget.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
EC Downbeat on UNRWA Emergency Appeal 
------------------------ 
 
2. (C) On 2/18, PRMAsst delivered reftel demarche to Giuseppe 
Angelini, ECHO desk officer for UNRWA and Palestinian issues, 
and Christian Berger, UNRWA Aid Counselor for DG RELEX. 
Though there was agreement that the situation for 
Palestinians, specifically those in the occupied territories, 
has deteriorated substantially, both Berger and Angelini 
expressed reservations when asked to increase funding to 
UNRWA\'s emergency appeal.  Angelini chided UNRWA\'s \"emergency 
appeal\" process and emphasized that the EC does not look upon 
the Palestinians as victims of an immediate, short-term 
crisis but rather as casualties of a long and protracted 
emergency.  Berger noted that although ECHO\'s response to 
UNRWA\'s emergency appeals has declined, total funding for 
UNRWA had actually increased.  Berger explained that for this 
reason the EC has reallocated significant funding for 
Palestinians to the MEDA II program, the principle financial 
instrument of the EU for the implementation of the 
Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, and limits its use of 
humanitarian and emergency accounts. 
 
3. (C) According to Berger, a feeling of mistrust between the 
EC and UNRWA is growing out of this issue of 
non-responsiveness to the emergency appeals.  Berger said the 
EC has repeatedly urged UNRWA to move away from emergency 
appeals and to incorporate these long-standing needs into the 
main budget.  He opined that UNRWA utilizes the \"sexy\" 
programs as bait for its emergency appeals thereby 
undermining legitimate needs assessment by donors.  According 
to Angelini, these funding strategies have prompted ECHO to 
increase funding to NGOs vis a vis funding for UNRWA. 
 
------------------------ 
Support to Vulnerable Palestinians to Continue 
------------------------ 
 
4. (C) Angelini indicated that ECHO plans to provide roughly 
35 million euros to assist vulnerable Palestinians in the 
Middle East.  He added that the amount could increase, as was 
the case in 2002 and 2003 \"when UNRWA eventually, but not as 
a pre-planned choice, received about one third of the euros 
38 million that were finally allocated to Palestinians.\"  He 
said ECHO will adopt a first funding decision near the end of 
April, which he estimated to total around 25 million euros, 
with about one third responding directly to the UN\'s 2004 
consolidated appeal (CAP).  Angelini said that the largest 
portion of these CAP-related funds probably will be allocated 
to UNRWA and WFP. 
 
5. (C) Angelini also described ECHO\'s planned response of 
shelter needs.  To address the house demolitions in Rafah, 
ECHO will probably make one million euros available to UNRWA. 
 Another euros 4 million has been reserved for shelter needs, 
but is pending discussion with UNRWA and the results of the 
June Geneva Conference.  Angelini emphasized that ECHO does 
not make allocations by agency, but instead based upon an 
assessment of the operational capacity of its implementing 
partners and therefore cannot \"plan\" exactly how much they 
\"intend to contribute specifically to UNRWA this year.\" 
 
------------------------ 
Support to the Palestinian Authority 
----------------------- 
 
6. (C) Based on information obtained during the 2/18 meeting 
with Berger and additional information obtained by USAID 
Development Counselor on 2/19 from DG RELEX, the EU\'s 
financial support to the Palestinian Authority (PA) is 
currently under discussion and should be proposed within the 
next week.  (Note.  The OLAF report on alleged irregularities 
on the use of EC funds is due to come out in March.  While 
the EC does not expect anything dramatic, their ability to 
deliver on the 2004 budget is directly related to the OLAF 
findings.  End Note.)   Funding decisions are based on a 
four-year cycle, with the 2002-2005 cycle nearing its end. 
Though there is a desire to match last year\'s funding amount 
of 80 million euros to the PA, this year\'s contribution may 
be smaller due to overall budget constraints.  The EC\'s 
strong preference is to provide support through the World 
Bank Trust Fund but will do so only if their contributions 
are matched by other donors. They will be actively seeking 
support for matching funds from other donors, including EU 
Member States, Japan, Norway, Arab League, the U.S., etc. 
 
7. (C) On the issue of disbursements from the 2003 budget 
support fund, the first tranche of 40 million euros has been 
deposited into a single Treasury account for the PA budget 
and is currently pending review. The EC has a certifier and 
an Ernst & Young auditing team to review and release payment 
based on satisfactory documentation.  Of this first tranche, 
6 million euros has been released, with the remaining euros 
34 million euros under review.   Both sources suggested that 
20 million euros could be released shortly. 
8. (C) The second tranche of 40 million euros is much more 
complicated; it has not yet been deposited because certain 
conditions must first be met.  The conditions include pension 
contributions, external audit and understandings on the 
salary payments for the security services through deposit 
accounts.  (Note.  These conditions were made at the request 
of the PA during prior consultations with the EC.  End Note.) 
 A meeting between PA Prime Minister for Finance Salam Fayyad 
and President Prodi on 2/18 helped to clarify the problems 
surrounding security payments. According to DG RELEX, Fayyad 
now has 40 percent of all security personnel receiving salary 
payments through deposits into their accounts.  He would like 
to expand this to the remaining 60 percent within the next 
few weeks, but he is facing \"fierce resistance\".  PM Qurei 
told HiRep Solana this week that the PA cabinet has taken a 
decision to begin all salaries under the bank transfer 
method, but was vague on how/when this would be implemented. 
The EC agreed to look at possibilities over the next few 
weeks.  RELEX stressed that although the funds are currently 
unavailable, they can be used as collateral to acquire loans 
and pay salaries.  In essence, it should not be seen as a 
substantial hindrance to the functioning of the PA. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"14171","2/23/2004 10:05","04BRUSSELS758","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS666","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 000758 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/SNEC, EUR/CACEN, EUR/ACE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, AM, AJ, GG, RS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: US-EU COEST CONSULTATIONS PART 2: SOUTH CAUCASUS 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 666 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: On February 9 in Brussels, EUR DAS Lynn 
Pascoe -- accompanied by EUR/ACE Deputy Dan Rosenblum and 
EUR/ERA Director Kathy Allegrone -- discussed US-EU 
cooperation in Central Asia and the South Caucasus with the 
EU\'s COEST Troika.  This cable covers the South Caucasus 
portion of the consultations.  The discussion of Central Asia 
is reported ref. A. 
 
-- Wider Europe Initiative (WEI): Decision will be made by 
end of June on whether to include South Caucasus in WEI; 
Irish FM Cowen, EUSR Talvitie and Enlargement Commissioner 
Verheugen all support South Caucasus inclusion, and are 
pushing others to do so; EU remains concerned about Russian 
reaction and overly high expectations of South Caucasus 
governments. 
 
-- Georgia: EU remains confident in Saakashvili\'s efforts to 
reform public institutions; EU has 30 million euros budgeted 
for assistance in 2004; US and EU to enhance on-the-ground 
coordination even further. 
 
-- Armenia: Kocharian making positive strides toward meeting 
conditions of Council of Europe membership; EU agrees that 
progress should be made toward opening the Turkish-Armenian 
border, but doubts whether this can happen without progress 
on Nagorno-Karabakh. 
 
-- Azerbaijan: Ilham Aliev tells EU he \"can wait\" on 
resolving Nagorno-Karabakh; EU agrees that recent positive 
attention on Georgia creates an opening for increasing 
pressure on Azerbaijan, which worries about being forgotten 
after Georgia\'s dramatic turnaround.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Wider Europe Initiative: 
Momentum Growing to Include South Caucasus 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) COEST Troika members told Pascoe that moves to include 
the three South Caucasus states in the EU\'s Wider Europe 
Initiative (WEI) were gaining ground.  Commission rep 
Reinhold Brender said that a decision would have to be taken 
by the end of June, and noted that Armenian President 
Kocharian made a direct plea for WEI inclusion during a visit 
to Brussels in December (at which time he also invited 
Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen to visit Yerevan).  The EU 
had two serious concerns about expanding WEI into the South 
Caucasus, he said: first, how would Russia react?  And 
second, how could the EU gently deflate the unrealistic 
expectations of the three countries regarding benefits of WEI 
membership?  The Council Secretariat\'s Michael Swann echoed 
this concern by explaining that the EU is nervous about 
comments by Georgian President Saakashvili and Azeri 
President Ilham Aliev that EU membership is an ultimate 
policy objective of their countries.  Wouldn\'t inclusion in 
the WEI reinforce this unrealistic objective?  Pascoe replied 
that the EU should tell Russia that the South Caucasus states 
are independent, and free to choose their own sovereign 
policies.  The benefit of expanding WEI into the region would 
be too great to abandon just because the Russians might get 
upset.  Of the second concern, Pascoe said that the high 
expectations of regional leaders was to be expected and 
provided a powerful impetus to reform.  There would be time 
to deal with these issues after WEI expansion and as reforms 
proceed. 
 
3. (SBU) Irish Presidency rep Barbara Jones said that 
maximizing the WEI\'s value as a point of leverage over 
included countries was an issue of great concern to the EU. 
Council Policy Planning advisor William Boe illustrated the 
concern by pointed out that Syria has been in the WEI for 
over a year now, yet has made little progress.  In that 
context, he asked, why should the EU expect more of Armenia 
after WEI inclusion?  Jones noted that Commissioner Verheugen 
is briefing other Commissioners on the issue this month.  She 
said that while some FMs remain wary -- arguing that the EU 
\"doesn\'t need a policy driven by enlargement\" -- many others 
are increasingly supportive of inclusion of the South 
Caucasus in the WEI.  Among the notable supporters of 
inclusion were Irish FM Cowen (who \"will manage the Council 
debate,\" she said), Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen, and 
EU Special Rep Heikki Talvitie. 
 
4. (C) COMMENT: The EU clearly has serious issues to resolve 
-- notably about scope, precedence, and managing expectations 
-- before signaling any decision to the region\'s leaders. 
Yet based on signals we have been receiving since December 
from Council, Commission and member state officials, it seems 
clear that the EU\'s momentum has shifted from debates about 
whether to include the Caucasus in WEI, to discussions about 
when, how, and to what end.  Skeptics remain but are rapidly 
being outpaced by advocates of WEI expansion.  END COMMENT. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Georgia: A Success for US-EU Cooperation 
---------------------------------------- 
5. (SBU) Jones said the EU remains optimistic about the new 
Georgian administration and anticipates positive outcomes 
from the new reform initiatives and the upcoming 
parliamentary elections.  She said it was important to 
maintain the momentum and to continue cooperating on 
difficult issues like Abkhazia, Adjara and IMF restructuring. 
 Pascoe agreed, observing that Georgia represented a stunning 
success for US-EU cooperation.  On Russia, Jones said the EU 
was maintaining a strong line with Moscow on the need to 
cooperate; Irish FM Cowen told FM Ivanov in a recent meeting 
that Russia must take Georgia\'s territorial integrity more 
seriously.  Pascoe agreed that Russia must learn to deal with 
Georgia as a normal, sovereign country.  Solutions to 
difficult issues like Abkhazia would not be found without 
serious Georgian progress and some Russian help.  Quoting a 
statement by NATO SYG de Hoop Scheffer that the South 
Caucasus were as much a part of Europe\'s near abroad as 
Russia\'s, Pascoe urged the EU not to acquiesce to Russia\'s 
effort to treat Georgia as a privileged sphere of influence. 
While recent public statements by Russian officials seemed 
positive, it was important to maintain the pressure to keep 
Moscow moving forward.  Boe said that compromise would be the 
key to resolving the Russian basing issues.  The Russians 
know the proposed payment of USD 500 million is a nonstarter, 
he said, and will probably seek to use the presence of US 
forces (conducting Georgia\'s train and equip program) to 
their advantage during negotiations. 
 
6. (SBU) Boe said that HiRep Solana and EUSR Talvitie are 
focused on the development of basic state structures as the 
primary priority in Georgia.  He noted that the EU budgeted 
30 million euros for assistance to Georgia in 2004. 
Commission rep Brender said the EU currently has 5 million 
euros available now for food security, and said the 2004 
budget would provide for 12 million euros for the EU\'s TACIS 
(Technical Assistance to the CIS) program in Georgia, 12 
million euros for food security, 4 million euros for 
rehabilitation projects in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and 
2.5 million euros for an EU initiative on democracy and human 
rights.  EUR/ACE Deputy Rosenblum noted that the US FY2005 
budget request for assistance to Georgia was higher than the 
amount requested for any other FSU state.  The US is 
prioritizing revenue collection, anti-corruption, and job 
creation.  He also noted that the US is considering 
supporting projects we have never before done in Georgia, 
such as helping mitigate the employment impact of public 
sector reform, adding that in this area the US will follow 
the World Bank lead.  Rosenblum noted that the US 
contribution for upcoming parliamentary elections will amount 
to about one quarter of Georgia\'s self-assessed need of USD 
3.4 million.  The US was also looking for help from others to 
fund a USD 500,000 computerized voter registration system, he 
said. 
 
7. (SBU) Pascoe urged the EU to maintain the pressure on 
Georgia to reform.  We should not be any softer on 
Saakashvili than we were on the last group, he said. 
Saakashvili\'s positive start needed to be bolstered, and 
outside pressure should be maintained to keep the new 
government on track.  Jones agreed, and said she would carry 
the message to EU member states to \"keep the spotlight on\" 
Saakashvili and his new administration.  Pascoe said that 
US-EU cooperation on the ground should be increased even 
further.  We should build on our success during the run up to 
the January election and carry our coordination into 
additional aspects of regional assistance, he said.  Jones 
said the EU welcomed the enhanced coordination and would 
direct its Missions to continue these efforts. 
 
------- 
Armenia 
------- 
 
8. (SBU) Pascoe noted that while the US continues to press 
Turkey on the need to make progress with Armenia, Azeri 
President Ilham Aliev continues to plead with Turkey not to 
abandon its defense of Azeri interests in Nagorno-Karabakh 
(NK).  Turkish PM Erdogan seems interested in beginning 
discussions on opening the Turkish-Armenian border, but is 
caught between Turkey\'s commitments to Azerbaijan and its 
partnerships with the West.  Pascoe estimated that Armenian 
President Kocharian will eventually compromise with the 
Azeris over NK, but perhaps Ilham Aliev is not yet a strong 
enough Azeri partner.  Boe voiced skepticism that the that NK 
could be delinked from the issue of Turkish-Armenian 
relations, and asked rhetorically how it would be possible to 
open the Turkish-Armenian border without first resolving NK. 
Pascoe said that the US and EU needed to set out a series of 
arguments to push home resolution of NK as soon as possible, 
rather than just letting it simmer on indefinitely. 
 
9. (SBU) Jones assessed as positive Kocharian\'s recent 
progress toward meeting the conditions of Council of Europe 
(CoE) membership.  Pascoe agreed, underscoring that CoE 
membership remained a useful point of leverage over Armenia. 
 
---------- 
Azerbaijan 
---------- 
 
10. (C) Boe noted that Ilham Aliev told EUSR Talvitie during 
a recent visit (January 20 to February 5) to the region that 
he (Aliev) could wait for a solution to NK.  He was young and 
not in a hurry like his father had been, Ilham reportedly 
said.  Boe said that it was unclear whether Ilham\'s remarks 
signaled a shift in policy or a sign of his weakness as he 
tries to consolidate power in Baku.  Boe also remarked that 
he and Talvitie had been hearing conflicting stories about 
Ilham\'s personal interest in power.  \"Some say he wants 
power, and some say he only wants to play,\" Boe said.  In 
either case, the Azeris seem to playing up the image of Ilham 
as a professional by boasting to Talvitie that Ilham now 
shows up for work at 9:00 every day. 
 
11. (C) Pascoe said the US was trying to strengthen Ilham and 
assist him with reform efforts because, while far from 
perfect, he is the most progressive figure available from a 
pool of unimpressive candidates.  Boe asked how we intended 
to do that.  Pascoe responded that the US was exploring ideas 
with Ilham and would want to discuss these issues during 
Talvitie\'s March 1-2 visit to Washington.  Boe pointed out 
that Georgia\'s recent and dramatic progress -- which has the 
Azeris complaining that the Georgians are getting all the 
attention lately -- provided a useful point of leverage over 
Ilham.  Pascoe agreed that Georgia\'s about-face had had a 
profound impact on Azerbaijan, and said the US and EU should 
use this new leverage for maximum benefit. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"14360","2/27/2004 11:49","04BRUSSELS854","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04BRUSSELS36","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 000854 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AC/ISN AND EUR/ERA 
GENEVA FOR CD DEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, KNNP, UNGA, EUN, CDG, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: JANUARY 16 U.S.-EU TROIKA CONSULTATIONS ON ARMS 
CONTROL AND GLOBAL DISARMAMENT (CODUN) 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 36 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified.  Please Protect Accordingly. 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  On January 16 in Brussels, Geneva CD 
Ambassador Jackie Sanders and AC/ISN Director Robert Luaces 
led productive discussions on arms control and disarmament 
with the EU\'s global disarmament troika (CODUN).  USEU Poloff 
Van Reidhead participated as Control Officer.  Issues 
discussed were: 
 
-- Irish EU Presidency priorities:  a) Universalize and 
strengthen multilateral regimes; and b) Strengthen the UNSC 
role in nonproliferation.  Cooperation with the US also 
features prominently. 
 
-- UNFC:  EU welcomes US-initiated \"revitalization\" campaign, 
and will discuss reform ideas intersessionally. 
 
-- CD:  EU optimistic about achieving work program this year, 
especially if US develops position on FMCT; wants to 
replicate UNFC revitalization efforts in CD. 
 
-- UNDC:  EU waiting for proposals on possible agenda items; 
shares US view of UNDC as ineffective, but believes it has 
&sociological-political8 value, so should at least pay it 
&lip service.8 
 
-- CCW:  EU pleased with outcome of November States Parties 
meeting; hopes US ratifies new ERW protocol soon; looks 
forward to 2004 AVM talks. 
 
-- BWC:  EU agrees that November BWC meeting was positive 
step toward strengthening pathogen security and national 
implementation measures; but had hoped for more ambitious 
agreement. 
 
-- CWC:  EU pleased with recent work in CWC, especially 
Article VII Action Plan; EU continues to insist that states 
meet CW destruction deadlines; hopes US-Russian talks succeed 
soon; EU supports challenge inspections but wants to hold 
seminars and simulations first. 
 
END SUMMARY. 
 
EU Delegation 
------------- 
2. (U) The Irish EU Presidency was represented by 
Nonproliferation and Disarmament Director Adrian McDaid and 
Deputy Director Cillian Smith.  The upcoming Dutch Presidency 
was represented by Nonproliferation and Nuclear Affairs 
Director Paul Wilke and Policy Officer Elke Merks-Schaapveld. 
 Nonproliferation Desk Officer Didier Cosse represented the 
Council Secretariat and USA Desk Officer Andrew Denison 
attended for the Commission. 
 
Priorities of the Irish EU Presidency 
------------------------------------- 
3. (SBU) McDaid said that the key theme for the Irish 
Presidency would be effective multilateralism.  In 
particular, the EU would seek to strengthen the role of the 
UNSC in nonproliferation, and to universalize and strengthen 
the nonproliferation, arms control, and disarmament regimes. 
Close cooperation with the US also would be sought.  McDaid 
said that the action plan in the EU,s new nonproliferation 
strategy (analysis at ref A) would serve as a blueprint for 
EU activity.  Ambassador Sanders and Luaces said that the US 
welcomed the EU strategy, especially its emphasis on US-EU 
cooperation, but cautioned against over-optimism about an 
enhanced UNSC role in nonproliferation. 
 
58th UNGA First Committee (UNFC) 
-------------------------------- 
4. (U) McDaid assessed the results of the 58th UNFC session 
as generally positive.  He reported that EU member states 
voted the same on 42 of 53 resolutions this year.  He said 
that the EU appreciated the good coordination with the US, 
and viewed as particularly useful the three US-EU troikas 
held in New York during the plenary.  The EU viewed the 
US-initiated &revitalization8 campaign as particularly 
positive, he said, and would look for ways to carry the work 
forward intersessionally.  (Note:  Because of NAM 
sensitivities, the EU prefers &revitalization8 to 
&reform.8)  The EU will focus especially on operative 
paragraph one )- which asks for proposals for reform -- of 
resolution 58/41, and invited an early exchange of views on 
possible recommendations for the 59th UNFC session. 
 
5. (U) Luaces thanked the EU for its cooperation in the First 
Committee, and agreed that the US-EU troikas in New York had 
been particularly fruitful.  The US agreed that it was 
important now to keep the momentum going, and to look for 
ways to operationalize resolution 58/41.  It would be 
important for the next UNFC chair, which would be a nation 
from the Group of Latin America and Caribbean States 
(GRULAC), to be committed to reform effort.  The US hoped 
that the EU would join us in encouraging GRULAC to select its 
chair wisely, with an eye to furthering the reform agenda. 
Conference on Disarmament (CD) 
------------------------------ 
6. (U) Dutch Nonproliferation Director Paul Wilke said that 
he was moderately optimistic about the chance of achieving a 
work program this year in the CD.  He said that while it 
probably would be desirable to just pitch the old agenda and 
start from scratch, he did not think that would be possible. 
McDaid said that the US should replicate its approach in the 
First Committee -) which featured transparency and open 
consultation -- to emphasize the need for reform in the CD. 
He did not think, however, that much progress could be made 
until the US defined its position on the Fissile Material 
Cutoff Treaty (FMCT). 
 
7. (SBU) Ambassador Sanders said that, during her 
consultations on arrival in Geneva, she had been hearing the 
phrase, &window of opportunity,8 for developing a work 
program.  It was important not to let the opportunity pass. 
The US would work with others )- especially in the CD,s 
Western Group -- to carry the positive work and new spirit of 
the First Committee into the CD.  Luaces noted that the FMCT 
was still under review in Washington, and said that, at this 
point, the US could not agree to any agenda that included it. 
 The US also remained concerned about the A-5 proposal, and 
continued to oppose linkages that would only deadlock the CD. 
 Ambassador Sanders said that an increasing number of NAM 
members were even beginning to support the US position on 
eliminating linkages. 
 
United Nations Disarmament Commission (UNDC) 
-------------------------------------------- 
8. (SBU) On the UNDC, McDaid said that the EU was in 
&collection mode,8 waiting for possible agenda items from 
member states.  Wilke said that his government, which viewed 
the UNDC as a consolation prize for countries that could not 
get into the CD, had never taken the commission very 
seriously.  Western governments should view the UNDC as 
having a certain &sociological-political8 value, he said; 
paying &lip service8 to it might help with certain NAM 
members during the important NPT PrepCom this year. 
 
9. (SBU) Ambassador Sanders observed that delegations in 
Geneva also were cynical about the UNDC.  We should look at 
it with a fresh and critical eye, she said, to see whether or 
not it could acquire any value.  Luaces said that the US was 
working on ideas sparked by the recent Oslo seminar, 
beginning with an evaluation of whether the UNDC should 
continue to exist.  Meantime, the US would propose:  a) 
shortening this year,s session from three to two weeks; and 
b) replacing the two-track agenda with a single-year proposal 
to look at institutional reform of the UNDC.  The US also was 
developing fallback positions for the UNDC,s nuclear and 
conventional arms categories.  McDaid cautioned that the US 
approach might be too radical, but said that he would canvas 
other EU member states for their thoughts. 
 
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
10. (U) McDaid said that the EU was pleased with the outcome 
of the November Meeting of States Parties in Geneva, and 
hoped that the US would soon ratify the new Explosive 
Remnants of War (ERW) protocol (Protocol 5).  Ambassador 
Sanders agreed that the meeting had been constructive, but 
observed that, while the US is pleased to have the new ERW 
protocol, we continue to believe that a political document, 
rather than a legally binding protocol, would have greater 
immediate impact.  The US also looked forward to 2004 
discussions on Anti-Vehicle Mines (AVM), and urged all EU 
member and associated states to co-sponsor the US-Danish 
draft protocol on AVM. 
 
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) 
----------------------------------- 
11. (U) The US and EU agreed that the document agreed at the 
November BWC meeting represented a positive step toward 
strengthening pathogen security and national implementation 
measures.  McDaid noted, however, that the EU had wanted a 
more ambitious text, and was disappointed that the more 
energetic August experts meetings had not translated into an 
equally energetic meeting of states parties.  The November 
outcome was &okay,8 but the EU had expected more.  Wilke 
said that he was &very enthusiastic8 about the developments 
of 2003, especially the material results of the 
intersessional experts meetings. 
 
12. (U) Luaces said that the US agreed with the EU assessment 
of the November meeting, and that we anticipated an equally 
productive 2004 session, which will focus on alleged use of 
biological weapons and disease surveillance.  (Note:  The EU 
Troika avoided the topic of resuming multilateral BWC 
negotiations after the 2006 RevCon, as well as the issue of 
creating an UNMOVIC-like entity to conduct biological weapons 
inspections.) 
 
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) 
--------------------------------- 
13. (SBU) Wilke said that the EU was happy with recent work 
in the CWC, especially the Article VII Action Plan agreed at 
the October 2003 Conference.  The EU had recently demarched 
all states not party to the CWC, he said, on the need to 
accede to the CWC.  The EU also would continue to insist that 
states meet their chemical weapons destruction deadlines, and 
hoped that US-Russian talks succeed soon.  The US and Russian 
delays were blocking destruction work overall, Wilke said. 
On the budget, Wilke said that the EU is moving away from 
micromanaging the OPCW because international confidence is 
growing.  The EU also supports challenge inspections, but 
wants to conduct seminars and simulations before discussing 
how such inspections could be conducted.  Wilke noted that 
the first of these would be in Austria in June or July. 
 
14. (SBU) Luaces outlined the four key US priorities for 
2004:  a) results-based budgeting; b) data automation at the 
OPCW; c) implementation of the Article VII and Universality 
Action Plans; and d) promoting compliance.  On the last 
point, Luaces noted that not all EU member states were in 
full compliance with CWC commitments.  The EU Troika said 
that it would convey the US point to member states.  The EU 
agreed that compliance must be strengthened, Wilke said, 
especially since the OPCW still lists so many states parties 
as noncompliant. 
 
Comment 
------- 
15. (SBU) Close US-EU coordination during last fall,s UNFC 
session and the success there of the U.S. revitalization 
initiative contributed to the positive atmosphere of these 
consultations.  Both sides were pleased to note the proximity 
of views on the issues discussed, while the EU side expressed 
guarded optimism on the prospect of the CD resuming work this 
year. 
 
16. (U) AMB Sanders and Mr. Luaces have reviewed this message. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"14366","2/27/2004 14:06","04BRUSSELS862","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 000862 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/PC MAREN BROOKS, L/LEI KEN PROPP. DOJ FOR 
OIA/KEN HARRIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/17/2009 
TAGS: CASC, KCRM, KJUS, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: STATUS OF BILATERAL PROTOCOLS ON EXTRADITION AND 
MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: 03 BRUSSELS 05015 
 
Classified By: USEU NAS:Frank Kerber.  Reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1.  (U) The U.S.-EU Agreements on Extradition and Mutual 
Legal Assistance (MLA) were signed at the Summit in 
Washington on June 25, 2003.  Before these agreements can be 
sent to Congress for ratification, protocols to existing 
bilateral extradition and MLATs must be negotiated.  In the 
limited instances where there are no existing bilateral 
treaties on either extradition or MLA, new agreements are 
necessary to create a bilateral obligation to bring into 
force the U.S.-EU Agreement.  The U.S.-EU Agreements and the 
bilateral protocols will then be sent forward as a package 
for ratification later this year.  The intent of the 
bilateral protocols is to formally incorporate the updated 
provisions of the new U.S.-EU Agreements into the existing 
treaties.  Where no extradition or MLA treaty exists, the 
U.S.-EU Agreements form the initial bases for bilateral 
cooperation.  Bilateral treaty articles not addressed in the 
U.S.-EU Agreements are unaffected and continue in force. 
 
2. (U) The third and last round of face-to-face negotiations 
on the bilateral protocols with the current EU Member States 
were held February 3-5 with Greece, the UK, France, Portugal 
and Spain.  Several states such as The Netherlands and 
Belgium opted to develop texts through informal exchanges 
rather than in formal face-to-face negotiation sessions in 
Brussels.  The process will now continue informally until 
final texts have been agreed.  The U.S. will sign the 
protocols with each country as they are completed.  USEU 
intends to brief the ten accession states as a group in April 
before beginning individual negotiations with each country. 
It is hoped that the protocols with the accession states can 
be concluded prior to submission of the package to Congress. 
However, if this is not likely, those protocols can be 
submitted at a later date. 
 
3, (C)  In this last round, France and Portugal proved to be 
the most problematic.  Portugal wants to use these protocols 
to legitimize its current practice of denying extradition in 
capital cases and those involving life imprisonment based on 
constitutional grounds, despite the fact that the current 
bilaterals do not authorize denial on these grounds.  France 
says it is bound to the U.S.-EU Agreements under EU law so 
does not intend to submit those agreements to its assembly 
for ratification.  France therefore opposes our bilateral 
protocol approach because it would be viewed as changing the 
existing bilateral agreements and thus require Assembly 
approval.  It is hoped that by signing protocols with the 
other Member States as they are completed, pressure can be 
put on France and Portugal to also agree rather than 
jeopardize the process. 
 
Foster 
"
"14450","3/2/2004 13:38","04BRUSSELS898","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE37339","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 000898 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR NP/PTR (ROZANNE OLIVER & JOSHUA HANDLER) & EUR/UBI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MNUC, PARM, PREL, RS, BE, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: BELGIUM TO ATTEND GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP WORKING GROUP 
MARCH 3 IN LONDON 
 
REF: STATE 37339 
 
(SBU) Belgian MFA Nonproliferation Director Werner Bauwens 
confirmed to D/PolCouns March 1 that Belgium will attend the 
March 3 Global Partnership Working Group meeting in London, 
per reftel invitation.  Bauwens reported that a Belgian 
diplomat from the Belgian Embassy in London will attend, with 
the Belgian Embassy coordinating directly with U.S. Embassy 
London on the arrangements.  Bauwens noted that initial 
planning had been for an MFA expert from his Directorate to 
attend both the UK-hosted NDCI Conference in London March 4-5 
and the U.S.-hosted Global Partnership meeting March 3, but 
severe budgetary constraints at the MFA had now significantly 
reduced travel funds.  Thus, the Belgian Embassy will have to 
cover both events. 
 
SCHOONOVER 
"
"14901","3/12/2004 15:07","04BRUSSELS1074","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE51534","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/12/2014 
TAGS: BK, MARR, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SOLANA ON BOSNIA: PARTNERSHIP REQUIRES TRUST, TOO 
 
REF: STATE 51534 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.5 (B 
)(D). 
 
1. (C) This is a joint USEU/USNATO message.  Policy 
recommendation in para 12. 
 
2. (C) Summary: In an animated discussion with Ambassadors 
Schnabel and Burns March 9 on planning for a post-SFOR EU 
mission in Bosnia, EU HiRep Javier Solana said, \"If you want 
the EU to be your partner in Europe, the US must learn to 
trust us.\"  Solana argued that U.S. proposals (reftel) for a 
NATO HQ in Sarajevo led by a two-star officer, as well as 
views on Dayton authorities and continuing NATO 
responsibility for PIFWCs, \"will not fly.\"  He stressed that 
clarity of command required that the EUFOR commander must be 
the final authority, legally and practically.  Ambassador 
Burns told Solana that the US wants the EU mission to 
succeed, and that we would continue to work practically with 
the EU to resolve misunderstandings and outstanding problems. 
 However, he reaffirmed that we continue to support an 
important role for a NATO HQ in defense reform, 
counter-terrorism, and PIFWCs.  Burns urged that we work 
pragmatically to iron out differences before the transition. 
 
3. (C) Solana\'s reaction to the US position reflects the EU 
concern that an EU-led mission in Bosnia be clearly perceived 
in Bosnia as the supreme authority, which we heard again from 
the EU at the March 10 NAC-PSC (see USNATO 242).  Ambassador 
Burns used the NAC-PSC to assuage these concerns, restating 
that the US wants the EU to succeed and fully accepts that 
the EU will have the lead role in post-SFOR Bosnia. He said 
the US would work to make sure that the Bosnians understand 
this fact.  USEU and USNATO recommend that the USG take a 
second look at the question of the hierarchy of ranks in 
Bosnia between the EU and NATO military leaders.  In order to 
avoid a senseless &bidding war8 over ranks between NATO and 
the EU, one solution would be for the NATO commander in 
Sarajevo to be a one-star officer, as opposed to a two-star. 
Not only would this be seen as a positive gesture by the EU, 
but it would remove the incentive for the EU to put a 
three-star officer in command of its operation, thereby 
ensuring that the AFSOUTH Deputy Commander in Naples would 
remain the higher ranking officer ) a key point in our favor 
as we seek to maintain a strict adherence to Berlin Plus 
principles.  End Summary. 
 
4. (C) Ambassadors Burns and Schnabel met March 9 with EU 
High Representative Javier Solana to review planning for a 
possible transition from SFOR to a EU-led mission in Bosnia. 
Ambassador Burns noted that a positive response to Solana\'s 
proposals on exchange of liaison offices at SHAPE and EU 
Military Staff would be forthcoming soon from NATO.  He 
stressed that the US wants an EU mission in Bosnia to 
succeed, and agrees that the EU must be seen to be in charge 
in Bosnia after SFOR shuts down.  We want to avoid the 
perception of competition between the EU and NATO, Ambassador 
Burns stressed.  He outlined reftel views on NATO\'s post-SFOR 
role in Bosnia, including continuing responsibilities for 
defense reform, counter-terrorism, and apprehension of PIFWCs. 
 
EU Accepts Any NATO Nominee in an \"International Capacity\" 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
5. (C) Solana said he was surprised that a NATO response to 
his proposals on liaison offices had been so long in coming, 
and confirmed that the EU would respect DSACEUR\'s decision to 
nominate any officer to fill the NATO liaison billets at EU 
Military Staff, regardless of nationality (a key point for 
non-EU allies Turkey, Norway and Canada).  Solana had 
delivered this message personally to the Turkish CHOD at the 
beginning of the week, emphasizing that the Turks were \"more 
than welcome, they are super-welcome.\"  Ambassador Burns 
welcomed this statement, and encouraged Solana to repeat it 
at the March 10 NAC/PSC. 
 
BOSNIA: DO U.S. POSITIONS REFLECT LACK OF TRUST IN EU? 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
6. (C) Turning to Bosnia, Solana became highly animated.  He 
said the U.S. position on continuing roles for a NATO HQ 
seemed to contradict the basic message of \"mission 
accomplished.\"  Instead, it appeared the US seeks a joint 
NATO/EU operation, rather than an EU-led mission using Berlin 
Plus.  The end result turned Berlin Plus on its head: instead 
of the EU having guaranteed access to NATO assets, it 
appeared the US wished to maintain NATO authority in Bosnia 
while using only EU assets on the ground. 
7. (C) He pointed to the US proposal for a NATO HQ led by a 
two-star general of equal rank to the EUFOR commander as one 
example.  This would blur lines of authority to the local 
population.  It must be clear that the EUFOR commander is the 
final authority.  NATO will have a small HQ of a couple 
hundred people, many not in uniform.  The EU will command 
several thousand troops.  Clarity of command requires that 
final authority in Bosnia be vested in the EUFOR commander. 
If the EU and NATO are to be partners, then NATO must be 
prepared to trust the EU, Solana stressed. 
 
8. (C) U.S. insistence on NATO HQ responsibility for 
apprehension of PIFWCs was another sign of \"lack of trust.\" 
The NATO HQ in Sarajevo would be too small to have any 
operational capability.  Any operations against a PIFWC would 
require local forces to provide area support for a Special 
Forces operation mounted from outside Bosnia.  That is how it 
has been up until now under SFOR command, and that is how it 
should continue once EUFOR takes over.  But since EUFOR will 
provide the area support, the EUFOR commander must have the 
same authorities now vested in the SFOR commander.  Solana 
briefly reviewed the U.S. points in reftel and said flatly 
\"these will not fly.\"  Instead, he suggested that NATO allies 
could continue to mount operations against PIFWCs, but that 
they must be under the ultimate direction of the EUFOR 
commander on the ground. 
 
9. (C) Ambassador Burns stressed that the U.S. proposes 
vesting Dayton authorities in DSACEUR or an appropriate 
official in AFSOUTH, to be delegated to NATO or the EU as 
needed to complete their missions.  Solana was not swayed, 
saying the US needs to be ready to trust an EU general.  He 
pointed out that the circumstances for EUFOR could not be 
better for the US: our most trusted European ally, the UK, 
will occupy every key position all the way up the command 
ladder.  Lord Ashdown is still in place, a UK commander will 
lead EUFOR, report to a British officer as DCINC at AFSOUTH, 
who in turn will report to a Brit as DSACEUR. 
 
10.  (C) Solana concluded that the impression left by US 
positions was that Washington is still not ready to trust the 
EU to take on this mission.  The EU is ready to do the 
policing mission, provide the resources to assist the 
Bosnians and try to eventually bring them into Europe.  To be 
successful, it needs the visibility and authority to carry 
out those tasks.  If the U.S. has a political problem with 
this, it should say so outright.  Ambassador Burns assured 
Solana that the U.S. supports an EU-led mission, and want to 
help it be a success.  He promised to convey Solana\'s views 
to Washington.  In addition, he argued that the U.S. 
proposals for a residual NATO headquarters were limited, 
practical, and common-sensical.  There was full support for 
them in Washington. 
 
11. (C) Post-Script: At the NAC-PSC the next day, Ambassador 
Burns used his intervention to reiterate our basic message 
while allaying EU fears about US intentions vis--vis the 
SFOR transition.  Noting that Bosnia will become the template 
for Berlin Plus, Burns said that the US wants the EU to 
succeed.  He said that the US agrees that the EU will be in 
the lead in Bosnia, as it will have the preponderance of 
forces on the ground, and that we will do everything to make 
it abundantly clear to the Bosnians that the EU, not NATO, 
had the leading role.  The Ambassador assured the EU that 
NATO would work with the EU on PIFWCs and that CT operations 
are aimed at preventing foreign terrorists from gaining a 
foothold in Bosnia.  He said that Dayton was a complex issue 
that would have to be resolved, but that clearly the EU would 
need to be vested with its powers, as would NATO.  Burns 
suggested a possible model would be to vest the authorities 
in DSACEUR, as he would be in both NATO and EU chains of 
command.  After the meeting, Solana thanked Ambassador Burns 
for his remarks, which he said clearly articulated US 
positions in a way that had given the process positive 
momentum by showing the US commitment. 
 
COMMENT AND POLICY RECOMMENDATION: 
---------------------------------- 
 
12. (C) The intensity of Solana\'s reaction reflects the need 
to continue to work with the EU on the details of a hand-off. 
 To help keep the process on track, one area where compromise 
is possible without crossing our redlines is the rank of the 
U.S. general in charge of NATO HQ Sarajevo.  We understand 
that the EU has sent mixed signals in the past on whether 
their EUFOR commander would be a three-star general and leave 
it to the US military to assess whether the EU has a valid 
point about clarity of command.  We believe that the EU has a 
valid point about the need for political clarity in Bosnia. 
In particular, the Europeans have been adamant with us that 
their own history in Bosnia peacekeeping requires that the EU 
be seen as a credible guarantor of security.  We believe 
making the Senior Military Representative in Bosnia a 
one-star general makes sense as an area to show flexibility 
with the EU.  It would give nothing away on the continuing 
operational role for the U.S. and NATO and is consistent with 
current NATO practice in its headquarters in Tirana and 
Skopje (which was recently downgraded to a one star billet). 
Finally, by removing the incentive for the EU to send a 
three-star to lead its Bosnia force, we would ensure the 
seniority of the AFSOUTH Deputy Commander, thereby 
reinforcing the position of this NATO command in the EU,s 
chain of command. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"14941","3/15/2004 8:02","04BRUSSELS1081","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 001081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA AND EAP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, KNNP, CH, ID, BM, KN, ASEAN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: US-EU COASI CONSULTATIONS PART 1: EAST ASIA 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) On March 5 in Brussels, SA A/S Rocca and EAP PDAS 
Keyser -- accompanied by USEU DCM Foster -- discussed US-EU 
cooperation in South and East Asia with the EU\'s COASI 
Troika.  This cable covers the EAP portion of the 
consultations.  The SA segment will be reported septel. 
 
-- Indonesia: EU concerned about lack of progress on Aceh and 
Papua; will send 200 observers for April and July elections; 
interested in coordinating with U.S. on education reform; 
Dutch will use EU Presidency to enhance EU support for reform 
and moderate Islam. 
 
-- Burma: EU stuck between wanting to take firmer action and 
doubts about effectiveness of sanctions; unsure whether 
Burmese membership in ARF would be good or bad; will reduce 
engagement with ASEAN when Burma assumes chair. 
 
-- ASEAN/ARF: EU wants to engage more with ASEAN/ARF and 
member states, which could pave way for eventual EU-ASEAN or 
intra-ASEAN FTA; will decrease direct assistance to ASEAN in 
favor of cooperating on more equal footing. 
 
-- China: EU moving rapidly to improve and deepen relations, 
but remains concerned about human rights; series of high 
level visits will culminate in November summit; EU well aware 
of U.S. views on arms embargo and keen to avoid transatlantic 
fallout. 
 
-- DPRK: EU grateful for readouts on Six Party Talks; stands 
ready to help when and as determined by U.S. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Indonesia: Aceh, Papua, Elections, Education, Timor 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
2. (SBU) Leading for the EU, Dutch Asia Director Robert 
Milders said that the EU continues to press Jakarta for more 
transparency on Aceh, including easier access for NGO\'s.  The 
EU is also increasingly concerned that Indonesia is not 
following through on its pledge to allow greater autonomy in 
Papua.  The EU will send 200 observers, 64 of whom will be 
\"long-term,\" to the April (parliamentary) and July 
(presidential) elections, Milders said, and will examine the 
calendar for the best time to send a Ministerial troika to 
support the Indonesian reform program.  He also noted that 
along with Afghanistan, Indonesia would be the Dutch EU 
Presidency\'s highest Asia priority.  The Netherlands wants to 
use its term at the EU helm (July through December, 2004) to 
boost the EU\'s presence in Indonesia in order to provide more 
support for Indonesian reform and counter-terrorism efforts, 
\"in coordination with the U.S.\"  Another initiative would 
focus on developing a \"sustained and engaged dialogue with 
moderate Islam in Indonesia,\" he said. 
 
3. (SBU) Keyser said the U.S. shared the EU\'s concerns about 
Aceh and Papua, and desire to support reforms and engage 
moderate Islamic forces.  The U.S. is also deeply concerned 
about the kind of teaching going on in Indonesian schools, 
and was looking at a range of options for promoting education 
reform.  Irish Asia Director Cliona Manahan, representing the 
EU Presidency, said that the EU also wanted to increase its 
efforts on education and would welcome ideas from the U.S. 
Keyser said the U.S. was very interested in coordinating with 
the EU on these efforts.  The Commission Southeast Asia Rep 
noted that the EC is committing 20 million euros for 
education in Indonesia this year and was planning 45-50 
million euros for the 2005-06 timeframe. 
 
4. (SBU) The EC Rep also expressed concern about the possible 
pullout from West Timor this year of the UNHCR, a move that 
would strand 40,000 displaced and vulnerable people currently 
living in camps on the border.  \"We hope the U.S. will help 
us get the UNHCR to change its mind,\" he said. 
 
----------------------- 
Burma: Holding the Line 
----------------------- 
 
5. (C) Keyser said that the similarity of U.S. and EU views 
on Burma offered an opportunity for greater policy 
coordination.  At the same time, though, the U.S. was 
disappointed that the EU did not enact further sanctions 
after the May 30 opposition crackdown.  The U.S. was also 
disappointed by ASEAN\'s reluctance to increase pressure on 
Burma at its October plenary.  Manahan said the EU remained 
stuck between, on the one hand, wanting to act firmer, and on 
the other, the perception that additional sanctions would be 
ineffective and possibly detrimental to Burmese citizens or 
third countries.  The EU was also torn on the issue of 
Burmese membership in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), she 
said, with the debate hinging on whether Burmese membership 
would reflect \"constructive engagement or obdurate 
ignorance.\"  Milders added that without ideas for a clear way 
forward, the EU would probably simply extend its common 
position on Burma for another year. 
 
6. (C) Irish Deputy Asia Director Niall Brady said that UNSR 
Rizali had briefed the EU in Rangoon immediately following 
his March 1 visit.  Rizali told the EU that he saw no signs 
of softening by the Burmese regime, although he was glad that 
he had been able to meet with ASSK.  Brady said that when the 
EU demarched Rangoon in October, it had been given the usual 
line about staying out of internal matters.  While the EU was 
at a loss about how to increase pressure on Burma, all agreed 
that at a minimum \"we need to at least get back to May 29, 
2003.\"  Brady added that the EU would also be forced to 
disengage to a certain extent from ASEAN when Burma assumes 
the chair in 2006.  Chris Holtby of the Council Policy Unit 
said the EU wanted to remain \"side by side\" with the U.S. on 
sanctions and policy, and was concerned that there might be 
the impression in Washington that the EU was soft on Burma. 
 
-------------------------------- 
ASEAN/ARF: \"Teeth\" in the Agenda 
-------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Keyser said while the U.S. and EU shared a common view 
of ASEAN and ARF, there was room for improvement in U.S.-EU 
program coordination.  He said the U.S. was intent on putting 
teeth into the agendas of regional fora to make them more 
effective in the war on terrorism.  One way to promote this 
-- supported by Japan -- would be the creation of a unit 
within ASEAN/ARF that could plan agendas and carry out work 
between plenary sessions.  The U.S. was not opposed to 
Japan\'s signing of  the ASEAN Treaty of Amity and 
Cooperation, he said. 
 
8. (SBU) Referencing the \"New Partnership with Southeast 
Asia\" paper endorsed by the European Council in 2003, the EC 
Rep said that the EU wanted more -- and more effective -- 
engagement with regional fora and their member states 
bilaterally.  Such efforts could \"pave the way\" for the 
eventual creation of an ASEAN or EU-ASEAN Free Trade Area, he 
said.  The EC is also finalizing a draft paper on cooperation 
with ASEAN in 2005-06.  The paper foresees a reduction in 
direct EU assistance to ASEAN in favor of cooperation on the 
basis of local ownership.  Future EU assistance to ASEAN will 
therefore be lower than the 70 million euros provided over 
the past five years.  He said also that the EC was 
considering providing support for ASEAN efforts on border 
management. 
 
9. (SBU) Milders said he was pleased with the U.S. desire to 
put teeth in ASEAN\'s agenda, but was worried that \"all the 
creativity in regional fora were being driven too much by 
China and Japan.\"  The EU would like to see others -- and not 
just Singapore -- get more engaged.  Keyser agreed, but noted 
that among the recent creative ideas, the Chinese proposal 
for a security forum at deputy defense minister level in 
ASEAN seemed worthy of serious consideration. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
China: \"They\'re All Over Us These Days\" 
--------------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Manahan and Milders said that the EU and China were 
moving rapidly to improve and deepen relations, although 
serious problems remained regarding human rights, Tibet and 
Taiwan.  Manahan noted that the Chinese Vice FM Zhou Wenzhong 
is coming to Brussels soon to meet with the EU Political and 
Security Committee, and that Premier Wen would follow soon 
after for a first-ever meeting with the EU institutions. 
Traveling in the other direction, HiRep Solana plans to visit 
Beijing this month and Commission President Prodi will follow 
in early April.  The EU and China will also hold a summit in 
November. 
 
11. (SBU) The Commission East Asia Rep said that the EU just 
completed its first \"seminar\" with China to \"give form to the 
enhanced relations.\"  The enhanced relationship will be built 
around five priorities, he said, reflecting EU support for 
economic and political reform: a) strengthened political 
dialogue; b) making sure the human rights dialogue works 
\"favorably;\" c) improvements on trade, such as Chinese 
implementation of the WTO agenda; d) dialogue on 
international challenges such illegal migration; and e) 
sectoral dialogues on issues such as culture, education, 
competition, nuclear energy, and customs, among others. 
 
12. (SBU) Holtby drew a parallel between a recent Chinese 
paper on its relations with the EU and the EU\'s new European 
Security Strategy (ESS), saying the two were remarkably 
similar and pointed to a likemindedness on EU-China 
relations.  The EU wanted to encourage China\'s recent 
progress on nonproliferation, but would remain critical of 
China\'s human rights record, he said.  He noted as well that 
the EU was taking seriously the ESS call for a stronger 
strategic \"partnership\" with China.  Manahan said that China, 
in seeking to use the leverage provided by the EU\'s desire 
for enhanced relations, keeps telling the EU that it should 
not apply conditionality to its strategic partners. 
 
13. (C) Keyser said that the U.S. had enjoyed improved 
relations with China since 9/11, but was concerned about 
Chinese backsliding on human rights during the past year. 
The U.S. has not decided yet whether to seek a resolution on 
China at the UNHRC this year, and was still hoping that the 
pressure of a possible resolution would inspire eleventh-hour 
efforts by China to meet its commitments and our 
expectations.  The Council Secretariat\'s Ana Ramirez said 
that the EU needed to adopt conclusions at the March 25-26 
European Council on what to do in the UNHRC this season.  The 
EU hoped for a U.S. decision soon, she said, as all were keen 
to avoid a repetition of last year when the EU had to issue 
conclusions before knowing what the U.S. positions would be. 
Manahan said she was cautiously optimistic about China\'s 
apparent decision to allow visits this summer by the Special 
Rapporteurs for Torture and Religious Freedom. 
 
---------------------- 
China: EU Arms Embargo 
---------------------- 
 
14. (C) Turning to the issue all had been waiting for, Keyser 
said that U.S. firm opposition to the EU lifting its arms 
embargo on China was based both on our assessment that 
China\'s human rights record had not improved sufficiently and 
on our assessment that lifting the embargo would upset the 
strategic balance in the region.  If the U.S. were some day 
obliged to come to the assistance of Taiwan in response to a 
Chinese attack, we would not want to be faced with advanced 
weaponry supplied by our European allies.  Keyser noted also 
that with transatlantic acrimony still evident as a 
consequence of divisions over Iraq, the last thing either the 
EU or U.S. needed was another major falling out. 
 
15. (C) Manahan said the EU was engaged in a very serious and 
very thorough review of its embargo and of its Code of 
Conduct on arms exports (which will govern defense trade with 
China if the embargo is lifted), and that the Irish 
Presidency had no desire to rush the process.  The EU was 
very sensitive to the implications for transatlantic 
relations, she added.  Milders said that the arms embargo was 
\"the most important thing\" in EU-China relations right now, 
adding that the EU recognized a year ago that it was time to 
review the embargo.  While the country\'s human rights record 
remains spotty, it is clear that China has made much progress 
since 1989. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
DPRK: EU Ready to Help When Time is Right 
----------------------------------------- 
 
16. (C) Manahan, who visited North Korea as part of an EU 
troika in December, thanked the U.S. for providing such 
prompt and thorough readouts of the most recent round of 
Six-Party Talks.  She said the EU would like to help the 
process if there was anything it could do, and noted that the 
DPRK would be the topic of the EU\'s June COASI meeting. 
(Comment: In a follow on meeting with Council DG Robert 
Cooper (septel), Cooper also asked if there was anything the 
EU could do to help.  Mission desk contacts have also begun 
stressing that the EU stands ready to assist when and as 
needed.  This willingness to help on our terms -- conveyed at 
all levels with an unobtrusive openness -- contrasts sharply 
with the EU\'s irritation last year at feeling left out of the 
whole process, particularly with regard to the now-defunct 
KEDO.  The turnaround is due to recent U.S. efforts to keep 
the Europeans in the loop on as Six Party Talks proceed.  End 
Comment.) 
 
17. (C) Keyser briefed the troika on U.S. views about how to 
proceed with the Six Party Talks, and said that the parties 
were moving toward creating working groups that could remain 
operational between the plenary sessions.  The EC Rep asked 
whether the efforts to disrupt North Korea\'s illicit 
activities were having a significant impact on the regime. 
He said also that the EU was \"struck\" by inchoate efforts at 
economic reform and was wondering whether to support them in 
hopes of undermining the regime\'s closed system.  Keyser 
responded that while what we do not know about North Korea 
could fill volumes, the regime appears too strong to be 
undermined from within anytime soon.  On disruption of 
illegal activities, he said that the Proliferation Security 
Initiative and the Illicit Activities Initiative appeared to 
be getting the regime\'s attention.  But since we don\'t know 
the level of revenue generated by illegal DPRK activities, we 
cannot determine with accuracy how much impact the 
disruptions are having.  In any case, Keyser said, the U.S. 
would continue to pursue vigorously the two initiatives on 
the merits, since it was the obligation of any nation to 
defend its citizens and society against illegal activities. 
 
18. PDAS Keyser has cleared this message. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"14954","3/15/2004 11:35","04BRUSSELS1090","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001090 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT ELECTIONS: BACKGROUND 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. The first European Parliament (EP) elections in a newly 
enlarged EU will be held June 10-13.  The EP has important 
budgetary powers, and decision-making powers on 
transportation, environment, data privacy and development 
aid, all significant issues in U.S.-EU relations. 
Candidates run as national party members but function in the 
EP as part of European party groups.  The number of 
representatives (MEPs) for each country is roughly 
proportional to population.  We expect low voter turnout and 
emphasis on member-state domestic issues to be key features 
of the elections.  END SUMMARY. 
 
SERIES OF PRE-ELECTION REPORTS 
------------------------------ 
 
2. This is the first in a series of reports on the European 
elections.  The second message will provide general 
background on the European elections campaign.  Subsequent 
telegrams will go into more detail on the role of U.S.-EU 
relations in the elections, the reelection prospects of key 
MEPs, possible realignment of party groups, and the expected 
influence of MEPs from the countries set to join the EU on 
May 1. 
 
THE EP ROLE IN THE EU: BACKGROUND 
--------------------------------- 
 
3.  The European Parliament (EP) was created in 1962 when 
the European Coal and Steel Community Assembly decided to 
describe itself as the \"European Parliament.\"  It became one 
of the three main EU institutions, with the appointed 
European Commission as an executive arm representing 
\"Community interests\" and the Council of Ministers 
representing member-state governments.  In 1976, the member 
states adopted an act providing for direct elections of MEPs 
to five-year terms, making the EP the only directly elected 
EU institution.  The first elections were held in 1979.  As 
its powers have developed over time, the EP has become 
arguably the only directly elected supra-national assembly 
in the world with effective decision-making power. 
 
EP: WHAT IT CAN DO 
------------------ 
 
4. The EP does not fulfill all of the functions of 
traditional national parliaments.  It cannot raise revenues 
for the EU (member-state governments do that) or initiate 
legislation (the European Commission has the sole right of 
initiative on EU-level legislation).  Nonetheless, the EP 
has steadily gained powers under the successive European 
treaties, and this trend is expected to continue if an EU 
constitutional treaty is approved.  The EP\'s powers consist 
principally of: (1) budgetary powers - The EP can amend and 
must give final approval to the EU budget except for 
agricultural expenditures; (2) \"co-decision\" power, shared 
equally between the EP and the member states, to amend or 
reject Commission-initiated legislation in many areas -- 
including areas that can affect U.S. interests such as 
transportation, data protection, environment and development 
aid; and (3) oversight and monitoring of the other EU 
institutions.  The European Parliament also has the final 
say on the accession of new member states, and can vote to 
approve or reject, collectively, the European Commissioners 
appointed by the member states. 
 
AFTER ENLARGEMENT 
----------------- 
 
5.  The number of MEPs has risen with each enlargement to 
today\'s 626 seats.  Seat allocation is determined according 
to population, but with a minimal threshold for smaller 
countries and considerably more voters per MEP in the larger 
countries than in the other member states.  In June, the 
first elections in an EU of 25 member states, about 340 
million voters will be called on to elect the largest EP 
ever - a total of 732 MEPs.  The number of languages for 
interpretation and translation will increase from 11 to 21 
languages (410 possible combinations of languages for 
interpretation).  The number of MEPs per country will be: 
 
-- Germany - 99 
-- France, Italy, UK - 78 
-- Spain, Poland - 54 
-- Netherlands- 27 
-- Belgium, Czech Rep., Greece, Hungary, Portugal - 24 
-- Sweden - 19 
-- Austria - 18 
-- Denmark, Finland, Slovakia - 14 
-- Ireland, Lithuania - 13 
-- Latvia - 9 
-- Slovenia - 7 
-- Luxembourg, Estonia, Cyprus - 6 
-- Malta - 5 
 
POLITICAL GROUPS IN THE EP 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  MEPs are elected in their countries on national party 
lists, with each country\'s seats allocated on a proportional 
basis.  MEP\'s then unite in transnational political party 
groupings in the EP.  The Socialists/Social Democrats (PES) 
and the Christian Democrats/Conservatives (EPP-ED) have 
always been the two largest groups, with a constantly 
changing pattern of smaller groups.  The EPP-ED came out of 
the 1999 elections as the largest group, with 233 EPP-ED 
seats to 179 for the PES.  The Liberal group (ELDR-now 53 
seats), the Greens (now 45 seats) and the far-Left (GUE- 
NGL-now 44 seats) all significantly increased in numbers. 
 
LOW INTEREST IN EP ELECTIONS 
---------------------------- 
 
7.  Preliminary indications are that voters\' lack of 
understanding of the EP will again result in a decline in 
voter participation.  So far, turnout has steadily dwindled 
in each successive election -- from 63 percent in 1979 to an 
all-time low of 49 percent in 1999.  According to a 
Eurobarometer poll published in February, fewer than 30 
percent of respondents in 11 member states (Estonia, 
Lithuania, Latvia, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Poland, 
Ireland, Spain, Austria, Portugal and the UK) said they 
would \"definitely vote\" in June.  Estonia came in last with 
only 14 percent.  Only in Denmark, Sweden and Greece did 
more than 50 percent say they would definitely vote. 
Another factor contributing to low voter turnout is that 
many voters do not see the relevance of the EP for their 
daily lives.  Although EU-wide issues such as Turkey\'s EU 
accession and U.S.-EU relations will play a role in the 
campaign (septels), polls indicate the EP elections will 
focus mainly on issues voters associate not with the EU, but 
with the performance of their national governments, such as 
employment, crime, and immigration. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"14958","3/15/2004 13:36","04BRUSSELS1094","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04BRUSSELS631|04MUNICH159","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001094 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED-PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY 
 
CORRECTED COPY OF BRUSSELS 1089 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EUROPEAN ELECTIONS CAMPAIGN: WHAT TO EXPECT 
 
REF: A) BRUSSELS 631; B) MUNICH 159 
 
1.CORRECTED COPY OF BRUSSELS 1089 
 
2. (SBU) Summary:   The European Parliament (EP) is now 
focused on the June 10-13 European elections.  As a result, 
there will be almost no legislative activity between early 
May and September.  U.S.-EU relations, the war on terrorism 
and Iraq are likely to be themes in many MEPs\' campaigns as 
they heat up in April-May.  Another key campaign issue will 
be Turkey\'s EU accession -- EP approval is needed before 
any new member can join.  The elections are expected to 
yield up to 60 percent turnover of MEPs, and our 
interlocutors, perhaps hastily, predict that the EPP-ED 
(Christian Democrats and Conservatives) will keep a 
plurality of seats with the PES (Socialists/Social 
Democrats) coming in second.  In the post-election EP, the 
expected pro-Americanism and euroskepticism among many new- 
member-state MEPs will bear watching.  END SUMMARY. 
 
SERIES OF PRE-ELECTION REPORTS 
------------------------------ 
 
3. (U) This is the second in a series of reports on the 
European elections.  Septel provided general background on 
the European Parliament and the European elections system. 
Subsequent telegrams will go into more detail on the role 
of U.S.-EU relations in the elections, the reelection 
prospects of key MEPs, possible realignment of party groups 
and the expected influence of MEPs from the countries set 
to join the EU on May 1. 
 
EP ACTIVITY FROM NOW TO SEPTEMBER 
--------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Much of this year\'s remaining legislative work will 
be done in the three EP plenary sessions between now and 
May 6 (March 29-April 1, April 19-22, May 3-6). 
Resolutions or reports on the following issues of interest 
to the U.S. are set to be brought to a vote before the May 
closure: U.S.-EU relations, Guantanamo detentions, 
preparedness for EU entry of the ten countries set to join 
on May 1, progress of Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey towards 
EU accession, cross-border investment services within the 
EU (2nd reading), capital markets transparency directive 
(1st reading), use of labels to claim health benefits of 
food products (1st reading), harmonizing member-state 
legislation to enforce intellectual property rights (1st 
reading), open skies agreement with third countries 
including the U.S. (2nd reading).  Resolutions on biometric 
data for passports and Passenger Name Record (PNR) may also 
be voted on by May. 
 
5. (U) As of May 6, EP business will halt to allow MEPs to 
campaign at home.  The post-election EP, (including the 
newly elected batch of new-member-state MEPs) will not meet 
again until July 20-23, at which time the main focus will 
be election of new EP officers and committee chairpersons. 
The first plenary after the August summer break will be 
September 13-16, at which voting on legislation will begin 
again in earnest.  What is not finished before May 6 is put 
in abeyance until September, and must be formally revived 
by a decision of the EP leadership (Conference of 
Presidents) or it will die. 
 
U.S.RELATIONS WILL BE CAMPAIGN ISSUE 
------------------------------------ 
 
6. (U) Officials in both the EPP and PES tell us that 
themes connected to transatlantic relations such as Iraq, 
the war on terrorism and the link between European Security 
and Defense Policy and NATO will be important campaign 
issues.  In most of the new member states from the former 
East Bloc, we expect keeping close ties to the U.S. to be 
an especially prominent theme.  Immigration issues, 
including worry in western Europe about jobs being taken by 
workers from the new member states, are also expected to be 
important trans-national themes (septel). 
 
TURKEY ACCESSION: MANY AGAINST 
------------------------------ 
 
7. (U) Another key issue for many will be Turkey\'s 
accession to the EU.  No country can join the EU without an 
EP vote approving the accession.  The Bavarian Christian 
Social Union (CSU) and many in its Christian-Democrat 
sister party (CDU) plan to run opposing Turkey\'s accession 
(ref B).  In reaction to this, the German Social Democrats 
and Greens have reiterated their stance in favor of Turkish 
accession.  Although it appears that now a majority of 
current MEPs favor Turkish accession, they are far ahead of 
their populations, opening the door for candidates to 
exploit this issue in their electoral campaigns. 
 
SOME EXPECT CHRISTIAN-DEMOCRAT WIN... 
------------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) Our EP interlocutors are predicting that the EPP-ED 
will hold on to its plurality, but much can happen between 
now and June.  With victory as their expressed goal, EPP-ED 
Chairman Hans-Gert Poettering and UK Conservative leader 
Michael Howard have negotiated a deal -- to be voted on by 
EPP-ED MEPs on March 31 -- keeping the British 
Conservatives in the EPP-ED.  Although the EPP has 
consistently opposed U.S. policy on the ICC, the Kyoto 
Protocol and Guantanamo, it is the most pro-U.S. EP group. 
It includes in its ranks, in addition to the German 
Christian Democrats and the UK Conservatives, the Spanish 
Partido Popular, the Italian Forza Italia and the Dutch 
Christian Democrats.  Partido Popular\'s surprise defeat in 
this weekend\'s elections may have an impact on campaign 
calculations, and could put a dent in the conventional 
wisdom predicting an EPP plurality. 
 
...BUT CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATS MAY SPLINTER 
--------------------------------------- 
 
9. (U) EP interlocutors told us that, after the EPP-ED, the 
PES is expected to remain the second strongest party group, 
and that the Liberal Democrats (ELDR) should come in a 
strong third.  The Greens should lose seats, as they are 
very weak in the new member states.  One recent 
development, however, could throw a wrench in the works. 
On February 20 some members of the EPP (principally from 
the French UDF and the Belgian CDH) met in Rome with 
leaders of the ELDR and members of the Italian \"Oliva\" 
party (recently launched by Commission President Romano 
Prodi) to explore the possibility of creating a \"true 
European Federalist party\" - in explicit opposition to the 
EPP\'s inclusion of the euroskeptic UK conservatives.  If 
this new party group does in fact emerge, the EPP could 
lose seats relative to the PES.  Both of these major 
parties could also find themselves faced with a third 
centrist force significantly stronger than the current 
ELDR. 
 
WHO WILL STAY AND WHO WILL GO 
----------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) According to the Parliament\'s EPP spokesman, the 
following key EPP-ED MEPs (and friends of the United 
States) are expected to return because of their high 
position on their party lists: Party Group Chairman Hans- 
Gert Poettering (Germany), Foreign Affairs Committee 
Chairman Elmar Brok (Germany), Transatlantic Policy Network 
(TPN) Chief James Elles (UK), and Environment Committee 
Chairwoman Caroline Jackson (UK).  In the PES, party group 
leader Enrique Baron Crespo has not yet decided whether to 
run for re-election.  Many key PES MEPs such as Economic 
and Monetary Affairs Committee Chairwoman Christa Randzio- 
Plath (Germany) and PES Foreign Affairs Committee 
Coordinator Jannis Sakellariou (Germany) will not run for 
re-election.  The leader of the ELDR group, Graham Watson, 
will probably be re-elected but may not remain as ELDR 
chairman.  Other key ELDR MEPs such as Foreign Affairs 
Committee Vice Chair Baroness Nicholson (UK), whose record 
on transatlantic issues is mixed, and PNR rapporteur 
Johanna Boogerd-Quaak (Netherlands), who opposes the U.S. 
agreement with the European Commission on PNR, will 
probably be reelected.  Franco-German Greens leader Daniel 
Cohn-Bendit, elected on the French Green list in 1999, will 
underscore his standing as the premier force behind the 
recent formation of a Europe-wide Green Party by running as 
number two on the German Greens\' list. 
 
NEW MEMBER-STATE MEPS PRO-U.S. 
------------------------------ 
 
11. (SBU) Altogether pundits expect the June elections to 
yield up to 60 percent first-time MEPs (including the 162 
new-member-state MEPs), much more than in previous 
elections.  We expect many MEPs from the 10 new countries 
to bring pro-U.S. attitudes and new-member euroskepticism, 
but their lack of EP experience will likely lead them to 
maintain a lower profile in the beginning.  If a plurality 
of the new-member-state MEPs are EPP-ED members, they will 
add to the weight of the pro-U.S. but euroskeptic British 
Conservatives and Forza Italia.  END COMMENT. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"15017","3/17/2004 7:06","04BRUSSELS1119","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS1081","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA AND EAP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, KNNP, KN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DG COOPER ON DPRK: EU READY TO HELP WHEN TIME IS 
RIGHT 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 1081 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (C) Visiting EAP PDAS Donald Keyser met with Council DG 
for External Relations Robert Cooper March 5 on the margins 
of semestral troika consultations with the EU (reftel). 
Cooper expressed satisfaction with the slow but steady 
progress in the Six Party process and offered the EU\'s 
assistance both in support of the process (i.e. to deliver 
any messages) and afterward (i.e. when the time comes for 
European aid and trade incentives).  (COMMENT: We believe the 
Department should bear Cooper\'s offer -- conveyed also by 
regional directors at the troika -- in mind as the Six Party 
process moves forward.  Multiple avenues for EU support 
exist, from political declarations to economic carrots when 
the time is right -- all in consultation with the U.S.  END 
COMMENT.)  Cooper drew a parallel between the North Korea and 
Iran, saying that in both cases the trend lines looked 
positive, if halting.  And he suggested that the lessons of 
the Iraq war were helping to curb the Libyan, Iranian and 
Pakistani WMD programs, and hopefully also the DPRK program. 
North Korea seems increasingly interested in aid and trade 
issues, he said, and in dealings with the EU has been less 
preoccupied by the old insistence on U.S. security 
guarantees.  The EU will convene an economic reform seminar 
in Pyongyang in April.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Accompanying Cooper were Council Secretariat DPRK Desk 
Director Antonio Tanca and China Desk Director Ana Ramirez. 
USEU DCM Jim Foster and USEU poloff also attended. 
 
3. (C) Cooper opened by assessing that efforts in North Korea 
\"do not seem to be going badly now.\"  He said that in 
retrospect, the war in Iraq might have been a good thing from 
the nonproliferation perspective because it appeared to be 
having a powerful and positive impact on Libyan, Iranian and 
Pakistani WMD programs.  Hopefully it was having a similar 
impact on North Korea, he said.  Keyser agreed that the 
Coalition resolve in Iraq was having an effect on 
proliferating states, and added that the Libyan and Khan 
events were potentially instructive for and manifestly 
troubling to the DPRK, despite its insistence otherwise. 
 
4. (C) Cooper said the U.S. \"strategy of calm patience\" in 
the face of North Korea\'s \"panicky attempts to provoke a 
crisis\" seemed to have worked.  The slow, deliberate pace of 
the Six Party process was probably a good thing, he said, 
because it had the effect of lowering temperatures and 
dampening North Korea\'s heated rhetoric.  \"It can\'t be called 
a success story,\" he continued, \"but it could be a lot 
worse.\"  He also drew a parallel between the DPRK and Iran, 
\"where the process is not entirely successful but where slow 
steady trend lines have emerged.\"  (COMMENT: Cooper\'s 
repeatedly expressed satisfaction with the Six Party Process 
was probably intended as a subtle message that the patient 
and unified-multilateral-front approach to North Korea might 
usefully serve as a model for dealing with other 
proliferating states, e.g. Iran.  END COMMENT.) 
 
5. (C) As evidence that tensions were waning, Tanca cited a 
recent meeting in Brussels between EU WMD Rep Giannella and a 
DPRK official, in which the official \"barely mentioned\" the 
North Korean goal of obtaining security guarantees from the 
U.S.  This was a new dynamic, Cooper and Tanca said, which 
was also reflected in the DPRK\'s growing interest in engaging 
the EU on aid and trade issues.  Keyser agreed that the Six 
Party Talks have pushed the North Koreans to focus more on 
their core interests -- i.e. economic and regime security -- 
and less on their earlier insistence on U.S. or multilateral 
security guarantees.  Tanca said the heads of EU member state 
delegations in North Korea, in coordination with the 
Commission, were organizing a seminar on economic reform in 
Pyongyang, tentatively scheduled for April 27 - May 1. 
 
6. (C) Cooper said the EU would continue delivering a strong 
message of support for the Six Party Talks in all dealings 
with North Korean officials.  He added, \"if at any time you 
think there is some way we can deliver a message, or think of 
some message we can send, let us know.\"  Keyser responded 
that the U.S. appreciated the EU\'s support for the process 
and that we would consult more as/when the time drew near for 
the EU to have a greater role.  For now, the focus needed to 
remain squarely on the goal of \"complete, verifiable and 
irreversible dismantlement\" (CVID) of North Korea\'s nuclear 
weapons program, including its clandestine HEU program. 
Cooper agreed, and said that the EU had no desire to see the 
process rushed.  Just \"let us know when you think we should 
get involved,\" he said, \"we\'ll be ready once things are 
resolved and you begin talking economics and assistance.\" 
 
7. (C) Tanca said also that the EU would introduce a 
resolution on North Korea at the UNCHR this year.  Keyser 
urged the EU to consult closely with South Korea on the draft 
resolution.  Cooper said they would (although it was clear in 
the meeting that the EU had not previously thought about 
consulting South Korea). 
 
--------------------------------- 
Comment: Considering the EU Offer 
--------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Cooper\'s message that the EU would like to help when 
the time came was reinforced by points made earlier in the 
day by a regional directors-level troika during U.S.-EU 
consultations on Asia.  At that meeting, EU interlocutors 
expressed gratitude at the U.S. effort to keep the EU in the 
loop about progress in the Six Party Talks and reiterated the 
EU desire to help when the time comes.  This willingness to 
help on our (or Six Party) terms -- conveyed at multiple 
levels and with an unobtrusive openness -- contrasts sharply 
with the EU\'s irritation last year at feeling left out of the 
whole process, particularly with regard to KEDO.  The EU\'s 
standing offer should be kept in mind as the Six Party 
process advances.  While the time for European carrots may 
not have yet arrived, perhaps there are other things the EU 
could do to support the process in the near term.  For 
example, we could talk to the EU about drafting a high-level 
declaration of support for the Six Party Talks, which could 
include strong, even conditional language on the need for 
CVID.  We could maximize the impact of such a declaration by 
suggesting and consulting on its language and timing.  Other 
options exist as well and should be carefully examined.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
9. (U) PDAS Keyser has cleared this message. 
 
Foster 
"
"15026","3/17/2004 10:08","04BRUSSELS1122","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03BRUSSELS5469","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001122 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DRL/IL; DOL FOR ILAB; FOR LABOR REPORTING OFFICERS 
AND ATTACHES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, SOCI, PHUM, SMIG, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: USEU LABOR/SOCIAL AFFAIRS HIGHLIGHTS FIRST QUARTER 
2004 
 
REF: A. 2003 BRUSSELS 5469 
 
     B. BRUSSELS 916 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: This quarterly report provides readers with 
analysis, priorities, and outreach/meetings related to EU 
labor and social affairs January-March 2004.  We examine EU 
efforts to recast its employment goals debate and EU concerns 
on the impact on enlargement on EU labor and social 
objectives. Key outreach, since ref a, include meetings with 
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) head 
Guy Ryder on Iraq, with AFL-CIO international affairs head 
Barbara Shailor on transatlantic labor relations, and USEU 
participation in an European Social and Economic Committee 
(CESE) working group on improving transatlantic relations. 
USEU also attended a moving joint EU/European Jewish Congress 
(EJC) Conference on \"Anti-Semitism in Europe.\" Looking ahead, 
we are interested in increased communication and cooperation 
among the ICFTU, the European Trade Union Confederation 
(ETUC) and the World Confederation of Labor (WCL). End 
Summary 
 
Guiding debate from \"firing\" to \"more\" employment 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. (SBU) Commission labor market experts believe the EU-15 
will fall short of meeting their intermediate 2005 Lisbon 
Process employment goals (notably getting more females, 55-64 
year olders, and able-bodied workers into the labor market). 
As this is a politically sensitive topic, a top cabinet 
advisor to now-departed European Commissioner Diamantopoulou 
told us that the EU is finding it convenient to couch the 
debate as a \"response\" or a \"wake-up call\" to the November 
2003 Kok Employment Taskforce report \"Jobs, Jobs, Jobs\" (a 
study funded and published by the EU but only \"reflecting the 
opinion of the Taskforce). Our Commission interlocutor argued 
that this \"outside\" report gives the EU some room to maneuver 
by helping it recast the debate from the politically 
unpopular \"hiring and firing\" issue of the 90\'s to the more 
politically palatable need for EU member-states to get more 
workers into the workforce and out of the long-term 
unemployed, under-employed, or early retirees or what 
Commission likes to call the EU \"full employment policy.\" 
 
Enlargement: Social and Labor concerns 
-------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU)  Many of our Commission colleagues in DG-employment 
are noting with concern, that with the 10 new  members 
entering May 1, overall EU unemployment will increase from 
about 8 percent to over 9 percent and that overall EU 
performance on meeting its Lisbon goals will be set back. 
For example, with older workers the Lisbon goal is to have 50 
percent in the workforce by 2010; currently among the EU-15 
slightly over 40 percent are in the work force; with 
enlargement, this number will drop to 39 percent.  Similar 
backward steps are expected not only on the other employment 
goals but also on reducing the EU\'s poverty rate and the 
fight against \"social exclusion.\"  Of particular concern to 
DG-Employment is that they fear an increase in \"social 
exclusion\" and discrimination against the Roma . With the ten 
countries, the Commission estimates that the Roma population 
in the EU increases from about one million to an estimated 8 
million making them the largest ethnic minority within the EU. 
 
4. (SBU) There has been much recent media and political 
attention to the most outwardly dramatic impact of 
enlargement, the flow of workers from the new member-states 
to the current EU members (ref b). Ref B cited a recent 
Commission study suggesting that even without currently 
planned temporary restrictions by virtually all current 
member-states on labor mobility from the 10 new members, the 
maximum movement would have been about 220,000/year over the 
next year - not a huge impact in a population of 450 million 
workers. However, one DG-Employment official told us that 
what worries the Commission even more is the overall impact 
of enlargement on the EU total employment rate (defined as 
the percentage of the working age population with 70 percent 
being the Lisbon Process target).  The Commission has 
estimated that enlargement will drop the EU-15 employment 
rate from 64.3 percent (using a 2002 statistic) to an EU-25 
rate of 62.4 percent -- the lowest rate of employment since 
1998. The European Employers Group (UNICE) has calculated the 
rate of employment for the EU at 25 at 62.8 percent, slightly 
higher than the Commission but still the lowest since 1999. 
 
Ongoing priorities 
------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) Over the longer-term, we are following with 
interest ICFTU/ETUC \"rapprochement\" and some tentative 
cooperation between the ICFTU and Christian-Democrat World 
Confederation of Labor (WCL) - two international trade unions 
that have been competing with each for decades.  At the next 
ICFTU executive board meeting at the end of March, ICFTU 
relations with the WCL are likely to be discussed. 
 
ICFTU concerns and challenge in Iraq 
------------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) After months of careful talks between the 
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions ICFTU and 
Arab trade leaders, the ICFTU -- nudged by the AFL-CIO and 
the UK Trade Union Congress (TUC) -- sent in a multinational 
trade union team into Iraq in February to assess  the 
situation on the ground. ICFTU head Ryder told us that he 
sought to avoid having the ICFTU being seen as a \"Western 
Imposition\" and believed that it is necessary to have the 
support not only of Iraqi workers but also the trade union 
movements in nearby Arab countries.  Complicating the ICFTU\'s 
efforts in Iraq is the fact that the old Ba\'athist pro-Saddam 
trade union movement was never affiliated with the ICFTU; 
rather it was a member of the old Soviet-dominated World 
Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU).  While the Ba\'athists 
unionists remain tainted by their long history of supporting 
Saddam Hussein, they are an established and recognized labor 
union.  How to deal with them, and newly emerging post-Saddam 
trade union movements, remains one of the ICFTU\'s biggest 
challenges. 
 
CESE Review of Transatlantic Relations 
-------------------------------------- 
 
7. (U) We note a recent increase in colloquia and thinktank 
activities in the last year focused on transatlantic 
relations. The European Social and Economic Committee (CESE) 
has created a working group to examine  transatlantic 
relations and to come up with recommendations on how to 
improve them.  Supported by the EU, CESE is made up of 
employer and worker representatives, i.e. the so-called 
\"social partners,\" to examine all aspects of European Union 
activity (not just economic, labor, or social affairs). At 
CESE\'s invitation, we discussed transatlantic relations March 
1 with them where we highlighted the importance of the New 
Transatlantic Agenda (NTA) in helping guide US/EU dialogue. 
One interesting aspect of the CESE study group has been its 
recognition that disagreements over political and security 
issues \"spill over\" and affect economic and social relations 
that are directly relevant to the more \"bread and butter\" 
priorities of the social partners. 
 
AFL-CIO: Cooperating with European counterparts 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
8. (SBU) AFL-CIO international affairs Department head 
Barbara Shailor called on us March 2 to talk about AFL-CIO 
relations with the ETUC and the ICFTU. She said that AFL-CIO 
is very pleased with ICFTU\'s performance under SYG Ryder. She 
noted that for the first time in years, the AFL-CIO is 
working well with the European Trade Union Confederation 
(ETUC); the new ETUC president, John Monks, (former head of 
the UK Trade Union Confederation - TUC) is also a 
long-standing close friend of AFL-CIO President Sweeney. 
Shailor was also interested in being briefed on transatlantic 
relations after Iraq and during the Irish Presidency. On her 
mind was the possibility of resurrecting the now largely 
dormant transatlantic labor dialogue (TALD). While she 
wondered what might benefit from putting greater ETUC/AFL-CIO 
cooperation in the TALD framework, she did take the point 
that there is a great deal of interest in reexamining 
transatlantic relations to see if they might be better and 
that the labor movements, like the business sector or 
consumers, might have a greater role to play. 
 
Canadian Labor Ministry\'s EU Priorities 
--------------------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) We met with Thomas Townsend, Health and Social 
Affairs Counselor, for the Canadian Mission to the EU.  He 
spends most of his time analyzing EU labor market and 
employment trends for the Canadian Ministry of Labor (his 
home office).  His highest reporting priority is EU efforts 
to meet its Lisbon Process goals, particularly in the 
Employment area.  Even though his home Ministry lacks the 
kind of memorandum of understanding that the US Department of 
Labor has with DG-Employment, the EU and Canada try to do two 
educational exchange programs per year on topics of mutual 
interest. This spring, Canada and the EU will do a 
\"Roundtable on Labor Market Employment.\"  (Townsend, who is 
new to Brussels, expressed his personal amazement by the 
amount of time he spent with his EC colleagues over whether 
to call the event a seminar, a workshop, or a roundtable.) 
The major topics to be covered are likely to be the three 
main Lisbon Process employment targets. 
 
SEIU Courtesy Call 
------------------ 
 
10. (U) Taking a break from their public relations efforts to 
enlist support from the ETUC and European Parliament (EP) for 
their campaign against Group 4 Falck and its US subsidiary, 
Wackenhut, Service Employers International Union (SEIU, the 
largest union in the AFL-CIO)) International President Andrew 
Stern and International Secretary-Treasurer Anna Burger paid 
a call on USEU to introduce themselves. They noted their 
efforts with the EP have found some resonance as the Group 4 
Falck is the EP security contractor. At their request, we 
reviewed US/EU labor cooperation on the role of the disabled 
in the workplace as well as US/EU relations writ large. 
 
EU/EJC Anti-Semitism Conference 
------------------------------- 
 
11. (U) USEU attended the February 19 EU/EJC Conference on 
Anti-Semitism in Europe. A virtual consensus emerged that 
there is a \"European dimension\" to anti-Semitism and that it 
is not only a member-state problem. Given this, there was 
also general agreement that \"Europe\" has to respond to it on 
a Europe-wide basis. Another important and related 
\"breakthrough\" of sorts was a clear recognition that the 
debate of whether anti-Semitism exists in Europe is over; one 
participant dramatically said the February 19 conference 
\"marks the end of denial in Europe of anti-Semitism.\" 
Speakers included EC President Prodi, German FM Fischer, EJC 
head Benatoff, and writer Elie Wiesel.  We reviewed the 
conference with an EU Council Secretariat human rights 
experts who told us that the next big step in this dialogue 
on anti-Semitism will be the special OSCE session in Berlin 
-- an event that Fischer said Germany was proud to host. 
 
Foster 
"
"15036","3/17/2004 11:56","04BRUSSELS1123","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE52611","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 001123 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, EAID, HA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: HUMANITARIAN AID TO HAITI: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
PLANS AND INTENTIONS 
 
REF: STATE 52611 
 
We delivered reftel demarche on March 12 to John Caloghirou, 
Head of Unit, Caribbean and OCTs, and Lut Fabert-Goossens, 
Haiti Desk Officer (both from the Development 
Directorate-General of the European Commission).  Caloghirou 
said the European Commission (EC) had received a request for 
35 million euros from the UN Flash Appeal, and that the EC 
was working with the UN on the ground in Haiti to evaluate 
that request.  Caloghirou and Fabert-Goossens stressed that 
the EC was working in several other channels to see whether 
funds could be freed up for Haiti.  Below is a summary of the 
main points they raised: 
 
--The European Commission Humanitarian Aid Office (ECHO) had 
been preparing a humanitarian aid package for Haiti before 
the current crisis.  Now, ECHO was reevaluating whether some 
of that money -- perhaps \"a couple of million euros,\" 
according to Caloghirou, could be allocated quickly to 
alleviate current needs. 
 
--The EC may also redirect some of the available balance from 
the ongoing 8th European Development Fund (EDF) (planned for 
the years 1997-2002); here more than 5 million euros might be 
made available for humanitarian aid and support for civil 
society in the areas of democratization and rule of law. 
 
--The 9th EDF for Haiti (for 2003-2007) remains suspended 
because of lack of progress toward democracy and rule of law; 
a reconsideration of the suspension is scheduled for June 
this year, but may be done earlier, according to Caloghirou, 
if the EC decides that 9th EDF funds are needed during the 
current crisis. 
 
--Caloghirou said, \"the immediate problem is not lack of 
money, but reaching a common set of donor priorities.\" 
 
--Caloghirou and his boss Sipke Brouwer, Director for Central 
and West Africa and the Caribbean for the European 
Commission\'s Development Directorate-General, plan to attend 
a meeting on Haiti for relief agencies at the World Bank in 
Washington on March 23. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"15067","3/17/2004 17:01","04BRUSSELS1134","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 BRUSSELS 001134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR AND S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/16/2014 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, PINR, PREL, PTER, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COUNTER-TERRORISM POLICY AFTER MADRID 
 
REF: USEU TODAY 02/06/04 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
------------------------ 
Summary: Europe Wakes Up 
------------------------ 
 
1. (SBU) The EU is re-examining its role in the war against 
terrorism following the March 11 attack in Madrid.  Many EU 
efforts to improve its counter-terrorism (CT) effectiveness 
-- for instance by revising the EU CT Action Plan and 
creating and streamlining the Clearinghouse -- were in the 
works before Madrid but are now being pushed along with 
greater urgency.  Others, such as establishing a CT 
Coordinator, were not yet considered ripe for adoption just a 
week ago.  European Council President Bertie Ahern announced 
on March 12 that he would seek a raft of agreements on 
counter-terrorism at the March 25-26 European Council 
(Summit). 
 
2. (C) A Council press release later detailed Ahern\'s 
proposals, saying he would seek agreement by EU Heads of 
State and Government to: adopt an EU solidarity clause; adopt 
a revised CT Action Plan; appoint an EU CT coordinator; 
enhance security and intelligence cooperation among member 
states; adopt a long-dormant \"guidelines\" document to provide 
strategic guidance to EU CT activities; endorse the draft UN 
Comprehensive Convention on Terrorism; enhance the 
\"efficiency and effectiveness\" of EU efforts to combat 
terrorist finance; reinforce cooperation with Europol, 
Eurojust and the Police Chief\'s Task Force; speed up 
implementation of existing agreements on border and document 
security; and adopt a program for enhancing EU-third country 
CT cooperation.  EU staffers are working round the clock to 
elaborate these proposals for policymakers, who will begin 
debating them in marathon sessions between March 18 and March 
26.  While many of the proposals put forward by the Irish 
Presidency are presentational, and intended to respond to 
political demands in the wake of the Madrid bombings, the 
shock of Madrid and a strong new mandate from heads of 
government at the March 25-26 Council session may help the EU 
move ahead where progress heretofore has been stymied.  This 
cable discusses the timeline and likely outcome of these 
debates.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Timeline: From Now to the Summit 
-------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) PM Ahern\'s proposals will be discussed first by the EU 
PermReps (COREPER II) on March 18, then by Justice and 
Interior Ministers at a special session of the Justice and 
Home Affairs (JHA) Council on March 19, then by FMs at the 
General Affairs and External Relations Council (GAERC) on 
March 22, and finally by Presidents and PMs at the European 
Council March 25-26.  Not all of the proposals will make it 
through the guantlet of EU preparatory bodies in time for the 
European Council, but some will; those that don\'t will be 
sent back to the preparatory bodies for further elaboration 
and negotiation.  The three high-profile measures -- the 
creation of an EU CT Coordinator, the adoption of a revised 
EU Action Plan, and the adoption of an EU Solidarity Clause 
-- will almost certainly be adopted in some form. 
 
----------------------------- 
Counter-Terrorism Coordinator 
----------------------------- 
 
4. (C) PM Ahern said that the EU \"will consider the 
appointment of a security coordinator to enhance cooperation 
between EU bodies and third countries and streamline 
activities in the fight against terrorism.\"   Commission 
security policy expert Patricia Holland told us the 
Coordinator would work in the Council Secretariat under HiRep 
Solana in an arrangement similar to that of WMD Rep Annalisa 
Giannella.  Unlike Giannella, however, the CT Coordinator 
will, if mandated as expected by the European Council, be 
vested with the explicit endorsement of EU leaders (Giannella 
was appointed by Solana unilaterally, as a \"Personal 
Representative\" for WMD).  The move to create a Coordinator 
has been pushing slowly forward since January (ref), but has 
taken on new urgency in the wake of last week\'s Madrid 
bombings. 
 
5. (C) The Coordinator post is envisaged as tasking one 
person with facilitating cooperation among EU institutions -- 
which jealously guard their stovepiped competencies, often 
leading to inconsistent policy and ineffective activities -- 
and with interfacing with third countries on behalf of the 
EU\'s CT machinery.  To a limited degree, and when asked, the 
Coordinator would assist EU Member States with their CT 
obligations under the revised EU Action Plan.  The 
Coordinator would have no direct authority over member state 
ministries, but would instead serve both as a clearinghouse 
for member state CT activities and as a facilitator for those 
seeking greater coordination and assistance.  Many in 
Brussels also hope that the Coordinator will acquire the 
moral authority to \"name and shame\" when Member States fail 
to live up to their Action Plan commitments. 
 
6. (C) In a meeting with visiting EUR/DAS Bradtke on March 
16, Council External Affairs DG Robert Cooper said he hoped 
the Coordinator would not only coordinate ongoing efforts, 
but help to drive them forward.  To do that, the office would 
need to have a certain amount of Member State acquiescence, 
which will be difficult to obtain even after Madrid. 
According to a British-national Commission contact who was 
part of an EU delegation sent to London to pulse its views of 
enhanced CT coordination, UK Home Secretary Blunkett has 
staked out an over-my-dead-body position on the idea of a 
Coordinator whose influence might extend beyond the halls of 
Brussels.  If that\'s the case, he asked, \"How can we expect 
smaller countries to cooperate if the British won\'t?\" 
 
7. (C) According to our interlocutors, the name most often 
mentioned as the first EU CT Coordinator is retiring Council 
Secretariat DG for Justice and Home Affairs Charles Elsen, a 
 
SIPDIS 
choice which would reflect the EU preference for a low-key 
senior bureaucrat to fill the post rather that a political 
figure.  But it is unclear how Elsen\'s front-runner status 
will be affected by the March 14 Socialist electoral victory 
in Spain.  After the Madrid bombings, Solana will not be able 
to name a Coordinator who does not have the fullest support 
of Spain. 
 
8. (C) While the Coordinator will probably be tasked with 
enhancing inter-institutional coordination, it is unlikely 
that the Commission will be any more inclined to cooperate 
than some of the Member States.  This is because CT policy in 
the Commission is divided among several (often competitive 
and mutually jealous) Directorates-General.  They have been 
reluctant to coordinate more with each other let alone with 
outsiders such as the envisaged EU Coordinator.  Recognizing 
this shortcoming, the Commission is separately debating how 
to improve its own internal \"cross-pillar\" coordination, with 
ideas ranging from the creation of a single executive-level 
Commission Coordinator, perhaps as a junior counterpart to 
the Council\'s Coordinator, to a coordination group that would 
bring together experts from the relevant Directorates-General 
on a standing or as-needed basis.  We believe the latter 
option is more likely, as that would allow each DG to have 
its own seat at the collective coordinating \"table.\" 
Commission Chiefs of Cabinet discussed the issue March 15 and 
the College of Commissioners discussed it March 16.  We do 
not yet have a readout of those discussions. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Adoption of a revised Action Plan on Terrorism 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
9. (C) The Irish Presidency was tasked with revising the 2001 
CT Action Plan in time for the June European Council.  PM 
Ahern surprised everyone by announcing on March 12 that he 
would seek its completion in time for adoption at the March 
25-26 gathering.  EU interlocutors involved in the revision 
process tell us that the new Action Plan will still not 
provide the kind of actionable detail that many would like. 
Instead, in the words of one Commission contact, it will 
mostly be \"motherhood and apple pie.\"  Among other things, it 
will call on Member States to do more in regard to terrorism 
finance, cooperation with third countries and organizations 
(U.S., CTC, ASEAN, etc.), law enforcement and intelligence 
cooperation, securing borders and international transport, 
addressing root causes of terrorism, and targeting assistance 
to countries in greatest need. 
 
10. (SBU) As a follow-on initiative, PM Ahern will seek 
support for the creation of a more detailed implementation 
plan to guide EU and Member State implementation of the 
Action Plan.  The March 25-26 Council will be just the 
beginning of that process.  Weeks or months will likely be 
required for the kind of detailed (yet consensual) 
articulation of steps and benchmarks desired by the Irish 
Presidency (and by the UK, the most notable and credible 
supporter of a strong implementation plan). 
 
----------------- 
Solidarity Clause 
----------------- 
 
11. (C) The draft EU Solidarity Clause was agreed late last 
year during the EU Constitution negotiations in the 
Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC).  But failure to agree on 
other constitutional items prevented the clause from being 
adopted at that time.  The clause (Article I-42 of the draft 
Constitution) states that the EU shall act \"in a spirit of 
solidarity if a Member State is the victim of a terrorist 
attack or natural or man-made disaster.\"  The idea is for the 
EU to be involved, as the EU, in terrorist and disaster 
response efforts, whether these responses include public 
health, law enforcement, or military resources. 
 
12. (C) The clause does not describe the kinds of actions the 
EU might take to \"assist\" Spain (assuming Spain asked for 
assistance).  Unlike many other aspects of the draft 
Constitution, the Solidarity Clause would not require a new 
treaty to adopt.  Nothing in the existing EU treaties forbids 
such steps, and a \"legal basis\" could be found under the 
current CFSP and JHA provisions.  Political agreement by EU 
member states is all that is required to put the clause in 
force.  Council, Commission and Member State interlocutors 
tell us that in the wake of Madrid, the clause should adopted 
with little debate.  While a few EU member states (most 
notably Sweden) reportedly retabled some of their original 
objections to the clause, we don\'t expect any -- after Madrid 
-- to stand in the way of consensus.  At the very least, says 
Solana Senior Advisor Niall Burgess, Member States will step 
over themselves to declare their full support for the spirit 
of the clause, if not the text. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Enhanced Intelligence Cooperation 
--------------------------------- 
 
13. (U) PM Ahern said the EU \"will strive to improve 
mechanisms for cooperation between police and security 
services and promote effective, systematic collaboration in 
intelligence services between Member States.\"  Two options 
are on the table: 
 
-- Creating a new \"European Information Bureau to bring 
together information analysis inside and outside the EU\" 
-- Strengthening Member State support for Europol. 
 
14. (C) The first option was proposed by Austria at the last 
JHA Council on February 19 but was not well received. 
Belgian PM Verhofstadt renewed the proposal over the weekend 
in light of Madrid.  The second option would seem easiest -- 
to give Europol the means required to make it effective. 
However, Member States have been reluctant to give Europol 
information, despite the fact that the fight against 
terrorism has been one of its central objectives since its 
creation in July 1999.  Our money is on Europol.  If Madrid 
doesn\'t empower this organization, nothing ever will. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
The \"Guidelines\" for Fighting Terrorism 
--------------------------------------- 
 
15. (C) PM Ahern is calling for \"speedy and final agreement 
on the draft Guidelines for a Common Approach to the Fight 
against Terrorism.\"  The Guidelines document -- intended as a 
sort of strategic umbrella for EU CT policy -- has been 
blocked in draft for the past six months.  According to Ken 
O\'Flaherty of the UK Mission, the Guidelines have become 
mired in theological debates over the definition and taxonomy 
of terrorism.  It is doubtful that these debates can become 
unblocked in time for the document\'s adoption on March 26. 
But it may not really matter.  The declaratory statement 
released my EU leaders at the European Council will likely be 
of sufficient depth and breadth -- in the context of a large 
consensual union -- that it could serve as the strategic 
umbrella that the EU has thus far lacked.  Solana Advisor 
Burgess predicts exactly that, and suggests that without 
agreement on the Guidelines, the EU could simply build upon 
whatever declaration emerges on March 26 in order to 
articulate strategic guidance for CT policy. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Increased EU-UN Coordination on Terrorism 
----------------------------------------- 
16. (SBU) PM Ahern wants to refocus EU efforts to achieve 
support for the draft comprehensive Convention on Terrorism 
currently under discussion at the UN.  This was originally 
endorsed by the EU in September 2001, when leaders adopted 
the CT Action Plan.  Yet to date -- after almost three years 
of declared EU support for a single comprehensive UN CT 
Convention -- only six of the twelve existing international 
CT conventions have been signed and ratified by all EU member 
states.  Therefore, any move to renew attention to this issue 
has as much to do with pressuring the EU\'s own Member States 
to speed up the process as it does with signaling support to 
outsiders. 
 
17. (C) Under the Italian Presidency, the EU began a 
concerted effort to strengthen ties between the CTC and the 
EU\'s third-pillar (i.e. external affairs) Counter-Terrorism 
Working Group (COTER).  Between October and December 2003, 
COTER members met with the Chairmen of the CTC, UNODC, 
Sanction\'s Committee, and other UN groups to discuss 
enhancing EU-UN CT cooperation.  The EU wants to strengthen 
these new ties and push the relationships even closer.  In 
particular, the EU wants to support the \"revitalization\" of 
the CTC in order to give it a more active role in global CT 
efforts, according to Irish COTER Chair Patricia O\'Grady.  In 
addition, the EU wants to coordinate more with the CTC, UNODC 
and CTAG in designing and implementing EU assistance programs 
to third countries.  These two efforts represent what we 
understand to be the focus of the \"new initiatives\" in EU-UN 
coordination mentioned by PM Ahern. 
 
---------------------- 
Financing of Terrorism 
---------------------- 
 
18. (C) PM Ahern is calling on the EU \"to enhance the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the EU,s mechanisms for the 
freezing of terrorist assets and to identify the movement of 
terrorist finances.\"  He said also that the Irish will \"give 
priority to taking forward work on the expected Communication 
on the prevention of terrorist financing...\"  According to 
Irish RELEX Counselor Kyle O\'Sullivan, the proposal for a 
\"Communication\" will come out of the Commission\'s JHA 
Directorate-General.  It has been in the works for some time 
and was expected to be issued later this spring.  Its release 
is being accelerated as a result of the Madrid bombings. 
O\'Sullivan has not seen a draft, but understands that it 
focuses on the creation of a network for the exchange of 
information among member states, while preserving the system 
of contact points between Financial Intelligence Units and 
Central Banks. 
 
19. (C) Beyond that, the statement refers generally to 
ongoing efforts, conducted under the leadership of the Irish 
Presidency, to improve Clearinghouse working methods.  The 
proposal being prepared for COREPER March 18 is made up of a 
\"modest\" list of areas where Clearinghouse practices could be 
improved, including: 
 
-- focusing on individuals associated with designated groups; 
-- member states providing more substantial background 
information when they present proposals for designations; 
-- the Clearinghouse renewing its focus on long-standing but 
essentially \"dormant\" proposals, with an eye toward resolving 
them one way on another;-- setting agendas for Clearinghouse 
meetings that would direct the focus toward specific groups 
rather than invite comment on all outstanding proposals at 
any given meeting; 
-- participation (albeit non-voting) by other services such 
as Europol in the meetings; 
-- taking a more active approach to renewing the list, as 
required every six months (e.g., taking a more rigorous look 
at the designated individuals to ensure that they have not 
died in the period since their designation). 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Measures to Reinforce Practical Cooperation 
------------------------------------------- 
 
20. (C) PM Ahern\'s reference to reinforcing \"practical 
cooperation with... the Police Chiefs Task Force, Europol and 
Eurojust\" is a recognition of the underutilized character of 
these organizations.  Of the three, Europol, which is still 
trying to find its way and earn the respect of Member States, 
is garnering the most attention and probably holds the 
greatest promise.  Although terrorism has been in its mandate 
since it was created in 1999, its work in this area to date 
has been limited to writing threat assessments.  It has no 
operational capacity.  In December, France unveiled an 
initiative designed to make Europol operationally capable of 
carrying out investigations.  The French proposal also calls 
for it to have the technical information required to provide 
more aid to Member States in specific investigations, and to 
have greater powers.  The French Interior minister claimed to 
have the support of the Commission, Austria, Spain and 
Germany.  The Irish proposal is to reinforce this initiative 
with a focus on counter-terrorism. 
 
21. (C) The Police Chiefs Task Force is a police-to-police 
network that bypasses central government ministries (in hopes 
of making it faster and more efficient than other 
coordinating bodies).  It is unclear how the EU could 
interface more effectively with this organization, or indeed 
whether it should.  Eurojust is a new organization still 
finding its feet.  The Irish Presidency wants to give it a 
boost, and is perhaps using the raft of CT proposals for the 
March 25-26 European Council as a way of doing so.  Yet it is 
hard for us to see how it could help in counter-terrorism. 
 
------------------------------ 
Implementing Existing Measures 
------------------------------ 
 
22. (C) The Irish proposal to \"take forward work on the 
Framework Decision on the Mutual recognition of Confiscation 
Orders\" refers to a draft decision that was alomost agreed at 
the February 19 JHA Council.  Under the proposal each Member 
State will have to recognize and execute on its territory 
confiscation orders issued by judicial authorities of another 
Member State.  The Framework Decision is based on the 
principle of \"mutual recognition of judgments\" throughout the 
EU and forms part of a series of such decisions:  After the 
Council Meeting Feb. 19th Irish Justice Minister Mc Dowell 
said he was aiming for political agreement on the draft at 
the next JHA Council on March 30th.  He noted that this 
Framework decision was closely linked to the already adopted 
Framework Decision on the Mutual recognition of orders 
freezing property or evidence.  It was also linked to the 
draft Framework Decision on confiscation of crime-related 
proceeds, instrumentalities and property on which the JHA 
Council adopted a general approach in December 2002.  In 
light of Madrid, the confiscations agreement will probably be 
endorsed at the Special JHA Council on March 19. 
 
23. (U) PM Ahern also called for \"the development of the 
second generation Schengen Information System and the new 
Visa Information System and the proposed European Borders 
Agency.\"  The SIS is a lookout database that keeps on file 
names of individuals who are barred from entering the 
Schengen area, as well as well as other individuals and 
stolen objects wanted by the authorities.  The proposed 
upgrades will include a biometric function to assist in the 
identification of listed individuals and will also support 
automatic transliteration capabilities for names from 
non-Latin alphabets (such as Chinese, Russian, Arabic, etc.). 
 Other upgrades include more data displayed on user terminals 
and the capability to query results and link searches between 
people and objects.  In this regard, the current SIS will 
evolve from a hit/no-hit name-checking system to one that 
could be of increased value to law enforcement entities.  The 
EC has also proposed that 
EUROPOL and EUROJUST should also be connected to SIS-II. 
 
24. (U) Similarly, the proposed Visa Information System (VIS) 
will contain a biometric function and will tie all EU 
consular posts abroad with ports of entry.  Neither the 
upgraded SIS nor VIS is expected to become operational before 
2007.  The Border Agency will help Member States coordinate 
policy, training and equipment acquisitions and could be 
established as early as 2005. 
 
---------------- 
External aspects 
---------------- 
 
25. (C) The EU wants to make CT a more central and actionable 
item in its relations with third countries, according to 
COTER Chair O\'Grady.  In terms of technical assistance, the 
EU will seek to better coordinate Member State and Commission 
programs to ensure maximum impact and to avoid duplication. 
The COTER working group is creating a matrix of existing 
programs in order to assist this effort (much as WMD Rep 
Giannella has done in relation to Member State and Commission 
nonproliferation assistance programs).  Under COTER lead, the 
EU is also looking for ways to design and implement these 
programs by drawing on the expertise of international (e.g. 
CTC, CTAG) and regional (e.g. ASEAN, GCC) organizations. 
 
26. (C) The EU also says it wants to \"operationalize\" its 
political- and expert-level dialogues with third countries on 
CT issues.  Taking a page from the revised work program of 
the U.S.-EU COTER troika consultations agreed under the 
Italian Presidency in 2003, the EU is likely to seek 
specific, achievable objectives in its dialogues with 
countries such as Russia, China, India and Canada.  In a 
confidential report on EU CT activities presented to FMs at 
 
SIPDIS 
the GAERC in December (please protect), the Presidency and 
Council Secretariat recommended that the EU \"focus COTER 
Troika meetings with third countries, whenever possible, on a 
more operational perspective... One objective of this 
exercise should be to devise, where appropriate common lines 
of action toward certain countries and/or regional 
organizations.  A specific priority should be given to the 
implementation of the revised mechanism for dialogue with the 
United States.\" 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
27. (C) Many of the proposals put forward by the Irish 
Presidency are presentational, and intended to respond to 
political demands in the wake of the Madrid bombings rather 
than move the EU forward in significant ways in their 
counter-terrorism activities.  Still, the creation of a 
\"Counterterror Czar\" and a new political impetus from the 
Council session could help improve EU implementation of 
decisions taken in the wake of the September 11 attacks in 
the US.  Since then, some of the initial EU elan became 
bogged down in legal debates and differing legal practices in 
member states.  The shock of Madrid and a strong new mandate 
from heads of government at the March 25-26 Council session 
may help the EU move ahead where progress heretofore has been 
stymied. 
 
Foster 
"
"15126","3/19/2004 4:22","04BRUSSELS1151","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE58545","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001151 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARMENT FOR PRM - MIKE MCKINLEY AND AF/RSA - MIKE 
BITTRICK; DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID FOR ROGER WINTER AND 
KATE ALMQUIST; NAIROBI FOR LISA PETERSON; USUN FOR GREG 
D\'ELIA; OSLO FOR ERIKCA BARKES-RUGGLES; LONDON FOR CHARLES 
GUERNEY; GENEVA FOR NANCE KYLOH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/18/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PREL, PHUM, CD, SU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: COORDINATION FOR THE CHAD CONFERENCE ON DARFUR: EC 
OBJECTIVES AND SUPPORT 
 
REF: STATE 58545 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC MEZNAR. REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  The European Commission (EC) is in agreement 
with USG thoughts on Darfur mediation (reftel), and is 
prepared to financially support the talks in Chad with 
400,000 euros channeled through the Centre for Humanitarian 
Dialogue (CHD).  According to the EC, important outstanding 
issues include the composition of the rebels\' delegation and 
monitoring mechanisms to ensure that a humanitarian ceasefire 
is respected.  The EU currently plans to be represented at 
the Chad meeting by its heads of delegation in Khartoum and 
N\'djamena.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) On 3/18, PRMOff delivered reftel talking points to 
Roger Moore, DG DEV Head of Unit for the Horn and East 
Africa, and to Christian Manahl, DG DEV desk officer for 
Sudan.  Manahl said the EC supports the role of the CHD as 
facilitator for the Darfur mediation effort.  He said that he 
had met with two representatives of the CHD who had just 
traveled to Brussels from Chad on 3/17.  The CHD reported 
that all sides had agreed to a meeting and that the CHD would 
facilitate logistics for the rebels to attend.  Although the 
Government of Chad had asked CHD to serve as chair, they 
declined the invitation but will act as advisor and support 
to the chair. 
 
3. (C) The EC agrees to N\'djamena as a venue, although it had 
hoped for a more neutral location.  Regarding the proposed 
date, Manahl said he felt that the March 23-24 timeframe was 
too early and that the meeting probably should not take place 
until at least the 27th.  He said that it was important for 
the right rebels to be identified and for them to be allowed 
adequate time to prepare for in depth talks, rather than just 
rounding up anyone to represent the rebel side.  He indicated 
that the rebels who had been in contact with CHD requested 
more time themselves to prepare for the meeting in Chad. 
Manahl said the EC also favored a five to six day meeting 
with a break in the middle so that the negotiating parties 
could consult back with Khartoum and the military leaders in 
the field.  Furthermore, he suggested a follow-up meeting to 
take place a month after the mediation effort in order to 
assess progress (or lack thereof). 
 
4. (C) Manahl said that the EC is prepared to use its Rapid 
Reaction Mechanism (a funding line controlled by DG RELEX 
which can be disbursed quickly) for a contribution of up to 
400,000 euros to support a series of meetings they think will 
be needed to bring about a lasting humanitarian ceasefire and 
sustained humanitarian access.  (Note.  CHD will revise its 
earlier proposal for a February mediation meeting in 
Switzerland, an event which never occurred.  End Note.) 
 
5. (C) Regarding participation, Manahl said that EU heads of 
mission and U.S. representatives in Khartoum had discussed 
delegations of five to six each for the two directly opposing 
groups, and two observers each from the U.S. and EU.  At this 
point, plans are for the EU to be represented by the French 
head of delegation in N\'djamena (who manages EU interests in 
Chad) and perhaps by his Dutch counterpart in Khartoum (who 
manages EU interests in Sudan).  No decision regarding EU 
participation has been finalized; a Brussels-based official 
might attend in place of the Dutch representative. 
 
6. (C) In terms of substance, the EU agrees with the 
principal focus of the talks centering on a humanitarian 
ceasefire and the issue of humanitarian access.  Manahl 
stated that the military discussions needed to be solid and 
substantive in order to result in long-term objectives.  He 
agreed that both sides need to come prepared to provide a 
rough breakout of the forces, the number of armed combatants 
and where they are located, and to where they would be 
withdrawn.  He added that the Janjaweed issue needed to be 
addressed.  Manahl expressed caution about \"self policing\" of 
the ceasefire, noting such might prove ineffective.  He 
preferred using the Verification Monitoring Team (VMT) that 
is already in-country to ensure that the ceasefire 
stabilizes.  Manahl reported that the GoS prefers the use of 
the Civilian Protection Monitoring Team for this purpose, but 
felt that this group did not have the technical capabilities. 
 (He noted that perhaps the VMT could be used after the 
ceasefire was firmly in place.)  Manahl stated that funding 
and/or resources would be required from the international 
community if either of these monitoring teams were employed 
to support the ceasefire. 
 
7. (C) In response to the talking point on \"the mandate to 
negotiate,\" Manahl expressed concern that no formal request 
has yet been made to anyone to organize or hold the Chad 
meeting nor have formal invitations been extended to anyone. 
He said that yesterday the GoS had requested the GoC to 
mediate, but there was disagreement between the two 
governments as to whom would be invited.  Manahl said he 
understood the GoS favored inviting only the SLM, while the 
GoC felt the JEM should also attend.  Another contentious 
factor relating to attendance, according to Manahl, is the 
role of Darfur exilees.  Manahl suggested that perhaps some 
should be included. 
 
8. (C) In closing, Moore and Manahl both said it was 
important to keep sight of two related issues -- the local 
disputes over pasture and land which need to be addressed, as 
well as the political demands of the regions within the 
overall constitutional review process.  Manahl said that 
Darfur might set a bad precedent for other restive regions 
and could encourage violence in order to obtain concessions 
from the central government. 
 
9.  Minimized Considered. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"15139","3/19/2004 9:31","04BRUSSELS1162","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS796|04MINSK352|04STATE48021|04STATE49374","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, UP, BO, MD, EUN, RU, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU DISCUSS RUSSIA, UKRAINE, MOLDOVA, BELARUS 
 
REF: A. A) MINSK 352 
     B. B) STATE 49374 
     C. C) STATE 48021 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 796 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY:  At U.S.-EU COEST consultations on March 16, 
EUR DAS Steven Pifer and EU interlocutors agreed that Russian 
progress on democracy and human rights and cooperation with 
the U.S. and EU in the former Soviet space were central to 
building a better strategic relationship with Russia.  EU 
participants stressed that Russia must agree to extend the 
EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), which 
frames EU-Russia relations, to the 10 incoming EU member 
states without preconditions.  On Ukraine, all agreed that 
strong U.S. and EU messages on democratization were key, 
especially in the run-up to the October elections. 
Discussion of Moldova centered on (1) reenergizing the 
process of resolving the break between Moldova and 
Transniestria, and (2) pressing the Russians to fulfill their 
OSCE \"Istanbul commitments\" to withdraw military materiel 
from Moldova.  Pifer and EU counterparts also discussed their 
upcoming March 19 joint visit to Minsk to push Belarus for 
specific steps toward democracy and respect for human rights. 
 We believe this U.S.-EU joint visit will strongly signal to 
Belarus the need for democratic change.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
EU-RUSSIA RELATIONS BASED ON SHARED VALUES? 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) Irish EU Presidency COEST head Barbara Jones said the 
recent EU reassessment of EU-Russia relations had been 
salutary (ref D).  The principal conclusion had been that the 
relationship has to be based on shared values of democracy, 
respect for human rights, and rule of law.  Also, the EU had 
realized that a lack of coherence in the EU approach to 
Russia had compounded the problems in the relationship. 
Thus, the EU had agreed that a key issues/objectives paper 
would be prepared before each EU-Russia summit to focus 
discussions.  In mandating this paper, the EU member states 
had given the EU presidency a clear signal to work closely 
with the Commission on Russia policy. 
 
--------------------------------- 
U.S., EU SHARE CONCERNS ON RUSSIA 
--------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Pifer said the U.S. had undergone a process of 
reassessment or recalibration of U.S.-Russian relations prior 
to the Secretary\'s visit to Moscow in January.  Key concerns 
were the same as the EU\'s:  democracy issues, the Yukos 
affair, the Duma elections, and Russia\'s actions in the 
former Soviet space.  Pifer agreed that an apparently 
widening gap in democratic values was complicating the 
building of a strategic partnership with Russia. 
 
---------------------------------- 
RUSSIA AND ENLARGED EU: BUMPY ROAD 
---------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Gerhard Lohan, Head of the 
Russia/Ukraine/Moldova/Belarus Unit of the European 
Commission Directorate-General for External Relations, raised 
the EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), 
the basic framework for EU-Russia relations.  He said it was 
critical that Russia extend the PCA without preconditions to 
the ten new EU member states by the time they accede to the 
EU on May 1.  Anything else, he said, would be a \"serious 
violation\" of the PCA as such.  He said Russia had given the 
EU a list of 14 issues that Russia wanted to see resolved 
before the May 1 enlargement.  Lohan said the EU was 
\"addressing\" those issues, and wanted to \"double-track\" the 
process:  Russia would extend the PCA now, and the EU would 
agree to work with Russia on resolving the 14 issues.  Lohan 
lamented that the Russians, however, wanted to put the 
question on hold until the EU-Russia Ministerial, which would 
be very late (the Ministerial, originally scheduled for March 
11, was postponed because of Putin\'s cabinet reshuffle; now 
the EU is shooting for a date in mid- to late April).  At an 
EU-Russia Political Directors\' meeting on March 22, the EU 
plans to press for a Russian statement that it will extend 
the PCA by May 1, according to Lohan. 
 
5. (C) Pifer asked how many of the 14 issues were serious 
Russian concerns.  Lohan replied that close to ten of them, 
mostly economic issues and questions related to visas and 
movement of people (especially related to Kaliningrad), were 
legitimate.  He said the Russians had also raised concerns 
about treatment of Russian minorities in the Baltic states, 
and had even thrown in \"noisy aircraft transition standards\" 
for good measure. 
 
------------------------------- 
EU UNCHR 60 CHECHNYA RESOLUTION 
------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) Jones reported that, since Russia had rejected the EU 
proposal to have a Chairman\'s statement on Chechnya at the 
upcoming UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) in Geneva, the 
EU was now about to circulate a draft UNCHR resolution.  She 
said the EU was counting on U.S. support (she made this point 
three times), and would share the draft with the U.S. as soon 
as the EU had reached internal agreement on the language. 
Pifer replied that the USG was engaged in interagency 
discussions on how to handle Chechnya at the UNCHR, and would 
inform the EU of the outcome of those deliberations. 
 
---------------------------- 
CHECHNYA EU SECURITY PROBLEM 
---------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Pifer said his impression was that Russia\'s focus in 
Chechnya was \"normalization\" -- but it was hard to see any 
Russian plans on how to move forward in Chechnya other than 
simply asserting that the situation was normalizing.  Pifer 
pointed out the difficulty of finding leverage on Chechnya 
other than moral suasion and public criticism, neither of 
which had moved Putin in the past.  Jones said that, with the 
Chechen terrorist trend toward suicide bombing and the latest 
UN High Commissioner for Refugees report showing Russia as 
the highest growth source of refugees to the EU, Chechnya was 
a looming human rights and security problem for the EU -- the 
empty talk about normalization could not be allowed to 
continue. 
 
------------------------------ 
RUSSIA AND FORMER SOVIET SPACE 
------------------------------ 
 
8. (C) The EU participants stressed Russian reluctance to 
talk with the EU about Moldova, Georgia, Belarus and other 
countries in the former Soviet space.  Pifer said the U.S. 
was emphasizing to the Russians that the USG\'s having 
interests in the former Soviet space should not translate 
into a zero-sum game between the U.S. and Russia.  The 
Secretary had focused during his Moscow visit on U.S.-Russia 
 
SIPDIS 
cooperation in Georgia, and Putin had explicitly affirmed 
Georgia\'s right to decide about the presence of foreign 
troops on its territory.  Of course, Pifer added, whether 
Putin\'s affirmation would be reflected in upcoming base 
negotiations with the Georgians remained to be seen. 
 
------------------------------------ 
UKRAINE: OCTOBER ELECTIONS WATERSHED 
------------------------------------ 
 
9. (C) Pifer and Jones agreed that the October presidential 
election would be a watershed for Ukraine -- a free and fair 
election would be a huge step toward consolidation of 
democracy, and the opposite would be a huge setback.  Pifer 
and Jones also underscored the multiplier effect of strong, 
coordinated U.S. and EU messages on democracy.  Pifer noted 
that Deputy Secretary Armitage would visit Kiev on March 
24-25 and would carry a strong message on democracy.  Peter 
McIvor of the Irish MFA said the EU was working on a 
declaration that would focus on the broad message of 
democratic standards, to be issued soon.  The Irish were 
considering the merits of a public calling to account of the 
Kiev government and sought U.S. views.  Pifer replied that 
the real question was to find incentives for President Kuchma 
on democracy issues.  One possible incentive was to condition 
an invitation to the June NATO summit in Istanbul on progress 
toward respecting the opposition and toward a free and fair 
election in October.  Also, one could couch the message to 
Kuchma in terms of his legacy -- he could claim a good record 
on the economy and on Ukraine\'s moving closer to Europe; his 
legacy on democracy could either underpin or undermine his 
record on those other points.  EU participants agreed that 
Kuchma wants to move on (as opposed to running for a third 
term) but has an interest in endorsing a successor and 
arranging for a safe and secure retirement. 
 
-------------------------- 
EU ACTION PLAN FOR UKRAINE 
-------------------------- 
 
10. (C) Lohan discussed the Commission\'s draft action plan 
for Ukraine.  Kiev is buying into the plan for the short 
term, but Ukraine\'s real focus is moving on within a few 
years to an association agreement with the 
medium-to-long-term perspective of EU membership.  The 
Commission is trying to steer Ukraine toward thinking in 
terms of the European Neighborhood policy and away from the 
perspective of EU membership.  EU resources would be tight 
through 2006.  For the 2007-2013 financial framework, the 
Commission hoped to establish a new instrument for 
Neighborhood technical assistance.  In May, Enlargemenet 
Commissioner Guenter Verheugen will report on the Action 
Plan\'s status.  On upcoming high-level meetings with Ukraine, 
McIvor was adamant that the cancellation of the March 30 
EU-Ukraine Ministerial had been due solely to an unavoidable 
conflict that arose in Irish FM Cowen\'s schedule.  The 
EU-Ukraine summit (under the Dutch EU presidency) is 
scheduled for July 8 at The Hague. 
 
11. (C) EU Council Ukraine/Moldova/Belarus Deskoff Carl 
Hartzell reported that, although the Commission has the lead 
on Ukraine in EU institutional terms, EU HighRep Javier 
Solana has taken a keen interest in Ukraine.  Solana believes 
that Ukraine can be a test case for the EU\'s Neighborhood 
Policy.  Jones noted that Ukraine is vulnerable to Russian 
energy pressure.  Pifer agreed that Russia bears close 
watching, but he added that it may be incorrect to attribute 
the activities of Russian companies in Ukraine to official 
Russian policy rather than simply to Russian companies\' 
acting in what they perceive to be their self interest. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
MOLDOVA: TRANSNIESTRIA, ISTANBUL COMMITMENTS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
12. (C) Pifer told the EU that Deputy Secretary Armitage 
expected to make a five-hour stopover in connection with his 
March 24-25 visit to Ukraine.  This would be the most senior 
U.S. visit in about a decade.  The U.S. continued to push for 
Russia\'s fulfillment of its Istanbul commitments, but there 
had been no removal of Russian ammunition from Moldova in at 
least three months.  On a solution to the breakaway region of 
Transnistria, Pifer said that Russia needed to get over the 
failure of the Kozak Plan and reengage within the OSCE 
mediation effort.  Pifer pushed the idea of a meeting of the 
U.S., EU, OSCE, Russia and Ukraine to examine how to move 
forward.  Lohan reported on informal trilateral talks 
(Moldova, Ukraine, Commission) on border management.  He said 
the parties had agreed to set up five joint border posts 
between Moldova and Ukraine, but not on the 
Ukrainian-Transnistrian border.  Commission technical 
assistance was slotted to rise, and the EU was prepared to 
shift from loans to grants contingent on IMF conditionality. 
 
------------------------------------- 
BELARUS: MARCH 19 JOINT U.S.-EU VISIT 
------------------------------------- 
 
13. (C) Pifer and EU counterparts used the Belarus discussion 
to coordinate strategy for their upcoming March 19 joint 
visit to Minsk to push Belarus for specific steps toward 
democracy and respect for human rights.  This visit will be a 
follow-up to the joint U.S.-EU delivery of a demarche to 
Belarus on March 15 linking Belarus\' relations with both the 
U.S. and the EU to specific progress on democracy and respect 
for human rights (refs A-C).  Pifer said a further signal to 
Belarus on U.S. resolve would be that the U.S. Ambassador in 
Minsk, George Krol, and Pifer would depart Minsk together for 
Moscow to talk with the Russians about the situation in 
Belarus, in an effort to see if Moscow was prepared to press 
President Lukashenko on democracy questions (though 
expectations were modest). 
 
--------------------------------- 
COMMENT: COORDINATION WITH EU KEY 
--------------------------------- 
 
14. (C) U.S. and EU views on all four of the countries 
discussed at this COEST remain very close.  U.S.-EU policy 
coordination in the region will remain an important part of 
the USG approach, especially after the May 1 enlargement 
brings the EU to the COEST countries\' borders.  The March 19 
joint visit of the U.S.-EU COEST Troika principals to Minsk 
will strongly signal to Belarus U.S. and Europe\'s common 
conviction of the need for democratic change.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
15. (U) This message has been cleared by EUR DAS Pifer. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"15151","3/19/2004 14:38","04BRUSSELS1177","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE53747","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001177 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID FOR D/AA WOODS AND DIRECTOR 
AFR/SA FLEURET; DCHA/OFDA FOR HALDRAST-SANCHEZ; DCHA/FFP 
FOR LANDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PREF, EAID, ZI, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SPURRING SADC ENGAGEMENT ON ZIMBABWE: EC RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 53747 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC MEZNAR. REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D). 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  The European Commission (EC) is skeptical 
that pressure 
through SADC or any other channel can reverse the 
deteriorating situation in 
Zimbabwe.  The members of SADC have disparate agendas and 
circumstances that 
hinder them from coming together forcefully on Zimbabwe. 
Although official 
development assistance to Zimbabwe has been frozen, the EC 
has stepped up its 
humanitarian efforts to respond to the food, health and 
education needs of 
the Zimbabwean people.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) On 3/18, PRMOff delivered reftel talking points to DG 
DEV Zimbabwe Desk 
officer Joan Pijuan regarding SADC engagement to address the 
deteriorating 
humanitarian and political situation in Zimbabwe.  As noted 
during DAS Pamela 
Bridgewater\'s discussions about Zimbabwe with senior EU 
officials on 3/10 
(septel), the EC is skeptical that any leverage on the GoZ 
will be effective. 
Pijuan said that the EU had clear benchmarks with regard to 
democracy and 
governance issues, but did not want to seem to be imposing 
them from the 
outside.  Ideally, he felt that SADC, for its own sake, 
should convey to Mugabe 
the importance of reform.  However, Pijuan thought it was 
unlikely this would 
happen because many of Zimbabwe\'s neighbors have no real 
incentive to pressure 
Mugabe.  Pijuan stated that the key player, South Africa, has 
its own agenda 
and will only give a token push when necessary to satisfy 
western concerns. 
Namibia shares the land reform issues as Zimbabwe and cannot 
be forward 
leaning. Other neighboring states are worse off economically, 
so the situation 
in Zimbabwe does not seem dire by comparison.  In fact, 
Pijuan said that some 
neighbors benefited economically from the trouble in Zimbabwe 
and might prefer 
to continue reaping advantages from these problems.  Even the 
spillover of 
migrant laborers was welcomed, to a degree, as professional 
and educated classes 
were among those leaving Zimbabwe. 
 
3. (C) Pijuan concluded that Mugabe, far from feeling 
isolated, actually has 
become more arrogant and disdainful of international 
pressure.  Pijuan signaled 
two worrying developments vis-a-vis the international 
community:  the 
withdrawal of Zimbabwe\'s request for UNDP to assist with 
elections and the 
decision to stop accepting food aid from WFP.  According to 
Pijuan, Mugabe will 
not show any pretense of conducting \"fair and free\" 
elections.  He said the 
government has food stocks available which it will freely 
distribute in the 
run-up to the election for political gain.  Pijuan concluded 
his analysis by 
saying that \"perhaps doing nothing is the best plan.  The 
international 
community should monitor and be ready, but should not push 
too much.   Let 
Zimbabwe find its own way.\" 
 
4. (SBU) Pijuan gave an overview of current EC assistance to 
Zimbabwe.  He 
noted that despite the freezing of 9th European Development 
Fund (EDF), the EC 
has actually reinforced its office in Harare since other 
funding sources are 
being utilized to assist vulnerable people.  Approximately 89 
million euros 
will be available this year, as follows: 
-- 25 million euros in remaining funds from the 6th through 
8th EDFs 
administered by DG DEV: All development assistance in the 
pipeline has been 
reprogrammed to meet the current humanitarian needs, mainly 
in the areas of 
health and education.  Although the assistance programs had 
been mainly in 
these same sectors, they are now being applied to meet the 
direct needs of the 
population (such as purchasing medicine) instead of 
supporting the 
institutional structures. 
-- 19 million euros from envelope B of the 9th EDF.  The B 
envelope can be used 
for unforeseen emergencies and does not require a signed 
agreement with the GoZ 
(as does the A envelope, which consists of 127 million euros 
in frozen funds). 
-- 25 million euros for humanitarian work: ECHO aims to meet 
pockets of hunger 
through school feeding, nutritional surveillance, 
agricultural rehabilitation, 
water and sanitation, therapeutic feeding and logistical 
support for 
distribution.  An initial funding decision for 15 million 
euros will be 
forthcoming (with funds likely to go to UNICEF, WFP, UNDP, 
ICRC and WHO). 
ECHO expects that later in the year additional funds will be 
made available 
to match their 2003 funding level of 25 million euros. 
-- 20 million euros for food aid administered by EuropeAid: 
These funds are 
being used to meet food needs through May 2004.  (Note.  This 
amount is half the 
total allocated in 2003.  Of the combined 2003-2004 amount, 
52 million euros will 
be channeled through WFP and the remaining 8 million euros 
through NGOs.  End 
Note.) 
 
FOSTER 
"
"15245","3/23/2004 11:45","04BRUSSELS1218","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE62133","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 001218 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OES/STC PAMELA HARGROW 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KSCA, TSPL, SENV, TSPA, EFIS, BE, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: BELGIUM:  NAME OF INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBLE FOR 
ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, AND HEALTH ISSUES 
 
REF: STATE 62133 
 
Per reftel request here follows information for the 
individual responsible for Environment, Science and 
Technology, and Health Issues: 
 
Name: Paul E. Rohrlich 
Title:      Deputy Economics Counselor 
Telephone Number: 322-508-2430 (work) 
                        322-772-3452 (home) 
Fax Number:             322-513-5333 
E-mail:                 RohrlichPE@state.gov 
 
SCHOONOVER 
"
"15307","3/24/2004 16:31","04BRUSSELS1256","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001256 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, XF, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU STAKES OUT \"COMPLEMENTARY BUT DISTINCT\" 
APPROACH TO GME 
 
Classified By: Political M/C Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.4 (B)(D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  At its March 22 Foreign Ministers\' meeting, 
the EU welcomed a report outlining a comprehensive European 
approach to the Middle East.  Dubbed \"EU Strategic 
Partnership with the Mediterranean and the Middle East,\" the 
paper supports the basic ideas underpinning the U.S. reform 
agenda for the Greater Middle East (GME), but seeks to define 
a complementary but distinct approach for Europe.  The 
Europeans will be shopping their ideas around the Middle East 
over the coming months, but this week\'s endorsement of the 
Irish Presidency\'s interim report indicates we have the EU on 
board on GME as long as they can maintain an independent 
profile.  End Summary. 
 
Vibrant Debate in Brussels Culminates in Irish Strategy Paper 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
2. (U) At this week\'s EU FM meeting, the EU welcomed an 
interim report prepared by the Irish Presidency on a European 
strategy toward the Middle East.  The report was mandated in 
December 2003, and was the result of intensive consultations 
in Brussels over the past two months.  U/S Grossman\'s 
discussions with Hirep Javier Solana and PSC Ambassadors 
stimulated a vibrant debate inside the EU on how it should 
proceed.  Sixteen papers were submitted by EU member states, 
the Council, and Commission and used as input in producing 
the final draft submitted by the Irish. 
 
3. (U) The Irish paper attempts to lay out the core elements 
of a European strategy toward the Middle East.  The 
Euro-Mediterranean Partnership (EMP - commonly called the 
Barcelona Process) remains the cornerstone of EU policy.  The 
EU is the dominant trade partner in the region, but also a 
significant donor: it contributes nearly one billion euros 
each year to EU development assistance activities in the 
Barcelona countries, and the European Investment Bank offers 
financing worth another two billion euros annually.  The 
Irish paper puts great stress on this \"partnership,\" 
emphasizing that any efforts to reach out to the countries of 
the Middle East must offer them a sense of \"ownership.\" 
 
4.  (U) The EU also seeks to bind its policy in the region 
firmly to its commitment to remain fully engaged in seeking 
resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.  The EU FM\'s noted 
that \"progress on the resolution of the Middle East conflict 
cannot be a pre-condition for confronting the urgent reform 
challenges facing the countries of the region, nor vice 
versa.  But it is clear that it will not be possible to build 
a common zone of peace, prosperity and progress unless a just 
and lasting settlement of the conflict is in place.  The lack 
of clear prospects for peace is already making it harder for 
reformers in the region to succeed.\" 
 
EU Objectives and Principles: The Eleven Points 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
5.  (U) The Irish text outlines eleven key objectives and 
principles for EU policy in the region, as follows: 
 
1) Promote the development of a common zone of peace, 
prosperity and progress; 
2) Geographic scope: primarily North Africa and the Middle 
East; 
3) Resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict will be a 
strategic priority; 
4) Partnership requires long-term and sustained engagement; 
5) The EU should strengthen its political dialogue with the 
region; 
6) The EU should use its dialogue with countries of the 
region to promote human rights and the rule of law; 
7) The EU should promote action and cooperation on terrorism, 
WMD and non-proliferation; 
8) The EU will support internally driven reforms in the 
economic, political and social spheres, noting in particular 
the UNDP Human Development Report emphasis on education, good 
governance and women\'s empowerment; 
9) The EU will seek an \"enhanced security dialogue\" (not 
further explained); 
10) The EU will support modernization of the regulatory 
environment in the region to promote WTO membership; and 
11) The EU will work closely with the US, the UN and other 
external actors in pursuit of these goals. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6. (C) In presenting its \"Eleven Points,\" the EU has covered 
much of the same ground that underpins the President\'s 
Forward Strategy for Freedom, and is clearly on track to 
support the ideas in our GME initiative.  The challenge will 
be keeping them there in the coming months.  The next steps 
for the EU are to begin a series of consultations with 
countries in the Middle East on their \"Strategic Partnership\" 
ideas, so that a final concept document can be adopted by the 
EU at their June Council session (June 17-18).  That meeting, 
falling as it does between the G-8 and the US/EU summits, 
will be an opportunity to highlight the \"complementary but 
distinct approach\" of the EU.  Already, however, we are 
hearing concerns from the Council and Commission that events 
in Gaza may divert the Arab League summit and ruin chances 
for a unified appeal for reform in the region.  Without this 
or some other plausible \"sense of ownership\" for Middle East 
reform, the EU will be reluctant to step forward boldly. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"15326","3/25/2004 10:54","04BRUSSELS1274","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE53747","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

251054Z Mar 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 BRUSSELS 001274 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/RSA; DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID FOR 
AFR, DCHA AND PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PREF, EAID, PHUM, XA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: TRANSATLANTIC CONSULTATIONS ON AFRICA HIGHLIGHT 
PEACEKEEPING AND POST-CONFLICT EFFORTS 
 
REF: STATE 53747 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) & (D) 
 
1. (U) Summary.  Major topics of discussion at the 
transatlantic consultations on Africa (COAFR), held March 10 
in Brussels, included:  support to peacekeeping and conflict 
prevention activities, including the EU\'s proposed Africa 
Peace Facility and U.S. support to ECOWAS through EUCOM; 
political developments in the Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC), Uganda, Zimbabwe and Guinea; post-conflict needs in 
Liberia; peace processes in Sudan and Burundi; the boundary 
dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea, and humanitarian 
concerns related to food insecurity and the bombing of 
civilians in the Darfur region.  The U.S. and EU agreed on 
most issues.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Participants 
------------------------ 
 
2. (U) EU participants included: Nicholas O\'Brien, Director 
General for African Affairs (MFA) and Pat Kelly, Deputy 
Director General for African Affairs (MFA) for the Irish 
Presidency; Ambassador Aldo Ajello, EU Special Envoy for the 
Great Lakes; Peter Clausen and Genoveva Hernandez, Africa 
Desk Officers for the EU Council Secretariat; Anders 
Henriksson, Director for the Horn, East and Southern Africa 
(DG DEV), Peter Christiansen, Head of Unit for Central Africa 
(DG DEV), and Andreas Fischer-Barnicol (DG RELEX) for the 
European Commission (EC); and Norbert Braakhuis, Deputy 
Director, Africa (MFA) for the incoming Dutch Presidency. 
USDEL consisted of Ambassador Pamela Bridgewater (Deputy 
Assistant Secretary, AF), William Schofield (Deputy Director, 
AF/Regional Affairs), Patricia Lerner (Development Counselor, 
USEU/USAID), and Marc Meznar (Political Officer, USEU/PRM). 
 
------------------------ 
Peacekeeping and Conflict Prevention: Shared Priorities 
------------------------ 
 
3. (C) The Irish Presidency reviewed the status of the Africa 
Peace Facility (APF), which O\'Brien characterized as an 
\"exciting new dimension of development and political policy,\" 
and said that he expected it to be operational before the end 
of June.  He noted that although \"African ownership\" of the 
APF was important, the EU needed to maintain adequate 
oversight of this 250 million euro funding mechanism. 
Henriksson added that the EU was not seeking to take over the 
African Union (AU) peacekeeping initiatives, but rather 
sought to show solidarity with them by establishing the APF. 
Presently, the EU is finalizing its internal discussion on 
the nature and scope of the APF.  According to Henriksson, 
this includes determining:  1) how South Africa and north 
African countries who are AU members, but not beneficiaries 
of the European Development Fund (from which the EU is 
drawing financial support for the APF), can be incorporated 
into this initiative; 2) how the APF will relate to future 
European security and defense operations in Africa (such as 
the recent Operation Artemis in the DRC); and 3) how the APF 
will relate to and support UN and regional peacekeeping 
initiatives.  Henriksson mentioned that other lingering EU 
concerns about the APF relate to the AU\'s inability to 
effectively manage funds, as well as the lack of military 
expertise necessary to assess situations and decide on 
logistical needs for each APF deployment. 
 
4. (C) The U.S. welcomed the EU plan to support peacekeeping 
in Africa and asked whether APF-supported deployments would 
act as bridge operations until UN peacekeepers could arrive 
or whether they would remain deployed until stabilization had 
been achieved.  Henriksson said that although both short-term 
and long-term deployments were envisioned, at present only 
bridging exercises could realistically be expected.  Ajello 
pointed out that 250 million euros was \"peanuts\" and said the 
APF deployments should be limited to bridging gaps -- that 
the AU should not try to duplicate UNPKOs.  He also suggested 
that the best APF forces deployed by the AU could be 
integrated into follow-on UNPKO operations. 
 
5. (C) When asked whether the APF would engage in any 
capacity enhancement initiatives, Henriksson said that at 
present this would be overly ambitious, but did not rule it 
out.  He spoke of triangular cooperation between the EU, AU 
and UN in both capacity building and conflict prevention 
activities.  He noted there was a common EU position on 
conflict prevention and said that the actual equipment, 
training and logistical support had to come from the Member 
States (not the EC).  By mid-March, the EU should complete a 
comprehensive work plan which will include coordination with 
UNPKO.  Henriksson requested a POC in Washington for 
transatlantic coordination and Bridgewater suggested Mike 
Bittrick of AF/RSA. 
 
------------------------ 
DRC: Kabila\'s Mistakes 
------------------------ 
 
6. (C) In his opening remarks, O\'Brien stated that the dates 
for the Great Lakes Conference had slipped  and probably 
could not take place before November 2005.  He also 
highlighted the need for the Kabila government to regularize 
its diplomatic relations with both Uganda and Rwanda.  Ajello 
said that despite President Kabila\'s resistance to better 
relations with his eastern neighbors, the EU should use its 
clout with Kabila to impress on him the importance of 
diplomatic ties.  He also said the U.S. and EU should work 
together to put pressure on Uganda, perhaps using aid to curb 
involvement in the affairs of the DRC.  Braakuis pointed out 
that both Uganda and Rwanda\'s ambassadors are awaiting 
accreditation even though, in Uganda\'s case, the appointment 
was made over a year ago. 
 
7. (C) Ajello described Kabila as better than his father, but 
still error prone.  He cited the letter Kabila wrote to 
Parliament and made public (characterized by Ajello as 
\"insulting\"), his decision to ask the Supreme Court about his 
prerogative to appoint members to the Independent Electoral 
Commission (IEC) and the Bokab crisis caused by his decision 
to order an arrest outside the chain of command.  Ajello also 
expressed concern over the integration of the army (i.e., the 
lack of a legal basis), problems with the police, and the 
bureaucracy put in place by the government to implement DDR 
(in order to tap into international funds for this activity). 
 Ajello also wondered whether MONUC could monitor control of 
the main mines and said that this could be discussed in the 
UN Security Council as this type of monitoring was not 
currently in its mandate. 
 
8. (C) Bridgewater said that the U.S. shared the EU\'s major 
concerns and stated that financial management was key.  She 
supported SRSG Swing\'s recent suggestion that consideration 
be given to having a \"strategic budget review\" to address 
financial shortfalls.  Christiansen noted that the DRC did 
not have money to support the upcoming elections.  He 
recommended that the international community work together to 
make sure a framework was in place for the elections, as well 
as on financing for it.  Lerner said that USAID is also 
supporting the IEC with training and other technical support. 
 
------------------------ 
Burundi: Dutch Mediation Positive 
------------------------ 
 
9. (C) O\'Brien noted the positive developments in Burundi, 
lamenting that the death of the Irish-born papal nuncio had 
been a catalyst in this regard.  Ajello said that the GoB\'s 
demobilization plans did not go far enough.  He thought it 
was ridiculous to integrate all ex-combatants into an army of 
80,000 and then start to demobilize them.    He also noted 
that the 36 million dollar price tag for this phase of 
demobilization (of the aged, children and disabled) was very 
high and that most donors would refuse to pay army salaries. 
Christiansen recommended that funds for training should be 
restricted to civilians and said he hoped demobilization 
would take place before the elections. 
 
10. (C) Braakhuis gave a read-out on the Netherlands\' 
initiative to sponsor talks between the GoB and FNL.  He said 
that it was very difficult to work with the FNL because of 
their ideological mindset, but within the CNLD there was 
great respect for the FNL as the godfather of Hutu resistance 
to Tutsi domination.  Regarding violence, Braakhuis said that 
he felt the FNL would respond to a ceasefire if there were 
pressure put on both sides.  He said that minimum security 
guarantees needed to be in place before the FNL rebels would 
agree to attend a conference; Braakhuis worried that the 
President did not have a grip on the armed forces.  According 
to Braakhuis, the FNL wants attention, but establishing a 
parallel process could kill the peace in Burundi. 
Bridgewater commended the Netherlands for this initiative and 
said the U.S. would press for FNL to participate in a 
dialogue with the GoB. 
 
11. (C) Regarding AMIB, Christiansen said EC funding should 
enable the deployment to last until at least May or June.  He 
noted that if a UNPKO would take over earlier than that date 
(perhaps by April), the EC would return the left over funding 
to the Burundi development accounts which had been used to 
support AMIB.  The U.S. noted that estimates of over 6000 for 
the PKO seemed too high.  Ajello replied that he thought the 
force could be the current AMIB force of about 2800 plus a 
headquarters element.  Both Christiansen and the Irish 
Presidency noted the importance of upcoming elections. 
 
------------------------ 
East Africa: Concern Over Regional Problems 
------------------------ 
 
12. (C) The Irish Presidency underscored EU concern over the 
border dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea saying that it 
had carried on longer than expected but that the EU had no 
bright ideas.  The EU planned to send a ministerial-level 
Troika to the region in early April.  The  message to the two 
parties would be that the decision of the boundary commission 
was final and that both countries must cooperate with Lloyd 
Axworthy, and that the EU does not view his appointment as an 
alternative negotiating mechanism.  The US thanked the EU for 
this effort, noting that this was consistent with the 
position of  the U.S.  Henriksson urged the U.S. to use its 
clout to influence the government in Addis.  Schofield said 
the U.S. was in contact with the GoE, but cautioned that 
since U.S. relations with Eritrea were \"strained\" we had to 
be careful not to give the impression that the U.S. was 
siding with Ethiopia in this dispute. 
 
13. (C) Regarding food issues, Lerner said that the U.S. and 
EU had developed good transatlantic cooperation in the area 
of short term food aid and long term food security, but that 
another food shortfall was expected this May in Ethiopia. 
Bridgewater noted that to date only 20% of WFP\'s appeal has 
been pledged and that the food pipeline had broken in 
February.  Henriksson replied that the EC was supporting the 
agricultural sector, but that a feudal system which tied 
people to the land was causing the vulnerability and that the 
Ethiopian government was not relaxing these policies. 
 
14. (C) Bridgewater briefed the EU on EACTI, stating East 
Africa was the most important region on the continent for 
counter terrorism activities.  She explained that EACTI was a 
15-month  program which included training for law enforcement 
and judicial authorities, the strengthening of financial 
institutions, and support for border and coastal security. 
She said a conference would be hosted in Kampala this April 
to plan next steps, including possible expansion of the 
program to Madagascar, the Comoros Islands and Yemen. 
Christiansen noted that terrorist financing also comes from 
the mining of tanzanlite and asked whether the recent closing 
of Islamist organizations was connected to USG initiatives. 
Schofield said that EACTI was designed to strengthen regional 
capabilities and not conduct operational activities.   Lerner 
noted the option for donors to invest in secular educational 
opportunities as an alternative to Islamist madrassas. 
 
------------------------ 
Sudan: Darfur and Navaisha both Precarious 
------------------------ 
 
15. (C) O\'Brien expressed \"grave concern\" over the 
deteriorating situation in Darfur, citing the 100,000 
refugees in Chad and 800,000 IDPs.  He informed the U.S. that 
the Government of Sudan had just agreed to U.S.-EU monitoring 
of mediation talks planned for next week and said the EU 
intended to participate.  Objectives of this mediation 
include a ceasefire and increased humanitarian access. 
(Background: UN Special Envoy Tom Vraalsen was in Brussels on 
March 8 and informed the EU of his efforts to involve 
President Deby of Chad to mediate between the GoS and rebels 
active in Darfur.  Besides the humanitarian toll in the 
region, Vraalsen expressed concern for the environmental 
degradation caused by over-grazing and digging wells to water 
herds of cattle.  He invited the EU to participate in this 
mediation effort and said he also intended to invite the U.S. 
 End Note.)   When asked about a possible joint statement on 
Darfur, O\'Brien said that he preferred to wait to see what 
might happen with this new mediation effort.  In any case, he 
agreed that it was important for the U.S. and EU to \"sing off 
the same hymn sheet\" and that we should stay in touch. 
 
16. (C) Regarding a possible Human Rights Commission (UNCHR) 
resolution about the bombing of civilian populations in 
Darfur, O\'Brien said he had learned that the GoS would not 
cooperate with even an Item 19 resolution.  He thought, 
therefore, that the EU might pursue an Item 9 resolution, 
falling back to an Item 19 if necessary.  Both the Irish 
Presidency and the incoming Dutch Presidency noted the Africa 
voting block in the UNCHR would serve to keep the pressure 
off Sudan.  Schofield stated that the U.S. would like to 
support a strong Item 9 resolution.  Braakhuis noted that the 
GoS has become accustomed to the pressure of the 
international community and it has not always had a positive 
impact.  Henriksson also noted that the EC\'s engagement with 
the GoS has resulted in \"very unsatisfactory meetings,\" 
particularly with regard to the humanitarian crisis in 
Darfur. 
 
17. (C) Braakhuis said he was worried that the situation in 
Darfur could complicate the Naivasha talks.  He noted there 
were a number of pending issues and wondered what the \"end 
game\" was for Sudan.  Bridgewater said the Acting Assistant 
Secretary was in Naivasha for the talks and reported positive 
 
SIPDIS 
movement.  She said the U.S. supported the inclusion of Abyei 
in the south.  Regarding a timeline, she said the U.S. had 
hoped for an agreement by the end of last year, but that it 
was up to the interested parties to finalize the negotiations 
and reach a comprehensive settlement. 
 
------------------------ 
Uganda: LRA vs. Museveni 
------------------------ 
 
18. (C) Regarding the situation in northern Uganda, O\'Brien 
noted that the LRA had a base in Sudan.  Schofield said that 
the GoS had said it had stopped supporting the LRA, and he 
noted the LRA was on the U.S. terrorism exclusion list. 
Bridgewater said that although the U.S. supported the GoU\'s 
struggle against the LRA, a political solution was required, 
not a military one.  Schofield also pointed out that the GoU 
was buying weapons of no particular use, such as jets and 
other high technology equipment.  He called for more 
transparency regarding Uganda\'s military budget.  Braakhuis 
commented on the GoU\'s call to have the International 
Criminal Court investigate the LRA leadership and questioned 
what impact this might have on a negotiated settlement.  He 
said there were indications the LRA was getting stronger and 
mentioned a UK defense review undertaken by DFID which might 
recommend that the strength of the Ugandan military be 
increased by one third.  Braakhuis said this would further 
complicate the situation in Uganda.  Both the U.S. and EU 
supported the current presidential term limits and felt 
President Museveni should step down at the end of his term. 
 
------------------------ 
West Africa:  Next steps for Liberia, Guinea and ECOWAS 
------------------------ 
 
19. (C) Bridgewater reported that a DoS/DoD mission had been 
undertaken to Liberia to assess military needs and 
recommended a merit based military that could protect its 
borders, including fishing resources along its coasts.  She 
said that support to the financial sector was crucial and 
that the interim government lacked transparency.  She called 
for more \"economic boots on the ground\" and said that the 
U.S. Treasury Department would be sending personnel to assist 
Liberian authorities. 
 
20. (SBU) Christiansen said that the 9 million euros (of the 
total 160 million euros pledge for Liberia) would be 
designated for technical support to and audits of key 
financial institution, 16 million euros for DDR activities, 
18 million euros for local community development (including 
reintegration of refugees, IDPs and ex-combatants); 8 million 
euros to support ECOWAS, and 55 million euros probably for 
health and education.  He added that 50 million euros were 
ready to spend and that a plan was being drafted for the 
remainder.  O\'Brien noted that Ireland had also made 5 
million euros available bilaterally for Liberia to support 
good governance, health and education. 
 
21. (C) Bridgewater said that the U.S., through EUCOM, would 
build capacity of ECOWAS by conducting training and joint 
exercises to support rapid deployments and would enhance 
communications networks in the region.  She also described 
initiatives to support ECOWAS headquarters in Abuja, 
including efforts to attract the best African military 
personnel (through improved housing and other benefits). 
Christiansen said that ECOWAS was clearly better now than ten 
years ago, but agreed that it still needed strengthening. 
Fischer-Barnicol added that good support at the head of state 
level for ECOWAS did not translate to improvements in the 
organization\'s bureaucracy.  He said the ECOWAS\' mission was 
not always clear and that only 10% of the EC\'s pledge for 
Liberia would be earmarked for peacekeeping.  (Note.  At a 
separate meeting at DG DEV, the EC expressed dissatisfaction 
with Francis Blaine for not being proactive and said that the 
EC was considering cutting its financial support for the 
ECOWAS office in Liberia.  End Note.) 
 
22. (C) Henriksson asked whether ECOWAS was becoming a victim 
of its own success and cautioned against overextending the 
organization.  He noted that although the peace/security 
sectors were dynamic, ECOWAS was structured to support 
economic growth.  Bridgewater shared this concern and agreed 
that the organization should not be diverted from its 
economic foundation by trying to be \"all things to all 
people.\" 
 
23. (C) Bridgewater stated that expanding the scope of the 
International Contact Group on Liberia to include Guinea had 
merit.  She said the U.S. was concerned about a deterioration 
of the social and economic conditions in Guinea and opposed 
the military stepping in when Presidente Conte left office. 
She said the GoG needed to begin a dialogue with the 
opposition and the country also needed an independent media. 
 
24. (C) O\'Brien stated that the EU was considering engaging 
Guinea in an \"article 96\" dialogue (of the Cotonou agreement) 
in which the GoG would come to Brussels and lay out their 
reform agenda.  The dialogue would continue for three months 
and at the end, the EU would decide whether to expand it to a 
regular, on-going \"article 8\" dialogue or end it for lack of 
substantive progress in Guinea.  Christiansen added that the 
EU has asked for the following items to be on the article 96 
agenda:  1) an independent body to supervise elections; 2) 
liberalization of the airwaves; and 3) measures to reverse 
the deterioration of the macro-economic climate. 
Christiansen noted that the December 2003 election had added 
to the further deterioration in Guinea and that the 
president\'s illness had basically halted the decision making 
process.  The EC\'s development assistance is frozen.  Lerner 
noted that USAID still has a $21 million assistance budget 
for Guinea, including programs to address AIDS, 
democracy/governance, education and agriculture. 
 
------------------------ 
Zimbabwe: No Bright Solutions 
------------------------ 
 
25. (C) Bridgewater made many of the points contained in 
reftel demarche about the continuing political impasse and 
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe.  She 
welcomed the EU\'s renewal and expansion of targeted sanctions 
and stressed the critical importance of urging the GoZ to 
establish a meaningful dialogue with the opposition parties. 
Responding to a question from the Irish Presidency about U.S. 
sanctions, Bridgewater stated that they included some 
businesses that were owned and/or operated by senior ZANU-PF 
figures.  O\'Brien said that the EU had considered similar 
provisions but had concluded that they were inoperable.  He 
also said the EU did not favor general economic sanctions 
that would affect the population.  Henriksson noted that 
there was a lack of understanding among Zimbabwean citizens 
about the EU\'s sanctions, with many believing them to be 
comprehensive instead of targeted.  Bridgewater responded 
that public diplomacy was critical and that many people were 
surprised that the U.S. still was giving $380 million for 
humanitarian assistance in Zimbabwe.  Lerner reviewed the 
various humanitarian needs, including the HIV/AIDS pandemic, 
drought in the region, unemployment and a contracting 
economy.  O\'Brien noted that the parallel dollar economy was 
thriving.  Henriksson said that the EC had allocated 20 
million euros for food needs until May, but no further 
funding was available.  He also said that the GoZ had not 
requested more food aid and that if they did there was a risk 
of politicized distribution for electoral gains. 
 
26. (C) Regarding a UNCHR resolution, O\'Brien said that 
Mugabe had been successful in convincing his counterparts in 
Africa that he was engaging in an anti-colonial struggle and 
that African governments were not responsive to critical 
resolutions.  Bridgewater encouraged the EU to consult with 
South Africa, Nigeria and other African members of the 
Commission before pursuing a resolution. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
27. (SBU)  The Irish Presidency\'s pledge to make Africa one 
of its top priorities was evidenced at the COAFR discussions. 
 Irish engagement in reconstructing Liberia and in finalizing 
decisions related to the APF peacekeeping facility are two 
examples of the Presidency\'s leadership being instrumental in 
achieving goals supported by the U.S.  Dutch leadership in 
Burundi and Sudan peace negotiations bode well for continued 
transatlantic cooperation in the second semester of 2004. 
 
 
(Ambassador Bridgewater has cleared this message.) 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"15346","3/25/2004 16:20","04BRUSSELS1295","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BELGRADE646","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001295 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, SR, ZL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SERB PM KOSTUNICA VISITS EU; SOLANA AND PATTEN\'S 
\"DISAPPOINTING\" TRIP TO KOSOVO 
 
REF: BELGRADE 646 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) Our readout of Serb PM Kostunica\'s March 23 meetings 
in Brussels with High Rep Solana, and Commissioners Prodi and 
Patten tracks closely with reftel account from Belgrade.  In 
addition, Kostunica is reported to have hinted at the 
possibility of a \"quiet dialogue\" with ICTY, claimed to be 
open to cooperation with Defense Minister Tadic, and was 
upbeat on the future of the State Union with Montenegro. 
Separately, Solana and Patten are reported to have been \"very 
disappointed\" by their March 24 visit to Kosovo, with 
disparaging assessments of both UNMIK SRSG Holkeri and most 
of the Kosovar Albanian leadership, save PM Rexhepi.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
KOSTUNICA VISIT 
---------------- 
 
2. (C) KOSOVO:   Solana did prompt Kostunica to change his 
terminology about Kosovo from \"cantonization\" to 
\"decentralization\".  (NOTE: At the March 23 Contact Group 
meeting, which was held just after Solana\'s meetings with 
Kostunica, there was general agreement that a further shift 
in language away from \"decentralization\" to discussion of 
\"increasing powers of local government\" would be desirable. 
END NOTE.) 
 
3. (C) ICTY: Both Solana and Commissioner Patten were clear 
that it was up to Belgrade to improve its relations with the 
court.  According to our contacts, Kostunica\'s reply stressed 
not only the need to support domestic trials and repetitions 
of demands for an undefined \"two-way street\", but he also 
acknowledge the need to engage with ICTY and claimed Belgrade 
was \"already thinking about a \'quiet dialogue\'.\" 
 
4. (C) SERBIAN POLITICS:  Kostunica told both Patten and 
Solana that he remains open to working with Defense Minister 
Tadic and that they have a good working relationship.  But 
Kostunica was uncertain what sort of deal could be reached 
and implied that any difficulties lay with Tadic and his 
party, not on Kostunica\'s side.  With Patten, Kostunica was 
also reported to be quite clear that he was not interested in 
running for President, a development that worries the 
Commission, as they feel this will leave the field open for 
the Radicals.  Finally, Kostunia was upbeat on prospects for 
the State Union, as he claimed Milo Djukanovic\'s political 
position in Montenegro was weakening, forcing him to 
cooperate more with Belgrade.  Neither Patten nor Solana were 
persuaded by Kostunica\'s analysis. 
 
5. (C) Kostunica\'s team did not earn very favorable reviews 
from either Solana or Patten\'s staffs.  Trade Minister Bubalo 
received curiously mixed reviews: Solana\'s staff found him a 
rather \"concrete\" guy with some new ideas.  But in the Patten 
meeting, where trade issues (related to the EU\'s concerns on 
customs fraud) were actually discussed, Bubalo was 
\"unimpressive and basically had nothing to say.\" 
 
SOLANA/PATTEN VISIT TO KOSOVO 
----------------------------- 
 
6. (C) Patten\'s staff told us both Patten and Solana returned 
from their one-day visit to Kosovo on March 24 \"very 
disappointed\".  Other than sessions with the German commander 
of KFOR and USOP COM Marcie Ries, the EU officials found 
their meetings in Pristina rather discouraging.  UNMIK SRSG 
Holkeri was described to us as a \"disaster\" who gave a 
\"lamentable performance\" in his meeting with Solana and 
Patten.  Particularly galling to Solana and Patten was when 
they were confronted by angry Serb civilians in the town of 
Kosovo Polje, Holkeri \"just sat in his car\" and then 
criticized Solana and Patten for taking risks by talking to 
the crowd.  Solana and Patten were also highly critical of 
most of the Kosovar Albanian leaders they met, whose 
statements about the recent violence were entirely 
inadequate.  Ibrahim Rugova reportedly prompted particular 
disdain (\"Solana even refused to accept his rocks\") for his 
weak excuses that he could do little to stop the violence 
because he did not control the police. 
 
7. (C) By contrast, Solana and Patten were favorably 
impressed by their meeting with PM Rexhepi.  He was \"miles 
ahead of the others\" in terms of understanding and accepting 
his political responsiblities in the current situation.  In 
this context, they took seriously Rexhepi\'s plea for caution 
when pressing for punishment of the villians in last week\'s 
events, even if they were not completely convinced by his 
arguments. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"15371","3/26/2004 11:34","04BRUSSELS1304","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 001304 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/26/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU CONSTITUTIONAL TREATY NEGOTIATIONS TO RE-START 
IN APRIL, CONCLUDE IN JUNE 
 
REF: USEU TODAY 3/19/04 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
1. (SBU) EU leaders at their March 25 Summit dinner agreed to 
an Irish Presidency recommendation that the EU\'s 
Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) on a draft EU 
Constitutional Treaty, which collapsed in December 2003 due 
to disagreements about voting weights, should be re-started, 
with the aim of completing negotiations by the June 17-18 EU 
Summit.  Irish PM Bertie Ahern said his government would 
begin work next week on IGC preparations, including for a 
planned visit to Dublin by Spanish PM-elect Zapatero in the 
third week of April.  No formal IGC session should be 
expected until the end of April.  Even then, Ahern said, some 
Member States had already made clear that they would not be 
prepared to engage in serious negotiations on some key issues 
until May at the earliest. 
 
2. (SBU) Ahern and other EU leaders, such as European 
Parliament (EP) President Pat Cox, said they would very much 
like to complete the IGC negotiations in time for the June 
10-13 EP elections.  Ahern said the Irish \"would try our 
best\" to conclude by June 10, but noted that the specific 
target EU leaders had set was the June 17-18 EU Summit.  An 
IGC source told us talk of finishing prior to the elections 
was only window-dressing; many EU leaders prefer that a final 
Constitutional Treaty deal come only after the EP elections, 
to avoid having the new Treaty and the question of whether it 
should be put to referendum for ratification becoming major 
campaign issues.  (COMMENT: The referendum issue can be 
partially defused by this timeline, as leaders will say \"we 
can\'t decide whether a referendum is appropriate until we 
know exactly what will be in the document.\"  Nonetheless, we 
expect that the Constitutional Treaty will become a central 
campaign issue in at least some states.  End Comment.) 
 
3. (C) COMMENT:  The IGC is re-starting because, as Polish FM 
Cimosiewicz put it, all EU Member States now accept that a 
compromise can be found using a \"double majority\" formula for 
voting in the Council, but that formula cannot be the \"50 
percent of Member States representing 60 percent of the 
population\" formula in the current draft.  Spain and Poland 
have relaxed their \"Nice or nothing\" stance, while France and 
Germany have dropped their insistence on the 50/60 formula. 
While some media and EU governments continue to push for a 
formula with a higher threshold for Member States but a lower 
bar for population, we believe (as reported Ref A) that the 
most likely solution will be one that raises both 
percentages.  Even if that formula can be agreed, the Irish 
Presidency will still face tough negotiations on a number of 
other issues, particularly whether additional policy areas 
should move from consensus to \"double majority\" voting.  If 
the Irish weren\'t confident they could reach a comprehensive 
deal, they would not have re-started the IGC; but success is 
still not assured. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"15389","3/26/2004 17:53","04BRUSSELS1337","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/26/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ZL, CY, IS, IZ, IV, EUN, RU, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU SUMMIT: FOREIGN POLICY TOPICS 
 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4. (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------ 
 
1. (SBU) The EU\'s March 25-26 Summit ran quickly through a 
series of foreign policy issues during dinner on March 25, 
followed up by a lunch discussion on Cyprus March 26 that 
lasted less than one hour.  The final Conclusions (available 
on at ue.eu.int/latest news) consisted of language largely 
repeating earlier positions on Iraq, the Middle East, Cyprus, 
Kosovo, and Afghanistan.  Two topics added to the agenda at 
the last minute were Russia and Cote d\'Ivoire, but even on 
those the language essentially reiterated earlier positions. 
On some topics, particularly Cyprus, however, the fact that 
the Conclusions say nothing new does not mean they weren\'t 
the subject of lengthy debate at the working level.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
IRAQ 
---- 
 
2. (C) A British source told us the Conclusions on Iraq had 
been drafted by the UK together with the Irish Presidency. 
They were \"carefully worded to be as helpful to the Coalition 
as possible.\"  The Conclusions harshly condemn the recent 
terror attacks, particularly the targeting of civilians as a 
method of attempting \"to disrupt the process of restoring 
sovereignty and stability to Iraq.\"  The Conclusions make 
repeated reference to the EU\'s desire for \"a strong\" or 
\"vital and growing\" UN role in the political transition 
process, but dances around the issue of any further UNSCR by 
saying the EU looks forward to having the UN\'s role 
\"endorsed\" by the UNSC.  Asked during a press conference if 
he felt a new UNSCR was necessary, French President Chirac 
noted France\'s \"consistent\" position that the only way to 
bring stability to Iraq was by putting in place a 
representative government with full powers, but on a UNSCR 
would only say that \"France\'s position continues to be that 
it would be useful.\"  European Parliament President Pat Cox, 
in a separate press conference, underlined the EU\'s interest 
in a \"core and central role\" for the UN, but added, in what 
appeared to be an indirect reference to Spain and others, 
that if such a role could be secured in time, then the EU\'s 
June 17-18 EU Summit \"would have to deliver.\" 
 
MIDDLE EAST: GME, YASSIN\'S DEATH 
-------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) The language here is largely a repetition of past 
GAERC or EU Summit Conclusions.  One sentence, highlighted in 
press reports, makes a reference that we do not recall seeing 
in earlier Conclusions, but which is consistent with standard 
EU policy: \"the EU will not recognize any change to the 
pre-1967 borders other than those arrived at by agreement 
between the parties.\"  The Conclusions also repeat the March 
22 GAERC\'s objections to the \"extra-judicial killing of Hamas 
leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin.\"  But, asked by the press about 
the EU\'s views on the vetoed UNSCR condemning the Israeli 
attack, Irish FM Brian Cowen commented that the draft 
Resolution failed because it was \"unbalanced\" and failed to 
condemn suicide bombings as well.  Asked in his press 
conference about whether Yassin\'s death would torpedo the 
U.S. Greater Middle East initiative, Chirac said that the 
project had been \"bouscule\" (which can be loosely translated 
as either \"shoved\" or \"knocked over\").  Still, in the Summit 
Conclusions the EU leaders recalled \"the readiness of the EU 
to work with the US and other partners in cooperating with 
the region.\"  Irish PM Ahern noted that he and FM Cowen would 
be traveling to the Arab League Summit next week, and meeting 
with Egyptian President Mubarak on March 29. 
 
CYPRUS 
------ 
 
4. (C) Our British contact stressed that the Conclusions say 
\"absolutely nothing that has not been said before.\"  He noted 
that drafters had argued all through the night of March 
25-26, only concluding their negotiations at 6 a.m. this 
morning.  While the final version says the Summit \"welcomes 
the Commission\'s continued willingness to offer assistance 
for a speedy solution within the framework of the acquis,\" 
our contact said the Greek delegation had argued \"endlessly\" 
for tougher language that would stress that any settlement 
must conform to the acquis, or that no EU citizen could be 
treated differently than another.  He said that after the 
negotiations the Greeks were irritated by the British 
insistence on sticking strictly to old texts, while the Turks 
were annoyed the Conclusions included any reference at all to 
the \"acquis.\"  \"The Turks should be pleased there is nothing 
new in the text, and that it is not worse,\" he added.  We 
also note that the Conclusions include a sentence saying the 
Summit \"welcomes the Commission\'s offer to organize a 
high-level international conference in Brussels on 15 April 
to prepare a donors conference.\" 
 
RUSSIA 
------ 
 
5. (C) Reportedly, over the past of couple of weeks the EU 
has gone back and forth about whether to include specific 
reference to Russia in this Summit\'s Conclusions.  In the end 
the Summit took the opportunity to not only congratulate 
President Putin on his re-election, but, more substantively, 
to reiterate to Russia that the EU expects its Partnership 
and Cooperation Agreement with Russia \"to be applicable to 
all Member States without pre-condition or distinction as 
from May 1, 2004.\"  A Russian colleague observing at the 
Summit with us, acknowledged that Russia had been taken by 
surprise by its inclusion in the Conclusions, and speculated 
that it was Poland that most likely pushed for the language 
on the PCA to be included. 
 
COTE D\'IVOIRE 
------------- 
 
6. (U) Presumably at French request, the Summit added a short 
paragraph on March 26 to its Conclusions regretting the 
recent violence and stressing that \"full implementation of 
the Marcoussis agreements is essential for returning peace in 
the country.\" 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"15391","3/26/2004 18:25","04BRUSSELS1338","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS1134","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001338 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA AND S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2014 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, PGOV, PINR, EFIN, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU LEADERS PLEDGE ACTION ON TERRORISM, NAME NEW CT 
CZAR 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 1134 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
SUMMARY AND COMMENT 
------------------- 
 
1. (U) In the wake of the Madrid bombings, EU leaders on 
March 25 issued a Declaration on Combating Terrorism 
(available at http://ue.eu.int/).  They pledged to improve 
cooperation, to speed up implementation of agreed EU 
measures, and announced new initiatives to counter the 
terrorist threat.  Among these are a political commitment by 
the EU-25 to abide by a Solidarity Clause (applicable to 
terrorism only) pledging mutual assistance in case of a 
terrorist attack, and appointing an EU CT Coordinator -- the 
Dutchman Gijs de Vries -- to monitor implementation of 
guidelines and ensure more effective cooperation among EU 
member states and institutions.  EU leaders also released, as 
an annex to the Declaration, an updated CT Action Plan which 
among other things calls for the EU to \"include effective 
counter-terrorism clauses in all agreements with third 
countries.\" 
 
2. (C) Most of the elements of the Summit were political 
rather than practical, and the real test for the EU will be 
in their implementation.  By establishing target deadlines 
for implementation on the national level, as well as creating 
the new position of coordinator to help knock heads in 
Brussels, the EU has indicated that they will begin to take 
their post-September 11 commitments more seriously.  We 
should welcome the conclusions, and pledge to work closely 
with de Vries as he seeks to chart this new counter-terrorism 
course in the Brussels bureaucracy.  Post recommends an early 
invitation to de Vries to meet with US counterparts to 
discuss ways the US and EU can cooperate on many of the areas 
mentioned in the declaration where US and EU goals coincide. 
END SUMMARY AND COMMENT. 
 
Solidarity Clause 
----------------- 
 
3. (C) In an annex to the CT Declaration, EU leaders made a 
mostly symbolic political commitment to act jointly against 
terrorist acts, \"in the spirit of the Solidarity Clause\" 
contained in the draft EU Constitutional Treaty.  Member 
states pledged mutual civil-military assistance to prevent 
terrorist attacks and to respond, if asked, in the event of 
an attack on another member state.  Each country remains free 
to choose the most appropriate means to comply with the 
solidarity commitment in the event of attack or imminent 
threat.  (COMMENT: The \"clause\" applies to terrorism only, 
and represents the natural desire of EU countries to come 
together at times of crisis.  It is not a NATO Article 
Five-type clause, and the Summit declaration offered an \"out\" 
to both NATO and neutral countries by saying that each state 
would choose the most appropriate means to comply with this 
commitment.  A contact present in the room as notetaker tells 
us that -- contrary to some press reporting -- there was 
no/no discussion by leaders of what the clause would mean in 
practice.  END COMMENT.) 
 
Counter-Terrorism Coordinator 
----------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Based on the need for a comprehensive and strongly 
coordinated approach in response to the terrorism threat, EU 
leaders agreed to establish a new position of 
Counter-Terrorism Coordinator and agreed to a suggestion by 
HR Solana to appoint the Dutchman Gijs de Vries, former State 
Secretary for the Interior and former Dutch representative to 
 
SIPDIS 
the Convention on the Future of Europe.  De Vries, who will 
take up his post as early as March 29, will work under Solana 
(in the Council Secretariat), and will coordinate the work of 
the Council in combating terrorism.  He is mandated to 
provide overview and coordination assistance to the Council, 
and to ensure implementation of Council decisions.  His first 
report to the Council is due in June.  A Council interlocutor 
present for the discussion said that EU leaders acknowledged 
the need to speed up national implementation of EU CT 
measures.  While not formally mandating him to do so, the 
Summit results left open the possibility that de Vries might 
be able to have a limited role assisting national efforts. 
One member state source said that de Vries will play an 
important role as the guardian of member state commitments, 
ensuring that they are carried out, and coming up with 
additional recommendations and ideas to advance CT efforts. 
(COMMENT: Clearly, not all member states will tolerate 
internal meddling from a Brussels coordinator.  De Vries\' 
ability to track and/or coordinate member state efforts will 
depend largely on his political sensitivities and ability to 
navigate below the radar of public political scrutiny.  END 
COMMENT.) 
 
Terrorism Finance 
----------------- 
 
5. (SBU) The Declaration is vague on terrorism financing 
(TF), repeating many of the standard EU talking points about 
needing to streamline processes and enhance cooperation.  The 
Declaration specifically tasks the Commission to \"consider 
improvements on regulation and transparency of legal 
entities, including charities and alternative remittance 
systems...\"  But unlike most of the other measures mandated 
in the Declaration, none of the calls for action on TF are 
linked to a deadline. 
 
The US and NATO 
--------------- 
 
6. (U) The Declaration has language stating the leaders\' 
intention to \"further strengthen cooperation with the US and 
other partners in countering the threat posed by terrorism.\" 
The revised Action Plan also calls on the EU to \"identify 
areas for closer cooperation in consequence management with 
other international organizations, including NATO.\" 
 
Linking EU Relations to CT Efforts 
---------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) In the Declaration, the EU says it will monitor the 
performance of third countries in their CT commitments, and 
suggests that good relations with the EU will depend on 
satisfactory progress.  The revised action plan goes a bit 
further in calling on the EU to \"Include effective 
counter-terrorism clauses in all agreements with third 
countries.\"  Interlocutors tell us that no proposals are yet 
on the table for how to do this.  Our prediction is that the 
EU will draft a model clause -- along the lines of the 
nonproliferation clause agreed last year -- for use in 
\"mixed\" (i.e. Council and Commission) agreements with third 
countries.  Because member states and the Council have no 
direct authority over Commission-only agreements, this Summit 
tasking does not apply to agreements on only economic or 
assistance issues. 
 
Intelligence Sharing 
-------------------- 
 
8. (C) The leaders backed HR Solana\'s efforts to develop, 
within the EU Council Secretariat, an intelligence capacity 
\"on all aspects of the terrorist threat with a view to 
informing EU policy.\"  Ahern said the leaders tasked Solana 
to report to the June EU Summit on \"how intelligence capacity 
can be integrated within the Council structure.\"  Though 
highlighted in many press reports, this point of the 
Declaration falls short of committing the leaders to 
establish \"an EU intelligence agency,\" as recently suggested 
by Austria (with the backing of Belgium).  Instead, the 
Declaration calls upon member states \"to improve mechanisms 
for cooperation and the promotion of effective systematic 
collaboration between police, security and intelligence 
services.\" 
 
9. (C) According to our interlocutors, Solana told leaders 
that the EU Situation Center would begin (before the June 
Summit) expanding its work on terrorism on the basis of 
existing resources.  SitCen director William Shapcott told us 
Solana already has discussed his ideas with EU Interior 
Ministers: he will ask the June Council session to agree to 
beefing up the Situation Center\'s analytical capacity, to 
include officials from internal security services in member 
states (currently, only external services are active). 
Shapcott emphasized the Situation Center would concentrate on 
analysis, not operational details, and stressed that there 
were no plans to create a \"European CIA.\" 
 
An EU PNR System? 
----------------- 
10. (SBU) The Declaration contains a helpful paragraph 
inviting \"the Commission to bring forward a proposal no later 
than June 2004 for a common EU approach to the use of 
passenger data for border and aviation security and other law 
enforcement purposes.\"  Apart from its obvious benefit to 
European security, this decision may assist US efforts to 
focus MEPs in the Parliament on approving the recently 
submitted US-EU PNR deal. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (C) Most of the elements of the summit were political 
rather than practical, and the real test for the EU will be 
in their implementation.  By establishing target deadlines 
for implementation on the national level, as well as creating 
the new position of coordinator to help knock heads in 
Brussels, the EU has indicated that they will begin to take 
their post-September 11 commitments more seriously.  We 
should welcome the conclusions, and pledge to work closely 
with de Vries as he seeks to chart this new counter-terrorism 
course in the Brussels bureaucracy.  On PNR, biometrics, 
transport security, consequence management, terrorist 
financing, and terrorism prevention, this Summit offers an 
opportunity to enrich our cooperation with the EU and perhaps 
make forward progress in areas where we have had difficulties 
in the past.  Post recommends and early invitation to de 
Vries to coordinate ways the US and EU can cooperate on the 
areas mentioned in the declaration where U.S. and EU goals 
coincide. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"15537","3/31/2004 12:39","04BRUSSELS1401","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE67849","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001401 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/29/2009 
TAGS: PREL, KNNP, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: P/DAS RIES DISCUSSES US-EU SUMMIT DELIVERABLES 
WITH EU WMD REP GIANNELLA 
 
REF: A. STATE 67849 
 
     B. STATE 65685 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  In a March 30 meeting with HR Solana\'s WMD 
Rep Annalisa Giannella, EUR P/DAS Charlie Ries shared 
preliminary USG thoughts about possible nonproliferation 
deliverables for the June US-EU Dublin Summit.  Stressing 
that these were just early ideas and not formal proposals, 
Ries suggested that we might work toward agreements on 
achieving a successful NPT Revcon; implementing provisions of 
the draft UNSCR on nonproliferation; securing radioactive 
sources; and reinforcing the G-8 Sea Island Summit 
initiatives.  Giannella agreed with the ideas in principle, 
and suggested two more ideas for possible Summit 
deliverables: promoting nonproliferation initiatives in the 
ASEAN Regional Forum and promoting initiatives to strengthen 
the IAEA.  She agreed with Ries that the Summit statement 
should not just repeat past statements, but should include a 
meaningful new commitment to cooperate on specific issues. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Also in attendance were Council Policy Advisor Andreas 
Strubb and USEU Poloff Van Reidhead. 
 
NPT and UNSC Nonproliferation Resolution 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Giannella agreed that in principle our ideas looked 
promising, but cautioned that not all EU member states shared 
our views on the NPT.  We would need some latitude to finesse 
the language of any declaration, noting that \"not everyone\" 
agrees with our proposal not to supply uranium enrichment or 
reprocessing equipment to countries that do not already 
possess enrichment or reprocessing facilities.  On the draft 
UNSCR on nonproliferation, Giannella said that EU member 
states were supportive of the effort and would likely support 
a US-EU deliverable.  (COMMENT: The EU Political and Security 
Committee has been discussing ways for the EU to enforce 
criminal sanctions on WMD-related material since January. 
One option is to issue a Council Declaration, which could be 
achieved relatively quickly, but which would only have the 
force of a political commitment by member states to implement 
the measures at the national level.  Another is to create a 
\"Third Pillar\" legal mechanism at the EU level that would 
allow the Commission to oversee the harmonization of national 
sanctions and monitor member state enforcement.  An internal 
PSC document (please protect) prepared by Giannella\'s office 
suggests that Giannella prefers both, i.e. seeking a 
political declaration as an immediate step and later creating 
a legal framework at the EU level.  END COMMENT.) 
 
Sea Island Summit and Securing Radioactive Sources 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
4. (C) Giannella also agreed that securing radioactive 
sources would be a fruitful area for cooperation.  She noted 
that the EU Summit in December adopted a Directive on 
securing sources, and said that the EU had already begun a 
diplomatic campaign to encourage other countries to do the 
same.  On reinforcing the message of the G-8 Sea Island 
Summit, Giannella said that while the idea was worth 
pursuing, the G-8 format could be awkward for the EU because 
most member states are not directly involved.  Stressing that 
her view on this was strictly personal, she said that we 
would have a better chance at incorporating G-8 
nonproliferation initiatives into the US-EU Summit if we 
consulted directly with non-G8 EU member states.  Strubb 
pointed out that we should keep Giannella and himself in the 
loop on this issue because they were supportive of the idea 
and would be able to promote it the PSC context. 
 
ARF and IAEA 
------------ 
 
5. (C) Giannella said she was pleased with the recent 
US-proposed statement on nonproliferation for the ASEAN 
Regional Forum (ARF) Ministerial in July (ref. B).  Yet we 
should go even further, she said.  One idea would be for the 
US and EU, and perhaps Australia, Canada and others, to work 
together within the ARF to bring all of its member states 
into the nonproliferation regimes.  Ries agreed that US-EU 
cooperation in the ARF could be fruitful, and said he would 
take it back for consideration in the context of the US-EU 
Summit.  Giannella also suggested using the Summit to 
reinforce shared ideas on strengthening the IAEA.  She said 
that while one \"major\" EU member state is still blocking EU 
consensus on making the Additional Protocol (AP) a condition 
of supply in the NSG, she thought that this obstacle would 
soon be resolved.  Save for the unnamed holdout, EU member 
states are very supportive of this effort, she said, and it 
might make a good point for the Summit. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"15628","4/2/2004 10:30","04BRUSSELS1431","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001431 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOL FOR BLS AND ILAB 
TREASURY FOR IMI 
STATE FOR DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU-15 UNEMPLOYMENT UNCHANGED AT 8.0 PERCENT 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  Aggregate unemployment in the EU-15 
was 8.0 percent in February 2004.  The rate was 
unchanged compared to the seven previous months and 
the February 2003 rate.  The ten acceding countries 
showed a 14.2 percent average unemployment rate for 
February 2004, also unchanged for the past five 
months.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  With seasonal adjustment and compensation for 
differences in national statistical methods, the EU- 
15 unemployment rate stood at 8.0 percent in 
February 2004, according to estimates released by 
the Commission\'s Statistical Office (EUROSTAT) on 
April 1.  The aggregate rate was unchanged compared 
to the seven previous months and the corresponding 
month of 2003. 
 
3.  The unemployment rate for the euro zone (the 
twelve EU countries participating in the euro) was 
also stable at 8.8 percent in February 2004, again 
unchanged since July 2003 and showing a marginal 
increase from 8.7 percent in February 2003. 
 
4.  The lowest rates among the EU-15 (February 2004 
rates unless otherwise indicated) were recorded in 
Luxembourg (4.0 percent), Austria (4.4 percent), 
Ireland (4.5 percent) and the Netherlands (4.5 
percent, January 2004).  Spain (11.2 percent) still 
showed the highest unemployment rate among the EU- 
15. 
 
5.  EUROSTAT noted that among the EU Member States 
that contributed data for at least one month in the 
period December 2003 - February 2004, nine showed an 
increase in their unemployment rate over the past 
twelve months, four a decrease and one recorded no 
change.  The most significant increases in 
unemployment rates were recorded in the Netherlands 
(from 3.2 percent in January 2003 to 4.5 percent in 
January 2004), Sweden (from 5.1 percent in February 
2003 to 6.4 percent in February 2004), Denmark (from 
5.1 percent in January 2003 to 6.1 percent in 
January 2004), and Luxembourg (from 3.3 percent in 
February 2003 to 4.0 percent in February 2004).  By 
contrast, Italy\'s rate decreased from 8.9 percent in 
January 2003 to 8.5 percent in January 2004, the 
UK\'s decreased from 4.9 percent in December 2002 to 
4.8 percent in December 2003, Spain\'s rate decreased 
from 11.4 percent in February 2003 to 11.2 percent 
in February 2004, and Finland\'s from 9.0 percent in 
February 2003 to 8.9 percent in February 2004. 
Ireland\'s rate was unchanged at 4.5 percent in a 
February-to-February comparison. 
 
6.  EUROSTAT estimated male unemployment for the EU- 
15 to have increased from 7.2 percent in February 
2003 to 7.3 percent in February 2004 (from 7.7 
percent to 7.8 percent for the euro zone).  The 
female rate over the same period remained the same 
(8.9 percent) for the EU-15 and increased from 10.1 
percent to 10.2 percent for the euro zone. 
 
7.  Unemployment rates among young people under 25 
ranged from 7.2 percent in Austria (February 2004) 
to 27.1 percent in Italy (January 2004).  The rate 
for this age group in February 2004 was estimated at 
15.5 percent for the EU-15 and 16.8 percent for the 
euro zone, compared to 15.6 percent (thus down 0.1 
percentage point) and 16.8 percent (unchanged) 
respectively in February 2003. 
 
8.  EUROSTAT estimated that 14.2 million were 
unemployed in the EU-15 in February 2004 (12.4 
million in the euro zone).  Following is the 
breakdown of unemployment rates for the individual 
EU Member States: 
 
(Seasonally-adjusted) 
 
                FEB 2004    JAN 2004      CHANGE 
 
Belgium           8.5           8.4      plus 0.1 
Denmark           N/A           6.1 
Germany           9.3           9.2      plus 0.1 
Greece            N/A           N/A 
Spain            11.2          11.2 
France            9.4           9.5      minus 0.1 
Ireland           4.5           4.5 
Italy             N/A           8.5 
Luxembourg        4.0           3.9      plus 0.1 
Netherlands       N/A           4.5 
Austria           4.4           4.5      minus 0.1 
Portugal          6.8           6.8 
Finland           8.9           8.9 
Sweden            6.4           6.0      plus 0.4 
UK                N/A           N/A 
 
9.  While no combined figures are offered (yet) for 
the EU-25, EUROSTAT publishes monthly rates for the 
ten \"acceding countries\" expected to join the EU on 
May 1, 2004.  The average rate for the \"ten\" was 
14.2 percent in February 2004, unchanged for the 
past six months and down from 14.4 percent in 
February 2003.  The ten\'s rate remains heavily 
influenced by the situation of the labor market in 
Poland (19.1 percent unemployment) and Slovakia 
(16.7 percent).  The country-by-country breakout was 
as follows: 
 
                 FEBR 2004   JAN 2004      CHANGE 
 
Czech republic    8.2           8.2 
Estonia           9.4           9.5      minus 0.1 
Cyprus            4.8           4.8 
Latvia           10.6          10.5      plus 0.1 
Lithuania        11.6          11.7      minus 0.1 
Hungary           5.9           5.9 
Malta             N/A           8.8 
Poland           19.1          19.1 
Slovenia          6.4           6.4 
Slovakia         16.7          16.6      plus 0.1 
 
10.  NOTES.  The monthly rates and numbers of 
unemployed are estimated and based on data from the 
annual EU labor force survey.  The estimated rates 
may differ from national unemployment rates due to 
differences in methods and definitions of 
unemployment.  Unemployed people according to ILO 
criteria are those aged 15 and over who: 
 
--   Are without work; 
 
--   Are available to start work within the next two 
     weeks; and 
 
--   Have actively sought employment at some time 
     during the previous four weeks. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"15676","4/5/2004 6:07","04BRUSSELS1448","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04USEUBRUSSELS742","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 001448 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958:    N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PREF, CVIS, CASC, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  MIGRATION ISSUES: EU INTERIOR MINISTERS REACH KEY 
AGREEMENTS ON ASYLUM PROCEDURES 
 
REF:  USEU BRUSSELS 742 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. At the March 30 Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) Council 
meeting, EU ministers reached political agreement on the so- 
called \"Qualification Directive\" that sets out the 
eligibility criteria for both refugee status and subsidiary 
protection in the EU and the entitlements of those persons 
who qualify for that protection, a key element in building a 
common EU asylum policy.  They also made progress on 
establishment of an EU Border Management Agency to increase 
operational cooperation between Schengen country border 
services, as well as Ireland and the UK.  END SUMMARY. 
 
QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE 
----------------------- 
 
2.  The Council reached a political agreement (subject to 
formalization of the text) on the Directive setting minimum 
standards for the qualification and status of third-country 
nationals and stateless persons as refugees or as persons 
who otherwise need international protection (REFTEL).  In Mc 
Dowell\'s words, the so-called \"Qualification Directive\" sets 
out the eligibility criteria for both refugee status and 
subsidiary protection in the EU and the entitlements of 
those persons who qualify for that protection.  The form of 
refugee protection envisaged is essentially the same as 
provided for in the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The subsidiary 
protection provision in the Directive is based on the 
protection principles set out in international Human Rights 
instruments such as the European Convention on Human Rights 
and the UN Convention Against Torture. 
 
3.  Mc Dowell and JHA Commissioner Vitorino hailed the 
accord as a key achievement in development of an EU asylum 
policy.  According to Mc Dowell, added to other instruments 
already adopted (Dublin II Regulation, EURODAC Regulation, 
Temporary Protection Directive, European Refugee Fund, 
Reception Standards Directive), the new piece will equip the 
EU with \"an important body of legislative instruments which 
will offer protection to refugees and others in need of 
protection, assist in reducing secondary movements of asylum 
seekers between our States and help to build confidence in 
our individual asylum systems.\" 
 
MINIMUM STANDARDS ON PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING AND WITHDRAWING 
REFUGEE STATUS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
4.  Mc Dowell said the \"missing piece of the asylum jigsaw\" 
was the draft Directive on minimum standards on procedures 
in member states for granting and withdrawing refugee status 
(REF C).  Mc Dowell reported progress on some questions, 
"
"15677","4/5/2004 6:07","04BRUSSELS1450","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001450 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958:    N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, PREF, CASC, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: COUNTER-TERRORISM/LAW ENFORCEMENT: EU 
BEGINS WORK ON AIRLINE PASSENGER DATA SYSTEM 
 
REF: (A) USEU BRUSSELS 1338; 
 
     (B) USEU BRUSSELS 743 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  The EU Council of Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) 
Ministers on March 30 displayed a new momentum to 
meet its obligations to deal with the Declaration by 
EU leaders on combating terrorism as well as its own 
rolling agenda.  The ministers agreed on a \"general 
approach\" (no formal agreement yet) on a Directive 
aimed at improving border controls and combating 
illegal immigration by the transmission of advance 
passenger data by air carriers to border 
authorities.  They did the same (pending scrutiny by 
national parliaments) for a Directive to ensure fair 
and appropriate compensation to victims of a crime, 
including a terrorist attack, suffered in a Member 
State other than their own.  Newly appointed CT 
Coordinator de Vries said his role would be to 
assist Member States to deliver on their 
commitments.  Full text of the JHA Conclusions has 
been transmitted to EUR/ERA and Embassy Dublin. 
Migration issues covered septel.  END SUMMARY. 
 
EUROPEAN COUNCIL DECLARATION ON TERRORISM: FOLLOW-UP 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
2.  With newly appointed CT Coordinator Gijs de 
Vries in attendance, the Council discussed the 
follow-up to the Declaration on Combating Terrorism 
adopted by the European Council on March 25 (REF A). 
Following a separate bilateral meeting with Council 
Secretary-General/HighRep Solana, de Vries told 
 
SIPDIS 
reporters his role would be \"to assist Member States 
in doing the things they have said they would do, 
i.e. to deliver on commitments.\"  De Vries made it 
clear he was \"not in the business of creating a new 
institution or a new bureaucracy.\"  Irish Justice 
Minister/Council chair Mc Dowell reported a \"great 
sense of confidence\" in de Vries, whom he presented 
as \"a man of huge experience and intelligence 
capacity, who is only interested in the outcome and 
not in Empire-building.\" 
 
OBLIGATION OF CARRIERS TO COMMUNICATE PASSENGER DATA 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
3.  Meeting in a Mixed Committee with Iceland and 
Norway in the context of the Schengen arrangements, 
EU JHA ministers reached a \"common approach\" (not a 
formal agreement yet) on a draft Directive aimed at 
improving border controls and combating illegal 
immigration by the transmission of advance passenger 
data by air carriers to border authorities.  The 
draft lays down obligations for carriers 
transporting non-EU nationals into the territory of 
the Member States.  In order to ensure greater 
effectiveness of this objective, it provides for 
financial penalties when carriers fail to meet their 
obligations.  Minister Mc Dowell noted that the 
importance of sharing passenger data was underlined 
by last week\'s European Council Declaration on 
Combating Terrorism.  The Declaration tasked the 
Commission to bring forward a proposal, no later 
than June 2004, for a common EU approach to the use 
of passenger data for border and aviation security 
and other law enforcement purposes.  Mc Dowell said 
the Directive would be reviewed in light of the 
Commission\'s proposal. 
 
4.  Mc Dowell commented that the Madrid bombings had 
triggered a \"more mature judgment\" by EU governments 
on access to personal data, adding: \"Post-Madrid, 
the European Parliament may have a rethink about 
whether privacy is such an absolute right.  I don\'t 
think the people of Europe would forgive us if 
information that could prevent such an atrocity were 
contained in files or records and could simply not 
be accessed by the people who could prevent such 
atrocities.\"  UK Home Office Minister for Organized 
crime reduction and European issues Caroline Flint 
said:  \"It is right we make the most of information 
collected at our borders by making available to 
immigration authorities and law enforcement agencies 
across the EU.  We should maximize our use of 
information, including from the proposed new range 
of biometric visas and passports, to ensure that 
legitimate passengers can move freely, while 
safeguarding our borders, not only against illegal 
immigration, but against serious and organized crime 
and terrorism.\" 
 
COMPENSATION TO CRIME VICTIMS 
----------------------------- 
 
5.  Mc Dowell also announced a consensus on a 
Council Directive on compensation to crime victims, 
for the adoption of which the March 25-26 European 
Council set a May 1, 2004 deadline.  The proposal is 
part of the EU\'s response to 9/11 and the Madrid 
attacks and ensures that victims of crime (including 
terrorist attacks) receive \"adequate compensation 
regardless of where within the EU such acts take 
place,\" according to the Council conclusions.  The 
deal, which is based on a Presidency compromise 
intended to prevent a deadlock on the issue of the 
legal basis for the Directive, remains subject to 
scrutiny by parliaments in the UK and Germany. 
However, Mc Dowell was hopeful for a formal 
agreement at the April 29-30 JHA Council.  He said 
the Directive would contain rules on access to 
compensation in cross-border cases that will help 
victims claim compensation as a result of a crime 
suffered in a member state other than their own. 
All Member States will also have to ensure that 
their national rules provide, by July 1, 2005, for 
the existence of a scheme guaranteeing fair and 
appropriate compensation for victims. 
 
MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF CONFISCATION ORDERS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
6.  Mc Dowell reported \"significant progress\" but no 
complete agreement yet on a draft piece of 
legislation intended to facilitate cooperation 
between Member States as regards the recognition and 
execution of orders to confiscate the proceeds of 
crime (REF.B).  By means of the Framework Decision, 
a Member State will have to recognize and execute in 
its territory confiscation orders issued by judicial 
authorities of another Member State.   Discussions 
in the Council focused on the grounds for non- 
recognition or non-execution of a confiscation 
order.  According to the draft text, the executing 
state may refuse the recognition/execution 
confiscation order when the offences have been 
committed wholly or partly within the territory of 
the executing state.  A number of delegations and 
the Commission think this provision should be 
limited in order to avoid the risk that criminals go 
unpunished as a consequence of its application.  Mc 
Dowell was confident that the Council will be able 
to meet the June 2004 target set by the March 25 
European Council Declaration for adoption of this 
draft. 
 
APPOINTMENT OF EUROPOL DIRECTOR 
------------------------------- 
 
7.  The term of office of the current (German) 
Director of Europol expires on June 30, 2004.  EU 
sources said the incumbent wishes to continue but 
Italy and France have put forward their own 
candidates.  Ministers held an initial inconclusive 
discussion over lunch. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8.  As highlighted by the Ministers\' comments, we 
see the EU\'s passenger data initiative as helpful in 
terms of potentially re-enforcing our arguments 
about the value of this kind of passenger name 
record data.  More generally, the new momentum 
displayed at the March 30 JHA Council owes much to 
the post-Madrid atmosphere of \"seriousness\" observed 
in EU corridors, but is also due to the fact that 
ministers are coming up against deadlines for the 
adoption of a series of measures.  The Irish 
Presidency and Coordinator de Vries must now use the 
timeframe created in the Declaration on Combating 
Terrorism to impose a new sense of urgency on the EU 
governments. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"15761","4/6/2004 16:10","04BRUSSELS1496","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR FOR SCC WESTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, KDEM, TU, CY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUR/PDAS RIES DISCUSSIONS WITH EU ON TURKEY\'S 
ACCESSION BID 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  EUR/PDAS Charlie Ries visited Brussels on 
March 30 to review EU Commission concerns on specific 
Copenhagen Criteria issues, with the aim of working with the 
EU and Turkey to achieve a positive decision on a Turkish 
date for accession negotiations in December.  Matthias Reute, 
DG Enlargement Director for Turkey, Bulgaria, and Romania 
told Ries that there are five specific areas where further 
improvement is needed.  These are the judiciary, protection 
of fundamental freedoms, civil-military relations, enjoyment 
of cultural freedoms, and southeast Turkey.  Ruete reiterated 
that implementation in all areas remains spotty, but 
expressed a general view that the \"glass\" of Turkish reform 
can increasingly be seen as \"half full\" as opposed to \"half 
empty\". 
 
2.  (C) Summary (continued): Ruete specifically requested 
U.S. help in pressuring Turkey to meaningfully reform its 
economy, and to push the GOT hard to ensure civilian control 
of the military.  Ruete (strictly protect) also offered his 
private political assessment of hold-outs against Turkish 
accession. (He included France, the Netherlands, and Austria 
in this group, but also expressed a growing concern about 
Denmark.)  In a subsequent lunch with a wider range of 
interlocutors, Ries reviewed these points, and pushed the EU 
hard on the need to (a) either ensure that the Republic of 
Cyprus votes yes to the Annan Plan; or, (b) not penalize 
Turkey in the event that the ROC blocks a Cyprus settlement 
in the eleventh hour.  End summary. 
 
-------------------- 
\"We\'re here to help\" 
-------------------- 
 
3.  (C) EUR/PDAS Charlie Ries visited Brussels on March 30, 
accompanied by US Embassy Ankara Econ Counselor Scot Marciel, 
to review EU Commission concerns on specific Copenhagen 
Political Criteria issues with a view towards offering 
behind-the-scenes U.S. assistance to the GOT in its efforts 
to meet the Copenhagen Criteria.  Ries met for two hours with 
Matthias Reute, EU Commission Director, Pre-Accession, DG 
Enlargement.  Ruete told Ries that there are five specific 
areas where further improvement is needed.  He identified 
these as the judiciary, protection of fundamental freedoms, 
civil-military relations, enjoyment of cultural freedoms, and 
southeast Turkey.  Ruete noted that implementation in all 
areas remains spotty.  (See septel for a specific review of 
concerns addressed in a preparatory working-level meeting on 
March 29.) 
 
4.  (C) Ruete was receptive to Ries\' message of U.S. 
willingness to assist with Turkey in ensuring that the 
Copenhagen Political Criteria are met.  He noted that there 
has been a significant change of tone from Turkey since the 
Erdogan government came to power, and this new discourse has 
been welcomed by the European Union.  Ruete said that where 
previously the basis of Turkey\'s arguments for EU membership 
had been perceived by the Commission to be \"you owe us a 
date\" the current Turkish government made a more persuasive 
case to the Commission by relying on arguments based upon the 
mutual benefits to the EU and to Turkey that would accrue in 
the event of eventual Turkish accession.  \"It\'s been a silent 
revolution\", he told Ries. 
 
5.  (C) Ruete said there continues to be debate in public 
opinion about whether the cup of Turkish reform is half full 
or half empty.  In his view, U.S. assessments of Turkish 
democratic process that focused on \"the water level of the 
glass\" were a helpful contribution to the internal EU debate; 
overt US pressure on the EU to accede to Turkish demands was 
not.  He cited EU domestic blowback on the State Department\'s 
annual human rights report as one irritant; the report had 
put his office in a difficult position as many suggested that 
the U.S. was being more critical than the Commission on 
Turkey\'s human rights record.  While public opinion would 
react negatively to perceived U.S. pressure, positive U.S. 
assessments of Turkish progress on human rights reform would 
be helpful as long as they were not explicitly linked to EU\'s 
decision in December.  Finally, Ruete noted he sees that \"the 
glass is filling up\" in terms of Turkey\'s fulfillment of the 
Copenhagen Criteria.  Challenges nonetheless remain and more 
action was needed. 
 
-------------------- 
Specific Religious & 
Cultural Freedoms 
-------------------- 
 
6.  (C) Ruete noted that a significant difficulty for Turkey 
is that the EU criteria are \"soft\" to the extent that there 
is no one EU model for Turkey to implement; in fact, there 
are fifteen EU models, and the GOT must find a model of 
religious and cultural freedom that addresses the spirit of 
the EU approach of respect for individual-rights.  This was 
both a challenge for Turkey (because there is no one model to 
implement), and an opportunity (because the GOT can invent a 
model appropriate for Turkey, provide it respects the spirit 
of the EU\'s rights-based approach).  Ruete added that the 
Council of Europe\'s guidelines and suggestions could be very 
useful resource for Turkey in this regard. 
 
7.  (C) Ruete\'s overall critique of the Turkish approach was 
the GOT\'s need to move from a \"statist,\" authoritarian 
approach, to a mentality respectful of individual liberty. 
Noting that limitations on religious freedom in Turkey remain 
a significant problem, he nonetheless expressed sympathy with 
the GOT argument that increasing the rights of religious 
organizations could open the door to Saudi-financed Wahabbist 
madrassah.  This is in turn could lead to a rise in Islamist 
radicalism in Turkey, the Turks argue.  On the Halki 
Seminary, Ruete noted that the GOT continues to insist that 
it be attached to the religion faculty of the University of 
Istanbul; Ruete was receptive to Ries\' idea of exploring a 
compromise that would attach Halki to a private college in 
Istanbul, instead of a government institution.  Reute 
stressed that the treatment of non-Muslim religions was of 
key concern to many of the EU Member States.  Almost a 
quarter of his briefing book for a recent meeting with 
Turkish officials was devoted to this subject. 
 
8.  (C) Ruete was very critical on GOT implementation of 
cultural freedoms.  The area of non-Turkish language 
broadcasting was \"one of the government\'s real defeats\" of 
the past few months; the law on non-Turkish language 
broadcasting simply imposed unacceptable burdens on those 
attempting to broadcast in Kurdish.  The broadcasting board 
was also hostile to Kurdish broadcasting, and needed a change 
in personnel (which is reportedly in the works). 
Recalcitrant bureaucrats were also unacceptably stalling 
Kurdish language education.  The GOT was simply not doing 
what it needed to do in this area of reform.  When asked 
whether minority language broadcasting had been an issue in 
the Commission\'s recommendations on starting accession 
negotiations with Hungary and Romania, Reute said he was not 
sure as this issue had not had the same degree of prominence. 
 
------------------------------- 
Of particular concern: civil - 
military relations, the economy 
------------------------------- 
 
9.  (C) Ruete had a broad set of concerns on civil-military 
relations.  The GOT needed to enhance the transparency of the 
military budget, addressing the question of off-budget 
military funding.  It also needed to remove the military 
representatives from the education and audiovisual boards.  A 
GOT appointment of a civilian head of the National Security 
Council this summer would also be helpful.  Ruete added that 
he wasn\'t sure that \"a general can be fired by a civilian\"; 
indeed, he was concerned that Turkish generals are not vetted 
by the civilian establishment.  Ruete told Ries that he 
thought that the U.S. could be helpful with the GOT in this 
area in particular, through frank dialogue with Turkish 
officials. 
 
10.  (C) Another key area where the U.S. could be 
influential, Ruete hoped, was the Turkish economy, which 
Ruete characterized as \"awful\".  In pharmaceuticals, IPR, and 
telecommunications, the GOT was behaving terribly.  On import 
liberalization, Ruete said that the \"Turks are behaving like 
the French in the seventies\".  Under the circumstances, 
Turkey remained incapable of raising foreign direct 
investment, and this had a negative impact on Turkey\'s 
accession quest.  \"If Turkey\'s GDP were at sixty percent of 
the EU average, public opinion would be much more favorable 
to Turkish accession\", Ruete said.  Economic reform was the 
only way to improve Turkish economic performance. 
 
-------------------- 
Getting to yes - the 
political landscape 
-------------------- 
 
11.  (C) While optimistic about the Commission issuing a 
positive report card on Turkey\'s fulfillment of the 
Copenhagen Criteria, Ruete warned that the political 
obstacles to a date remain.  \"On some member states, very 
clearly, there are big question marks.  Go to Paris, you 
won\'t find one senior official who won\'t tell you its crazy 
to begin negotiations.  However they won\'t say this publicly 
as they are waiting to see what position Chirac will adopt\". 
The Netherlands and Austria remain problematic, he said, 
before noting that he was also a \"little bit\" concerned about 
the trend in Denmark, where an influential official has been 
raising new concerns over torture and ill treatment of 
prisoners.  He was more sanguine about Germany; in his view, 
the opposition would change its position once in power.  The 
question for Germany was whether Germany wants 
\"German-speaking Turkish engineers or English-speaking Indian 
engineers\" to address its long-term demographic gap. 
Finally, Ruete was confident that the new accession states 
would be favorable for a date. 
 
----------------- 
Annan Plan Impact 
----------------- 
 
12.  (C) In a subsequent lunch with a wide range of EU 
officials dealing with Turkey and Cyprus, Ries reviewed these 
points, and pushed the EU hard on the need to (a) either 
ensure that the Republic of Cyprus votes yes to the Annan 
Plan; and to, (b) not penalize Turkey in the event that the 
ROC blocks a Cyprus settlement in the eleventh hour.  Ries 
suggested a number of ways that the EU could actively 
campaign for a \"yes\" vote in the south, and heard EU 
interlocutors add some ideas of their own, including high 
level statements of support from Greek and EU political 
leaders, joint visits to the island on the eve of the 
elections, and a clear message to the Greek Cypriots that 
there would be consequences to a no vote.  Reute offered the 
argument that a settlement would statistically decrease 
Cyprus\' per capita GDP making the island as a whole, and the 
Greek Cypriot south, eligible for a greater share of EU 
structural funds.   Interlocutors were divided on the 
consequences to Turkey\'s accession quest of a no vote on the 
Annan Plan by the south; it was generally agreed, however, 
that a no vote would have a negative impact on Turkey\'s 
candidacy.  Ries pushed back hard on this point, saying that 
it would be unacceptable for the international community to 
punish Turkey for the Greek Cypriots\' failure to accept a 
peace plan. 
Foster 
"
"15764","4/6/2004 16:23","04BRUSSELS1497","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001497 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, KDEM, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COMMISSION OUTLINES KEY COPENHAGEN CRITERIA 
ISSUES REMAINING FOR TURKEY, EUROPEAN UNION 
 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) Prior to EUR/PDAS Charlie Ries\' visit to Brussels on 
March 30 covering the same issues at a higher level (septel), 
working level EU officials on March 29 met with us to detail 
EU Commission concerns on specific Copenhagen Criteria 
issues.  The Commission laid out five specific areas where 
further improvement is needed.  These include the judiciary, 
fundamental freedoms, civil-military relations, cultural 
freedoms, and southeast Turkey.  Globally, the Commission 
officials underscored that implementation on all areas 
remains spotty, and a problem.  On the timing of their report 
on the Copenhagen Criteria, Commission officials said that 
they will draft the report in July and August for a late 
September/early October release.  End summary. 
 
-------------- 
Interlocutors 
and Mechanics 
------------- 
 
2.  (C) In preparation for EUR/PDAS Ries\' March 30 visit to 
Brussels to discuss Turkey\'s EU accession efforts, Embassy 
Ankara Economic Counselor Scot Marciel and EUR/ERA Michael 
Dixon met with EU Commission Turkey Team Head Martin Harvey 
on March 29.  Accompanying Harvey was Alessandro Missir di 
Lusignano, who is the principal drafter of the Commission\'s 
accession report and recommendation .  Harvey explained that 
the report will be drafted in July-August, then vetted 
throughout the Commission for a late September/early October 
release to the public.  This time table requires the GOT to 
progress rapidly for information to make it into the report 
prior to the cut-off date, which is one month before the 
report\'s publication.  (Although Missir noted that 
information can be added at the last moment if it is 
particularly significant.) 
 
------------------ 
Progress Continues 
------------------ 
 
3.  (C) Overall, Harvey underscored that there has been a 
significantly positive change of tone from Turkish government 
interlocutors over the past 18 months; the AK government has 
changed the nature of the discussion through a pragmatic 
focus on making real progress as opposed to the threats and 
ultimatums which sometimes characterized previous GOT 
discussions with the EU.  The U.S. side reiterated our 
support for Turkey\'s accession, and said we would continue to 
encourage the GOT to take the steps needed to meet the 
Copenhagen political criteria. 
 
---------------------- 
But critical areas for 
improvement persist 
---------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Echoing language the EU has used with us before, 
Harvey and Missir outlined five particularly important areas 
for improvement: 
 
-- On Judicial Reform, the EU remains concerned about the 
GOT\'s implementation of existing reforms; this is a 
particular problem in some regions, with implementation 
varying by region.  The Commission was looking forward to the 
GOT\'s promised constitutional amendment to abolish or reform 
the state security courts.  The EU also views a new penal 
code as a requirement, and is concerned about \"rumors now 
that Turkey may not do this year despite the fact that they 
have been working on it for two years\".  Harvey noted EU 
concerns that the draft penal code may not adequately 
address: 1) gender equality; 2) freedom of expression; and, 
3) aligning of rights of defendants with EU standards. 
Harvey underscored that there is no specific EU model for the 
Turkish judicial system -- the GOT cannot simply follow an EU 
standard.  There are many acceptable judicial systems in the 
EU; the point is that Turkey today hasn\'t yet arrived at a 
model that appropriately addresses EU concerns.  These 
concerns include making the organ that appoints and manages 
judges and prosecutors independent of the executive branch. 
The current situation, in which the judicial branch is housed 
in same building as the Ministry of Justice, and shares the 
same budget, is not acceptable. 
 
-- The GOT has work to do improving protection of fundamental 
freedoms, including that of expression, free association, 
religion and the press.  The GOT needs to move from its 
\"statist\" authoritarian approach to one more reflective of a 
free society.  While time is short, the GOT needs nonetheless 
to establish a track record indicating that the long-term 
trend towards greater individual liberty is irreversible.  In 
this regard, the GOT needs to move faster to protect and 
nurture religious freedoms through new legislation on 
religious foundations.  It needs to start the process of 
revising the law of association and begin revising the 
currently very restrictive press laws.  Non-Muslim 
foundations are still very restricted; they need to be 
offered more autonomy. 
 
-- While Turkey has made progress on civil-military 
relations, much remains to be done.  Harvey singled out this 
area as one in which US pressure could be particularly 
influential.  Areas cited by Harvey included the need to 
ensure parliamentary control over the military budget; the EU 
remains skeptical about GOT claims that this has happened 
already.  The GOT needs to remove military representatives 
from education and audio-visual boards, although this seems 
to be happening.  The appointment of a civilian head of the 
National Security Council Secretariat would also be a 
positive signal. 
 
-- Cultural rights remain a particular concern.  The 
Commission is frustrated with lack of progress on Kurdish 
education and broadcasting.  GOT movement on these issues has 
been unsatisfactory, as shown by the failure of Kurdish 
broadcasting to begin.  The new broadcasting law is very 
burdensome and inhibits applications.  Kurdish language 
instruction has begun in an extremely desultory manner, with 
only 600 students starting April 1. 
 
-- Finally, the Commission remains focused on GOT treatment 
of Southeast Turkey as a general human rights issue.  The GOT 
needs to do more to address the issue of displaced persons. 
While the Commission has seen some encouraging signs of 
dialogue, the GOT needs to do more, and make resources 
available.  A long term objective should be the economic 
development of the region.   progress in developing the 
region. 
 
----------------------- 
Further Implementation 
needed across the board 
----------------------- 
 
5. (C) Beyond the five specific areas cited above, Harvey and 
Missir stressed a persistent global reservation about the 
GOT\'s implementation of legislation and promised additional 
reform.  Implementation remains spotty and inconsistent. 
While Missir recognized that mentalities take time to change, 
he made it clear that implementation is part of the 
Copenhagen political criteria being judged.  Torture is an 
issue of concern, still.  There is some evidence that other 
forms of psychological and non-physical abuse have replaced 
physical torture.  Thus while the overall trend is positive, 
the GOT needs to remain vigilant in ensuring that reforms 
were respected throughout Turkey.  Harvey and Missir also 
noted that they are watching high profile cases such as Layla 
Zana\'s but said that although they are important, it is 
Turkey\'s global approach that they are primarily charged with 
assessing.  They want the GOT to do more than just solve 
specific cases. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (C) Some key points re-emerging from these review of the 
Commission\'s Copenhagen Criteria review process included the 
following: 
 
-- The Commission, representing as it does fifteen member 
states, can\'t offer specific formulae to Turkey that the GOT 
can simply replicate.  As such, the Copenhagen Criteria are 
\"soft\" in that the Commission is charged with assessing the 
\"spirit\" of reforms as well as the \"letter\" of the laws. 
This presents both challenges and opportunities to the GOT. 
A challenge because the criteria can in some instances seem 
amorphous and non-specific; an opportunity because the 
Commission will apparently accept GOT solutions that are 
rooted in Turkish reality, provided that they confirm to the 
spirit of the larger European political tradition of open 
societies grounded in the protection of individual liberty. 
 
-- The Commission is clearly impressed by the ambition and 
the pace of the current government\'s reform package.  This is 
greatly improving the prospect of a positive decision for 
Turkey in December. 
 
-- Finally, there was a clear message that implementation 
needs to proceed aggressively, both on specific issues like 
Kurdish linguistic rights and on global issues like judicial 
reform and religious freedom writ large.  While the GOT\'s 
legislative cup of reform is definitely perceived in Brussels 
as more than half full, the implementation cup remains half 
empty.  Given that the Copenhagen political criteria are 
being evaluated on implementation as well as on intent, the 
GOT needs to continue to work hard on all fronts if it is to 
obtain a positive decision in December.   Foster 
"
"15785","4/7/2004 8:27","04BRUSSELS1501","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04ATHENS1196|04NICOSIA586","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/07/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, CY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: GETTING TO YES IN THE CYPRUS REFERENDA: ACTION 
PLAN FOR THE EUROPEAN UNION 
 
REF: (A) NICOSIA 0586 (B) ATHENS 1196 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
-------- 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
1.  (C) With Cyprus guaranteed entry into the EU no matter 
what the outcome of the referenda, EU officials feel bereft 
of carrots to encourage a positive Greek Cypriot response. 
Promoting a \"yes\" vote in Cyprus will depend on our use of 
the Cyprus Pre-donors\' Conference on April 15 to prove that 
there are real economic benefits for the south in the Annan 
Plan, and also to encourage clear political signals from 
European governments that the EU endorses the UN\'s Plan as 
the opportunity of a generation and the \"European way.\"  USEU 
recommends the following efforts in the run-up to and 
immediately after the Pre-Donors\' Conference: 
 
-- Senior EU leadership, in particular Hirep Solana, but also 
Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen and Relex Commissioner 
Patten, should be pressed to engage Greek and Cypriot 
leadership both publicly and privately on the need to support 
the Annan Plan. 
 
-- Encourage a strong indication of European support for a 
successful referendum at the April 16 Gymnich. 
 
-- Work with the European Parliament to send a signal via a 
non-binding resolution encouraging a  \"yes\" vote to the Annan 
Plan. 
 
At the conference itself, we should: 
 
-- Seek specific commitments to identify European Commission 
funding for the property commission -- the clearest signal to 
Greek Cypriots that they too will benefit from peace. 
 
-- Advocate with the EU concerted, visible efforts to discuss 
and ideally to develop intra-zonal investment packages that 
will benefit all islanders. 
 
-- Consider ear-marking pledges to elements of the Annan Plan 
that specifically address compensation for Greek Cypriots and 
that can be used to make a political argument in the south 
for a \"yes\" vote to the Annan Plan. 
 
------------------------- 
The EU\'s Cyprus Realities 
------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) EU interlocutors have repeatedly told us that 
regardless of outcomes of the Annan Plan referenda, Cyprus 
will enter the EU on May 1st.  (Indeed, legally, there is no 
other option, as the accession treaty has been ratified.) 
The Annan Plan referenda in north and south will simply 
determine whether the island enters the EU as a unified whole 
or as the south alone.  Turkish Cypriot voters in the North 
know that their one chance to enter the Union soon will be a 
\"yes\" vote -- and the Turkish government at home knows that 
its future hopes for accession also hinge importantly on a 
positive outcome.  The battle then clearly is on the Greek 
side of the island.  Since the accession question for the 
Greeks has been resolved, persuasion must take other forms. 
The problem is that this reality defines and constrains EU 
leverage on the Republic of Cyprus, as the Greek Cypriot 
population knows that it will enter the EU irrespective of 
the outcome of the poll.  Informed northern Cypriot voters, 
in contrast, by now are equally aware that their only chance 
of entering the EU for the foreseeable future is predicated 
on a \"yes\" vote in the referendum. 
 
3.  (C) Our challenge is to promote a \"yes\" vote in the south 
given the realities cited.  We also understand from the 
Commission that many Greek Cypriots see the Annan Plan as 
providing far more carrots to the Turks than to the Greeks. 
A successful strategy to encourage a \"yes\" vote by the Greek 
Cypriots must address this reality.  While Hirep Solana, 
Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen, and EU Parliament 
President Pat Cox have repeatedly stated their desire to 
facilitate a settlement publicly and privately, they -- and 
their staffs -- admit privately to us that the political 
leverage of accession is now gone.  As officials of the 
Union, they have also been reluctant to publicly encourage a 
member state to adopt a specific course of action, especially 
if Greek government support is tepid.  Brussels-based 
officials know that they hold no leverage but political 
opprobrium against a rejectionist Cypriot republic.  The EU\'s 
relative failure to enforce discipline against the Austrian 
government during the Haider crisis proved that Cyprus has 
little to fear from the EU in this regard. 
 
--------------------- 
Cyprus as the spoiler 
of Turkish accession 
--------------------- 
4.  (C) The larger question of Turkish accession is another 
element to the Cyprus equation in Brussels.  We have heard 
that some EU member countries wary of offering an accession 
negotiation date for Turkey are secretly hoping for failure 
of the Annan Plan.  (Informed Commission interlocutors cite 
France, Austria, and the Netherlands as members of the group 
of those opposed.)  The entry of the Republic of Cyprus 
without northern Cyprus into the EU would immensely 
complicate Turkey\'s EU vocation, and provides these 
Turko-skeptics an easy out.  Even strong friends of Turkey in 
the EU, such as Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen, have told 
us that the political reality of the continued existence of 
the \"TRNC\" -- and the illegal Turkish occupation of a part of 
EU territory -- would be a potential deal-killer for Turkey 
in December, no matter whether Turkey and Turkish Cypriots 
supported the peace plan. 
 
---------------------- 
Our last best shots: 
Using the Pre-donors\' 
Conference and Gymnich 
---------------------- 
 
5.  (C) Given the current political reality in Brussels, our 
last shots at favorably influencing a Cyprus deal under the 
Annan Plan are primarily through the April 15 Pre-Donors\' 
Conference and the April 16 informal EU foreign ministers\' 
meeting.  We will need to change Greek Cypriot perceptions 
that the deal does not offer them enough and that waiting for 
more is not a viable strategy.  Thus, we need to work with 
the EU to ensure that the message rings loud and clear out of 
the conference that settlement will bring concrete benefits 
to the south as well as the north, and that \"Europe\" favors a 
yes vote.  There are two key elements to this effort: 
political and public diplomacy aimed at steering the Cypriot 
population toward yes, and setting out a series of financial 
incentives to convince waivering Greek Cypriots they will 
benefit from unification.  Obviously, a key element in this 
will be the need to work with the European Commission and 
other key potential donors at a strategy to be unveiled at 
the Pre-Donors\' Conference to underscore the EU and the 
international community\'s commitment to addressing the 
concerns of the south.  Such an approach might include: 
 
-- pushing the EU to ensure sufficiently high-level 
representation at the conference, and a specific commitment 
by the European Commission to fund or identify funding for 
the property commission, which will be of particular benefit 
to the south.  The south needs tangible evidence of the 
benefits of the Annan Plan. 
 
-- concerted, visible EU efforts to develop intra-zonal 
investment packages that will benefit all islanders.  An 
example of this might be a private-public partnership 
addressing Greek desiderata for the development of the 
tourist industry in ways that benefit both sides of the 
former Green Line. 
 
-- ear-marking pledges to elements of the Annan Plan that 
specifically address compensation for Greek Cypriots, 
especially the property commission.  Given that property 
issues are particularly important to the south, we need to 
show just how important this issue is to us. 
 
6.  (C) The donors\' conference will be followed immediately 
by the informal EU Foreign Ministers\' meeting in Dublin. 
This would provide a good occasion for some back-room 
straight-talk from their European colleagues with the Greek 
and Cypriot FM\'s, and could also provide an opportunity for 
the Irish EU Presidency to come out publicly with a call for 
Cypriots to step up to the historic occasion provided by 
these votes -- combined with a public pledge that the EU is 
ready to support a peace deal.  We recommend a letter from 
the Secretary to the Irish FM, copied to his colleagues, and 
perhaps followed up by an S phone call. 
 
7. (C) We also endorse Athens\' and Nicosia\'s views that 
senior EU leadership, in particular Hirep Solana but also 
Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen and External Relations 
Commissioner Patten, should be strongly encouraged to engage 
Cypriot leadership both publicly and privately on the need to 
support the Annan Plan.  The Secretary raised this April 2 
with Solana, and he pledged to do all he could to help 
convince the Greek Cypriots.  It would be useful if the 
Secretary followed up to see what Solana has been doing.  A 
 
SIPDIS 
well-placed press interview by Solana or another leading EU 
figure could be a key indicator of how far the EU is prepared 
to lean in favor of an agreement.  In a similar manner, the 
Irish Presidency should become engaged, and PM Ahern and FM 
Cowen encouraged to raise with their Cypriot and Greek 
counterparts the importance of seizing this historic 
opportunity. 
 
8. (C) We also believe that it would be useful to engage 
European Parliament President Cox with an eye towards a 
parliamentary resolution advocating support for the plan. 
Ambassador Schnabel will seek an occasion in the coming days 
to discuss the issue with Cox. 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"15791","4/7/2004 12:11","04BRUSSELS1510","Embassy Brussels","SECRET//NOFORN","04BRUSSELS1464|04PRAGUE390|04STATE68263","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/06/2014 
TAGS: PARM, PHUM, PREL, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: CHINA ARMS EMBARGO: APRIL 2 PSC DEBATE AND NEXT 
STEPS FOR U.S. 
 
REF: A. USEU TODAY 04/06/04 
     B. BRUSSELS 1464 
     C. STATE 68263 
     D. PRAGUE 390 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (S/NF) The EU Political and Security Committee (PSC) 
discussed the EU arms embargo on China during a heated 90 
minute exchange on April 2.  PSC Ambassadors generally agreed 
that the issue -- of whether, when and how to lift the 
embargo -- should be sent back down to working groups for 
further study before being presented to political groups for 
a decision.  France objected, however, and succeeded in 
getting agreement to discuss the issue at the April 26 FMs 
meeting (GAERC) -- but failed in its campaign to secure an 
early decision.  The debate will likely continue well into 
the Dutch EU Presidency.  This cable draws on a detailed 
readout and a sensitive internal report provided to Poloff by 
UK and Hungarian contacts (please protect accordingly), as 
well as background provided in recent days by other 
interlocutors.  It also offers a strategy for continuing US 
engagement. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
PSC Reacts Badly to Latest US Demarche 
-------------------------------------- 
 
2. (S/NF) PSC Ambassadors reportedly arrived at the April 2 
meeting to find copies of ref C demarche sitting on their 
otherwise empty desks.  The demarche was received badly 
because it gave the impression that \"big brother was 
watching,\" and because it appeared timed as a heavyhanded and 
hubristic attempt to influence the PSC, according to our UK 
contact.  Some reps, led by Greek Ambassador 
Paraskevoupoulos, objected to the Council Secretariat\'s 
distribution of the demarche under Council Secretariat cover 
and with a Secretariat identifying number.  He argued that 
the document had no business being circulated by the 
Secretariat, and insisted that it be stricken from EU 
 
SIPDIS 
records.  Ambassadors also reacted against what they 
perceived as the threatening tone of our demarche. 
 
3. (S/NF) The Financial Times\' front page article on April 2 
about the US demarche campaign also enflamed the Ambassadors 
because it appeared directly aimed at Friday\'s PSC 
discussion.  Irish Ambassador Kelleher reportedly opened the 
meeting by waving the article in the air and imploring his 
colleagues to protect the confidentiality of internal EU 
deliberations.  Poloff pointed out that the timing of the 
latest US demarche was a coincidence, as we were previously 
unaware that the PSC was scheduled to discuss the issue on 
that day.  (COMMENT: Our demarche was received badly not so 
much because of its substance, but because of the way it was 
presented.  Our UK contact faulted the Irish and the Council 
Secretariat for the way the demarche was handled in the PSC, 
 
SIPDIS 
and also the awkward timing that made it seem, along with the 
FT article, tailor-made to influence the April 2 discussion. 
END COMMENT). 
 
----------------------------------------- 
National Positions: France versus Denmark 
----------------------------------------- 
 
4. (S/NF) According to our UK contact, France staked out a 
\"zero flexibility\" position on lifting the embargo, and is 
opposed to any talk of applying conditionality (i.e. by 
insisting on further human rights progress by China and/or 
strengthening the Code of Conduct prior to lifting the 
embargo).  The Danes are reportedly still leading the 
opposition, and have circulated to EU partners a list of ten 
human rights conditions that they believe China should meet 
before the embargo is lifted (we have not yet obtained a copy 
of this list).  Other EU Member States are lining up 
somewhere in between, although \"all agree in principle\" that 
the embargo should be lifted if certain conditions are met. 
The debate from now on will focus on defining conditions and 
timing. 
 
5. (S/NF) Following is a summary of national interventions 
made at the April 2 PSC: 
 
-- France: The embargo is anachronistic and must go; willing 
to discuss timing but not conditionality because China would 
not accept human rights conditionality; likewise would be 
contradictory to enhance the Code of Conduct specifically for 
China while also lifting the embargo; opposed also to making 
Code of Conduct legally binding; wants issue to remain 
political; opposed to sending it down to working groups. 
 
-- Denmark: Any decision to lift the embargo must be linked 
to specific Chinese steps on human rights; EU also needs to 
review Code of Conduct to ensure that lifting the embargo 
does not result in increased arms sales to China. 
 
-- Germany: EU must consider regional impact of lifting the 
embargo; now is not a good time to lift embargo (COMMENT: The 
Germans appear to have moved closer to the Danes in recent 
weeks, and are now the largest EU member state with serious 
reservations about lifting the embargo.  One report of the 
discussion suggests that \"the tough German position, coupled 
with the strength of US views, might be tempering French 
enthusiasm.\"  END COMMENT). 
 
-- UK: Should be further study by working groups to identify 
implications for human rights and regional stability, and to 
examine options for strengthening Code of Conduct (COMMENT: 
Our Hungarian contact reports that the UK is fundamentally 
closer to the French end of the spectrum than the Danish. 
The UK, like France, does not favor making the Code of 
Conduct legally binding.  END COMMENT). 
 
-- Greece: Should explore gestures China could make on human 
rights without explicitly linking them to lifting the 
embargo; should not link regional stability to lifting 
embargo; \"provocatively\" proposed that the Code of Conduct be 
made legally binding.  (COMMENT: Our contacts report that the 
Greek position on lifting the embargo is closer to France 
than any other Member State.  END COMMENT). 
 
-- Ireland: Supports sending the issue back to working groups 
(in part to keep the EU from making any decision during its 
Presidency). 
 
-- Netherlands: Central consideration should be possible 
release of political prisoners from the 1989 Tiananmen 
crackdown. 
 
-- Czech Republic: Supports French position that issue should 
remain political; silent on other points (COMMENT: Our UK 
contact said that the Czech position is generally understood 
to be informed by that country\'s interest in selling radar 
equipment to China, as described ref D.  END COMMENT). 
 
-- Sweden: Working groups should further study issues of 
human rights, regional stability, and enhancing the Code of 
Conduct. 
 
-- Austria: Should explore gestures on human rights that 
China could make but avoid linkage to lifting the embargo; 
should conduct a general (i.e. non China-specific) review of 
Code of Conduct. 
 
-- Italy: Intervened with same points as Austria. 
 
-- Belgium: More discussion needed of implications, including 
on human rights, of any decision to lift embargo. 
 
-- Commission: Took no position on lifting embargo but said 
EU should remain focused on human rights. 
 
Other member states did not intervene in the PSC discussion. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Timeline: Back to the Working Groups? 
------------------------------------- 
 
6. (S/NF) The PSC will meet again on this issue on April 7, 
when it is expected to approve an \"issues paper\" which will 
then be sent through COREPER to FMs for discussion at the 
April 26 GAERC.  According to our UK and Hungarian contacts, 
the paper is intended as a tour d\'horizon for the GAERC 
discussion.  It will not contain recommendations, and FMs are 
not expected to take a decision.  Instead, they will likely 
send the paper back down to the PSC for re-examination.  Most 
PSC Ambassadors, having satisfied the French desire for a 
ministerial discussion in April, will then press France to 
accept the majority preference for sending the issue back to 
the working groups.  The working groups would need two to 
three months, minimum, to complete their assessments and 
submit their papers to the PSC (EU working groups are 
comprised of capital-based experts who rarely meet more than 
once per month).  The relevant working groups are COHUM 
(human rights), COASI (Asia Directors), and COARM 
(conventional arms exports). 
 
7. (S/NF) What all this means is that the debate will likely 
continue well into the Dutch Presidency.  Already, Member 
States are beginning to look toward the December EU-China 
Summit as a possible timeframe for any decision to lift the 
embargo.  We have heard they are also looking at the US 
electoral calendar and quietly wondering whether it would be 
worth holding off their decision until November or December 
in the hopes of sneaking it past the US radar.  They have not 
and will not discuss such issues openly, even amongst each 
other in the PSC, but our UK contact confirms that quiet 
conversations and suggestive comments are going on in the 
wings. 
 
--------------------- 
Next Steps for the US 
--------------------- 
 
8. (S/NF) Our efforts have managed to slow down the momentum 
in favor of removing the arms embargo, but have not killed 
this idea outright.  In addition to the ongoing diplomatic 
dialogue on this issue, we recommend the following steps to 
help us keep the pressure on European governments: 
 
-- We should coordinate closely with Japan, and perhaps also 
the ROK.  According to numerous EU interlocutors, the 
Japanese have become increasingly active on this issue, but 
their efforts appear so far uncoordinated with our own. 
While this may have served our interests in the sense that it 
gave the Europeans the impression that Japan\'s concerns were 
genuine and not dictated by Washington, it is now time to 
begin coordinating our efforts, so that Europeans recognize 
that other key players in the region share our regional 
stability concerns. 
 
-- We should engage the European Parliament, and particularly 
members of its Human Rights Committee.  The EP is already on 
record opposing an end to the embargo.  By calling attention 
to EU deliberations and ongoing Chinese human rights abuses, 
the EP could increase the political heat on member state 
governments against any decision to lift the embargo. 
 
-- We should consider increasing our public statements and 
press briefings for European audiences, on the assumption 
that more scrutiny by European publics would help our views 
on this issue, especially as regards human rights. 
 
-- We should increase our engagement with institutional and 
member state representatives to the COHUM, COASI and COARM 
working groups.  In this way we could ensure that our views 
on human rights, regional stability and the Code of Conduct 
are fully understood by those experts who will be supplying 
recommendations to the political groups for discussion. 
 
-- Additionally, as suggested ref B, we recommend the USG 
begin considering options for how the EU might strengthen 
controls on arms exports to China in a post-embargo scenario. 
 The worst case for us would be for the EU to lift its 
embargo without having in place some sort of new mechanism 
for controlling the transfer of arms and sensitive 
technologies to China. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"15827","4/8/2004 12:59","04BRUSSELS1543","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001543 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, MOPS, BK, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU INFORMAL DEFENSE MINISTERIAL APRIL 5-6 
 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (C) The EU Informal Defense Ministerial in Brussels on 
April 5/6 endorsed and appeared to expand the concept of the 
EU rapid reaction force, with Hirep Solana identifying as its 
elements rapid EU institutional decision-making, a planning 
cell, and battle groups.  Solana explained that the purpose 
of the battle groups was to provide the EU with \"the means to 
apply the European Security Strategy\".  On Bosnia, Defmins 
discussed the way forward with NATO, and appeared to reach 
informal consensus that the current way forward and division 
of tasks (with PIFWCs continuing under current arrangements) 
is acceptable to the EU.  Following the informal, Solana on 
April 7 approved the draft General Concept on Bosnia, which 
can now be formally approved on April 15 by the PSC, and then 
moved up the EU chain to COREPER and the Council, with final 
approval likely April 23rd.  END SUMMARY 
 
-------------------- 
Capabilities the Key 
-------------------- 
 
2.  (U) Following April 5th discussions, Hirep Solana told 
the press and invited diplomats that the first day\'s 
discussions had focused on capabilities, and the EU\'s need to 
\"be ready to act quickly\" in the event of a crisis.  There 
were different strands to this.  One was the importance of 
the new 2010 Headline Goal, intended to enhance EU 
interoperability, deployability, and sustainability.  \"The 
idea\" guiding the EU, said Solana, \"is to have the means to 
apply the European Security Strategy\".  Solana said that the 
focus needed to be giving the EU the means to respond to 
several crises simultaneously.  A skeptical press corps 
pushed the Hirep hard on specifics, but Solana was reserved. 
 
--------------------- 
Ministers Endorse the 
Battle Group Concept 
--------------------- 
 
3.  (C) Irish Defmin Smith noted that the Franco-UK-German 
Battle Groups concept had been favorably received by all EU 
member countries at the ministerial, and could be seen as 
having the informal endorsement of the group.  According to a 
Council Secretariat contact speaking on April 8, the Battle 
Groups idea can now be seen to have the informal endorsement 
of the member states, increasing the likelihood that it will 
be formally folded into the 2010 Headline goal at the 
appropriate political juncture. 
 
4.  (U) On April 5, Solana stated that the EU intends to have 
its incipient planning cell functioning by the end of the 
Irish Presidency in June, and the first battle group on line 
by 2007.  Solana remarked at the press conference that the 
EU\'s ability to respond rapidly rests on three elements: 
flexible decision-making, speedy planning, and a rapid 
response capability such as Battle Groups.  He was notably 
imprecise about where the speedy planning would take place. 
It should be noted that in his intervention Solana repeatedly 
underscored the need to work in harmony with NATO. 
 
----------------- 
Bosnia Transition 
----------------- 
 
5.  (C) We debriefed Council Secretariat working-level 
officials on April 7 and 8 on the Bosnia transition.  These 
informed interlocutors, who attended the defense ministers 
informal and who actually drafted the draft General Concept 
for Bosnia, told us the following: 
-- exchanges at the defense ministerial on Bosnia were 
primarily focused on force generation, with Solana expressing 
concerns that there would be shortfalls; 
-- according to one official present, the meeting was 
characterized by \"lots of small countries offering up minor 
contributions; Solana was clearly concerned that this was 
inadequate;\" and, 
-- there was general consensus that the current state of 
NATO-EU agreement on task delineation constitutes \"a workable 
starting point\" but that there was a need for operational 
commanders on the ground to eventually work out clearer 
understandings. 
 
6.  (C) Following the defense ministerial, Hirep Solana on 
April 7 approved the Council Secretariat\'s draft General 
Concept.  This document sets down the strategic parameters of 
the security and stabilization tasks for the EU in Bosnia. 
Solana\'s approval seems to reflect his comfort level with the 
outcome of the discussion at the informal ministerial, and 
clears the way for the draft to be presented to the Political 
and Security Committee (PSC) on April 15, where if approved, 
it would go on to COREPER on April 21 for clearance prior to 
final approval by the Council on April 23.  There are no 
surprises in the concept, which accepts command and control 
arrangements running from DSACEUR through AFSOUTH to the EU 
OpCommander in Bosnia. 
 
------------------------------- 
Other issues: Defense Armaments 
Agency, Military role for GWOT? 
------------------------------- 
 
7.  (C) According to our Council contacts, another notable 
issues were discussed at the informal ministerial.  Following 
a presentation by its British Head of the Agency 
Establishment Team, Nick Whitney, there was an inconclusive 
debate about what sort of entity the Defense Armaments and 
Capabilities Agency would be.  Would it be a proper agency 
with a budget and a staff like the Commission, or would it 
remain a secretariat with very limited resources like the 
Council Secretariat?  Clearly the debate was just beginning 
on this issue, although it was a debate of some urgency, 
given Solana\'s imperative to get the project operational by 
the end of 2004.  Finally, at the CHODs meeting on 7 April, 
there was some discussion of the potential for an EU military 
role (a \"second pillar role\") in the war on terrorism.  This 
conversation was spurred by the appointment of the new EU 
anti-terrorism coordinator.  It was extremely preliminary, 
limited to traditional military tasks and consequence 
management, we were told. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  (C) The ever-cautious Solana\'s decision to push the draft 
Bosnia General Concept forward to the PSC indicates that 
Solana believes he is on solid ground with defense ministers 
on the parameters of the EU\'s proposed Bosnia operation, 
following the April 6 discussion with ministers.  We 
understand that there are no surprises in this document, as 
it endorses a DSACEUR/AFSOUTH/EUFOR chain of command, and 
accepts NATO and U.S. redlines. 
 
9.  (C) The informal endorsement of defense ministers of the 
UK-French-German Battle Groups concept was expected.  We 
expect that the concept will be folded into the EU 2010 
Headline Goal at the appropriate political opportunity, and 
will become the basic \"cost\" to member states wishing to join 
\"structured cooperation\" in the future -- if this element of 
the Constitution is ever adopted. 
 
Foster 
"
"15949","4/14/2004 5:24","04BRUSSELS1577","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS1510","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 001577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/07/2014 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, PHUM, CH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU CODE OF CONDUCT ON ARMS EXPORTS: QUESTIONS AND 
ANSWERS 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 1510 
 
     B. USEU TODAY 04/06/04 
     C. BRUSSELS 1464 
     D. STATE 68263 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) This message is intended as a companion to Mission 
reporting (refs A, B, C) about the possibility that the EU 
may soon lift its arms embargo on China.  In place of the 
embargo, some EU Member States favor enhancing the EU Code of 
Conduct on arms exports, either in general or with specific 
regard to China.  To inform thinking on this possibility, we 
offer below answers to commonly asked questions about the 
Code of Conduct.  In para 19 we also provide the text of a 
non-paper the EU uses to describe the Code.  We conclude that 
the Code of Conduct, while generally positive, is no 
substitute for the China arms embargo. 
 
All documents mentioned here are available at 
http://ue.eu.int/pesc/ExportCTRL/en/Index.htm 
 
---------------------------- 
What is the Code of Conduct? 
---------------------------- 
 
2. (U) Adopted in 1998, the EU Code of Conduct (CoC) on 
Conventional Arms Exports has two objectives.  The first is 
to reaffirm the eight criteria for evaluating export 
applications agreed to by EU leaders in 1991 and 1992 at the 
Luxemburg and Lisbon Summits.  These criteria include the 
political commitment of EU member states not to sell military 
equipment to countries if doing so would, among other things, 
threaten regional stability, contribute to internal 
repression, or threaten the interests and security of 
European allies. 
 
3. (U) The second objective is to foster the gradual 
convergence of national export policies and licensing 
procedures by creating a system for consultation and 
information sharing.  The CoC\'s twelve operative provisions 
require EU member states to report to each other any denials 
of applications for export licenses when those denials are 
based on CoC criteria.  In 2003 EU member states also agreed 
to apply the CoC to all applications for arms brokering 
licenses.  The underlying idea is that through openness and 
consultation, EU member states will be able to foster an 
EU-wide export norm that upholds European values and reduces 
the risk of competitive undercutting, while at the same time 
preserves the sole right of European nation-states to 
determine their own export policies. 
 
------------------------------- 
Does it apply to all countries? 
------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Yes.  The CoC is universal and non-discriminatory, and 
should be applied when evaluating transactions to all third 
countries.  (COMMENT: One problem with the idea of creating 
an enhanced CoC relevant only to post-embargo China is that 
the EU does not want to be discriminatory.  Another is that 
it would contradict the political signal that the EU would 
wish to send by lifting the embargo.  We believe that, 
strengthened or not, the CoC will remain universal and 
non-discriminatory.  However, it is possible that the EU will 
move toward some kind of new -- unwritten and non-public -- 
\"gentleman\'s agreement\" to restrict certain transactions with 
a post-embargo China.  END COMMENT). 
 
----------------------------------------- 
What kinds of transactions does it cover? 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) The CoC applies to all transactions involving items 
included in the EU Common Military List.  It also applies to 
items on the EU Dual-Use List if the purchaser is the 
military or internal security forces of the country in 
question.  Member states are also committed to apply the CoC 
to items on their national control lists when those items do 
not appear on the common military list. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
What does the EU Common Military List cover? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) The Common List was updated in 2003 to mirror the 
Wassenaar Munitions List of controlled items.  The EU adopted 
the Wassenaar list because it was an expedient way to achieve 
consensus on an updated EU list.  However, the two lists are 
not directly linked.  Updates to Wassenaar will not 
automatically entail updates to the EU list. 
 
-------------------------- 
What about dual-use items? 
-------------------------- 
 
7. (U) Member States are obligated under a legally binding 
Council Regulation adopted in 2000 to regulate the export of 
dual-use items identified in a control list annexed to the 
regulation.  The list compiled from all entries in the 
dual-use control lists maintained by the Wassenaar 
Arrangement, Missile Technology Control Regime, Australia 
Group, Nuclear Suppliers\' Group, and Chemical Weapons 
Convention.  Updates to regime lists are automatically 
transcribed into the EU list.  The regulation also includes 
the \"transmission of software or technology by electronic 
media, fax or telephone.\" 
 
8. (U) National experts monitor implementation and exchange 
information in a dual-use working group chaired by the 
Commission.  The general aim of the regulation is to ensure 
the free movement of goods and technology within the EU while 
providing for a common standard of control for transactions 
with parties outside EU borders. 
 
9. (U) Member States are obligated to apply the CoC to items 
on the Dual-Use List when the purchaser is identified as the 
military or internal security service of a third country. 
 
----------------------------- 
What is the CoC Users\' Guide? 
----------------------------- 
 
10. (U) The Users\' Guide was drafted by the COARM working 
group in 2003 to describe standard operating procedures for 
adhering to the CoC. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
What are Member States obligated to report? 
------------------------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Significantly, the CoC only applies when an EU 
member state denies an export or brokering application, and 
then only if the denial was based on CoC criteria.  There is 
no/no obligation for EU member states to report when they 
grant export licenses.  (COMMENT: This means there is no easy 
way to evaluate the impact the CoC has had on arms transfers 
since 1998.  Evidence of how seriously member states take the 
CoC must be gleaned inferentially through national export 
reports.  END COMMENT) 
 
12. (U) EU member states are obligated to inform each other, 
through the Council Secretariat in Brussels, when they deny 
license applications based on CoC provisions.  Denial 
notifications, and when applicable the amendment or 
revocation of denial notifications, are supposed to be 
submitted using a standardized explanation form.  Member 
states are also supposed to consult the Council Secretariat\'s 
central database of denial notifications each time they 
evaluate an export or brokering license.  If, after querying 
the database, they discover that another member state denied 
an \"essentially identical\" transaction within the past three 
years, they are supposed to consult the state that originally 
denied the application before making any final adjudication 
of the application (Note: The original denying country does 
not have a veto over subsequent decisions to grant licenses.) 
 These are intended as confidential bilateral consultations 
that bypass the Council Secretariat. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
What about intangible technology transfers? 
------------------------------------------- 
 
13. (U) The CoC does not address the transfer of intangible 
technology that might be used in the production of items on 
the common military list.  Recognizing this as a loophole, 
but as yet unwilling to take it up at the EU level, member 
states in 2001 endorsed the importance of establishing 
controls and agreed to deliberate further, a process which is 
still ongoing.  By contrast, the EU\'s Dual-Use Regulation 
mandates controls on technology transfers by electronic 
media, fax or telephone (including oral transmission). 
-------------------------------- 
What about end-use certificates? 
-------------------------------- 
 
14. (U) The CoC does not say anything about end-use 
certificates.  However, within the context of the CoC\'s call 
for policy convergence, member states have agreed on the 
types of information that should be included in end-use 
certificates when such certificates are required by national 
export regulations.  The hope is that member states without 
end-use certification requirements will use the agreed 
certification format as a basis for creating their own 
regulations. 
 
---------------------------- 
How is undercutting handled? 
---------------------------- 
15. (U) The \"Compendium\" of agreed practices attached to the 
annual COARM reports says that Member States agreed in 2001 
to share information whenever they decide to undercut each 
others\' export decisions.  As presented, the idea is not to 
name and shame but to \"highlight different interpretations of 
the (CoC) criteria.\"  For that reason, according to the 
Compendium, Member States deciding to undercut their partners 
\"agree to share, to the extent compatible with national 
considerations and on a confidential basis, information on 
the undercut decision not only with the State responsible for 
relevant denial, but in the context of COARM deliberations, 
with all Member States.\" 
 
-------------------------- 
How is the CoC monitored? 
Is there public oversight? 
-------------------------- 
 
16. (SBU) The CoC is largely peer monitored by Member State 
experts in the COARM working group.  The Council Secretariat 
maintains a central database of CoC activity.  Every year the 
COARM group issues a report on CoC implementation and Member 
State progress toward policy convergence.  A \"Compendium\" 
attached to the annual report details new or emerging areas 
of Member State agreement within the CoC framework.  The 
report is public and is presented to the European Parliament 
for consideration (although the EP has no authority over the 
CoC).  It is not clear the extent to which national 
parliaments or public interest groups monitor EU exports 
under the CoC. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Does peer pressure play a role? 
Do member states \'name and shame\' for bad behavior? 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
17. (C) We are unsure of the extent to which CoC-based peer 
pressure plays a role in national export decisions.  As a 
\"gentlemen\'s agreement,\" the CoC relies on the likemindedness 
and good intentions of national governments, not on fear of 
punitive action at the EU level.  Rosemary Chabanski and John 
Mattiussi, respectively the Council and Commission COARM reps 
and leads on the EU Code of Conduct, report that member state 
reps are sometimes subjected to \"mild chiding\" from 
colleagues in the monthly COARM meeting when their countries 
make questionable licensing decisions (e.g. along the lines 
of, \"So what did you sell that for?\" or, \"How are you going 
to justify that one?\").  Asked if more serious (i.e. naming 
and shaming) pressure was ever exerted, Chabanski replied, \"A 
teeny-weeny bit in one case.\"  Both report being unaware of 
any occasion on which these discussions were pushed up to a 
political level. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
What about all the talk of strengthening the CoC? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
18. (C) There is some talk of \"tweaking\" the COC in general, 
in order to make it more effective and useful to member 
states, but the occasional call to make the CoC legally 
binding has to date fallen on deaf ears.  The UK and France 
-- with the EU\'s largest defense industries -- are firmly 
opposed to the idea.  During an April 2 discussion by the 
Political and Security Committee, Greece was the only country 
to come out in support of a legally binding CoC, a position 
that a UK contact described as \"provocative\" (ref A). 
 
---------------- 
EU CoC non-paper 
---------------- 
 
19. (U) The EU describes the CoC with the non-paper below. 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF NON-PAPER: 
 
EU Code of Conduct 
 
The EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports was adopted by the 
Member States, within the framework of the Common Foreign and 
Security Policy, in May 1998 (following agreement in 1991 and 
1993 on criteria to be applied to arms exports). 
 
It is a politically binding document aimed at creating high 
common standards when assessing applications for the export 
of military equipment, listed in the agreed Common List of 
Military Equipment, to states outside of the European Union. 
It establishes eight criteria for judging whether a 
particular export should take place. 
 
The operative provisions of the Code of Conduct provide for 
the notification of denials and for confidential 
consultations among the Member States concerned. These 
procedures give Member States a great comprehension of each 
other\'s reasons for refusal to export and hence increase 
mutual understanding of Member States\' export licensing 
policies. 
 
The final decision on whether or not to export remains at the 
discretion of the Member State to which an application for a 
transaction/export involving arms and weapons systems has 
been made.  (Conventional arm exports are not an area of 
Community competence.  Member States have up to now, on the 
basis of Article 296 (ex-Article 223) of the EC Treaty 
exempted the trade in arms from the scope of application of 
treaty rules.) 
 
Member States exchange information annually on their arms 
exports and on this basis an annual report is produced.  This 
provides for a common assessment of the functioning of the 
Code. 
 
From 1998 to 2000 the Annual Reports of the Code of Conduct 
did not contain figures on the number and value of licences 
granted per destination; nor did they indicate numbers of 
licences refused.  These figures have been included in the 
reports from 2001.  Thus the fourth and fifth annual reports 
contain figures for the number of licences granted by each 
Member State, as well as the value of such licences and/or 
the value of actual exports for each destination. 
 
Member States are currently considering in the Council Group 
dealing with conventional arms transfers (COARM) how they can 
improve the EU Code of Conduct. 
END TEXT OF NON-PAPER. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
20. (C) The CoC is a marginally positive tool for managing EU 
arms exports, but it is no substitute for the EU arms embargo 
on China.  Both are relatively weak political instruments 
(the embargo itself is contained in only eight words from a 
1989 EU Summit declaration that calls for \"an embargo on 
trade in arms with China\").  EU Member States have sold 
considerable amounts of military equipment to China even 
under the embargo (as the 2003 COARM Report shows), but after 
a certain point, such sales would entail certain political 
costs to the selling nation.  The same is not true of the 
CoC.  Under the CoC, Member States would have much more room 
for maneuver in deciding whether or not China satisfies the 
agreed export criteria.  And if the embargo is lifted, Member 
States will even be able to point to that event -- the end of 
the embargo -- as partial evidence for determining that China 
is an acceptable purchaser under the CoC. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"15955","4/14/2004 8:39","04BRUSSELS1586","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF, EAID, UNRWA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DONORS EYE ISRAELI PULLOUT WITH MIXTURE OF HOPE, 
CONCERN 
 
 
1. (U) Summary:  At a one-day informal meeting of the 
\"no-name\" group in Brussels, convened by Canada to discuss 
Palestinian refugee issues, participants were fixated on the 
issue of Israel,s proposed withdrawal from Gaza, which they 
characterized as posing both an opportunity and an enormous 
challenge.  They were anxious to learn more details of PM 
Sharon,s plan, and what the U.S. reaction to it would be 
when Sharon visits the U.S. April 13-15.  The group was 
unanimous that Israel should coordinate its pullout with the 
governing authorities in Gaza; that Israel should ensure 
continued humanitarian access; and that the international 
community (especially donors), the Palestinian Authority, and 
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian 
Refugees (UNRWA) need to begin planning now for the host of 
issues implied by The withdrawal.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) Participants of the meeting: 
 
Ambassador Marc Otte, EU Special Representative for Mideast 
Peace; 
Christian Berger, political officer, Directorate General 
RELEX, European Commission; 
Charlotta Sparre, Swedish PermRep to EU; 
Geoffrey Dean, Dept. Of Foreign Affairs, Canada; 
Markus Kostner, World Bank Representative for West Bank and 
Gaza, Washington DC; 
Takashi Ishii, Japanese mission to EU; 
Mark Singleton, MFA, Netherlands; 
Fritz Froelich, MFA, Switzerland; 
Barbara Fontana, MFA, Switzerland; 
Katherina Lack, Foreign Office, Germany; 
Benedicte de Monthaur, MFA, France; 
Oleg Ozerov, MFA, Russia; 
Martin Rapley, DFID, United Kingdom; 
Age Tiltnes, Regional Representative for FAFO, Amman; 
Bernard Philippe, European Commission; 
Matthias Burchard, UNRWA, Geneva; 
Lindsay Campbell-Reidhead, USEU/PRM; 
Robert Ward, program officer, PRM, Washington, DC; 
Keith chang, CIDA, Canada; 
Roula El Rifai, IDRC, Canada; 
Helene Kadi, CIDA, Canada; 
Wolfgang Barwinkel, EU; 
Jan Thesleff, EU; 
Rex Brynen, McGill University, Canada; 
Jill Sinclair; Foreign Affairs, Canada; 
Ghaith Al Omars, Geneva Accord negotiator, Jerusalem; 
Daniel Levy, Geneva Accord negotiator, Jerusalem. 
 
3. (U) The Refugee Working Group (RWG) was established under 
the Declaration of Principles in 1993 and Canada was named 
chair.  Although the RWG is defunct, Canada remains active in 
its leadership role on Palestinian refugee issues and 
Convened a meeting of the group of interested countries (\"no 
name\" group) April 2 in Brussels.   Major themes of the 
meeting follow. 
 
Negotiate or coordinate 
----------------------- 
 
4. (U) Participants expressed concern about a unilateral 
pullout from Gaza by Israel.  They echoed Palestinian 
pollster Khalil Shikaki,s warning that an Israeli pullout 
without prior negotiation could lead to infighting, chaos, 
anarchy, and a worsening humanitarian situation.  One 
participant noted that a recent poll in Gaza revealed 55 
percent thought that an Israeli pullout without negotiation 
would strengthen extremist groups (Hamas). There may not be a 
need to negotiate Israel,s withdrawal, but there is a need 
to coordinate a pullout, participants agreed.  In fact, in 
the absence of an actual pullout timetable, it was warned 
that an escalatory climate is emerging.  In this climate, the 
Israeli military has little choice but to take a forward 
military posture while Palestinians scramble to \"make their 
mark\" by imparting the most damage possible before a military 
withdrawal. Given the implications suggested, coordination 
may need to preempt further progress toward a pullout. 
However, many noted that, by working with the Palestinian 
authority, the GoI and the international community could 
strengthen the foundering institution, which would not only 
improve prospects for Gaza, but also spur the defunct peace 
process. 
 
Access routes, humanitarian aid 
------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) Participants were unanimous that Israel needed to keep 
access corridors open so that humanitarian aid could flow 
into Gaza (especially through Karni).  They also noted that 
an Israeli pullout would likely compel the international 
community to hold a donor,s conference to raise funds for 
the reconstruction of Gaza, and that such reconstruction, if 
done right, could serve as a model for the West Bank.  A 
first step would be the conducting of a comprehensive needs 
assessment. 
 
Economic development a top priority 
----------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) Participants were also unanimous that should the GoI 
pull out of Gaza, donors should focus on rebuilding the Gaza 
airport and port so that economic development can proceed. 
Without the port and airport, Gaza will remain an economic 
basket case relying on international handouts.  One 
participant noted that it would be important for the GoI to 
issue a minimum number of permits for Gazans to work in 
Israel, which is important considering there are few economic 
opportunities in Gaza and wages are higher in Israel.  The 
Netherlands rep noted that even with an Israeli pullout, 
investors would likely steer clear of Gaza until a final 
settlement occurred, which could be years away.  A complete 
Israeli pullout would also likely result in a new flow of 
trade between Gaza and Egypt, ending Gaza,s economic 
dependence on Israel. 
 
Security 
-------- 
 
7. (U) Several participants highlighted the importance of 
security following an Israeli pullout.  Swiss rep Froelich 
suggested that the donors formulate a plan to train and 
finance 1000 police to help keep law and order.  Russian rep 
Ozerov suggested the temporary insertion of an international 
force to maintain security.  The World Bank rep noted that an 
Israeli pullout would provide the pportunity for us to 
bolster the Palestinian Authority,s capacity to administer 
Gaza.  If we fail to identify a Palestinian partner and 
subsequently fail to get the necessary mandate needed to meet 
demands, then the power base in Gaza will be up for grabs. 
The inclusion of the PA from the outset will be essential. 
Otherwise, Hamas is likely to fill the vacuum, several 
participants concurred. 
 
Land use 
-------- 
 
8. (U) Participants noted that an Israeli pullout would 
trigger an intense debate within Gaza regarding land use 
issues.  There are only 1200 or so houses in Israeli 
settlements in Gaza - and they are higher quality and more 
expensive than refugee housing.   Thus, the governing 
authority might sell them rather than let refugees take them 
over.  There is a question of what land is state land and 
what land is private land.  There is also a question as to 
what would happen with the refugee camps.  Refugees think 
they own the housing they are living in, but they do not. 
The pullout would bring great pressure on the governing 
authority to relieve the congestion of the refugee camps, 
which are severely overcrowded in Gaza.  The PA\'s Ministry of 
Planning should begin working on housing plans for Gaza, if 
it has not already started to do so.  However, the PA should 
not have sole responsibility over the land issue.  It will be 
necessary to impart international control; otherwise there is 
a very real risk of infighting over land, which the PA would 
be unable to control.  The UNRWA rep noted that donors could 
help right now by fully funding UNRWA,s 2004 emergency 
appeal, which requests $32 million for housing projects in 
Gaza.  (Note:  The USG has contributed $20 million of the 
total $45 million donated to UNRWA,s emergency appeal in 
2004.  The appeal requests $193 million in humanitarian 
assistance for the West Bank and Gaza.  End note.) 
 
Flow of refugees, control of border 
----------------------------------- 
 
9. (U) Participants noted that if Israel should pull out 
completely, pressure might mount on Gaza refugees living in 
Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan to return via Egypt to Gaza 
without waiting for a \"final\" settlement.  Such movements 
could have ramifications for the peace process. 
 
UNRWA,s role? 
------------- 
 
10. (U)  UNRWA rep Burchard noted that UNRWA, s mandate 
allows it to care For non-refugees in emergency situations. 
Therefore, UNRWA could be the conduit for assistance for the 
500,000 non-refugees in Gaza, as well as the 900,000 refugees 
there in the event of an Israeli pullout.  UNRWA,s 
longer-term role in Gaza would have to be revisited by the 
United Nations General Assembly, which sets UNRWA,s mandate 
every three years. 
 
Conclusion 
---------- 
 
11. (U) Participants, while generally upbeat about the 
prospects of an Israeli pullout, were also well aware of how 
many ways things could go wrong.  They were cognizant of the 
inherent difficulty in brainstorming a response to the 
withdrawal absent a copy of the actual Israeli plan.  There 
is a \"matrix of possibilities,\" as one participant said. 
Ideally, participants want their governments to have input 
into how to help manage the Israeli withdrawal in a way that 
minimizes the potential for a humanitarian disaster for 
Palestinian refugees.  They want to be briefed on the plan by 
the quartet, and to have a say in discussions regarding 
reconstruction of Gaza, which they as donors will be called 
upon to fund.  One participant noted that donors are tired of 
pouring money into the \"black hole\" of the occupied 
territories, and stressed that donors want to be sure that 
this time, their money will be used in a transparent and 
accountable fashion such that there is real movement from 
relief to development.  They also acknowledged that 
throughout the process, there will be a need for the 
governing authority, as well as the international community, 
to solicit the views of the refugees themselves prior to 
taking actions on their behalf. 
 
(This cable was drafted by PRM/ANE.) 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"15994","4/14/2004 15:27","04BRUSSELS1607","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS1081|04BRUSSELS1119|04BRUSSELS36|04PARIS13","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001607 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO IO/CD AND NP AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, KNNP, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SUBJECT: MARCH 19 U.S.-EU TROIKA CONSULTATIONS ON 
NON-PROLIFERATION (CONOP) 
 
REF: A. A. BRUSSELS 1119 
     B. B. BRUSSELS 1081 
     C. C. USEU TODAY 03/03/04 AND PREVIOUS 
     D. D. BRUSSELS 36 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff David Armitage for reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY. On March 19, Special Representative of the 
President for Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and Geneva 
CD Ambassador Jackie W. Sanders and NP/PPC Director 
Christopher Murray led discussions on arms control and 
disarmament with the EU\'s Nonproliferation Troika (CONOP). 
Issues discussed were: 
 
-- Irish European Union (EU) Presidency priorities:  The 
Irish want to implement the EU\'s weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD) nonproliferation strategy.  This includes seeking to 
universalize nonproliferation, disarmament, and arms control 
regimes.  It also includes an EU peer review of national 
export controls, with a general assessment planned for 
completion by June. 
 
-- Nuclear Issues: The EU is concerned about planning for the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Third Preparatory Committee 
and reiterated its call for support for extending Nuclear 
Suppliers Group (NSG) membership to the EU accession states 
that are not yet members of the NSG. 
 
-- Missiles:  The EU was raising pre-launch notifications at 
every occasion and has discussed it so far with 113 countries. 
 
-- G8 Global Partnership:  EU member states seemed willing to 
expand the Global Partnership\'s geographical scope, but 
resources would be tight through 2006. 
 
-- Regional Issues:  Iran, Libya, and North Korea were 
discussed, and everyone noted the need for continued US-EU 
cooperation. 
 
-- Australia Group:  EU restated its hope for USG assistance 
on extending AG membership to all EU accession states. 
 
END SUMMARY. 
 
 
EU Delegation 
------------- 
2. (U) The Irish EU Presidency was represented by Disarmament 
and Nonproliferation Director Adrian McDaid and Deputy 
Director Sarah McGrath.  The upcoming Dutch Presidency was 
represented by Nuclear Affairs and Nonproliferation Director 
Paul Wilke and Policy Officer Elke Merks-Schaapveld. 
Annalisa Giannella, Personal Representative for WMD 
Nonproliferation and Nonproliferation Desk Officer Didier 
Cosse represented the Council Secretariat.  Nonproliferation 
specialist Marc Deffrennes and USA Desk Officer Andrew 
Denison attended for the Commission. 
 
Priorities of the Irish EU Presidency 
------------------------------------- 
3. (SBU) McDaid said that a priority for the Irish Presidency 
would be to implement the EU\'s WMD nonproliferation strategy 
(ref. D).  A key tool in the EU strategy is to seek 
universalization of nonproliferation, disarmament and arms 
control regimes.  This will be in the form of a series of 
demarches to countries that have not yet acceded to the 
regimes.  The first round, currently underway, urges 
universal membership in the Chemical Weapons Convention 
(CWC).  The results will be compiled in a matrix and 
delivered to the organization for the Prohibition of Chemical 
Weapons (OPCW).  The EU is working on the terms of reference 
for a Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) demarche.  The EU 
also plans to hold a seminar on challenge inspections, as 
part of its effort to strengthen multilateral 
nonproliferation regimes.  McDaid discussed plans to exchange 
information among EU member states on bilateral assistance to 
prevent overlap. 
 
4. (C) Giannella described the EU nonproliferation strategy. 
In early February, a team of EU member state experts began a 
peer review of national export controls and hoped to have a 
general assessment completed by June.  The EU is also 
implementing a Council Directive on controlling radioactive 
sources that is stronger than a Code of Conduct, and recently 
conducted a demarche campaign urging countries to enhance the 
physical protection of fissile materials.  Moreover, the 
Political-Security Committee (PSC) plans to discuss 
transshipment/transit and seizure issues, which Giannella 
described as \"conceptually linked\" to the Proliferation 
Security Initiative (PSI), but which she said \"needs to 
happen anyway.\" (ref. C) 
 
5. (U) McDaid and Murray exchanged views on US and EU efforts 
to support International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
activities.  McDaid noted that the EU had just pledged 3.3 
million euros through the Common Foreign and Security Policy 
(CFSP) budget to fund three new EU-selected, IAEA-implemented 
programs in Southeast Europe and the Caucasus/Central Asia. 
Murray responded that the US provides about USD 50 million 
annually in voluntary contributions to the IAEA.  Murray also 
provided an update on the status of ratification of the IAEA 
Additional Protocol in the Senate.  McDaid emphasized that 
the EU was looking to work with the US to strengthen the 
IAEA.  With reference to the President\'s February 11 
nonproliferation speech, he asked rhetorically how we might 
define \"under suspicion\" when deciding whether to bar a 
country from the IAEA Board of Governors. 
 
Nuclear Issues/NPT 
------------------ 
6. (C) Ambassador Sanders stressed that the U.S. was 
committed to a renewed emphasis on compliance with NPT 
nonproliferation obligations.  Recent disclosures in Libya 
and elsewhere have made clear that the NPT needs 
strengthening, a goal the US would pursue at the 2004 NPT 
Prepcom and 2005 Review Conference (RevCon).  McDaid 
discussed issues related to the run-up to the Third PrepCom. 
He noted that the PrepCom should provide two sets of 
recommendations:  one procedural and the other substantive. 
McDaid agreed that it would be best if PrepCom III could 
resolve the RevCon agenda issues, and cautioned that we 
should avoid publicly discussing any possibility of a 4th 
PrepCom to avoid a self-fulfilling prophecy. 
 
7. (C) On the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), Dutch Nuclear 
Affairs and Nonproliferation division head Wilke described 
work in several areas: a French paper on sensitive 
technologies; a French/British/Swedish paper on information 
exchange; a British/Austrian paper on the Additional Protocol 
as a condition of supply; and a French outreach paper. 
Sweden had raised the issue of NSG intelligence sharing, and 
was hoping to get into greater depth at information sharing 
meetings by limiting participation to a select group.  The EU 
reiterated its call for support on ensuring NSG membership 
for all ten EU accession states.  Murray later reported that 
the U.S.supports NSG membership for Malta, Estonia, and 
Latvia, the three accession states that are not already 
members of the NSG.  Finally, the EU expressed concern over 
China\'s bid for NSG membership, particularly with regard to 
1993 grandfathering and IAEA safeguards.  Murray reviewed the 
President,s speech of February 11 as it described proposals 
for limiting the export of enrichment and reprocessing 
equipment and technology.  These proposals, he continued, 
could be effected through strengthening NSG guidelines, which 
would be discussed at the upcoming NSG working level meeting 
in Vienna.    Wilke replied that most EU member states would 
support our amendments, but that one (note: one EU 
participant confirmed on the margins that it was France. end 
note) was likely to block full EU consensus. 
 
8. (C) European Commission nonproliferation specialist 
Defrennes raised a question about how to deal with spent 
fuel.  He said some were concerned about the possible impact 
of the US NSG proposals on the EU\'s internal market and 
Euratom.  He added that the Commission legal services were 
responding to a member state request for further analysis. 
 
Missiles 
-------- 
9. (C) Wilke asked where the US stood with Russia on 
finalizing the pre-launch notification system, and urged us 
to move quickly to finish the process.  He said that the EU 
was raising pre-launch notifications at every occasion.  The 
EU has discussed it with 113 countries so far.  On the 
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), Wilke noted that 
Kazakhstan\'s and Croatia\'s MTCR membership credentials were 
weak, but stressed the EU desire that no one break silence on 
EU accession state applications.  Murray agreed that Croatia 
and Kazakhstan were not potential significant suppliers of 
missile technology, and Kazakhstan was not part of the ICOC 
or BWC.  Wilke expressed interest in whether interception 
would be on the agenda of the Re-enforced Point of Contact 
meeting in Paris 13-14 April, and if so, whether it would be 
related to PSI. 
 
G-8 Global Partnership 
---------------------- 
10. (C) Deffrennes provided a readout of ongoing Commission 
efforts in the G-8 Global Partnership (GP), and said the EU\'s 
Joint Action to renew the program with Russia would be 
finalized June 24.  Deffrennes noted also that the EU was 
unhappy with Russia\'s efforts to link GP assistance delays to 
Russia\'s failure to destroy chemical weapons stockpiles in 
accordance with its CWC commitments.    He said there 
appeared to be the will among EU member states to expand the 
geographical scope of the GP and to devise a second Joint 
Action program.  He warned, however, that the EC would be 
under budget constraints through 2006, so new money would not 
be available until the 2007-2013 budget cycle.  Murray 
replied that the US is focusing on the threat, not just 
geography, and is also considering countries such as Libya, 
Iraq, etc. 
 
Regional Issues 
--------------- 
11. (C) On Iran, the EU was supportive of the efforts by the 
EU-3 and recognizes the need to maintain pressure.  McDaid 
assessed Iranian cooperation so far as mixed -- should have 
been better but could have been worse -- and said the EU was 
pleased that the IAEA Board of Governors was able to agree on 
a resolution by consensus.  On Libya, McDaid said the EU was 
pleased with the BOG resolution and with the US-UK 
disarmament efforts. 
 
12. (C) Wilke was interested in US views on the situation in 
the DPRK, particularly as it impacts KEDO.  Currently, there 
is no EU position on the costs of suspending KEDO, but he 
emphasized that there was a connection between KEDO 
suspension and Six Party talks.  Wilke reiterated what he 
called the \"standing offer\" made by EU Asia Directors and DG 
Cooper (refs. A and B) to assist in any way possible with the 
Six Party process.  Giannella said the EU did not want the 
DPRK to have even a civilian nuclear facility, though it was 
unclear how North Korea would meet its energy needs without 
one. 
 
Australia Group 
--------------- 
13. (C) Wilke was open to US ideas on preparation for the AG 
plenary June 7-10 in Paris.  He reiterated the need to 
discuss membership in the AG for the ten EU accession states. 
 Murray said the US was discussing the issue with EU 
counterparts through AG channels, and would do so more once 
the current MTCR silence process was finished.  He said the 
US would appreciate EU assistance in persuading Switzerland 
and France to stop blocking the addition of new nerve gas 
precursors to the control lists.  The EU took note of the 
request but did not respond. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"16038","4/15/2004 16:01","04BRUSSELS1622","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE82674","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 001622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PBTS, MD, OSCE, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU WELCOMES MOLDOVA CONSULTATIONS 
 
REF: STATE 82674 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.5 (B 
)(D) 
 
1. (C) Mission raised reftel proposal for five-party expert 
(Ambassadorial) level talks on Moldova April 14 with 
Christoph Heusgen, head of the Policy Unit.  His experts on 
Moldova were not available, but Heusgen promised to get back 
to us soon with a more formal reply.  He said he was 
confident the EU would support the proposed meeting in early 
May.  Heusgen suggested it would be important to include a 
representative from the Kremlin in the talks, since he was 
not sure the Russian MFA\'s officials could speak 
authoritatively.  Heusgen also questioned if the Russians 
were sincere about seeking progress, suggesting they might 
only hope to gain tactical advantage prior to CFE meetings on 
Istanbul commitments.  At Heusgen\'s request, we also shared 
US proposal with Irish Presidency. 
 
2. (C) On April 15 we followed up with Carl Hartzell, who 
told us the EU welcomed the proposal, and would participate 
in an early May meeting (EU sensibilities would likely 
require participation of two officials: the Irish Presidency 
and a Council expert).  Hartzell had the impression that 
Novozhilov hoped expert-level meetings could be used to drag 
things out or perhaps lead to some sort of blessing of 
Russian \"peace-keeping\" activities.  He suggested it might be 
useful to hold some sort of US-EU consultations on the way 
forward even prior to five-party talks in early May. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"16041","4/15/2004 16:47","04BRUSSELS1623","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04MINSK476|04STATE82809","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 001623 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, BO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU REACTION TO POTENTIAL POSITIVE STEPS FOR BELARUS 
 
REF: A) STATE 82809 B) MINSK 476 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.4 (B 
)(D) 
 
1. (C) Mission passed ref a points April 15 to Carl Hartzell, 
East Europe and Caucasus specialist of the Council\'s Policy 
Unit.  Hartzell reviewed them briefly, and said they seemed 
reasonable, and in fact went further than the EU was thinking 
at this time.  The EU was also looking at steps to increase 
dialogue in response to positive steps by Belarus, but would 
likely limit them to expert meetings and perhaps a Political 
Director troika at most. 
 
2. (C) Hartzell said the Council had held a review of its 
policy toward Belarus following the US-EU joint demarche to 
confirm that there was no need to change their policy.  This 
was a tactical decision, since it was possible that 
enlargement could lead to pressures by countries bordering on 
Belarus to adjust the policy.  The review, however, had 
reconfirmed the EU\'s current approach, adopted originally in 
1997.  He said the Council was looking at ways that EU funds 
could be used to help civil society, but admitted that EU 
mechanisms (such as TASIS funding) were not very nimble for 
this purpose, as they required approval by the government. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"16063","4/16/2004 13:59","04BRUSSELS1655","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE52528","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 BRUSSELS 001655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/AFR; EUR/ERA; AF/C; DEPARTMENT PLEASE 
PASS USAID FOR DCHA/OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF, EAID, PHUM, PGOV, BU, TZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: JOINT U.S.-EC MONITORING TRIP IMPROVES DONOR 
COORDINATION, HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE IN BURUNDI AND 
TANZANIA 
 
REF: STATE 52528 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  In order to improve donor coordination and 
to bring international attention to the humanitarian needs in 
Burundi, the U.S. and the European Commission (EC) undertook 
a joint monitoring mission from March 29-April 2 to assess 
post-conflict needs and to monitor the work of implementing 
partners.  The overall deterioration of the social system in 
Burundi will require years of humanitarian assistance to 
bring living standards up to minimum levels.  Nonetheless, 
the Government of Burundi (GoB) is more interested in gaining 
direct access to development funds in order to accommodate 
the needs of returnees and other vulnerable people.  The 
steady, manageable stream of refugees from camps in Tanzania 
is likely to continue, although UNHCR also has contingency 
plans for a sudden massive inflow.  The major success of the 
joint monitoring team was bringing together different 
agencies from both the U.S. and EC that represented a 
comprehensive assistance mandate and which will facilitate 
the link between relief and reconstruction.  EC funds greatly 
exceed USG assistance for Burundi.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Pilot Joint-Monitoring Mission:  Strengthening Donor 
Coordination 
------------------------ 
 
2. (U) In order to take transatlantic donor coordination one 
step further, the U.S. and EC conducted, for the first time 
ever, a joint monitoring trip to one of the world\'s regions 
emerging from civil conflict.  In order to underscore the 
fact that many of our largest humanitarian projects are in 
Africa, and that a number of regional conflicts on that 
continent are entering a resolution phase when refugees begin 
returning home, the top two humanitarian donors chose Burundi 
for this pilot mission.  Apart from the transatlantic nature 
of the pilot, each side brought together an interagency 
delegation. 
 
3. (U) Participants for the EC were:  Dietmar Krissler (DG 
Development Burundi desk officer); Gabriela Koehler-Raue (DG 
Development Tanzania desk officer); Marc Stalmans (EuropeAid 
post conflict programs manager); Susanne Martin (ECHO Burundi 
desk officer); Angela Pollitzer (ECHO Tanzania desk officer); 
Yorgos Kapranis (ECHO/Bujumbura); and Yves Horent (ECHO/Dar 
es Salaam).  USG participants were:  Shane Hough (PRM/AFR); 
Marc Meznar (USEU/PRM); Matthew McKeever (Kampala/PRM 
Refcoord); Denise Gordon (Bujumbura/OFDA) and Robert Marks 
(Bujumbura/POL-ECON). 
 
------------------------ 
Mission Objectives and Results 
------------------------ 
 
4. (SBU) The stated objectives of the joint mission were 
accomplished as follows: 
 
a) Increase transatlantic cooperation between the U.S. and 
the EC in coordination of humanitarian assistance and 
longer-term development needs (both at headquarters and field 
levels) 
 
-- From planning the mission to traveling to remote sites 
together, a spirit of camaraderie was created that will 
certainly facilitate direct communication between program 
officers as they draft and decide on funding priorities in 
the coming years.  USG participants gained a better insight 
into the various funding pots the EC draws from, including 
limitations associated with each of these.  Understanding the 
parameters of the EC\'s 25 million euro, multi-year grant to 
UNHCR via EuropeAid was particularly important, since PRM 
frequently encourages the EC to channel more of its 
assistance through international organizations. 
 
-- Field staff also worked closely together in Bujumbura, 
with the U.S. taking the lead in arranging meetings in the 
capital while the EC organized the logistics for the field 
trip to the Burundi-Tanzania border region.  Transatlantic 
cooperation in the field was strengthened through the joint 
planning and travel. 
 
b) Observe and exchange information on best practices in 
monitoring/evaluation in the field 
 
-- By listening to questions posed to the implementing 
partners, both sides gained a better understanding of what 
the funding agency considered appropriate and effective use 
of donor funds.  For example, the EC noted the USG practice 
of asking governmental authorities about their working 
relationships with implementing partners.  Overall, 
monitoring and evaluation techniques used by both sides were 
remarkably similar. 
 
c) Promote coordination in linking relief to rehabilitation 
and reconstruction 
 
-- The interagency composition of each delegation was perhaps 
the most important lesson learned from the mission, 
particularly because it involved planning a multi-year 
strategy to link the immediate humanitarian needs with 
longer-term development assistance.  This mission marked the 
first time the three funding entities of the EC had ever 
traveled together. 
 
-- The joint mission marked one of the first times that EC 
desk officers responsible for neighboring countries in 
different geographic regions (i.e., Great Lakes versus 
southern Africa) had traveled jointly. 
 
-- In the case of Burundi, the humanitarian needs are 
overwhelming because 99% of the population lives below the 
poverty line; humanitarian assistance will be needed long 
after reconstruction has begun. 
d) Assess the competing needs in terms of social and economic 
rehabilitation and reintegration in Burundi of returning 
refugees, internally displaced, and demobilized soldiers 
 
-- In almost every meeting with international implementing 
partners, the need to \"de-label\" those requiring assistance 
was emphasized.  According to many interlocutors, labeling 
and providing different levels of assistance based on whether 
individuals were refugees, internally displaced or former 
combatants would be counter-productive in the long run. 
Because the infrastructure in Burundi is so degraded, many 
felt the best approach to humanitarian assistance would be to 
focus on infrastructure upgrades to schools, health clinics, 
etc. for the benefit of all, particularly in areas of return. 
 
 
-- Of the three groups of vulnerable people considered, the 
problem of demobilizing combatants was viewed as the most 
complex because their possession of weapons gave them 
leverage to demand greater assistance.  Furthermore, the 
psychosocial support to this category of vulnerable people, 
particularly child soldiers, was deemed most critical. 
Failure to provide schooling might make them vulnerable to 
re-recruitment by rebel fighters and thus perpetuate the 
cycle of violence. 
 
e) Assess the accuracy of pre-departure information and 
expectations in camps before returns begin 
 
-- In general, refugees in the camps were well aware of the 
degraded social services that currently exist in Burundi and 
frequently cited this situation as a reason for remaining in 
Tanzania.  Some seemed to erroneously think that if a border 
crossing had not yet been opened to their province of origin 
(many were from Makamba province) they were not allowed to 
return home voluntarily.  Another major reason for not 
returning was the fear of renewed ethnic violence, 
particularly in a post-electoral period.  Some refugee 
leaders said that they would return only when the Burundian 
security sector is reformed.  Radio seemed to be the primary 
venue for hearing news about developments in Burundi. 
 
f) Monitor and verify procedures and numbers of returning 
refugees at the Tanzania/Burundi border and conditions in 
reception areas 
 
-- On successive days, the joint delegation monitored the 
Gisuru reception and transit center in Ruyigi.  Overall, 
UNHCR\'s organization and coordination with the various 
entities working within the center was exceptional.  Of the 
registered refugees in the Tanzania camps, a total of 63,384 
are from Ruyigi province; another 30,000 or so will also 
transit through Gisuru to provinces neighboring Ruyigi.  The 
joint team found the actual number of returnees per convoy 
(350) was a little lower than the estimated number per convoy 
(500), the number UNHCR is working with when projecting its 
workload for 2004.  WFP has seemingly solved much of its 
logistics problem in providing return packages / food rations 
in support of returning refugees.  The capacity of the Gisuru 
reception and transit center was estimated by WFP as 3,000 
returnees per week. 
 
-- The transfer of health data from IRC (the NGO in charge 
for health in the Kibondo, TZ camps) to AHA (health NGO 
working with returnees at the transit center) is an area of 
the operation that could use some revamping.  The story of 
the death of a diabetic young woman upon returning home to 
Ruyigi because of inadequate medical oversight highlighted 
the lack of cross-border coordination between UNHCR country 
offices and health NGOs. 
 
g) Assess programs in place to return displaced people to 
regions of origin or newly established villages, as well as 
rehabilitation and reintegration efforts 
 
-- The GoB\'s idea to create villages was received with mixed 
feelings by the displaced.  Some, particularly women, 
indicated that if conditions equaled those in the Tanzania 
refugee camps they would consider relocating to a village. 
Others insisted they would only return to their own land. 
 
-- Conditions at a temporary settlement site for both 
returning refugees and internally displaced persons in 
Kabuyenge visited by the joint mission were extremely 
primitive.  However, returnees seemed to be upbeat even 
though they expressed some safety concerns related to 
bandits.  A primary school that had been gutted was partially 
restored allowing some education.  Some expressed a wish to 
settle permanently in Kabuyenge. 
 
h) Assess government and UNHCR policies to facilitate 
rehabilitation & reintegration of the above mentioned target 
groups 
 
-- Some officials and implementing partners argued that three 
months worth of food for returnees was not enough to 
facilitate reintegration, particularly got those who returned 
during the dry season when planting could not begin 
immediately.  However, saddling refugees with even more food 
items would not be tenable since the GoB was not fulfilling 
its responsibility to transport returnees from UNHCR drop-off 
points to final destinations.  A solution, albeit 
impractical, would be to provide the reintegration kits at 
destination.  As is, refugees sell off, at below market 
value, food and NFI supplies -- something that minimizes 
donor contributions and also negatively affects the local 
market. 
 
-- MSF/Belgium presented the results of an in-depth study 
about the effect on child mortality from a GoB plan to 
recover medical expenses by charging vulnerable populations 
based on a sliding scale.  In general, those made to pay half 
of the overall expenses fared worse than those required to 
pay just for the extras, like lab tests and medication. 
Mortality rates of those who received free health care were a 
fraction of the other two categories. 
 
i) Assess institutional capacities of government and UNHCR to 
deal with the load of returning refugees 
 
-- The transitional government does not appear to be able to 
meet the needs of returnees, even though official policy is 
to encourage them to return.  GoB officials visit camps in 
Tanzania, describe conditions in the country and promise to 
improve the infrastructure. 
 
-- Overlap and competition between the Ministry for 
Reintegration and Rehabilitation of Displaced and Affected 
and the National Committee for the Reinsertion of Vulnerable 
Populations needs to be resolved.  The government would 
prefer ending humanitarian assistance (which is channeled 
through international implementing partners) in order to 
receive direct infusions of development aid for rebuilding 
the infrastructure. 
 
-- UNHCR staffing in Burundi, particularly in the 
sub-regional offices it intends to open, needs to be 
strengthened.  Neither the chief of mission in Bujumbura or 
the officer setting up the sub-office in Ruyigi seemed firmly 
in control of details or transmitted an urgency in moving the 
agenda forward.  By contrast, the head of Kibondo 
sub-regional office in Tanzania portrayed an effective 
management style, although she lamented that for long 
stretches only one of a total of five international positions 
were filled. 
 
-- EC officers suggested tapping into unused resources from 
Burundi accounts to fund repatriation efforts from Tanzania, 
instead of UNHCR\'s current practices of cutting care and 
maintenance for refugee camps to fund the logistics of the 
return from the Tanzania account.  During the Tanzania 
portion of the trip delegation members saw the direct impact 
of the redirection of \"care and maintenance\" funds to 
repatriation:  UNHCR has begun exploring once monthly food 
distributions vice biweekly (which has a significant effect 
on household economy leading to more food selling and less 
food security). 
 
j) Underscore importance of effectively managing 
post-conflict developments in Burundi by the joint trip of 
the top two donors 
 
-- The joint mission met with top GoB officials dealing with 
refugee issues including Francoise Ngendahayo, the Minister 
for Reintegration and Rehabilitation of Displaced and 
Affected people, and Frederick Banvuginyumvira, the President 
of the National Committee for the Reinsertion of Vulnerable 
Populations.  At a dinner hosted by the EC ambassador, the 
delegation was also able to discuss with the Minister of 
Finance issues of concern (such as the policy change 
requiring health officials to recover medical expenses with 
returnees).  In Ruyigi, the joint delegation met with the 
provincial governor. 
 
-- Furthermore, the joint mission had the opportunity to 
brief the top Geneva-based UNHCR officer for Africa, 
Assistant High Commissioner Kamel Morjane, following their 
field trip and convey impressions and recommendations.  By 
meeting and expressing concerns jointly to top governmental 
and IO officials, the strength of the message had a 
multiplying effect. 
 
------------------------ 
GoB: Unable to meet needs 
------------------------ 
 
5. (SBU) In a meeting with Ngendahayo on April 2, the 
minister stated that life in Burundi may not be as good as 
the refugees have it in Tanzania, \"but at least they\'re free 
and not herded into camps like animals.\"   As proof she 
pointed to the large numbers who are spontaneously and 
voluntarily voting with their feet, even walking for three 
days to reach home.  She noted that while many humanitarian 
organizations are in place, the infrastructure to help 
returnees reintegrate into society is missing.  Ngendahayo 
stated that the government could not compete with NGOs and 
churches in providing and rehabilitating shelter, but she 
expressed concern that no uniform standards were being 
followed by these organizations.  She indicated this could 
lead to future resentment.  The minister briefly touched on 
the idea of model villages as a solution to this problem. 
 
6. (SBU) She also mentioned a fluctuating security situation, 
which discourages returns.  Ngendahayo stated that an 
important objective of her ministry was to build the capacity 
of \"welcoming committees\" in order to promote reconciliation 
and peaceful coexistence.  She lamented that many of those 
born and/or reared in the politicized camps are fed a 
continuous diet of hate, which she emphasized by breaking 
into English and terming it \"brain washing\".  She also 
briefly touched on refugee resettlement activities out of the 
camps, cautioning against criminals and others perpetrating 
fraud (by claiming they are orphans, etc.). Regarding 
elections and violence, Ngendahayo minimized the connection 
between the two by explaining that the violence was connected 
to change (i.e., independence in 1961, abolition of the 
monarchy in 1965, end of a single-party political system in 
1972, etc., and the subsequent settling of accounts in 1993), 
not elections per se.  She also minimized the effect that 
refugees would have on the upcoming elections, noting that 
those eligible to vote from the camps would only be about 3% 
of Burundi\'s electoral population. 
7. (SBU) Regarding relations with UNHCR, she said that after 
a rocky start with disagreements over security in certain 
regions, cooperation had greatly improved.  She highlighted 
the problem that UNHCR caused by describing how those 
returning spontaneously were forced to ask military 
commanders for food because UNHCR was not providing 
assistance in phase four areas. 
 
8. (SBU) In a separate meeting with the National Committee 
for the Reinsertion of Vulnerable Populations, Bavuginyumvira 
emphasized that in Burundi, creating a distinction between 
humanitarian work and development was artificial because the 
whole social infrastructure needed rehabilitation.  He 
suggested that the medical centers could be privatized to 
improve services.  Because returnees generally lacked housing 
in their places of origin, he recommended that construction 
tools and supplies such as nails and roofing be included in 
reintegration kits.  He also promoted the creation of model 
villages, particularly for demobilized combatants arguing 
\"Who could refuse them?\" 
 
9. (SBU) Bavuginyumvira stated that 2,000 refugees were 
returning each week to Ruyigi province, and that the total 
number of returnees per week to Burundi was about 3,000.  He 
ventured that opening Makamba crossing on April 20 might 
trigger a massive return.  When asked about UNHCR, 
Bavuginyumvira said that the agency needed more human 
resources and material supplies.  He also noted a problem 
with payment of salaries, that Geneva was not sending funds 
to pay its staff in-country. 
 
------------------------ 
UNHCR: Responsive to Suggestions 
------------------------ 
 
10. (SBU) On April 1, the joint mission met with UNHCR\'s 
Assistant High Commissioner Kamel Morjane to brief him on 
their field visit and relay preliminary impressions.  Major 
points made by the EC and USG representatives included: 
 
a) Obstacles to repatriation: 
-- lingering ethnic divisions (with some refugees demanding a 
50/50 ethnic composition of the armed forces); 
-- fears that the elections might be the prelude to renewed 
ethnic-based violence; 
-- generalized banditry; 
-- political pressure from rebel factions to not return (or 
on the other hand, to do so -- one scenario for a massive 
uncontrolled return) and; 
-- lower levels of basic social services and education: 
 
The joint delegation emphasized, nonetheless, there was a 
general will to return, and those who were in sub-standard 
returnee settlements still seemed to be satisfied they had 
made the right decision in returning. 
 
b) Repatriation logistics: 
-- GoB is not transporting returnees from UNHCR drop off 
points to places of origin as originally planned; 
-- There may be a need to revisit composition of both food 
and NFI return packets (as many need to walk up to 15 miles 
to finally reach home) if transportation all the way to 
returnees, homes cannot be realized; 
-- There is an insufficient budget for repatriation in 
Tanzania (which results in cut backs to care and maintenance 
in the camps); 
-- Benchmarks must be defined or made more explicit before 
promoting returns, and; 
-- A systematic plan to utilize the acquired skills of 
returnees in rebuilding Burundi would be highly useful and 
productive in the long run.  Plugging in skilled returnees is 
difficult because of their general reluctance to be made 
known to local government officials in their areas of origin. 
 
The joint delegation stated UNHCR deserved high marks for the 
orderly return operation to date. 
 
c) Staffing issues: 
-- A serious need exists to improve coordination between 
UNHCR staff in Tanzania and Burundi (including use of EC 
funds for Burundi to pay for the repatriation logistics 
instead of borrowing from the camp budgets); 
-- Sub-regional offices in the provinces must be fully 
staffed and made operational  (for example, Ruyigi only had a 
few temporary staff in place although its plan calls for a 
dozen international officers and 30 local hires); 
-- UNHCR must avoid bringing staff from other critical 
regions with human resource deficits (one of the Ruyigi staff 
on mission had come from Guinea), and; 
-- UNHCR should set an example by having an ethnically 
balanced local staff (all those employed by UNHCR in Ruyigi 
were Tutsis). 
 
11. (SBU) Morjane was receptive to all these points and said 
they contained no surprises.  He noted that because it was 
unclear whether returns would continue at a slow, steady pace 
or suddenly burst into a massive return, UNHCR would release 
a supplemental budget for 2004/2005.  Regarding promoting 
returns, he said that there was no need to do so if the 
current flows continued, that local authorities were not able 
to absorb higher numbers of returnees.  Morjane stated, \"All 
Burundi needs humanitarian assistance,\" and that need would 
continue for the next ten years at least.  He acknowledged 
the benefits of a diversified staff but mentioned problems of 
finding Hutus with necessary professional skills.  McKeever 
urged UNHCR to consider the skills acquired by refugees in 
the camp when hiring local staff and devision community 
programs in return areas. 
 
12. (SBU) Stalmans mentioned that EuropeAid has not been 
happy with the results of its pilot pledge of 25 million 
euros for UNHCR for the repatriation and reintegration of 
returnees.  He said that not enough work was done to prepare 
for the repatriation effort before people started 
spontaneously and voluntarily returning and that UNHCR had 
not provided adequate reports as to how the money was being 
spent.  (He noted that things were not much different in the 
other pilot refugee program for Eritrea.)  Morjane 
acknowledged initial differences of opinion about the 
security situation in the country, which led to a more 
cautious approach by UNHCR than other parties had hoped for. 
Morjane said that over half of the 11 million euros had 
already been programmed and that the balance would be used 
before the end of the year.  He said that although UNHCR had 
strengthened its dialogue with ECHO, it was evident that 
similar measures needed to be taken with EuropeAid since it 
had become a major funding partner of UNHCR. 
 
13. (U) Morjane said he would be visiting many of the same 
camps, resettlement sites and reception areas monitored by 
the U.S.-EU joint mission.  He hoped 2004 would be the year 
for solutions in Africa, not just in Burundi, but also in 
Angola, DRC, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Sudan.  He 
called the evolving refugee situation in Chad \"the\" emergency 
for UNHCR at this time. 
 
------------------------ 
ECHO Funding: Meeting Humanitarian Needs 
------------------------ 
 
14. (U) ECHO\'s global plan for Burundi notes that the country 
ranks 171 out of 175 on UNDP\'s human development index and 
that over two-thirds of its citizens are undernourished. 
Life expectancy has fallen from 53.8 years in 1992 to 40.9 
years in 2001.  Other indicators -- such as the number of 
IDPs per total population, number of refugees to GDP per 
capita, ODA/per capita (calculated by the OECD), children 
under weight per age and child mortality rate (calculated by 
UNICEF) -- predict that general humanitarian assistance will 
be required for at least the next ten years in Burundi. 
Thus, all envelopes coming from ECHO, EuropeAid and DG 
Development will focus on bringing the country up to minimum 
standards.  The joint U.S.-EU monitoring trip also marked the 
first time these three EC agencies traveled together and 
should prove effective in encouraging a more systematic 
application of EC funds so that the link between emergency 
relief and longer-term goals are in place. 
 
15. (U) ECHO,s latest funding decision of 15 million euros 
for Burundi will cover an 18 month period beginning in 
February 2004 and will be targeted to the following sectors: 
food (33.3%), health (27.6%), water and sanitation (19.6%), 
emergency relief and non-food items (6%), protection and 
coordination (4%), psychosocial assistance (3%), and the 
balance on other activities.  These ECHO funds have been 
earmarked as follows: 
 
-- 11.85 million euros to assist with the reintegration of 
returnees (both IDPs and refugees) and will be channeled 
through ICRC, FAO, UNICEF, WFP, UNHCR, OCHA, WHO and other 
NGO implementing partners; 
-- 3 million euros to help international organizations like 
ICRC, OCHA, UNICEF and WHO carry out their specific mandates; 
and, 
-- 150,000 euros in technical assistance to facilitate 
monitoring and evaluation by field staff. 
 
16. (U) A separate decision by ECHO to support the refugee 
camps in Tanzania provides 15 million euros for funding: 
 
-- to operate and maintain 280 four wheel drive vehicles and 
70 light trucks in order to improve access to the camps; 
-- to improve the infrastructure in the camps, which includes 
the registration of refugees, environmental protection, 
community services, shelter and other non-food items; 
-- to provide care and maintenance of the refugees, such as 
health, nutrition and hygiene (especially vulnerable groups 
such as children, breast-feeding mothers and HIV/AIDS 
patients). 
 
------------------------ 
EuropeAid Funding:  Preparing for Repatriation and 
Reintegration 
------------------------ 
 
17. (U) Although ECHO funding for Burundi has fallen over the 
past years -- down from 20 million euros in 2001 to 17.5 
million euros in 2002 and 15 million euros in 2003 -- the EC 
has made a political commitment to bolster the peace process 
in the country by designating 25 million euros to prepare for 
the repatriation, return and reintegration of refugees in the 
region.  Using development accounts administered by EuropeAid 
(taken from the 7th and 8th European Development Funds), 
UNHCR has been given a multi-year grant covering the period 
2002-2004.  UNHCR has used some of this money to rehabilitate 
roads for the repatriation effort, as well as schools and 
other infrastructure in refugee return areas.  The remaining 
11 million euros should be spent by UNHCR this year. 
 
------------------------ 
DG DEV Funding:  Linking Relief to Reconstruction 
------------------------ 
 
18. (U) On September 9, 2003, the European Commission and GoB 
signed the 9th European Development Fund, which is divided 
into two envelopes: 
 
-- 115 million euros in envelope A to be spent on rural 
development (49%), good governance (15%) and macroeconomic 
assistance (27%); and, 
-- 57 million euros in envelope B for emerging needs, of 
which 25 million euros has already been pledged to support 
the Africa Mission in Burundi (AMIB) peacekeeping operation 
coordinated by the AU.  The AMIB mission will also help begin 
the disarming, demobilization and reintegration of former 
combatants, another \"at risk\" group with special needs. 
 
19. (U) Because the general degradation of social services is 
so widespread throughout the country, these EDF funds 
programmed by DG Development will also be used in large part 
to meet the needs of the returnees. 
 
------------------------ 
Member State Funding: Supplementing EC efforts 
------------------------ 
 
20. (U) In addition to EC funding, various EU Member States 
maintain bilateral aid programs that provide significant 
funds to help meet Burundi\'s needs.  In 2003, EU Member 
States contributed the following euro amounts: 
 
-- Belgium:  3,260,417 
-- Sweden:  1,830,000 
-- Netherlands:  1,161,000 
-- Germany:  1,607,000 
-- Denmark:  390,765 
-- France:  232,986 
-- United Kingdom:  171,112 
-- Spain:  150,000 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
21. (U) As a pilot endeavor, the joint monitoring trip to 
Burundi and Tanzania was overwhelmingly positive -- both 
substantively by addressing humanitarian needs and 
politically by enhancing the transatlantic relationship. 
Through joint travel to the field, relations between agencies 
were strengthened and donor coordination improved. 
Implementing partners also appreciated briefing multiple 
agencies simultaneously, thus economizing on time and 
resources which five separate visits would have required. 
Before the joint mission had ended, the EC already suggested 
a follow-on activity, either in the same region or a 
different part of the world.  ECHO and USEU have since 
featured the joint trip on their websites. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16234","4/22/2004 9:15","04BRUSSELS1736","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS1090","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001736 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: IMPACT OF ACCESSION 
 
REF: A. A. USEU BRUSSELS 01090 
 
     B. B. USEU BRUSSELS 01094 
     C. C. PRAGUE 00461 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff David Armitage for reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY. Until now, politicians from the ten accession 
states have only been observers of the European Parliament 
(EP).  We expect a culture clash when these observers become 
full-fledged members.  They are generally younger and look at 
the EP as a vehicle for political advancement.  They are also 
more likely to pursue national, vice \"European,\" interests 
(although national cooperation probably will fade over time). 
 We doubt the overall balance of power between European 
political groups will change very much.  The generally 
pro-U.S. outlook of many accession state parliamentarians 
will be tested once they enter the EP.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
Series of Pre-Election Reports 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) This is the third in a series of cables exploring 
the June 10-13 European Parliament (EP) elections, focusing 
on the expected impact and potential influence of MEPs from 
the countries set to join the EU on May 1.  Previous cables 
(reftels A-B) provided general background on the European 
elections campaign and the role of the EP in the EU 
decision-making context.  Subsequent telegrams will go into 
more detail on the role of U.S.-EU relations in the 
elections, re-election prospects for key MEPs, and possible 
realignment of party groups. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Brussels confusing but good training ground 
------------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) As a general rule, new members view serving in the 
EP as of more benefit to them than current members do.  Many 
EP observers consider working in Brussels as an essential 
launch pad for their political careers and a definite plus 
for making it big back home.  This is certainly the case in 
the Czech Republic (reftel C), but also in Hungary and other 
parts of Central Europe (less so in the Baltic states, Malta, 
and Cyprus).  The young, talented future stars in national 
politics are cutting their teeth in Brussels and Strasbourg. 
(18.5% of the EP observers are under 40, compared to 6.4 
percent of the MEPs)  This contrasts with a traditional 
attitude in the current EU-15, where the EP is sometimes 
perceived as a place for those in the autumn of their careers 
or who could not make it in the national arena.  Joszef 
Szajer (European People\'s Party - Christian Democrats, 
Hungary) and Agnes Vadai (PES - Party of European Socialists, 
Hungary) both remarked that their experiences had helped them 
be better politicians back in Budapest.  Interestingly, 
Szajer (age 42) plans to run for a seat in the June election, 
while Vadai (age 29) plans to return to the Hungarian 
parliament in Budapest.  Both plan to go where their 
respective parties should be in the majority.  As both noted, 
it is no fun to be in the opposition. 
 
4. (SBU) In contrast, Magda Kosa Kovacs (PES, Hungary) said 
that what would be important over the long term would be to 
have competent professionals working in Brussels and 
Strasbourg.  She stressed that one should already have some 
experience and proven political skills before becoming an 
MEP.  According to (the 64-year old) Kosa Kovacs, \"The EP is 
not for people in their early 20\'s.\"  Kosa Kovacs (and 
others) also complained of the difficulty in grasping the 
opaque and complex EU legislative process.  The terminology, 
rules, and procedures were confusing, leaving many observers 
frustrated. 
 
--------------------------- 
Bluebloods meet Blue Collar 
--------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Besides increasing the EP\'s size from 626 to 732, EU 
enlargement will bring stylistic changes.  The EP observers 
we spoke with commented on how the European Parliament is a 
debating club - very formal and \"proper.\"  This contrasts 
with the down-and-dirty, rough-and-tumble political style in 
many Central and East European states, they said.  Szajer 
noted how combative politics are in Budapest.  Vadai said 
that current MEPs are rushing to pass legislation before May 
1 because they fear how the new members might vote, given 
their \"take-no-prisoners\" political style.  The Strasbourg 
style is very different.  There is plenty of \"nice talk and 
philosophy,\" but the accession states are more used to 
\"fighting\" and seeking \"practical\" solutions. 
 
------------------------- 
Greens Influence May Wane 
------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Of the 162 EP observers, only one (from Latvia) is a 
member of the Green political group.  This is quite a 
contrast to the numbers in the current EP, in which Greens 
comprise almost 8 percent of MEPs.  Even Socialists such as 
Vadai noted that pushing for the environment was not a big 
campaign plus.  If given the choice between resources for 
environment or resources for people, Vadai said that she 
would choose the people.  Thus, the sway of the Greens in the 
Parliament may diminish somewhat, but it will depend on the 
numbers: The future MEPs from the accession states will 
comprise only 22% of the entire European Parliament. 
Therefore, even if the MEPs from the accession states have 
strong views, their influence will be felt only if they can 
place themselves on key committees or succeed as rapporteurs. 
 The new MEPs will have to fight for these plum positions. 
 
----------------------------------- 
National Trumps Partisan...for Now 
----------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Many of the accession-state observers we spoke with 
view their role as defending national interests in Brussels. 
As Vadai mentioned, accession states saw three basic models 
to dealing with the EU: the British (Thatcher\'s rebate - 
rolling back EU agreements in pursuit of national interests); 
Finnish (follow everything); and Austrian (ask for opt-outs). 
 She said that Hungary was adopting a mixture.  For too long, 
Vadai said, accession state capitals were told to do this and 
that by Brussels, and many are biding their time to push 
back.  Vadai said she could hardly wait to begin pushing back 
once she can vote as a full MEP in May. 
 
8. (C) For many from the accession states, national identity 
will remain very important - but probably only in the short 
term.  For example, Vadai and Szajer, although they are from 
opposite sides of the political spectrum, were consistent in 
saying that their loyalty was national first and partisan 
second.  Part of this is the feeling that the accession 
states need to \"catch up\" to the current EU-15.  Szajer said 
that there might also be ad-hoc cooperation among the Central 
European countries (Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary, 
Slovakia), but that there would be nothing formal.  Such 
regional coalitions probably would be rare and would be 
determined by the particular issue under consideration. He 
also noted that nationals would receive regular briefings and 
that national interests would be pursued through the parties. 
 EP Observer Toomas Ilves (PES, Estonia) noted that his party 
was the only one in his country not to use a variation of the 
slogan, \"Protecting Estonia from the EU.\" 
 
9. (C) A final remark concerning nationality: some of our EP 
observer interlocutors were sensitive to the possibility of 
being treated as inferiors from the more established western 
European democracies.  Vadai said she was chastised by a 
Spanish MEP (presumably a fellow Socialist) during the run-up 
to Iraq for her country\'s stance in favor of U.S. policy. 
The MEP said Hungary was not abiding by \"European 
solidarity.\"  She wondered whether such treatment would 
continue after May 1. 
 
10.  (C) COMMENT: Given experiences from past enlargements, 
however, national cooperation probably will fade over time 
since the EP is structured to steer members toward partisan 
coalitions rather than national coalitions.  As one academic 
expert told us, \"It will be hard for the new members to 
remain nationalist because the EP simply doesn\'t operate that 
way.\"  The generally pro-American attitudes among accession 
state parliamentarians will be sorely tested once inside the 
EP, where anti-American views run deep, and pressures to 
conform will be significant.  END COMMENT. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16242","4/22/2004 12:14","04BRUSSELS1749","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE83901","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001749 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DHS FOR UNDER SECRETARY HUTCHINSON; DOJ FOR CRIMINAL 
DIVISION BRUCE SWARTZ; STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, CA DAS 
JANICE JACOBS, S/CT WILLIAM POPE; 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA, EAIR, ECON, EU, PTER, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR APRIL 26 INAUGURAL SESSION OF THE 
TRANSPORT, BORDER AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY DIALOGUE 
(TBIS) 
 
REF: STATE 083901 (NOTAL) 
 
1.  Summary and introduction.  The inaugural meeting of the 
high level dialogue on transportation, border and 
infrastructure security (TBIS) on April 26 is an important 
opportunity to break through the bureaucratic logjams between 
various EU components that have severely complicated efforts 
to advance our homeland security agenda with the EU.  By 
bringing together several elements of the Commission, along 
with the Council Secretariat, the Irish Presidency, and 
newly-installed EU Counter-terrorism coordinator Gijsbert de 
Vries, we have a chance to get them to place existing EU 
efforts more squarely in the context of the struggle against 
terrorism.  The EU was contemplating the creation of a 
similar structure when we tabled our proposal for the 
creation of this group. 
 
2.   On the EU side, the meeting will be formally co-chaired 
by Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) Director General Jonathan 
Faull and External Relations (RELEX) Deputy Director General 
Fernando Valenzuela.  They have the lead, but we have found 
in the past that the real problems arise from more robust 
rules and regulations promulgated by \"first pillar\" 
directorates such as Transport/Energy and Internal Market. 
Representatives from these directorates will also be present 
at the session although not at the table.  One of our key 
goals for the day should be to convince the \"backbenchers\" 
that their offices need to take better account of the 
implications of what they do for the war on terrorism. The 
Irish Presidency and the Council Secretariat should be allies 
in trying to push for a more comprehensive and balanced 
approach on these questions.  End summary and introduction. 
 
----------- 
The Setting 
----------- 
 
3.  The EU has indicated they want this first TBIS meeting to 
be a success - to have a positive agenda and to achieve 
concrete results.  Within the EU this meeting is referred to 
as the \"Enhanced Security Dialogue.\"  We will need to explain 
our view that this meeting is not to replace our current 
discussion mechanisms on JHA issues.  It is indeed precisely 
because our current JHA discussions address the issues of 
transport, border and infrastructure security in an 
unsatisfactory way that we have proposed this new mechanism. 
DG RELEX has confided to us that if this meeting can 
effectively bring together the various directorates to 
discuss these issues in a coordinated fashion it will have 
been a successful venture.  The EC recognizes that it has 
\"stove-piped\" its handling of these issues and is hopeful 
that this new mechanism will assist in overcoming this 
problem.  In addition to overcoming the \"stove-piping\" 
problem, we want to use this meeting to enhance the pivotal 
role of Jonathan Faull and his JHA Directorate in this 
dialogue as he is the one focusing on law enforcement and 
security aspects of these issues.  We also want to underscore 
the important role that the newly-named Council terrorism 
coordinator Gijsbert  De Vries can play. 
 
4.  There has long existed a tension among the various 
directorates of the Commission, the council secretariat and 
the Member States.  This tension has only been exacerbated by 
the push to forge an EU counter-terrorism strategy.  For 
example, the focus of the Transport and Internal Market 
Directorates is primarily commercial, while that of JHA is on 
law enforcement and security.  Meanwhile, terrorism 
coordinator De Vries has been placed within the Council 
Secretariat and answers to High Representative Solana. 
 
SIPDIS 
Elements of the Commission do not acknowledge his position as 
having jurisdiction over their portfolios.  The EU 
Counter-terrorism Declaration is a Member State document, but 
contains initiatives that touch on Commission competencies. 
This forum may bring some of these tensions to the fore.  In 
this context, there is a danger that the session could be 
side-tracked into theological debate on the purpose of the 
group.  We will need to review this at the top of the 
meeting, but we should seek to move quickly to the other 
items on the agenda in order to look for practical outcomes. 
 
5.  There is much in the recently-adopted Council Declaration 
issued after the Madrid attacks that can be helpful in 
framing the agenda and purpose of the group.  It also can 
provide a point of departure as we consider a possible joint 
Summit statement.  De Vries will want to explain the 
initiatives (old and new), but we should try to steer him 
away from a presentation on a public document we have already 
read and digested.  Instead, we should key on the declaration 
to begin a focus on how this will affect transatlantic 
efforts to cooperate more fully on law enforcement and 
improve security for transport/infrastructure and borders. 
 
--------------- 
Priority Issues 
--------------- 
 
6.  Biometrics:  The EU will expect an update regarding the 
Administration,s efforts to persuade Congress to postpone 
the 10/26/2004 biometrics deadline.  The EU has informed 
Congressman Sensenbrenner in writing of its efforts to 
coordinate the introduction of biometrics into Member State 
passports.  An early, favorable decision by Congress 
regarding the deadline will be critical in managing the flow 
of legitimate travelers.  The parallel policy change of 
enrolling visa waiver travelers in US VISIT on or about 
9/30/2004 will also be raised by the EU.  The lack of prior 
notification and expected negative public reactions as the 
date nears are two issues the EU may raise.  Although the 
Commission has publicly stated it will not pursue reciprocal 
treatment of American travelers to the Schengen area, calls 
for reciprocity have already been heard in Europe (with the 
example of Brazil cited).  Finally, the issue of visa waiver 
for new Member States continues to simmer.  The Commission 
notified USEU that the Czech Republic has again demanded that 
visa waiver be discussed at the next JHA Council meeting.  If 
this issue is raised at the TBIS, we suggest that it be 
deferred to a technical meeting later in the day between CA 
and DG JHA where DAS Jacobs will explain the legislative 
parameters to the VWP. 
 
7.  Border security: Our delegation might press for the 
following concrete results to enhance border security:  a 
pilot project to share, on a reciprocal basis, 200 names from 
our lookout systems before the end of the calendar year. 
This gives the EU time to resolve potential legal and 
technical issues relating to the Schengen Information System 
(SIS).   The Department,s swift response to the EC,s 
proposal on sharing lost/stolen passport information via 
Interpol (reftel State 83112) can be used as leverage to 
obtain from the EU a similar response on our proposed pilot 
for exchanging lookout information.  A written proposal 
(similar to the one Jonathan Faull presented to the 
Department on lost/stolen passports) may be helpful in moving 
this suggestion forward. 
 
8.  Information Exchange:  We might also like to flag a 
longer-term objective of exchanging on a reciprocal, routine 
basis information on visa applications that have been 
refused.  DG JHA Head of Unit for IT Systems Frank Paul, who 
is charged with designing the Visa Information System (which 
will make such an exchange possible), has been selected for 
an IVP in FY 2005.  His consultations in Washington during 
this program might serve to lay the foundation for a 
longer-term objective related to the VIS.  Since this visa 
information would relate to aliens outside the EU, privacy 
objections should be minimized.  In addition, SIS II is being 
developed in response to the enlargement.  Agreement to 
cooperate with the EU on sharing data using the SIS II 
database must come quickly if the EU\'s system is to be 
designed with this objective in mind. 
 
9.  Link to G7/G8:  Many of these border security initiatives 
are being simultaneously worked in the G8 Secure and 
Facilitated International Travel Initiative (SAFTI).  Four EU 
member states and the Commission participate in these G8 
discussions.  We should anticipate that the dialogue with the 
EU will touch upon these G8 initiatives and programs. 
 
10.  PNR:  After the Parliament vote, the Commission has 
stated that it will proceed with an \'adequacy finding\' for 
PNR data transfers, but the Irish have been less emphatic 
that they will move forward on the associated \"international 
agreement\" in the Council.  The TBIS will provide a good 
forum to push for rapid adoption of the deal.  We can also 
use this opportunity to outline our approach on third country 
transfers of PNR data and send the signal we consider the 
question closed.  We understand that in ICAO, some member 
states are pressing forward a proposal on airline passenger 
data that would call for a moratorium on PNR transfers until 
an ICAO standard is developed.  We should ask the Commission 
and Council representatives present to explain their 
positions on this potentially damaging initiative. 
 
 
11.  CAPPS II:  The Commission (DG Transportation and DG 
Markets) would also like a readout of where we are on 
implementation of the CAPPS II system after the February GAO 
report.  That readout would include our best estimates on 
timing for the system\'s going live, and when we planned on 
initiating bilateral discussions to work out an \'adequacy 
finding\' for operation of the system with EU data. 
 
12.  Air Marshals:  In January 2004, U/S Hutchinson appeared 
before a special session of European Directors General of 
Civil Aviation and  suggested that the U.S. and EU could work 
together to develop guidelines for the placement of sky 
marshals on flights, as well as alternate measures that 
countries could implement to substitute for assigning 
marshals.  The Commission will want to discuss this matter 
further.  They also wish to learn more about work TSA is 
doing with the UK on the \'gold standard\' for placement of 
marshals. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16283","4/23/2004 8:22","04BRUSSELS1766","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/22/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PGOV, XI, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SUBJECT: APRIL 15 U.S.-EU TROIKA CONSULTATIONS ON 
THE MAGHREB (COMAG) 
 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff David Armitage for reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY. On April 15, NEA/ENA Director Greg Berry led 
discussions on the Maghreb with the EU\'s Troika (COMAG). 
Issues discussed were: 
 
-- The Barcelona Process and European Neighborhood Policy: EU 
officials shared their views on the existing Barcelona 
Process and their new Neighborhood Policy in the context of 
their vision of an EU strategic partnership with the 
Mediterranean and Middle East. 
 
-- Greater Middle East Initiative:  The US provided a 
read-out of latest thinking.  EU officials cautioned that the 
G-8 should not go beyond a \"statement of principles\" at the 
Sea Island Summit. 
 
-- Algeria: Everyone agreed that the elections reflected the 
general will of the Algerians.  The EU believed that Algeria 
wanted to catch up with others in the region and hoped that 
the Association Agreement (yet to be ratified) would be a 
step in the right direction. 
 
-- Libya: The EU was encouraged by developments leading to 
Qadhafi\'s renunciation of WMD, but cautioned that the La 
belle disco and Bulgarian cases were acting as a constraint 
to formalizing EU-Libyan relations. 
 
-- Syria: The EU provided an update on the status of its 
Association Agreement with Damascus.  The agreement, the 
\"last one in the ring\" of the existing European-Mediterranean 
Partnership countries, also was the first one to include the 
WMD clause.  The EU believed that Syria is interested in 
ratifying to justify internal reforms, but the EU believed it 
would be delicate to get the wording and presentation right. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
 
EU Delegation 
------------- 
2. (U) The Irish EU Presidency was represented by 
Director-General for the Maghreb, Barcelona Process and the 
Gulf States Eamonn MacAodha, Deputy Director Paul Gunning, 
and Counselor to the Irish EU Mission Fergal Mythen.  The 
upcoming Dutch Presidency was represented by Middle East 
Department Director W.R. Beelaerts van Blokland, Middle East 
Desk Officer Angelique Eijpe, and Counselor to the Dutch EU 
Mission Remmert Cohen.  Mashrek/Maghreb Desk Officer Ruth 
Kaufmann-Buhler and Lene Hove, Desk Officer for Iran, Iraq, 
and GCC, represented the Council Secretariat.  Maghreb 
Division Head Leonello Gabrici, Deputy Xavier Marchal, and 
Deputy Head of Barcelona Process Division Michael Webb 
attended for the Commission.  The US Delegation included: 
Greg Berry, Director for Egyptian and North African Affairs 
for the Department of State; Kyle Scott, USEU Political 
Minister-Counselor; Patricia Lerner, USEU International 
Development Counselor; and David Armitage, USEU political 
officer (note taker). 
 
The Wider Region 
---------------- 
3. (C) EU officials outlined their existing Barcelona Process 
and their new European Neighborhood Policy.  Regarding the 
Barcelona Process, Irish delegation head Eamonn MacAodha said 
that Libyan membership was currently being discussed. 
Leonello Gabrici of the European Commission (EC) described 
the Neighborhood Policy as a new packaging of relations with 
these countries on the edge of the EU: with a political, 
security, and economic dimension.  Gabrici emphasized that 
the countries need a framework to support their internal 
reforms, and the Neighborhood Policy does that.  He added 
that the countries are eager to move forward on their 
individual Action Plans.  Berry noted that the EU\'s program 
resembled the Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI) in 
its emphasis on a regional approach. 
 
4. (C) Michael Webb of the Commission elaborated, saying that 
the Neighborhood Policy builds on the Barcelona Process to 
encourage \"South-South\" cooperation.  The first tangible 
example is the Agadir Agreement signed on February 25.  There 
will be a trade ministers meeting in July, and the EU hopes 
to pursue further trade liberalization in services, 
agriculture, energy, gas, electricity, and encourage 
infrastructure projects.  The EU envisions a blueprint for a 
transport connector and telecommunications regulations at the 
regional level. The European Investment Bank (EIB) is running 
ahead of schedule and has now invested 2 billion euros in the 
region.  The EIB\'s Facility for Euro-Mediterranean Investment 
and Partnership (FEMIP) is also interested in pursuing 
regional cooperation in judicial and police arenas, 
particularly with regards to developing an integrated 
approach to migration and fighting organized crime.  The EC 
would devote 10 million euros to a databank in 2005-06.  The 
Commission also had projects in audio-visual cooperation, 
cultural heritage, youth exchanges, and higher education, but 
Webb stressed that the Commission needed to raise its 
visibility.  The EU was \"not good at publicizing our 
accomplishments.\" 
5. (C) Berry outlined latest thinking on the Greater Middle 
East Initiative (GMEI).  He reiterated that reform needed to 
grow out of democratic currents in the region itself, with 
support from the international community.  Democracy could 
not be imposed from outside.  In response to a question from 
the U.S. delegation about mixed signals from the EU on GME, 
EU officials said they were fully on board for the G-8 to 
issue a \"Statement of Principles\" on the need to support 
reform in the Middle East.  However, they prefer to leave a 
detailed Action to the US-EU summit later in June.  MacAodha 
pointed out that the G-8 included only some EU member states 
and the Commission, while the EU\'s flagship Barcelona Process 
is an EU-wide initiative that should remain separate and 
distinct from the G-8.  There was also discussion about the 
role of the Arab League, whose credibility everyone agreed 
was at an all-time low.  Berry noted that, despite the 
League\'s dubious record on reform, a declaration from the 
League would be very helpful, since it would represent an 
example of reform in itself, would offer a basis for the 
international community to support reform, and would provide 
political cover for national leaders. 
 
Algeria 
------- 
6. (C) The EU provided its views on the situation following 
President Bouteflika\'s 83% landslide victory in the April 8 
elections.  There was agreement that the outcome - although 
larger than expected - reflected the genuine will of the 
Algerian people.  Berry felt it was a real step forward and 
hoped it would serve as a model for the rest of the region. 
He said that US-Algerian relations were steadily improving, 
but from a relatively low base, and that US-European 
cooperation on shared concerns in Algeria was particularly 
important.  Gabrici believed that Algeria wanted to catch up 
economically, and the European Commission hoped to open a 
mission there soon.  He added that the EU-Algeria Association 
Agreement was not yet ratified. 
 
Libya 
-------- 
7. (C) Berry recounted the rapid turn of events leading to 
Libya\'s rapprochement with the international community. 
Berry stressed Libya\'s good faith in meeting its commitment 
to dispose of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), although 
there remained some areas for discussion and follow-up on 
WMD.  He noted that cooperation on terrorism was growing, and 
that Washington was studying Libya\'s performance on 
terrorism-related issues as part of the review of the 
potential removal of Libya from the list of state sponsors. 
Other areas - particularly human rights and Libyan policy in 
Africa - would have to be addressed as US-Libyan bilateral 
relations grew.  The Irish stated that the EU was generally 
pleased by the developments, but cautioned that the pace of 
normalization from an EU perspective depended on resolution 
of the La belle disco and Bulgarian cases. 
 
Syria 
----- 
8. (C) Gabrici described the status of the EU-Syria 
Association Agreement (AA) as the \"last one in the ring\" of 
the Barcelona Process, but it was also the first with the 
EU\'s insistence on a WMD clause.  EU officials believed that 
the Syrians were interested in ratifying the AA to justify 
internal reform, but the EU would have to tread carefully on 
how to present the WMD clause.  Both the language and the 
presentation were important, and the EU hoped to have an 
agreement within the next three weeks.  Berry encouraged the 
EU to remain firm on its proposed WMD language, and briefed 
on the structure and status of the Syrian Accountability Act. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16294","4/23/2004 13:19","04BRUSSELS1783","Embassy Brussels","SECRET","04STATE84033","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001783 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/22/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, NL, KAWC, HR, ICTY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: COMMISSION\'S POSITIVE \"AVIS\" ON CROATIA\'S EU 
MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION 
 
REF: A. STATE 84033 
 
     B. USEU TODAY 4/20/2004 
     C. THE HAGUE 975 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 B/D 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) In issuing its positive recommendation April 20 for 
opening of accession negotiations with Croatia, the 
Commission has tried to stress that Croatian cooperation with 
ICTY \"must continue\"  and the Croatia must \"take all 
necessary steps to ensure the remaining indictee is located 
and transferred to ICTY.\"  EU officials also note that 
further progress reports from ICTY on Croatia will be due in 
May and June.  The Irish Presidency has told fellow member 
states it does not plan to put the issue on a GAERC agenda 
until June 14.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U)  On April 20, the European Commission issued a 
positive opinion (\"Avis\") on Croatia\'s application to begin 
membership negotiations with the EU, recommending to the 
Council that \"negotiations for accession to the EU should be 
opened with Croatia.\"  The avis does not comment on when such 
negotiations could or should begin.  As forecast in REF B, 
one key conclusion of the Commission\'s \"avis\" was to note 
that \"in April 2004, the ICTY Prosecutor stated that Croatia 
is now cooperating fully with ICTY.  Croatia needs to 
maintain full cooperation and take all necessary steps to 
ensure that the remaining indictee (Ante Gotovina) is located 
and transferred to ICTY.\" 
 
3. (C) The EU\'s Western Balkans Working Group (COWEB) on 
April 22 was given a brief presentation from the Commission 
on its avis.  There was no debate in COWEB on the avis.  The 
Irish Presidency chair simply noted it would not prejudge the 
eventual decision by the Council on the Commission\'s 
recommendation.  Commissioner Patten will likely present the 
avis to EU FMs at their April 26 meeting (GAERC) in 
Luxembourg, but the Irish did not intend to have any 
discussion of the issue at either the April or May GAERCs. 
Croatia would be on the agenda only of the June 14 GAERC. 
(NOTE: Discussion of the issue at lower levels, beginning 
with COWEB, would have to begin some weeks before that.  End 
Note.)  Expectations are that the June 17-18 European Council 
will take a decision on whether to begin Croatia\'s 
negotiation, but the Irish are not absolutely committed to 
that calendar. 
 
4. (S) We have spoken with COWEB representatives and 
Commissioner Patten\'s staff about the avis.  They have all 
noted the EU shares our surprise (REF A) at the report from 
ICTY Prosecutor Del Ponte that Croatia was \"now fully 
cooperating.\"  Both the Dutch COWEB rep (protect) and Patten 
advisor Patrick Rock were keen to stress that the EU believes 
\"Croatia is not off the hook yet.\"  EU pressure had helped 
produce the improved Croatian cooperation with ICTY cited in 
Del Ponte\'s letter, but the EU has stressed Croatia \"must 
continue its cooperation.\"  The EU will pay close attention 
to further reports from ICTY that will include coverage of 
Croatia\'s behavior.  (According to Rock these include a May 7 
report by the ICTY President -- not Del Ponte -- to the 
Council of Europe, a May 31 written report from Del Ponte to 
the UNSC, and a June 15 -- immediately preceding the EU\'s 
decision -- oral report by Del Ponte to the UNSC.)  Our Dutch 
contact noted that EU monitoring of Croatian cooperation with 
ICTY would still continue even after negotiations might 
begin, with a negative report at any time potentially 
derailing Croatia\'s progress. 
 
5. (S) In response to REF A points arguing Del Ponte\'s 
assessment was insufficient, Rock said that all the 
Commission knew about Del Ponte\'s justifications for her view 
was what she put in her letter.  He suggested the USG push 
Del Ponte harder to \"spell out in terms\" the basis for her 
change of position and lay out any evidence we might have 
indicating the Croatians are providing less than full 
cooperation.  \"But that is the kind of conversation the 
Commission can\'t have with her,\" Rock added, since the 
Commission does not have access to any intelligence on the 
issue.  Our Dutch contact (protect) said that in his 
conversation with ICTY Special political Advisor Ruch, he had 
been given much the same report on ICTY-GoC interaction as 
reported REF C, with the additional note that the Office of 
the Prosecutor was now pushing the GoC on implementation of 
an \"action plan\" that has a \"timeline of 2 to 3 months.\"  Our 
contact observed that timeline would appear to extend beyond 
the EU\'s own decision-making calendar.  He noted that the 
Dutch \"would love to believe Del Ponte has assurances of 
results\" in the coming weeks, but are not at all confident 
that is the case. 
 
6. (C) COMMENT:  The key now will be to leverage the 
Commission\'s positive avis as best we can with Croatia.  Our 
sense is that the EU is primed to respond if Del Ponte should 
reverse or revise her assessment of Croatian cooperation over 
the course of the next two months.  While the Commission avis 
notes that \"additional efforts\" will be needed by Croatia in 
a variety of policy areas (notably minority rights, refugee 
returns and judicial reform), the key message to the GoC 
needs to be that the path is clear to opening EU membership 
negotiations: the only thing that could trip them up between 
now and June would be if they fail to \"take all necessary 
steps to ensure the remaining indictee is located and 
transferred to ICTY.\"  End Comment. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16300","4/23/2004 14:31","04BRUSSELS1787","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001787 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR FOR RIES & WESTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/23/2014 
TAGS: PREL, CY, TU, EUN, UN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU HAND-WRINGING ON CYPRUS REFERENDUM: NO CARROTS, 
FLIMSY STICKS 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) One day away from a Cyprus Referendum, EU officials 
are wringing their hands in Brussels about the likely fate of 
the Annan Plan -- and the likely accession of a divided 
Cyprus into the EU on May 1.  The Head of the Commission\'s 
Cyprus unit told us April 23 that he is anticipating numerous 
headaches due to Turkish non-recognition the Republic of 
Cyprus -- a full EU member -- as of May 1.  Pressed by us on 
the possibility of EU actions to punish Cypriot 
intransigence, our interlocutor noted that Article 7 of the 
EU Treaty could be used, although he pointed out that this 
stick is untried, and thus should be considered a flimsy one. 
 In a related action, EU Parliament Pat Cox has initiated a 
separate Article 7 proceeding on the run up to the 
referendum, although EU Parliament action is more symbolic 
than determinant, barring further Council action. 
 
2.  (C) Comment: Despite the hand-wringing, the EU no longer 
has any carrots to encourage a positive vote in southern 
Cyprus, and its only stick, the unprecedented imposition of 
Article 7 of the Treaty of European Union, would be very 
difficult to wield, requiring as it does a consensus 
(excluding Cyprus) to proceed and a qualified majority to 
punish.  Article 7 could in an extreme application lead to 
the denial of its European Council vote to Cyprus.  But 
Turkey\'s situation as of May 1 is far worse.  Its accession 
quest is now crippled by its non-recognition of an EU member 
and on-going occupation of sovereign EU territory.  Combined 
with EU dissatisfaction with the Layla Zana sentence, this 
has been a bad week for Turkey in Brussels.  End comment and 
summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Facing Facts: There is No Plan B 
-------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) One day away from a Cyprus Referendum expected to 
reject the Annan Plan in the south, EU officials are wringing 
their hands in Brussels about the likely demise of the Annan 
Plan -- and the certain accession of a divided Cyprus into 
the EU on May 1.  Commission Cyprus Unit Head Leopold Maurer 
told us April 23 that he is anticipating numerous headaches 
due to Turkish non-recognition the Republic of Cyprus -- a 
full EU member -- starting as early as two weeks from now. 
As an example, he cited a working meeting on the Turkish-EU 
customs relationship that will now need to address Turkish 
non-recognition of Cypriot goods.  Given Cyprus\' full EU 
membership, it will be covered by EU agreements with Turkey 
on the same terms as any other EU state. 
 
---------- 
No Carrots 
---------- 
 
4.  (C) Despite good efforts by Commissioner Verheugen, EU 
Parliament President Cox, and Hirep Solana to make positive 
statements about the need for a yes vote, Cyprus politicians 
know that the EU holds no positive leverage at this point. 
EU officials have been especially miffed that their 
entreaties were kept off the airwaves by Greek Cypriot media. 
 Even so, as the treaty of enlargement has been ratified, and 
accession is a done deal, there is nothing more the EU 
bureaucracy can offer by way of blandishments to southern 
Cyprus voters.  The April 15 Pre-Donors\' Conference, with its 
generous promise of post-settlement assistance, was the EU\'s 
last carrot, and it apparently failed to find a taker in the 
south. 
 
---------------------------- 
And the Stick Looks Weak... 
---------------------------- 
 
5.  (C) Pressed on the possibility of EU sanctions for 
Cypriot intransigence and manipulation of the vote, Maurer 
noted that Article 7 of the EU Treaty could theoretically be 
used, although he noted that this stick has never been used 
under any circumstances.  As a politically theoretical 
instrument with many bars to use, it should be considered a 
flimsy one to wield in an attempt to get Cyprus voters to 
change their votes. 
 
6.  (C) Maurer explained that under Article 7 of the Nice 
Treaty, member states could unanimously (with the exception 
of Cyprus itself) and with the two-thirds assent of the 
European Parliament, determine that rejection of the Annan 
Plan, or the circumstances of that rejection, were \"a serious 
and persistent breach\" of one or more of the Article 6 
provisions calling for respect of the \"principles of liberty, 
democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, 
and the rule of law...\".  The Council would then vote by 
qualified majority rules on what sanctions to impose. 
 
7.  (C) We noted to Maurer that any member state could block 
the invocation of Article 7 under the terms outlined by the 
treaty, and some member states, (Greece, for example) would 
probably be inclined to do so.  Maurer agreed, but reiterated 
that this was the only legal avenue available to the EU to 
attempt to redress any manipulation of the Cyprus poll, 
presuming that the UN Secretary General decided that the 
polling had not been free or fair.  (Comment: although Maurer 
didn\'t mention them, the only other punishments we could 
imagine might be ones entailing blocking Cyprus from getting 
anticipated benefits, rather than trying to withdraw existing 
ones.  In theory, the EU could send a clear message to Cyprus 
that so long as the Green Line persists, Cyprus could never 
expect to get full Schengen treatment; another might be to 
block Cyprus admission into the Eurozone.  End comment.) 
 
-------------------- 
EU Parliament Begins 
Article 7 Proceeding 
-------------------- 
 
8.  (C) On April 23, EU Parliament President Cox\'s diplomatic 
adviser Joe Dunne (strictly protect) told us that President 
Cox received a letter from DISY leader Nico Anastassiades 
complaining about the management of the referendum in Cyprus. 
 Following consultations with party leaders, Cox referred 
Anastassiades\' complaint to Parliament for consideration as 
an Article 7 proceeding.  Dunne said that there was no 
objection from party leaders to proceeding along this route, 
and he assessed that there was a reasonable prospect of 
getting a two-thirds majority in Parliament, probably on the 
last and only remaining scheduled vote of this session, on 
May 5.  We asked Dunne about the difficulty of getting a 
consensus in the European Council (including Greece but 
excluding Cyprus) on Article 7.  He replied that his focus is 
getting a two-thirds majority in Parliament, and said that he 
is optimistic about this prospect.  The Council issues are 
not his purview, and he would not be drawn into speculation 
on the ultimate outcome of an Article 7 effort in the 
Council. 
 
--------------------------- 
Comment: Much Hand Wringing 
- Good Parliamentary Action 
--------------------------- 
 
9.  (C) With the Accession Treaty signed, sealed, and 
delivered, the Commission no longer holds either carrots or 
sticks to push a Cyprus deal.  Given this reality, working 
level Commission priorities have shifted focus from finding a 
Cyprus settlement to making Cyprus\'s EU accession work on an 
island divided into mutually hostile camps.  The immediate 
impact of Cyprus accession will be to put Turkey in 
non-compliance with its customs treaty with the European 
Union, given that Turkey\'s deals with the EU now have to 
apply in Turkey\'s obligatory dealings with new EU member 
Cyprus.  Over the longer term, Turkey is going to have to 
cede additional ground on Cyprus issues if it is to maintain 
good relations with the EU during its run up to talks on an 
accession date.  This hurts Turkey\'s prospects for a 
favorable accession deal in December, and adds to the bad 
blood in a relationship already scarred this week by EU 
dismay about the Layla Zana verdict. 
 
10.  (C) More to the positive side, EU Parliament President 
Cox has once again shown his willingness to try to go the 
extra mile for a Cyprus settlement, even as the EU\'s 
political options for encouraging settlement diminish.  We 
are not in a position to evaluate Cox\'s adviser\'s assessment 
that he can get a two-thirds majority in Parliament to 
sanction Cyprus on Article 7 grounds.  If he does, however, 
the quest to punish rejectionist Cyprus through Article 7 
will likely face an extremely tough environment in the 
European Council, where Greece alone can block further 
action.  Even then, all members except Cyprus would have to 
accept the premise that Cyprus\' expected no vote -- or the 
process that led up to it -- indeed constitutes \"a serious 
and persistent breach\" of one or more of the Article 6 
\"principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights 
and fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law...\".  Schnabel 
"
"16349","4/26/2004 12:52","04BRUSSELS1806","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE784","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001806 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RPM, IO/UNP, DRL/IRF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/26/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, OSCE, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU RELEASES ANTI-SEMITISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 784 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: On March 31, the European Monitoring Center 
on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC) released its long-awaited 
report on anti-Semitism in the EU.  Its data indicate a 
growing level of anti-Semitic violence in Europe.  Right-wing 
\"skin-head\" attacks continue unabated, while a growing number 
of attacks by Muslims in Europe account for the overall 
increase.  A comparison with the previous EUMC report reveals 
the EUMC may be inviting a second wave of recrimination -- at 
a time when it has not yet recovered from the storm of 
controversy caused by its initial decision last winter not to 
release the first report.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
REPORT DOCUMENTS INCREASED ANTI-SEMITISM 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) At a March 31 press conference at the European 
Parliament (EP) in Strasbourg, EP President Pat Cox, EUMC 
Director Beate Winkler and European Jewish Congress President 
Cobi Benatoff presented the report, \"Manifestations of the 
Antisemitism in the EU 2002-2003.\"  Cox said: \"The report 
asks basic questions:  is there anti-Semitism in the EU, is 
it rising, and is it an issue that we have to address -- the 
answers are yes, yes and yes.\"  Benatoff welcomed the report 
as a step in \"preventing the conspiracy of silence,\" while 
adding that it confirmed his fear that \"the cancer of 
anti-Semitism is back in Europe.\"  All three joined in 
calling for concrete actions against anti-Semitism. 
 
---------------------------- 
DIFFERS FROM PREVIOUS REPORT 
---------------------------- 
 
3. (C) The controversy around the EUMC\'s initial refusal to 
release the previous paper appears to have exerted an 
influence on this new venture.  The just-released report\'s 
assessment of anti-Semitism in the EU dilutes, with extreme 
care and plenty of equivocation, the most controversial 
findings of last winter\'s document -- which the EUMC 
characterized as \"inadequate\" and refused to release (until 
forced to do so by political pressure). 
 
-------------------------------- 
FIRST REPORT: MUSLIMS AND ISRAEL 
-------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) The first report, which covered the first half of 
2002, asserted that Muslim Europeans and European attitudes 
toward Israel were the major cause for the rise in 
anti-Semitic attacks, and that &extremist far-right 
parties((did not play) a decisive role.8  The authors also 
examined anti-Semitic statements of pro-Palestinian groups, 
politicians, and &citizens from the political mainstream8 
and posited a close connection on the political left between 
anti-Semitism and anti-Zionism.  The report stated: &it 
could be said that the tradition of demonising Jews in the 
past is now being transferred to the state of Israel.  In 
this way traditional anti-Semitism is translated into a new 
form, less deprived of legitimacy, whose employment today in 
Europe could become part of the political mainstream.8 
 
----------------------------------------- 
NEW REPORT: ANTI-ISRAELI NOT ANTI-SEMITIC 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) The just-released report attempts, with extreme care 
and plenty of equivocation, to mitigate those views.  At one 
point, it says, rather clumsily, that \"hostility toward Jews 
as \'Israelis\'\" is not anti-Semitic if it is \"not based on ... 
antisemitic stereotyping of Jews.\"  On the sources of 
anti-Semitism in Europe, the report concludes after a long 
and tedious discourse on &defining anti-Semitism8 
(including a paragraph on why the term should be spelled 
&antisemitism8 and not \"anti-Semitism8) that \"it is 
problematic to make general statements with regard to the 
perpetrators of antisemitic acts.\"  Winkler states on the 
EUMC website that \"young, disaffected white Europeans, often 
stimulated by extreme right-wing groups\" appear to be the 
largest group responsible for anti-Semitic attacks.  The 
report notes, however, that a further source of anti-Semitism 
in some countries was young people of North African Muslim 
extraction, and that they were changing the demographic 
nature of anti-Semitism in Europe. 
 
 
---------------------------------- 
COMMENT: STORM CLOUDS APPROACHING? 
---------------------------------- 
8. (C) COMMENT:  Following the criticisms of the first 
report, this second effort is very careful in its arguments 
and in describing its methods and the reasons for its 
assessments.  Cobi Benatoff\'s presence at the press 
conference announcing its release testifies, both politically 
and substantively, to its quality.  Nevertheless, the way in 
which the EUMC continues to tread gingerly around the subject 
of anti-Semitism in Europe indicates the political volatility 
of this issue and a continuing reluctance to face this 
phenomenon in Europe boldly and with conviction.  END COMMENT. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16438","4/28/2004 14:21","04BRUSSELS1868","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001868 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/29/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, PBTS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DINING WITH CHRIS: RANDOM THOUGHTS FROM RELEX 
COMMISSIONER PATTEN 
 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.4 (B 
)(D) 
 
1. (C) Summary: Over rubbery fish at an Adenauer Stiftung 
affair on April 27, External Relations Commissioner Chris 
Patten touched briefly on why the EU will never be a \"real 
power,\" the dubious backgrounds of some of the leaders of the 
EU\'s new members, next steps on Cyprus/Turkey, the 
differences between a union and an alliance, and Russian 
President Putin\'s \"killer\'s eyes.\"   His formal remarks 
focused on the future of the European Commission, where he 
offered ten recommendations to the next commission.  End 
Summary. 
 
On What It Means to Be a \"Real Power\" 
------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) To be a real power, Patten said, a country must be 
ready and able to adopt and implement a policy, even if the 
rest of the world considers it unwise.  Europeans may agree 
or disagree with US policy, but they admire that the US is 
ready to carry out the policies it thinks best, no matter 
what the rest of the world thinks.  Under this yardstick, the 
EU will never be a \"real power\" because there is always 
someone in the room who is overly cautious, and will insist 
on looking at matters \"sensibly.\" 
 
Next Steps On Cyprus/Papadopolous\' Dubious Character... 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
3. (C) The next steps for the Commission are figuring out how 
to spend money in Northern Cyprus.  Patten expects the EC to 
open an office to oversee their assistance.  While there will 
be legal hurdles to managing the process, he was confident 
the Commission would find a way.  Patten doubted the Greek 
Cypriots would openly oppose any efforts, noting that they 
were \"on their heels\" diplomatically after their blatant 
efforts to stifle opposing views on the referendum.  This 
incident, Patten said, was a sad reflection on the realities 
of EU enlargement: Some of the new members were people you 
would \"only want to dine with if you have a very long spoon.\" 
 Not that the EU should have been surprised by Papadopolous\' 
behavior, Patten said, since they knew well who they were 
dealing with: Milosevic\'s Cyprus lawyer, who was also 
responsible for laundering billions of ill-gotten Russian 
money through Cypriot banks.  Patten, who had listened 
patiently to a lengthy policy explanation of the Russian veto 
in the UNSC from Foreign Minister Lavrov at EU-Russian 
consultations the day before, said he suspected the money 
connection is the real reason for the Russian vote: 
\"Papadopolous just called in his chits.\" 
 
... And on Turkey 
----------------- 
 
4. (C) Patten noted that he was the biggest proponent in the 
Commission for Turkey\'s admission.  In his view, based on the 
technical merits alone, the Commission has no other option 
but to give a positive avis to begin accession negotiations. 
Still, he said the political climate in Europe is not 
receptive to Turkey\'s candidacy.  The problem, in his view, 
was not Chirac in France, since \"he can change his policies 
on a whim.\"  Patten considered the opposition of conservative 
parties in Germany and Spain the most serious obstacles to 
Turkish admission. 
 
On the Difference Between a Union and an Alliance 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
5. (C) Patten also said he felt at times the US does not 
fully appreciate the difference between expanding an alliance 
like NATO, and a Union like the EU.  When a country joins an 
alliance, it becomes a distinct member of a group committed 
to a common cause -- but nothing more.  When countries join 
the EU, they become part of the whole, formally and 
practically indistinct in many areas of EU competence.  \"We 
have to be ready to trust their food and sanitation 
standards, for instance.\"  In this regard, he noted that some 
of the accession countries were foisted on the EU as part of 
a larger bargain.  Cyprus, for instance, probably should not 
have been admitted (as Papadapolous\' behavior prior to the 
referendum indicated), but the Greeks insisted on Cypriot 
admission as the price of agreeing to some of the northern 
European candidates.  Croatia, Patten said, is probably far 
more prepared for EU membership than either Bulgaria or 
Romania, who will likely enter the Union earlier.  Romania, 
in particular, was a \"feral nation.\"  We noted that we were 
shocked by del Ponte\'s clean bill of health on ICTY 
cooperation while Gotovina still was at large inside Croatia. 
 Patten said he too was surprised by del Ponte\'s letter, but 
once the referee had made the call, the EU was bound by her 
judgement. 
 
On Russia, WTO, Kyoto, and Putin\'s \"Killer\'s Eyes\" 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6. (C) Patten was in Moscow last week, and had just concluded 
EU-Russia ministerial consultations in Brussels this week. 
He said the EU had become overly dependent on Russian energy 
supplies, and should become more engaged with the countries 
of the Caucasus and Central Asia in order to diversify 
supplies.  To do so, however, the Union would also have to 
become more involved in pipeline politics. 
 
7. (C) WTO discussions had not moved forward substantially 
during these most recent talks.  Patten said the EC was 
sticking with its positions on energy, but he was worried 
that they may have taken too strong a line, and would be 
forced to backpedal significantly at a later stage.  In his 
view, this was unfortunate because he was worried the EC was 
spending too much negotiating effort on energy rather than 
focussing on other items that really mattered, such as 
overflights.  Patten also said that Putin had explicitly 
suggested a possible trade-off between the Russian position 
on the Kyoto Protocol and WTO negotiations during last week\'s 
talks, although he was not sure how serious the Russians were 
on this, or whether it was a convincing trade-off for 
Commission officials. 
 
8. (C) Patten said Putin has done a good job for Russia 
mainly due to high world energy prices, but he had serious 
doubts about the man\'s character.  Cautioning that \"I\'m not 
saying that genes are determinant,\" Patten then reviewed 
Putin family history: grandfather part of Lenin\'s special 
protection team, father a communist party apparatchik, and 
Putin himself decided at a young age to pursue a career in 
the KGB.  \"He seems a completely reasonable man when 
discussing the Middle East or energy policy, but when the 
conversation shifts to Chechnya or Islamic extremism, Putin\'s 
eyes turn to those of a killer.\" 
 
Ten Commandments for the Next Commission 
---------------------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Patten\'s public remarks at the dinner focused on the 
future of the Commission -- not foreign affairs.  He offered 
ten recommendations for the next Commission to help them 
improve the EU\'s image with Europe\'s citizenry, as follows: 
 
-- 1) Deliver substance: highlight areas where the EU can 
make a difference in the world, such as the rapid changes in 
Justice and Home Affairs, or external assistance. 
 
-- 2) Go with the flow of the institutional debate: Don\'t 
spend energy trying to stop intergovernmental efforts that 
have a head of steam behind them.  Instead, try to channel 
these efforts in useful directions. 
 
-- 3) Exploit the \"Community Method\" where it exists:  Make 
the most of EC strengths, such as on the internal market, 
trade, or foreign assistance. 
 
-- 4) Be open to new ways of working: The number of 
regulations passed should not be a measure of success of the 
Commission. 
 
-- 5) Regulate better: aggesively develop the initiative the 
Commission launched in 2002.  Get serious about consultation 
and impact assessment rather than just going through the 
motions. 
 
--6) Get economic management right: There should be no \"free 
riders\" in the monetary union, but the EU should seek greater 
flexibility that takes account of the differences between 
states.  The Commission must also be ready to accept the same 
sort of management discipline it demands of the Member States. 
 
-- 7) Put more effort into monitoring implementation of EU 
legislation: use score cards and \"league tables\" on 
infractions. Compare best practices.  Be ready to be tougher 
on sanctioning persistent bad performance, perhaps by cutting 
EU financial programs such as structural funds. 
 
-- 8) Be prepared to scale back or eliminate bad policies: 
Take a thorough look at the CAP, and focus greater attention 
on what needs to be done at the Community level, and where 
\"subsidiarity\" and national/local administrations would be 
the better option. 
 
-- 9) Get internal organization right: Create real clusters 
of issues where Commission Vice Presidents have real 
authority. 
 
-- 10) Demonstrate that the EU can make a difference to 
people\'s lives. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16441","4/28/2004 14:37","04BRUSSELS1870","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001870 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, CY, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/CYPRUS: DEVELOPING THE EU\'S POST-REFERENDA 
APPROACH 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 ------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) April 28 COREPER discussion on defining the Green 
Line for the European Union focused on the extent to which 
the Green Line is a barrier and to what extent it will be a 
border.  Roughly speaking, our contacts report that the Greek 
Cypriots would like a barrier without the political 
characteristics of a border; the Commission and other Council 
members have been more open to the mix of barrier and border, 
with those in favor of rewarding Turkish Cypriots advocating 
a minimal barrier to the passage of people, goods, & 
services.  Under EU procedures, the Commission would have the 
authority to develop implementing procedures for the Green 
Line; with COREPER still in session April 28 at the time of 
this writing, Greece is threatening to veto any COREPER 
decision not giving the Council oversight of the final 
dispositions of the Green Line (and thus a Greek Cypriot 
voice to define the political parameters). 
 
2.  (C) The debate on disbursement modalities for the EU\'s 
package for northern Cyprus has yet to be engaged.  The 
Council has endorsed the Commission\'s disbursement of a 259 
million euro assistance purse in the north.  On the other 
hand, because the previous package was predicated on a Cyprus 
settlement, the Commission has now been tasked with coming up 
with a new financial instrument to define the disbursement. 
This new financial instrument will need to be approved by the 
Council at 25 and the European Parliament.  The Commission 
prefers an approach including a Commission office in northern 
Cyprus, and disbursement with a maximum degree of autonomy 
from the Republic of Cyprus.  But discussions on the 
Commission\'s approach in the Council are expected to be 
difficult, given Republic of Cyprus involvement.  Separately, 
RELEX Commissioner Patten told us April 27 that the money 
will certainly be spent, although the modalities remain to be 
decided.  Patten also predicted that Turkey would get a 
positive Commission \"avis\" to open accession talks in 
December.  End summary. 
 
------------------- 
The new Green Line: 
Border and Barrier? 
------------------- 
 
3.  (C) A senior Commission official on April 28 reviewed the 
Cyprus Green Line discussion in the COREPER (The EU\'s highest 
sitting Brussels body: the Committee of Permanent 
Representatives).  The COREPER is still meeting at the time 
of this writing.  Our interlocutor told us that the focus of 
COREPER\'s discussion is defining the terms upon which EU 
rules would be promulgated and implemented in relation to the 
Green Line.  The assumption before the failure of the 
referendum was that this discussion would focus on validating 
the Annan Plan\'s approach to the Green Line; since April 24, 
the debate has shifted to the extent to which the Republic of 
Cyprus gets in-put into the Commission\'s drafting of the 
rules governing the Green Line. 
 
4.  (C) The COREPER discussion is now focused on the 
parameters of the Green Line as a demarcation of the EU\'s 
frontier with an area in which the acquis communitaire (EU 
law & regulation) do not apply.  The crux of the matter for 
the EU is the status of the Green Line.  The UK has proposed 
changes to the Green Line rules that would make the 
demarcation more permeable and its dispositions more 
favorable to the Turks.  The Greek Cypriot position is that 
the Green Line must not be a border (for this would imply 
recognition of \"TRNC\" sovereignty) but must remain a barrier. 
 For those seeking to reward the Turkish Cypriots for their 
support of reunification, the Green Line must take on some 
characteristics of a border while losing its aspect of a 
barrier to the free flow of people, goods, and services. 
This is a tricky mix. 
 
5.  (C) Our contact reported that Enlargement Commissioner 
Verheugen is happy with the UK proposed changes to the Green 
Line rules, but believes that the EU could go further in the 
direction of the Turkish Cypriots.  We understand that this 
is unlikely, and that the preferred position of the 
Commission is now to leave current rules in place or else 
limit discussion to the immediate question of free passage of 
persons, thus \"splitting\" the legislation. 
 
6.  (C) Typically, the Commission would then be tasked with 
drafting the implementing rules for the passage of goods and 
services without the interference of the member states.  In 
this case, however, we have been told that Greece at COREPER 
is holding out for a Republic of Cyprus voice approving 
whatever the Commission drafts.  The Commission opposes this, 
but the decision on this issue rests with COREPER ambassadors 
working on the basis of consensus (which until May 1st 
includes Greece but excludes Cyprus). 
 
--------------------- 
Carrots for the North 
--------------------- 
 
7.  While the 259 million euro Commission package for Cyprus 
has been blessed by the Council, the modalities for 
disbursement remain open.  Though even Papadopoulos is on the 
record that it is appropriate that the money be spent in 
Northern Cyprus, there is a major difference of approach 
between Commission and Council (including Cyprus).  The 
Commission wants to be able to disburse independently of 
Cyprus authority. Verheugen spoke to the European Parliament 
on April 27, stating that the Commission would now have to 
establish an office in Northern Cyprus, as the financial 
package for assistance would be too great to manage through 
the UN.  Verheugen\'s Cyprus Adviser (strictly protect) told 
us April 28 that Verheugen hasn\'t really formulated an 
approach yet, but simply doesn\'t want Cypriot control over 
his policy process in the \"TRNC\".  In his remarks to 
Parliament, Verheugen rejected allegations that an office in 
northern Cyprus would imply recognition of the Northern 
Cypriot government, comparing the Cypriot case with Taiwan, 
where the Commission has effective cooperation without formal 
recognition of Taiwan. 
 
7.  Verheguen\'s challenge is that Cypriot President 
Papadopoulos wants a hand in deciding how the money will be 
spent in the north, and according to Verheugen\'s Cyprus 
adviser, once the Commission develops its new financial 
instrument for use in northern Cyprus, both the Council (by 
consensus at 25) and the European Parliament through its 
standard budgetary approval process will have to endorse 
whatever Verheugen proposes.  This virtually guarantees that 
Republic of Cyprus redlines will be asserted and protected in 
the Council. 
 
------------------- 
Wary on Sovereignty 
------------------- 
 
8.  Our Council and Commission interlocutors continue to 
express extreme wariness about offering the \"TRNC\" any of the 
accoutrements of sovereignty.  \"TRNC President\" Denktash is 
still in power, and one key Solana advisor told us April 24 
that the worst case development for the EU would be a \"TRNC\" 
candidacy for accession.  The EU\'s legal experts rule out 
such a possibility, however, since all EU members recognized 
the indivisible borders of the united Cyprus through the 
Accession Treaty, which governs the terms of their political 
union with each other.  Indeed, Enlargement Director Matthias 
Ruete, speaking to EUR/PDAS Ries on April 26 said that the 
accession treaty of union precluded recognition of the \"TRNC\" 
by EU members. 
 
------------------------- 
RELEX Commissioner Patten 
------------------------- 
 
9.  Speaking informally at a NGO social event April 27, RELEX 
Commissioner Chris Patten told us the Commission is still 
trying to figure out how to spend money in Northern Cyprus. 
Patten expects the Commission to open an office to oversee EU 
assistance.  (Patten didn\'t even bother to mention Greek 
Cypriot opposition to this prospect.)  While there will be 
legal hurdles to managing the process, Patten was confident 
the Commission would find a way, he said. 
 
10.  Patten doubted the Greek Cypriots could openly oppose 
any efforts to disburse money in the north, noting that they 
were \"on their heels\" diplomatically after their blatant 
efforts to stifle opposing views on the referendum.  (Note: 
Other Council and Commission interlocutors share this view. 
End note.)  Despite expected opposition from Greek and 
Cypriot parliamentarians, Patten was confident the Commission 
would easily gain Parliamentary approval for spending in 
Northern Cyprus; he expressed no opinion about whether such 
funding could be directed through \"TRNC\" entities, which we 
have heard is the crux of the current debate inside the 
Council. 
 
11.  Finally, on Turkey\'s accession bid, Patten told us the 
Commission has no other option but to give a positive avis to 
begin accession negotiations based on Turkey\'s technical 
merits.  Still, he said the political climate in Europe is 
not receptive to Turkey\'s candidacy.  He viewed the 
opposition of conservative parties in Germany and Spain as 
the most serious obstacles to Turkish admission.  (Comment: 
Patten\'s inclusion of the Spanish opposition among the 
nay-sayers is a new one for us.  EU insiders generally 
include France, Germany, Austria, and the Netherlands as the 
core group of Euro Turcophobes.  Patten\'s inclusion of the 
Spanish opposition is particularly odd given that its ability 
to influence the decision on Turkey is extremely limited, so 
far as we are aware.  End comment.)  Schnabel 
"
"16442","4/28/2004 14:42","04BRUSSELS1871","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, CY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUR/PDAS RIES MEETING WITH MATTHIAS RUETE 
 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (C) On April 26 EUR/PDAS Charlie Ries met in Brussels 
with EU Commission Enlargement Director Matthias Ruete, who 
is responsible in the Commission for Turkey\'s accession bid. 
Ries emphasized the US view that Turkey should not be 
punished for southern Cyprus\' rejection of the Annan Plan. 
He encouraged Ruete and the Commission to look at creative 
ways of recognizing northern Cyprus\' yes vote, and 
underscored the US view that Turkey has shown it is willing 
to do the heavy lifting required to fulfill its end of the 
accession bargain with the EU; it is up to the EU to offer 
Turkey a date in December.  Ruete responded that the Cyprus 
vote created a \"dichotomy between the political situation and 
the legal reality\" of the division of Cyprus and Turkey\'s 
accession quest.  Ruete also warned that EU member state 
political debate about whether Turkey should join the EU is 
not over.  He noted public comments in France by governing 
party officials that \"Turkey is not ready\".  He also asked 
that the US deliver a strong message to German opposition 
leader Angelika Merkel that her anti-Turkish position is not 
helpful.  End comment. 
 
------------ 
Atmospherics 
And Context 
------------ 
 
2.  (C) On April 26, EUR/PDAS Charlie Ries met with Matthias 
Ruete, Director, Enlargement Directorate for Romania, 
Bulgaria, and Turkey, to review Ries\' March 31 meetings in 
Ankara with Turkish government and political leaders on 
Turkish efforts to fulfill the Copenhagen Criteria.  Ries 
underscored continued strong US support of Turkey\'s accession 
bid, and reminded Ruete that the EU should not let Greek 
Cypriot rejection of the Annan Plan prejudice Turkey\'s 
accession bid, particularly given Ankara\'s excellent progress 
on the Copenhagen Criteria.  In the aftermath of the decisive 
vote in the \"TRNC\" in favor of the Annan Plan, now is the 
time to reward Turkey for progress, not punish it. 
 
------------------ 
Responding to the 
Cyprus Referenda.. 
------------------ 
 
3.  (C) Ruete responded that Greek Cypriot rejection of the 
Annan Plan was a heavy blow to supporters of a date for 
Turkish accession talks.  The GOT had shown that it could do 
the heavy lifting in very difficult political areas; but 
irrespective of who is to blame for the failure of the Annan 
Plan, Turkey is most likely to pay a price.  With the failure 
of the Annan Plan, there is now \"a dichotomy between the 
political situation and the legal reality\" of the division of 
Cyprus.  Under the Accession treaty, Ruete said, \"all of 
Cyprus enters the EU, and Turkey doesn\'t recognize Cyprus\"; 
these are realities that now block Turkey\'s path towards 
accession.  It remained to be seen how the EU could address 
them. 
 
4.  (C) Ries suggested that the EU look at creative ways of 
politically recognizing Turkish Cypriot good will in the 
referendum.  Ruete dismissed any parallel with the Hallstein 
doctrine (governing recognition of East Germany up until the 
1970s).  Ruete noted that even if EU members were inclined to 
recognize \"TRNC\", the reality was that the twenty-five EU 
members had just signed and ratified an accession treaty 
recognizing Cyprus as the legitimate government of the whole 
island.  For this reason, Ruete said, there are no meaningful 
parallels with Taiwan.  The EU is locked into recognition of 
the Republic of Cyprus alone.  The bottom line for Ruete was 
that \"the Republic of Cyprus has a capacity to be a nuisance 
which is enormous,\" with the legal tools at its disposal to 
back up its position. 
 
5.  (C) The rejection of the Annan Plan in the south was a 
bad thing; there was no question about this, in Ruete\'s eyes. 
 But Cyprus\' accession to the EU still brought positive 
elements for citizens of the \"TRNC\".  For instance, Turkish 
citizens in the north are in most cases \"Cypriot/EU citizens\" 
under the terms of accession.  The challenge now for the EU, 
and the Commission, was defining the future of the Green 
Line.  It could go two ways: either it could become \"a real 
border\" or, Ruete suggested as his preferred alternative, \"it 
could become more permeable; this is what I\'ve heard from the 
north\".  Ruete speculated that while Cyprus would not take 
the first step in developing a formal bilateral relationship 
with Turkey, it would be easier for Turkey to recognize the 
south; this would be a clever step on the part of the Turks, 
he said, and might lead to some progress. 
 
------------------ 
The \"Turkey in EU\" 
debate is not Over 
------------------ 
 
6.  (C) Ruete (strictly protect throughout) noted that the 
context of Turkey\'s accession bid was \"evolving rapidly\", 
with pressure growing in the European Parliament for a 
factual analysis of the costs and benefits of Turkish 
accession.  The key, said Ruete, was to move off an emotional 
debate on the subject and on to a discussion \"why Turkey 
should join the EU.\"   The political debate in Europe is not 
won.  Ries mentioned that he was getting on a train to 
promote the Turkish case in the Netherlands on April 27; 
Ruete asked for a read-out of Ries\' discussions in The Hague, 
which Ries promised to provide. 
 
7.  (C) Ruete asked that the US ensure that German opposition 
leader Angelika Merkel hear a clear message from the US on 
why she shouldn\'t oppose Turkish accession; Ries said he 
would make sure that Washington was aware of the need to do 
this.  On France, Ruete said that \"Chirac\'s party is making 
increasingly anti-Turkish comments\" with the message that 
\"Turkey\'s not ready\" to join the EU.  Ruete offered that this 
message might moderate after the EU parliamentary elections 
this summer.  Nonetheless, the Layla Zana case was \"playing 
very loudly\" in the French press.  The argument is that \"a 
country with political prisoners can\'t be an EU member.\" 
Ruete had heard that the GOT was working the Layla Zana case, 
and he would be glad if something were done, but he had heard 
this before.  He wanted to see results. 
 
8.  (U) EUR/PDAS Ries did not have a chance to see this cable 
prior to departing post. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"16536","5/3/2004 5:25","04BRUSSELS1897","Embassy Brussels","SECRET","04STATE88689|04STATE90371","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001897 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SPG - MERANNEBERGER; PRM - MMCKINLEY; AF - 
CSNYDER; DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID FOR D/AA DCHA ROGERS; 
DCHA/OFDA - HALMRAST-SANCHEZ; DCHA/FFP - WELLER; USUN FOR 
LUTZ; GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/29/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PREF, PHUM, SU, CD, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ON DARFUR: CEASEFIRE MONITORING, HUMANITARIAN 
ASSISTANCE AND UNCHR ISSUES 
 
REF: (A) STATE 90371 (B) STATE 88689 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
1. (S) Summary.  The EU will contribute personnel and 
financial resources to support both the Ceasefire Commission 
and other efforts to establish peace in Darfur, as well as to 
address the complex humanitarian emergency in the region. 
The EU feels the disagreement at the UNCHR meeting was not 
over the essentials of Darfur but over tactics.  However, 
U.S. statements in Geneva have given rise to some speculation 
in Brussels over a possible U.S. military intervention in 
Darfur if the situation cannot be contained by diplomacy. 
The EC is expected to double its assistance resources this 
year for Sudan and Sudanese refugees in Chad.  On 4/27, the 
EU Council expressed \"grave concern\" over the situation and 
called on the GoS to allow full, unhindered access to the 
region.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
EU Efforts to Support Ceasefire 
------------------------ 
 
2. (C) Following receipt of reftel A, DCM spoke with 
Christoph Heusgen, head of EU High Representative Solana\'s 
policy unit, regarding EU efforts on behalf of Darfur. 
Heusgen said that following GAERC discussion on 4/26, the 
Policy and Security Committee (PSC) met on 4/27 and decided 
that the EU must do something beyond humanitarian assistance. 
 This meant support, logistical and otherwise, for the 
Ceasefire Commission and the Joint Commission.  He said the 
EU will also probably contribute six persons to the Observer 
Mission and support logistically contributions by African 
countries.  Heusgen said the EU would participate in a 
\"reconnaissance\" mission next week to assess needs and to 
prepare the ground for greater EU action. 
 
3. (C) PRMOff also discussed these issues with DG Development 
Sudan Desk Officer Christian Manahl who made many of the same 
points.  He said that at the PSC meeting of 4/30, the EU is 
expected to offer the following human resources (depending on 
the final agreement between the GoS and rebels): 
 
-- one Brussels-based military staff representative to 
participate in the AU-led reconnaissance mission to Darfur; 
-- one EU representative on the Joint Commission that 
oversees the overall implementation of the ceasefire; 
-- the deputy chief of staff position of the Ceasefire 
Commission (CFC), provided by an EU Member State, to reside 
in Darfur; 
-- five or six Member State officials to join the group of 25 
proposed observers. 
 
4. (SBU) Regarding funding, Manahl said that if no larger 
staff protection force (a group of 250 has been on and off 
the table) were needed, then funds already in the pipeline 
could cover the African contributions to the observer 
mission.  He referred to a 10 million euro contribution to 
the AU\'s conflict prevention and peacekeeping unit from the 
EC.  This, of course, is depending on the two parties 
accepting AU leadership in such a mechanism. 
 
5. (C) Manahl said that AU Director for Peace and Security 
Sam Ibok\'s efforts in N\'Djamena to sell the AU agreement to 
the two sides has not been easy.  The validity and 
sustainability of the April 25 agreement remains doubtful, 
taking into account the ambiguous position of the rebels. 
Next steps should include clarifying the position of the 
rebels and the establishing of a clear schedule and agenda 
for the implementation of the ceasefire agreement.  The 
framework for further political talks also needs to be 
clarified. 
 
------------------------ 
EU Analysis of UNCHR Dispute with the USG, Possible U.S. 
Military Intervention 
------------------------ 
 
6. (S) Manahl (protect) forwarded PRMOff an internal analysis 
of what went wrong in Geneva.  It included, \"Cooperation 
between the EU and US has previously been good, but sharp 
divergences have appeared at the UNCHR at Geneva, where the 
U.S. undermined a (successful) joint initiative of the EU and 
the African Group resulting in the adoption of the Chairman\'s 
decision....  The difference between the EU and U.S. 
positions is a matter of tactics and overall objectives 
rather than assessment.  We have advocated a more 
compromising approach towards the African Group in the CHR, 
convinced that only close cooperation between the EU and the 
U.S. on the one hand, and the AU and Sudan\'s neighbors on the 
other, can secure the consolidation of the ceasefire.  The 
U.S., on its side, appears to believe that strong additional 
pressure on the GoS is necessary to achieve a more 
compromising attitude of Khartoum.  Furthermore, the U.S. is 
also somehow using the Darfur issue to exert further pressure 
on the GoS in relation to the north-south peace 
negotiations.\" 
 
7. (S) Another part of the internal EU document which 
speculated on a possible U.S. military intervention stated, 
\"It is presently unclear whether the U.S. would consider, or 
is considering, a military intervention in case of a 
continuation of the campaign of ethnic cleansing; the 
reference to Rwanda (only two weeks after the genocide 
commemoration) and Kosovo seems to indicate that Washington 
is playing with the idea.  It is clear that such a military 
intervention would bring the peace process in Darfur, but 
also the negotiations between the GoS and the SPLM/A under 
IGAD auspices, to collapse. 
 
------------------------ 
EC Expected to Double Aid to Sudanese in 2004 
------------------------ 
 
8. (U) On 4/22, PRMOff delivered talking points contained in 
reftel b regarding the worsening humanitarian situation in 
Darfur.  European Commission (EC) interlocutors are in full 
agreement with USG analysis of the situation and need to 
support international relief organizations both financially 
and politically in order to gain unimpeded access to Darfur. 
 
9. (SBU) In a meeting with ECHO Director Costanza Adinolfi 
and her staff on 4/28, she noted that \"Sudan has never been 
an easy crisis.\"  She said that an ECHO officer had had visa 
difficulties to enter the country and although he was 
expected to arrive in Darfur that morning they had no 
assurances that he would actually make it to the region. 
Adinolfi stated that the EC had issued a strong appeal to 
warring parties earlier in the day to secure safe 
humanitarian access so that the enormous needs of the 
displaced and affected populations could be properly 
addressed.  She said that from a humanitarian point of view 
it was irrelevant to assign blame or determine who was at 
fault for the deteriorating situation, but that the 
international community should work together to meet basic 
food and shelter needs.  Despite the ceasefire and other 
on-going talks between Sudanese authorities and rebels, the 
fact remained that there was no real progress with regard to 
access.  She also pointed out that the negotiated ceasefire 
was for only 45 days and that much time had already been lost 
by delaying tactics. 
 
10. (SBU) Adinolfi said that ECHO had decided to request 10 
million euros from the emergency reserves as part of its 
response to the growing humanitarian crisis in Darfur.  This 
money is in addition to 2004 program funding of 20 million 
euros for Sudan as well as 4 million euros for Sudanese 
refugees in Chad -- money already in the pipeline.  She noted 
that the lack of access to the displaced is severely 
affecting the absorption rate.  If delivery of aid were to 
improve, ECHO would be open to requesting additional funds 
from the emergency reserves.  Because approval for 
supplemental funding needs to be obtained from the EU Member 
States, the additional tranche of 10 million euros is not 
expected to be available before the end of May.  ECHO will 
apply it towards a variety of sectors in Darfur.  According 
to ECHO Sudan Desk Officer Javier Perez, the decision to seek 
emergency funds is partly a result of USAID Administrator 
Natsios\' appeal on behalf of Darfur at the recent OECD DAC 
High Level conference in Paris. 
 
11. (SBU) ECHO Head of Unit for Africa Steffen Stenberg said 
that he expected total funding this year for Sudan and 
Sudanese refugees to be double that of 2003.  He also noted 
the problems associated with access and subsequent problems 
of distributing relief aid, as well as the logistical 
difficulties which seasonal rains will soon create.  He 
stressed the importance of remembering the plight of refugees 
in Chad which he characterized as \"far from settled.\"  ECHO 
supports UNHCR as the lead agency in coordinating in Chad and 
that of OCHA in coordinating in Darfur. 
 
12.  (SBU) EuropeAid Deputy Head for Food Security Robert 
Hynderick agreed that there had been a serious increase of 
needs in Darfur and said that the EC was expected to increase 
its funding from the four million euros it has already 
allocated this year.  EuropeAid is considering an additional 
five million euros for Sudan and one and a half million euros 
for Chad channeled through WFP.  EuropeAid\'s funds will be 
used to purchase sorghum locally in order to get it quickly 
to the displaced populations.  Hynderick questioned whether 
WFP\'s plans to airlift half of its food aid to the affected 
region was necessary given that the price (which is 
denominated in currency rather than tonnage) is already the 
highest in the world.  USAID Food For Peace reps note we face 
similar issues, but we assume we will have to airlift food, 
thought hopefully not airdrops. 
 
------------------------ 
EU Statements on Darfur 
------------------------ 
 
13. (U) On 4/15, the Irish Presidency released the following 
declaration on behalf of the EU, acceding and associated 
countries:  \"The EU welcomes the signing of the humanitarian 
ceasefire agreement between the Government of Sudan and the 
SLM/SLA and the JEM.  It calls on all parties to observe and 
scrupulously respect the rules of that agreement.  It 
congratulates the Chadian mediators for their efforts to 
promote the conclusion of the agreement.  It salutes the 
commitment of all parties to authorize unrestricted 
humanitarian access and facilitate the distribution of 
humanitarian assistance to the people of the Grand Darfur 
region.  In this context it is essential that the Sudanese 
Government fulfill its commitment to control the irregular 
armed forces known as Janjaweed.\" 
 
14. (U) On 4/27, the EU External Relations Council adopted 
the following conclusion on Sudan:  \"The Council expressed 
its grave concern at the situation in Darfur and called on 
the government of Sudan to allow full, unhindered access to 
the region for UN and other humanitarian agencies.  The 
Council called on all parties to fully respect the terms of 
the humanitarian ceasefire agreement reach on 8 April in 
N\'Djamena.  The Council noted with concern the actions of the 
Janjaweed militias operating in Darfur and called on the 
Government of Sudan to take command of all armed groups under 
its control.\" 
 
15. (U) On 4/28, Development and Humanitarian Commissioner 
Poul Nielson used an event unveiling ECHO\'s 2003 Annual 
Review to, as the press statement notes, \"launch a strong 
appeal to the warring parties in the Darfur region of western 
Sudan.\"  USEU will forward a transcript of these remarks 
septel when they become available. 
 
MINIMIZED CONSIDERED. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16548","5/3/2004 12:36","04BRUSSELS1907","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04BRUSSELS1749","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 001907 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA, CA AND S/CT; DOJ FOR CRIMINAL DIVISION 
BRUCE SWARTZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA, EAIR, ECON, PTER, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: INAUGURAL SESSION OF THE U.S.-EU POLICY DIALOGUE 
ON BORDER AND TRANSPORT SECURITY 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 01749 
 
 1. Summary.  The inaugural meeting of the new Policy 
Dialogue on Border and Transport Security April 26 addressed 
biometrics, the US-VISIT and Visa Waiver Programs, the joint 
initiative on lost and stolen passports, \"flights of concern\" 
and air marshals.  Newly appointed Counter-terrorism 
coordinator De Vries reviewed the March 25 Council 
Declaration on Combating Terrorism, and the Irish Presidency 
undertook to produce a first draft of a US-EU CT Statement 
for the June Summit.  The group agreed to meet once per EU 
presidency and also on an ad hoc basis if circumstances 
warrant.  The wide-ranging joint press briefing received wide 
and positive media attention.  End Summary. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
2. Comment: The U.S. objective for this new group was to 
establish a forum where the issues of transport and border 
security could be addressed at a policy level.  Current JHA 
discussions address these issues in an unsatisfactory way. 
The inaugural meeting successfully discussed a wide range of 
issues without getting \"down in the weeds\".  Working-level 
experts from the Directorates of Transport, Markets, Justice 
and Home Affairs (JHA) and External Relations were present, 
demonstrating an EU effort to avoid \"stove-piping\" its 
handling of these issues.  The principals on both sides 
promised to use this new mechanism to alert each other to 
problems or initiatives on the horizon, such as CAPPS II. 
The robust USG participation in this first meeting signaled 
to the EU that we take this new high-level dialogue seriously 
and want it to succeed.  To reinforce this message, we 
suggest the next meeting be held in Washington during the 
Dutch Presidency.  End comment. 
 
Press Coverage 
-------------- 
 
3.  The media replayed the positive messages from the joint 
press briefing by U/S  Hutchinson and Faull.  Two contentious 
issues -- the sharing of air passenger data with third 
countries and sky marshals on European flights of concern -- 
were widely portrayed as resolved.  The press gave prominent 
attention to Hutchinson\'s public flexibility on sky marshals, 
citing his comment that \"we will not make the demand when 
that is not workable in an EU state\" and \"alternative 
security measures\" were available.  The press briefing made a 
strong visual statement on US-EU transport and border 
security cooperation to the 50 media reps in attendance. 
 
EU Council Declaration on CT 
---------------------------- 
 
4.  EU Co-chair JHA Director General Jonathan Faull noted 
that the March 25 Council Declaration on Combating Terrorism, 
issued following the Madrid bombings, described a wide range 
of activities within the EU, and demonstrated that the 
purpose of the EU in the fight against terrorism has been 
reinforced at all levels.  The Declaration signaled the unity 
of the EU in this important area.  Newly-named EU 
Counter-terrorism Coordinator De Vries said this new dialogue 
was assisting the Union in pushing implementation of the 
Declaration\'s initiatives and programs both at the national 
level and externally with third countries.  U/S Hutchinson 
responded that the U.S. wants to enhance its cooperation with 
the EU in all areas, and that this new policy forum can play 
a useful role in this effort.  He thanked the EU for 
concluding the U.S.-EU Agreement on Passenger Name Records 
(PNR) and the recently-signed agreement on Container Security 
(CSI). 
 
EU-US Summit Statement on Combating Terrorism 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  EUR PDAS Ries reported that a recent White House Summit 
planning meeting was impressed with the Council Declaration, 
commended its \"holistic\" approach to the issue, and noted it 
contained much substance for both current and potential 
cooperation.  He said we were working on an outline for a 
possible statement for the June Summit keyed to the Strategic 
Objectives listed in the Declaration Annex and hoped to have 
an outline ready to discuss at the May 6 Task Force meeting. 
Paul Hickey of the Irish Justice Department said the 
Presidency was working on its own draft statement for 
discussion at the May 6 Task Force meeting. 
 
Data Protection 
--------------- 
 
6.  Faull announced that JHA is working on a set of data 
protection rules for law enforcement and security purposes 
which will hopefully be ready in June and proposed to the 
Council in the June/July timeframe.  The new Parliament will 
have to decide whether the proposal is satisfactory.  He 
hopes the document will be finalized by the end of the year. 
Asked whether the current drafting process is open for 
discussion, Faull responded that JHA would welcome our views 
when the document is presented to the Council and made public. 
Biometrics 
---------- 
 
7.  Both sides agreed on the need to overcome technical and 
legal issues which affect incorporating biometrics in travel 
documents.  Faull said that if the political process went as 
expected, measures would be in place by the end of 2005 to 
begin issuing biometric passports.  The EU will add digitized 
images in visas by 2006 and fingerprints in visas by 2007. 
Faull noted there is still public relations work ahead to 
inform EU citizens what biometrics are, why they are 
necessary, and how they will be used by authorities.  U/S 
Hutchinson welcomed the EU\'s decision on fingerprints and 
said that DHS is working hard to ensure that the expansion of 
US-VISIT to include VWP travelers 
does not delay procedures at points-of-entry. 
 
Visa Waiver Program (VWP) 
------------------------- 
 
8.  Faull urged the U.S. \"to think again about ways to treat 
all EU countries the same way in the foreseeable future.\"  He 
acknowledged Washington-based difficulties by noting that an 
expansion of the VWP list was not expected to take place 
immediately nor that all ten needed to gain status 
simultaneously.  Faull said that the EU\'s own certification 
process regarding Schengen border standards would be done on 
a country-by-country basis.  U/S Hutchinson said that the 
U.S. would soon begin conducting reviews of current VWP 
members and would be interested in seeing the results of the 
relevant countries\' Schengen certification.  He said the U.S. 
was also considering other ways to facilitate international 
travel.  DAS Jacobs stated the U.S. was aware of the enormous 
interest in expanding VWP and noted that the requirements 
were set in legislation.  (Note: In a separate briefing to 
JHA officials she described the requirements and process for 
adding new countries to VWP.  End note.) 
 
US-EU Initiative on Lost and Stolen Passports 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
9.  Faull welcomed the U.S. decision to work through Interpol 
on sharing lost/stolen passport data.  He said that the April 
29 JHA Council invited the Commission to make a formal 
proposal.  Hutchinson noted that prompt reporting on lost and 
stolen passports was an important criterion for VWP status. 
 
Visa Data Exchange 
------------------ 
 
10.  DAS Jacobs mentioned that State is developing a pilot 
exchange on lookout information and said that the U.S. would 
submit a written proposal to the EU within a month.  (Note: 
This could be formally presented during Commissioner 
Vitorino\'s May visit to Washington.  End Note.) 
 
Flights of Concern/Armed Law Enforcement Officers 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
11.  U/S Hutchinson noted that the U.S. learned a great deal 
in December and January from the emergency measures it had to 
implement on certain flights from the UK and France.  The 
U.S. worked bilaterally with the member state governments to 
work through the emergency.  Some flights had to be 
cancelled.  The U.S. now seeks to work with carriers. 
Intelligence on threats to aviation might include specific 
flights and times, but the U.S. also received credible 
threats without reference to a time.  In one instance, the 
threat against a particular flight extended over two months, 
making cancellation of that particular flight impossible. 
There are a number of measures, short of cancellation, that 
can be taken to mitigate the threat on a flight of concern. 
U/S Hutchinson saw the assignment of armed law enforcement 
officers to flights of concern as a particularly helpful 
deterrent to air terrorism but respected the alternative 
views of some in Europe and did not wish to dictate a 
response.  In light of the reservations expressed by some 
foreign governments, the U.S. hoped for international 
standards on addressing flights of concern.  DHS was willing 
to work with Europe on measures that could be put into place 
in lieu of posting law enforcement officers on flights.  The 
topic would benefit from international discussion to develop 
a security approach that includes alternatives. 
 
12.  Hickey noted that member states were interested in a 
coordinated response in the area, and had planned to address 
the question in ICAO where members would discuss the issue in 
May.  The Commission was looking at the scope of the proposed 
guidelines.  Commission Head of Unit for Transport Security 
Eckard Seebohm welcomed Hutchinson,s willingness to reach an 
international consensus and look at alternatives to posting 
marshals.  A few member states had reservations about air 
marshals, but cancellation of a flight should be seen as a 
last resort.  Hutchinson added that without International 
protocols, states would likely disagree on measures to be 
taken.  He added that the December and January delays were 
due in large part to the need to vet passenger manifest 
lists, underscoring the importance of advanced passenger data 
systems.  PNR will provide a new tool to better manage 
aviation security.  Hickey suggested the U.S. and EU wait to 
see what decisions are taken in the ICAO context. 
 
Rail Security 
------------- 
 
13.  U/S Hutchinson noted that EU nations were already 
working to secure rail travel.  In the U.S., rail and 
specifically mass transit security is often categorized as a 
local government issue, but the Department of Homeland 
Security has taken a number of steps to secure the sector. 
It was looking at screening methods for rail passengers that 
would necessarily differ from the current aviation model.  It 
was also developing explosive detection technology applicable 
to rail.  In the policy arena, DHS would develop a federal 
baseline for aviation security so that when threats appear, a 
datum line exists to build upon.  U/S Hutchinson said that 
the U.S. would be interested in technical exchanges with the 
EU based on the EU\'s experience.  Seebohm noted that a 
technical subgroup of the U.S.-EU Transportation Security 
Coordination Group (TSCG) between DG TREN and the TSA could 
address the mass transit/rail issue.  Hutchinson agreed that 
this forum was the appropriate venue for discussion. 
 
PNR 
--- 
 
14.  Commission PNR negotiator Susan Binns said that while 
much of the work on the PNR  \"adequacy finding\" and 
\"international agreement\" was complete, the Commission would 
follow up on Secretary Ridge,s letter on PNR data transfers 
to third countries.  She added that while the Commission and 
Council had decided to approve the adequacy finding and 
international agreement despite the Parliament,s request to 
the Court of Justice, the Commission would welcome a cautious 
approach by the U.S. in its public statements on the matter 
as there were still some minor matters that had to be 
attended to. 
CAPPS II 
-------- 
 
15.  U/S Hutchinson said that DHS would not move forward on 
the CAPPS II system without thorough testing, and it could 
not successfully test without access to a significant volume 
of data.  DHS was currently working to secure such data. 
 
Participants and Future Work of the Dialogue 
-------------------------------------------- 
16.  DHS U/S Asa Hutchinson, DOJ Deputy A/AG Bruce Swartz and 
EUR PDAS Charlie Ries launched the new US-EU Policy Dialogue 
on Border and Transport Security on April 26.  They were 
joined by DHS Director of Cargo and Trade Policy Elaine 
Dezenski, S/CT Deputy William Pope and CA/VO DAS Janice 
Jacobs,  The EU was represented by Justice and Home Affairs 
(JHA) DG Jonathan Faull, External Relations Deputy DG 
Fernando Valenzuela, newly-named EU Counter-Terrorism 
Coordinator Gijsbert De Vries, Paul Hickey of the Irish 
Justice Department, and Council Secretariat JHA Director 
Gilles de Kerchove.  The two sides agreed to meet once per EU 
presidency and also on an ad hoc basis as circumstances 
warrant.  They also agreed that this new group would be 
flexible in its composition and scope, and not duplicate any 
existing group in the New Transatlantic Agenda (NTA). 
FOSTER 
"
"16551","5/3/2004 13:40","04BRUSSELS1911","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001911 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF, PREL, CMGT, CVIS, SMIG, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU AGREES ON ASYLUM PROCEDURES DIRECTIVE 
 
REF: (A) USEU BRUSSELS 1448; 
 
     (B) USEU BRUSSELS 742; 
     (C) USEU BRUSSELS 309 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  The EU Justice and Home Affairs Council on April 
29 reached political agreement on a draft Directive 
imposing minimum standards on procedures in Member 
States for granting and withdrawing refugee status. 
Coupled with the formal adoption of the Asylum 
Qualification Directive on the same day, the deal 
sets out the bases of a Common EU Asylum System as 
envisaged under the EU Tampere program and in 
keeping with the target of the Amsterdam Treaty. 
UNHCR, however, has raised concerns that the new EU 
Directive \"may lead in practice to breaches of 
international refugee law.\" Full text of the Council 
conclusions has been transmitted to EUR/ERA. 
Justice issues discussed at the meeting will be 
reported SEPTEL.  END SUMMARY. 
 
\"MINIMUM STANDARDS\" DIRECTIVE 
----------------------------- 
 
2.  The Irish Presidency at the April 29 meeting of 
EU Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) Ministers in 
Luxembourg succeeded in its goal to record political 
agreement on the Asylum Procedures Directive that 
lays down minimum standards on procedures in Member 
States for the grant and withdrawal of refugee 
status.  The accord, which remains subject to 
parliamentary scrutiny reservations, ends three and 
a half years of negotiations in which Germany and 
the UK held major reservations at various stages. 
It enables the EU to complete the first stage of a 
Common European Asylum System within the five-year 
deadline (May 1, 2004) set by the 1999 Tampere 
European Council and the Amsterdam Treaty.  The 
Directive is the final building block of this first 
stage, described by EU officials as \"minimum 
standards legislation.\" 
 
3.  The Directive deals with matters such as right 
of access to an asylum procedure, requirements for 
the examination of asylum applications and 
guarantees for applicants (interviews, consultation 
with UNHCR, access to legal aid, etc.), obligations 
for applicants to cooperate with the asylum 
determination process and nature of outcome to be 
expected where an applicant fails to cooperate.  The 
Irish Presidency said the Directive provided for \"an 
effective remedy/appeal against negative first 
instance decisions in asylum applications and a 
legal framework for the application of the safe 
country of origin and safe third country concepts in 
EU law.\" 
 
4.  Final difficulties related to the potential use 
of lists of countries to keep asylum seekers out of 
the EU territory or to expedite handling of asylum 
applications (REFTEL).  Member States agreed to 
establish a minimum list of safe countries of 
origin, whereby asylum applicants coming from those 
countries will have their application denied by an 
accelerated procedure.  However, in order to secure 
the necessary consensus, the Irish Presidency made 
the text somewhat less detailed than the 
Commission\'s original proposal.  The Council 
\"undertook to conduct during the coming months an in- 
depth assessment of countries that may be included 
in a minimum common EU list of safe countries of 
origin to ensure that they fulfill the criteria in 
the Directive.\"  Taking account of substantive 
changes with respect to the text on which the 
European parliament was originally consulted, the 
Council decided to re-consult before formal 
adoption. 
 
5.  The UNHCR issued a statement expressing \"regret\" 
that the EU missed an opportunity to adopt high 
standards with regard to asylum.  A press communique 
by UNHCR argued that the new EU Directive \"may lead 
in practice to breaches of international refugee 
law.\"  The most worrisome provisions of the 
Directive, it said, relate to \"safe third countries\" 
to which asylum seekers may be returned and lack of 
appeal procedures.  JHA Commissioner Vitorino at the 
final press conference rebutted \"NGOs\' concerns,\" 
saying that the standards agreed in the Directive 
were consistent with international obligations of 
the Member States, such as the Refugee Convention 
and the European Convention on Human Rights.  Though 
he would not deny that the \"level of ambition\" of 
the agreed text was lower than the original and 
amended versions of the Commission proposal, 
Vitorino stressed that the deal provides for \"the 
same safeguards\" for asylum applicants across the 
EU: comprehensive information about the procedure at 
the start of the process, access to legal 
assistance, the right to an interview and a 
motivated decision in writing by an authority 
qualified in refugee law. 
 
6.  According to the Commission, the Directive will 
ensure that all negative decisions on asylum 
applications in the EU are subject to judicial 
scrutiny.  Member States can provide lower 
safeguards only in three very specific situations 
defined in the Directive: 
 
--   Where an applicant arrives at the border and 
     makes an application which can be considered 
     unfounded within four weeks; 
 
--   Where an applicant makes, after a previous 
     procedure, a new application without bringing 
     forward any new relevant facts, 
 
--   Where the applicant could have asked for asylum 
     in a third country, which is considered safe by 
     a Decision of the Council because the third 
     country fully respects the Refugee Convention 
     and the European Convention of Human Rights. 
 
QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE 
----------------------- 
 
7.  The Council also formally adopted without 
discussion the Directive on minimum standards for 
the qualification and status of third country 
national or stateless persons as refugees or as 
persons who otherwise need international protection 
and the content of the protection granted (REFTEL 
and previous).  The March 30 JHA Council had reached 
Agreement on the text subject to a parliamentary 
scrutiny reservation by the Dutch delegation. 
 
A COMMON EU ASYLUM SYSTEM 
------------------------- 
 
8.  Mc Dowell and Vitorino said the deal on the two 
Directives, together with the other legislative 
instruments on asylum already adopted by the 
Council, would guarantee a minimum level of 
protection and procedural safeguards in all Member 
States for those who are genuinely in need of 
international protection, while preventing abuses of 
asylum applications that undermine the credibility 
of the system.  Vitorino said:  This \"effectively 
means that the first phase of the Common European 
Asylum System has now been established.  Both 
Directives will significantly contribute to a common 
approach across all 25 EU Member States.  The 
Directives will promote mutual confidence in Member 
States\' asylum systems in the EU, where only one 
Member State will be responsible for a particular 
application.\" 
 
OTHER BUSINESS 
-------------- 
 
9.  The Commission briefly updated the Council on 
the state of play concerning visa reciprocity and 
its recent proposal requesting a Council mandate to 
negotiate with the Russian Federation a visa 
facilitation agreement. 
 
10.  Among other decisions taken without discussion, 
the Council formally adopted: 
 
--   A Directive on the residence permit issued to 
     victims of trafficking in human beings from non- 
     EU countries or to non-EU nationals who have 
     been the subject of an action to facilitate 
     illegal immigration who cooperate with the 
     competent authorities; 
 
--   A Council Directive on the obligation of 
     carriers to communicate passenger data (REF.A); 
 
--   A Decision on the organization of joint flights 
     for removals, from the territory of two or more 
     Member States, of non-EU nationals who are 
     subjects of individual removal orders; 
 
--   A Regulation concerning the introduction of 
     some new functions for the Schengen Information 
     Systems, including in the fight against 
     terrorism; 
 
--   Conclusions on the location, management and 
     financing of the new second generation SIS. 
     Minister Mc Dowell thanked France and Austria 
     for making their respective facilities at 
     Strasbourg (central part of SIS II) and 
     Salzburg (business continuity site) available 
     for the system.  The decisions will enable the 
     Commission to have the requisite facilities 
     available for the contractor selected to 
     develop the system, thus ensuring that the 
     timetable for developing SIS II is maintained; 
 
--   Decisions amending the Common Schengen Manual 
     to include provision for targeted border 
     controls on accompanied minors and to use a 
     standard forum for refusal of entry; 
 
--   A Decision determining the minimum indications 
     to be used on signs at external border crossing 
     points. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
11.  The fact that the final text of the Procedures 
Directive does not have \"as high a level of 
ambition\" as the Commission originally envisaged 
reflects both the unanimity requirement and the 
sensitive character of asylum issues in many EU 
countries.  However, the Directive will contribute 
to creating a level playing field in the area of 
asylum in the 25 Member States.  Experience will 
show whether this will enhance mutual confidence in 
Member States\' systems.  The deal opens the way to 
the second stage of the Common European Asylum 
System and allows further approximation of Member 
States legislation and practice.  Future EU 
legislation in this area will include co-decision 
with the European Parliament and allow for qualified- 
majority voting in the Council. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"16564","5/3/2004 15:45","04BRUSSELS1919","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001919 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR EDSON 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, E, EB AND NEA/PI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/03/2009 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: GME: GETTING THE BALANCE RIGHT BETWEEN THE G-8 AND 
US-EU SUMMITS 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Lee Litzenberger; Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
 1.  (C)  Summary.  According to an EU official working on 
the issue, the EU is becoming increasingly skeptical of the 
U.S.\'s GME proposals for the G8 summit.  Citing Commissioner 
Patten, the official said the G8 should stick to a political 
statement supporting regional reform; the U.S.-EU summit 
should focus on a plan of action.  On the U.S. proposal to 
establish a facility to finance small and medium enterprises, 
he said, \"The EU is already doing this -- and on a much 
larger scale than the U.S. proposes.\"  Microfinancing, the 
official said, is a good idea but is labor intensive and 
unpopular with governments in the region, who claim it funds 
Islamic fundamentalism.  The EU is concerned that U.S. 
proposals for the G8 will divert EU member state resources 
from the EU\'s Barcelona Process, just as the EU is 
negotiating its 2007-13 budget.  EU officials are considering 
the U.S.\'s ideas, but have been distracted by the need to 
prepare for the May 5-6 Euromed ministerial meeting in 
Dublin.  End Summary. 
 
EU uneasy over U.S. proposals for G8 summit 
--------------------------- 
2.  (C)  On April 30, European Commission Director for the 
Barcelona Process, Patrick Laurent, provided visiting U.S. 
Treasury Department officials his views of the U.S. proposals 
for GME at the G8 Sea Island summit.  He said the EU is 
considering the U.S. proposals, but is increasingly skeptical 
of them as they become more detailed and specific.  Laurent 
acknowledged there is a consensus for a broad strategy to 
support reform in the region, but beyond that, views tend to 
diverge.  He said there was no agreed definition of GME, and 
regional leaders don\'t like the term -- the Saudis, he said, 
resent being put in the same group as countries in the 
Maghreb.  The U.S. seems to be moving the G8 to agree to 
specific financing instruments -- a mistake, in Laurent\'s 
view, that was taking the summit in the wrong direction. 
 
G8 should issue statement; U.S./EU should do action plan 
------------------------- 
3.  (C)  Citing EC Commissioner Chris Patten, Laurent said 
the G8 summit should issue a political statement (which he 
said would send an important signal to the region); the 
U.S.-EU summit should follow-up with an action plan. 
Discussion of GME at the G8 summit began with an a la carte 
list of ideas.  Now, however, the latest U.S. proposals are 
getting into implementation and programs.  The G8, Laurent 
argued, is a macro-economic forum, not a place to discuss 
programs.  Going that route will raise expectations, but 
won\'t result in getting the pledges needed to meet them.  The 
U.S. ideas seemed to focus on creating financing 
\"instruments\".  EU implementation of these proposals would be 
difficult, Laurent said.  The U.S. proposals altogether 
amount to only $100-150 million; the EU is already providing 
ten times that amount to the region.  The EU doesn\'t need 
GME.  The EU already has initiatives in place in the region 
-- its Euromed program (based on country specific action 
plans) and, more recently, its new European Neighborhood 
strategy. 
 
Diversion of resources from EU programs? 
-------------- 
4.  (C)  Laurent also expressed concern that the U.S. 
proposals, if implemented, would reduce EU member state 
ability to fund the EU\'s Euromed initiative.  The EC was 
seeking a three-fold increase in Euromed funding (from 800m 
euros to 2.4 billion per year) for the 2007-2013 period. 
Laurent said he doubted the EC\'s ability to meet its target, 
but it is making a major push to increase funding to the 
region.  If France, Italy, Germany and the UK commit to 
financing a G8 initiative in the region, Laurent is concerned 
that the funds will come out of the Euromed budget.  EU 
members, he said, \"should respect the primacy of existing EU 
instruments\". 
 
U.S. Proposals for SME\'s and Microfinancing 
--------------- 
5.  (C) Laurent said the U.S. proposal to create a facility 
to finance small and medium enterprises (SMEs) was a case in 
point.  The EU was already doing this, and on a much larger 
scale than envisioned in the U.S. proposal. 
FEMIP, the European Investment Bank\'s Facility for 
Euro-Mediterranean Investment and Partnership, directed more 
than a third of the 2.1 billion euros it loaned to the region 
in 2003 to support private business development.  On the U.S. 
proposal to provide microfinancing, Laurent said this was a 
good idea in principle, but that it was very labor intensive 
and unpopular with governments in the region, who claim these 
programs can end up funding Islamic fundamentalists.  For 
these reasons, the EU was moving away from micro-financing. 
 
Let the U.S.-EU Summit Lay Out an Action Plan 
-------------- 
6.  (C)  Laurent said it makes sense for the G8 to set broad 
priorities and objectives, but he argued that the U.S.-EU 
summit was best suited to working out the details of an 
action plan that would identify \"things the U.S. and EU can 
do side by side\" in the region to promote reform.  He 
cautioned, however, that any initiative would need support 
and \"ownership\" in the region, and this would take time to 
build.  For example, Laurent said that the EU has tried to 
set up a regional development bank in the Euromed region in 
the past, but failed due in part to member state objections. 
He speculated that if the U.S. were to announce its intention 
to fund a bank in the Gulf area, where the EU does not 
provide assistance, it could spur the EU to make another 
effort at establishing a bank for Mediterranean Arab 
countries.  This was a hypothetical example of how the U.S. 
and the EU could work in tandem. 
 
Comment 
------- 
7.  (C)  Laurent\'s comments reflect his institutional bias 
for promoting the EU\'s substantial ongoing programs in the 
region, and his aversion to any initiative that might 
undercut the budget for these programs.  They are likely to 
carry weight within the Commission as the EU considers the 
U.S. proposals for the G8 summit, but EU policymakers have 
been distracted by the need to prepare for the May 5-6 
Euromed ministerial in Dublin and have not focused on 
responding to our ideas yet.  To the extent our proposals are 
interpreted here as competing for funds (at least from 
France, Italy, Germany and the UK) for the EU\'s Euromed 
program, it will be viewed with skepticism in Brussels.  On 
the positive side, it appears the EU is prepared to work with 
us to hammer out some kind of action plan for the U.S.-EU 
summit that will demonstrate our shared commitment to promote 
reform in the region.  The challenge for us in the coming 
weeks will be finding the right balance between the two 
summits. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16591","5/4/2004 12:27","04BRUSSELS1929","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, CASC, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU AGREES ON MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF 
CONFISCATION ORDERS 
 
REF: (A) USEU BRUSSELS 1450; (B) USEU BRUSSELS 1338; 
 
     (C) USEU BRUSSELS 753 ; (D) USEU BRUSSELS 1911 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  EU Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) 
on April 29-30 agreed on the application of the 
principle of mutual recognition to confiscation 
orders, a follow-up to the March 26 European Council 
Declaration on Combating Terrorism.  The Commission 
will bring forward by June further proposals for the 
exchange of information for law enforcement 
purposes, including terrorism and the exchange of 
passenger data for border and aviation security. 
The Council also requested proposals on the exchange 
of information on lost and stolen passports in 
keeping with a requirement in the March Council 
Declaration on Combating Terrorism.  Ministers 
failed on a new Director for EUROPOL starting in 
June 2004.  END SUMMARY. 
 
MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF CONFISCATION ORDERS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2.  The JHA Council meeting in Luxembourg on April 
29 reached a \"general approach\" (subject to 
parliamentary scrutiny reservations) to the text of 
a Framework Decision on the application of the 
principle of mutual recognition to confiscation 
orders.  Further technical work is required on an 
annex to the draft.  Under this new piece of 
legislation, a Danish initiative, a Member State is 
obliged to recognize and execute in its territory 
confiscation orders issued by a court competent in 
criminal matters of another Member State.  The 
stated goal, according to EU officials, is \"to 
ensure that all Member States have effective rules 
governing the confiscation of proceeds from crime, 
inter alia in relation to the onus of proof 
regarding the source of assets held by a person 
convicted of an offence related to organized crime.\" 
 
FOLLOW-UP TO DECLARATION ON COMBATING TERRORISM 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
3.  With CT Coordinator Gijs de Vries in attendance, 
the Council briefly noted achievements so far 
regarding the targets set by the European Council 
Declaration under its March 26 Declaration on 
Combating Terrorism, in particular: 
 
--The above agreement on confiscation orders, which 
  should enable the Council to meet its June 2004 
  deadline; 
 
--Agreement on the Council Regulation on the 
  introduction of new functions in the Schengen 
  Information System and the conclusions on the 
  location and management of the second generation 
  SIS (SIS II - ref D); 
 
--Formal adoption of the Victims of Crime Directive 
  (below) and of the Directive on the obligation of 
  carriers to communicate passenger data (ref D); 
 
--Progress in implementing instruments such as the 
  European arrest warrant (currently implemented in 
  12 Member States) and joint investigation teams. 
 
4.  Irish Justice Minister/Council chair Mc Dowell 
told a press conference further progress would come 
shortly with the publication of a draft Framework 
Decision on the retention of communications traffic 
data sponsored by Ireland, the UK, France and 
Sweden.  He described the tabling of the measure 
together with Commission proposals for the exchange 
of information on terrorist offences as a speedy 
response to the new legislative proposals.  Mc 
Dowell noted that the Commission would also bring 
forward by June further proposals for the exchange 
of information for law enforcement purposes, 
including terrorism and the exchange of information 
of passenger data for border and aviation security. 
The Council also requested proposals on the exchange 
of information on lost and stolen passports in 
keeping with the requirement in the European Council 
Declaration.  The Irish Presidency will set out, in 
a new Action Plan, a detailed implementation 
strategy in relation to outstanding matters related 
to the CT Declaration. 
 
NEW EUROPOL DIRECTOR 
-------------------- 
 
5.  Ministers failed to reach the necessary 
consensus on who will be the Director of EUROPOL 
starting in June.  They will have to return to the 
issue in June.  There are three candidates in the 
running:  the German incumbent Jurgen Storbeck, 
Frenchman Jacques Franquet and Italian Emmanuelle 
Marotta. 
 
OTHER ITEMS 
----------- 
 
6.  Among other issues, the Council also: 
 
--Formally adopted a Directive relating to 
  compensation to crime victims that sets up a 
  system of cooperation to facilitate access to 
  compensation for victims in cross-border 
  situations.  The competent authority of the Member 
  State where the crime was committed shall pay 
  compensation.  The Directive provides that Member 
  States will have relevant national provisions in 
  place by July 1, 2005 to ensure compensation to 
  victims of violent intentional crime. 
 
--Held a discussion with Michael O\'Kennedy, 
  President of EUROJUST (EU Prosecutors\' Office), 
  based on his agency\'s annual report for 2003. 
  There was a 50 percent increase in EUROJUST case 
  referrals last year.  The conclusions task 
  EUROJUST to examine the scope for further measures 
  to improve its capacity to contribute to the fight 
  against terrorism. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"16627","5/5/2004 13:40","04BRUSSELS1960","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001960 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, CY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU: CYPRUS ACCESSION AND COMMISSION RESPONSE 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF ANDREW ERICKSON, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 ------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (C) Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen\'s Cabinet member 
for Cyprus, Kristin Schreiber, told us May 5 that the 
Commission is readying proposals for improving northern 
Cypriot commercial access to the EU.  The Commission 
proposals will likely be presented to the Council in late 
June, for adoption by qualified majority voting rules.  Among 
the measures envisaged is the possibility for direct exports 
from northern Cyprus ports of goods from northern Cyprus. 
The Commission is also watching carefully the circulation of 
people across the Green Line, and understands that EU 
citizens are being allowed to cross.  Schreiber expressed 
reservations about the EU\'s influence on direct air travel to 
the north, noting that this would have to be negotiated 
bilaterally with individual governments, through the 
government of Cyprus.  Nonetheless, the Commission was 
willing to consider being helpful if it could.  Working level 
Turkish views in Brussels on EU efforts to date vary widely. 
End summary. 
 
------------------ 
Commission at work 
on improving ties 
------------------ 
 
2.  (C) Kristin Schreiber, Enlargement Commissioner 
Verheugen\'s member of cabinet responsible for Cyprus, updated 
us May 5 on where things stand in the Commission\'s post April 
24 efforts to address the Turkish Cypriots\' clearly expressed 
will to join the European Union as part of a united Cyprus. 
Schreiber prefaced her comments by underscoring that all EU 
moves are constrained: the EU could not take steps seen as 
recognizing the \"TRNC\" in any way.  The EU was focused on 
economic relief for the Turkish Cypriots, not political 
relief for the \"TRNC\". 
 
3.  (C) Within this context, there was quite a bit that the 
EU could do, said Schreiber.  Over the next month, the 
Commission was working on developing trade implementing 
measures for the areas of Cyprus not currently covered by the 
acquis communitaire.  These measures would be presented to 
the Council in June (probably \"late June\" said Schreiber) for 
final approval. 
 
----------------- 
Specific Measures 
----------------- 
 
4.  (C) Specific measures under consideration are focused on 
facilitating northern Cyprus\' trade with EU member countries. 
 The first step in that process would be the development of 
an identification and phyto-sanitary regime that would 
address EU concerns without recognizing \"TRNC\" sovereignty 
while minimizing Greek Cypriot interference with trade.  The 
Commission was exploring the direct use of northern Cypriot 
ports for export to EU markets; this looked feasible.  The 
Commission was \"confident\" that it would be able to set up an 
office in northern Cyprus to disburse the 259 million euro 
assistance package already agreed.  This office would clearly 
be an economic assistance office and nothing more.  Schreiber 
expressed optimism that the Commission would be able to open 
such an office, on a non-political basis, without further 
clearance from the Council.  On the free movement of persons 
across the Green Line, Schreiber said that she understood 
that the Greek Cypriots were posing no problems for EU 
nationals who crossed the Green Line.  This was a welcome 
development, she indicated. 
 
-------------- 
Air Travel Not 
in EU purview 
-------------- 
 
5.  (C) On the possibility of direct air travel from EU 
member states to northern Cyprus, Schreiber noted that this 
issue was not currently in the Commission\'s purview.  She 
said her understanding is that landing rights are negotiated 
on a bilateral basis.  One issue the Commission would watch 
closely was Cyprus\' treatment of EU nationals seeking to 
overnight in northern Cyprus after crossing the Green Line. 
Another was whether Cyprus would allow EU citizens to enter 
Cyprus from northern Cyprus if they had not initially 
transited the Green Line to enter the north. 
 
---------------- 
Turkish Mission: 
\"a good result\" 
---------------- 
 
6.  (C) In separate discussions with two Turkish mission 
officials, we heard two interpretations of EU actions since 
the April 24 referenda.  One colleague, a Turkish pol-mil 
officer, noted that the consensus in the mission was that the 
failure of the referendum in the north was a \"great result\" 
for Turkish EU aspirations.  \"Our people showed that they 
were willing to do everything they needed to do\" said this 
diplomat.  \"This puts the EU in a position where it 
absolutely needs to do the right thing in December.\" 
 
7.  (C) Another Turkish diplomat (who while serving as a 
Turkish diplomat nonetheless told us that she is from Cyprus) 
expressed considerable frustration with EU steps so far. 
According to her analysis, the people of northern Cyprus made 
a real gesture of reconciliation with their overwhelming 
\"yes\" vote to the Annan Plan; it was up to the EU to develop 
concrete measures to address the disappointment felt in the 
north as a result of the failure of the Annan Plan in the 
south.  This interlocutor made it clear that she felt that up 
to now, the Commission\'s gestures and statements of intent 
have been inadequate.  She was unable to tell us, however, 
what additional steps the EU could take given the reality of 
Cypriot EU membership since May 1. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"16709","5/7/2004 12:03","04BRUSSELS1997","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, PINR, ECON, ETRD, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/COUNTERTERRORISM: VITORINO AND DE VRIES: TIME 
TO STEP UP AND PERFORM 
 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
1. (SBU) For the past two years, we have struggled with the 
EU bureaucracy on a range of counter-terrorism measures aimed 
at tightening border security, enhancing control of container 
traffic, improving travel document security, and 
strengthening law enforcement cooperation.  After the Madrid 
bombings, the EU is starting to get more serious about these 
concerns.  Justice and Home Affairs Commissioner Antonio 
Vitorino (cabinet minister equivalent) and newly-appointed 
Counter-Terrorism coordinator Gijs de Vries (S/CT counterpart 
with U/S equivalent rank) should be the point men in this 
effort, but neither have been as forceful as we believe is 
necessary if the EU is to move in the directions we would 
like.  Even as their discussions in Washington delve into the 
particulars, we should also underscore the overall policy 
message: we want to cooperate with the EU in preventing 
terrorism, not just reacting to it, and it is time for this 
duo to step up to the plate and perform.  End Summary 
 
EU Trying to Get Serious About Terrorism 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) After 9/11, the EU adopted a series of policy 
measures aimed at tackling the threats posed by terrorism. 
Those decisions were welcome, but implementation bogged down 
in myriad internal regulations in the EU, where rules 
developed to regulate commerce and protect personal data were 
ill-equiped to address the terrorism menace.  At the level of 
member states, law enforcement and counter-terrorism 
cooperation was minimal and grudging.  Slowly, the EU has 
been trying to change this mindset.  The European Security 
Strategy adopted late last year identifies terrorism as one 
of the key threats to European society, and calls for 
measures to address it.  The Madrid bombings brought home to 
Europeans that the threats are real, and the need to respond 
urgent.  In March, the European Council reaffirmed many of 
its post-9/11 decisions, and called for implementation to be 
accelerated.  In our bilateral efforts with the EU, we have 
scored successes -- last July we agreed on a revolutionary 
new Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty -- but pinning down 
implementing agreements on a state-by-state basis has 
languished.  More recently, we reached agreement on sharing 
of Passenger Name Record data (over significant opposition 
from the European Parliament), signed a Container Security 
Initiative agreement, and the EU is moving ahead slowly in 
adopting new rules on terrorist financing and designating 
more organizations on their asset freeze list. 
 
3. (SBU) Still, at every step in the road, the EU has 
struggled with itself: the \"mixed competency\" area of Justice 
and Home Affairs has not been able to take the lead from the 
more developed \"first pillar\" bureaucracy that regulates 
trade and commerce in the EU, and member states continue to 
resist ceding national control over security and 
counter-terrorism in favor of better coordinated mechanisms 
on a Europe-wide basis.  That is why the Council also decided 
at its March session to appoint a \"Terrorism Czar\" to bring 
greater coherence and effectiveness to this effort. 
 
Vitorino and De Vrijs: 
Teammates or Competitors, Leaders or Something Else? 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
4. (SBU) The two point men in this effort are Vitorino and De 
Vries.  Unfortunately, neither has stepped forward boldly to 
drive European policy in this field.  Vitorino, a former 
Portuguese Defense Minister turned Eurocrat, is nurturing a 
dark horse candidacy to replace Romano Prodi as the next 
President of the Commission.  His is a long shot, as he does 
not come from the ruling party in Portugal, and has no other 
member state as a champion.  Still, he is treading carefully 
to ensure he can maintain broad support within EU circles. 
If he does not emerge as a compromise candidate, he will 
increasingly look like a lame duck, with his term in the 
Commission likely to end this November.  Vitorino allowed 
Commission colleagues overseeing internal market rules to 
take the lead in our difficult PNR discussions, and failed to 
confront member states on MLAT implementation or 
counter-terrorism coordination.  Directly beneath him, his 
Director General, Jonathan Faull, is an experienced 
bureaucrat, veteran of the several Commission directorates as 
well as a former spokesman for Prodi.  He is the power behind 
the throne on JHA matters, has been a key player in moving 
forward our agenda, and will be accompanying Vitorino in all 
his meetings.  If, as we suspect, Vitorino\'s days are 
numbered, we should not ignore Faull, who is likely to remain 
in place no matter what changes take place in the Commission. 
 
 
5. (SBU) De Vries is the new kid on the block.  He is just 
settling into his new position, but his first efforts have 
been extremely modest.  A retiring Dutchman with limited 
experience in counter-terrorism, he lacks stature or any real 
authority.  He has no staff to speak of, and appears to spend 
as much time fighting bureaucratic battles with the 
Commission (especially with Faull) over where the lead on 
counter-terrorism should be as he does in addressing the 
actual issues at play.  In fact, the current tandem visit by 
Vitorino and de Vrijs is itself the result of an uneasy 
patchwork of invitations and mutual recriminations between 
Council and Commission staffers.  De Vries failed to speak up 
when he had opportunities on PNR, and appears to be treading 
carefully with member states as well.  If the EU is to gain 
real traction here, these two elements will have to begin to 
see each other as teammates in a broader struggle, and also 
begin to take a bolder leadership stand within the EU 
bureaucracy and with member states to ensure that needed 
changes take place. 
 
Our Message: Time to Step Up to the Plate 
------------------------------------------ 
 
6. (SBU) Our message to the EU in Washington has both public 
and private elements.  The public message should be that the 
US welcomes the EU commitment to address terrorism, and we 
want to work closely with you.  In private, however, we 
should make clear the we have been frustrated with our 
efforts thus far, and believe the EU needs to begin putting 
greater emphasis on the practical measures needed to address 
the terrorist threat, and to give greater weight to law 
enforcement cooperation, intelligence-sharing, and practical 
measures to protect travel and commerce.  They need to hear 
we are interested in working with the EU, but also that we 
cannot allow EU institutional complexity to slow down 
measures we are convinced we need to take.  The high-level 
meetings accorded Vitorino and de Vries in Washington 
(Secretary Ridge, Attorney General Ashcroft, Deputy Secretary 
Armitage) are in themselves an indication of the hopes we are 
placing in improving our cooperation.  To succeed, however, 
we will be looking to Vitorino and de Vries to take a 
stronger leadership position to prove the EU\'s new 
seriousness of purpose.  If they leave Washington with a 
renewed commitment to lead, it will have been a very 
successful visit. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"16762","5/10/2004 13:30","04BRUSSELS2027","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PINS, TSPL, EAGR, MCAP, PARM, ETTC, MASS, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ARMS AGENCY: STATE OF PLAY 
 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (C) The EU continues to develop the EU Arms Agency 
(EUAA), and hopes to have it up and running by the final 
quarter of 2004.  The agency\'s mission is to develop a 
systematic EU approach to addressing ESDP capability needs. 
EU officials note that close coordination with NATO will be 
required if the agency is to be successful, and fault current 
EU-NATO dialogue on addressing the capabilities shortfalls of 
EU members.  As the EUAA moves off the drawing board and into 
operation, we need to respond rapidly to ensure appropriate 
access to the agency as it evolves.  With this in mind, we 
have nominated one of the key officials in the EU\'s planning 
team for a VolVis program to the US; we suggest aggressive 
engagement with him in Washington to ensure that he 
understands US redlines and desiderata for the arms agency, 
and the rationale behind our thinking.  End summary. 
 
---------- 
Modalities 
---------- 
 
2.  (U) On the basis of a tasking from the November 17/18 
GAERC, the EU arms agency establishment team (AET) is now 
meeting regularly in Brussels to develop an outline of the 
new EU institution.  It should be noted that the working name 
of the new organization is now the \"European Arms Agency\". 
On April 28 the AET issued a report on progress to date. 
This report remains in draft until approved by the Council. 
It is on the agenda for the May 17-18 General Affairs Council 
(GAERC). 
 
--------------- 
What\'s Planned? 
--------------- 
 
3.  (C) The GAERC assigned the arms agency four functions, 
including \"defense capabilities development, armaments 
cooperation, the European defense technological and 
industrial base (DTIB) and defense equipment market (EDEM), 
and research and technology.\"  Specifically, the AET has 
identified the need to address \"an insufficiently systematic 
or comprehensive approach to identifying ESDP\'s capability 
requirements,\" \"a lack of clear future needs on which 
collaborations...can be built\", and \"a fragmented DTIB, which 
suffers from a lack of economies of scale and too much 
duplication; from under-funding of R&T, and from a 
demand-side and a market which remain largely national rather 
than European in scale.\" 
 
4.  (C) Comment: it is the last point which bears particular 
emphasis, according to Paul Collins, a leading member of the 
AET, for it is in rationalizing the EU arms market that 
improved capabilities can be obtained from existing 
expenditure.  We note, however, that placing responsibility 
for harmonizing defense industries, establishing ESDP 
acquisition requirements and priorities, and assessing EU 
force capabilities could lead to a \"command economy\" for EU 
defense backed up by Council decisions that would be binding 
on member-states.  In other words, there is a strong 
potential to institutionalize \"fortress Europe\" in armaments. 
 A Dutch PSC representative told us recently that the member 
states divide roughly into two camps on EUAA development: 
those who emphasize using the organization to increase 
capabilities, and those whose interest is more in line with 
\"Fortress Europe\" thinking.  End comment. 
 
---------------- 
A need for close 
EU-NATO dialogue 
---------------- 
 
5.  (C) Collins dismissed our question about why the need for 
an EU arms agency exists, given NATO\'s role.  The EU has 
already made a decision to proceed, he asserted, so this was 
a pointless question.  The more important question, for 
Collins, was how to improve NATO-EU cooperation, particularly 
given the \"disastrous\" functioning of the EU-NATO 
capabilities group.  Collins argued that only \"a real change 
of attitude\" on the part of NATO would make NATO influence 
possible with the European Arms Agency. 
 
6.  (C) While scathing in his dismissal of the current 
EU-NATO capabilities dialogue, Collins underscored that a 
NATO leadership role was \"essential\" if the European Arms 
Agency was to work in a way that strengthened transatlantic 
cooperation on capabilities.  On the other hand, the reality 
of the arms agency was that there would be an EU approach to 
research, development, and procurement, and NATO would have 
to learn to live with this.  The key was determining the 
nature of the relationships between the EU and NATO.  In this 
regard, it should be noted that the EU has rejected the idea 
of non-member states participating in armaments agency 
decision-making; the EU position is that \"transparency can be 
secured\" through consultative roles for non-member states. 
 
-------------- 
Thinking big... 
-------------- 
 
7.  (C) Regardless of the evolution of its relationship with 
NATO, the European Arms Agency is rapidly staffing up, and 
expects to have 26 personnel by the final quarter of 2004. 
Budgetary estimates for 2004-2005 will be largely driven by 
personnel and accommodation costs and will be approximately 
2.4 million euros in 2004 and some 25 million euros in 2005 
(including 10 million for non-recurring agency start-up 
costs). 
 
8.  (C) According to the draft planning document, the agency 
will be governed by bi-annual defense ministerial level 
meetings (\"perhaps back-to-back with GAERCs in November and 
May\").  On the question of the attendance of the NATO SYG: 
the draft AET document says that NATO SYG attendance \"will 
usually be appropriate.\"  It should be noted that according 
to the draft AET document, there \"will be a need for 
decisions by the Council\" on an occasional basis.  \"Such 
occasions might be \"when a substantive decision binding on 
all participating member states was at issue\", \"when 
decisions...involved competences beyond those of defense 
ministers\", and \"when the additional political force of a 
decision by the Council seemed desirable.\" 
 
--------------------- 
...but starting small 
--------------------- 
 
9.  (C) The AET has also sketched out some initial priorities 
for work in 2005 (following the achievement of operational 
status in 2004).  These 2005 priorities include: 
-- supporting work on the headline goal; 
-- developing more comprehensive and systematic approaches to 
capabilities development; 
-- assuming oversight of ECAP (the European Capabilities 
Action Plan); 
-- beginning work on a long-term vision; and, 
-- supporting work on collaborative activities. 
 
10.  (C) As a specific example of the sort of initial efforts 
that the European Arms Agency might undertake, the AET 
informally proposed launching an initiative in the SATCOM 
area \"with the aim of suggesting a way ahead.  This area is 
considered essential for interoperability and effective 
command and control of EU forces.  The scope is to analyze 
the requirements, possible options and contributions of 
existing SATCOM capacities.  Proposals will include R & T 
focus, cooperative schemes (operational and equipment) and 
industrial ramifications.\" 
 
11.  (C) We asked what would prevent the European Arms Agency 
from simply becoming a tool for a few powerful EU countries 
(such as France) to impose their armaments standards upon the 
entire EU.  Collins (strictly protect) replied that \"the 
reality of European capabilities today is that to the extent 
that most EU countries have capabilities, they\'re niche 
capabilities.  We need to ensure that we plan our procurement 
so that the countries that make the best gas masks -- for 
example -- end up setting the standard for that capability. 
This will not reinforce French dominance, particularly.\" 
 
----------------- 
Comment: we need 
to engage now for 
maximum influence 
----------------- 
 
12.  (C) The agency establishment team has been pushing 
forward aggressively with developing the parameters of the 
new arms agency.  Paul Collins, who is one of the small group 
of officials charged with articulating the somewhat 
ill-defined EU vision of what the Arms Agency will ultimately 
be, has been a key interlocutor of this mission as the EU\'s 
vision evolves.  Post has nominated Collins for a VolVis 
program, and he has received the approval of the AET to go if 
our nomination is approved in Washington.  We believe that 
this is an extraordinarily important opportunity for us to 
engage with a key AET interlocutor before the outlines of the 
arms agency get set in stone.  We recommend that Washington 
interlocutors with equities in this issue be prepared to 
engage Collins during his upcoming visit, and particularly, 
that Collins eventually departs Washington with a full 
understanding of the need to get the development of the 
European Arms Agency right.  End comment.  Schnabel 
"
"16865","5/13/2004 6:46","04BRUSSELS2068","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002068 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, BK, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COUNCIL ON NATO-EU RELATIONS 
 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (C) EUR/RPM Director Dan Russell visited Brussels May 6-7 
to meet with EU Council Secretariat officials responsible for 
EU European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) formulation. 
The primary topic of discussion was the transition in Bosnia 
from SFOR to a EU mission.  In all of his meetings, Russell 
drew upon the interagency-cleared guidance prepared for the 
May 5 PCG-PMG meeting on Bosnia.  Russell met with Council 
deputy director general for ESDP Pieter Feith and exchanged 
views on NATO-EU relations.  Council Secretariat planner 
Matthew Reece briefed Russell on the EU General Concept, and 
subsequently, Russell reviewed U.S. thinking on Bosnia with 
Council Defense Aspects Director Claude France Arnould.  EU 
officials expressed confidence that things are generally \"on 
track\" for Bosnia, although the Council continues to have 
concerns about the Dayton authorities, strategic reserve 
arrangements, and the delineation of tasks, primarily 
monitoring.  Finally, Russell met with EU Civilian Crisis 
Management Director Michael Matthiessen, and discussed the 
EU\'s military liaison with SHAPE with Major General 
Jean-Pierre Herreweghe, EU Military Chief of Staff. 
Herreweghe told Russell that the EUMS was staffing up its 
SHAPE liaison office, and would have approximately 10 
officers in place at SHAPE by early June.  These officers 
would also serve liaison roles at AFSOUTH and Sarajevo, as 
required.  End summary. 
 
------------------- 
Council Secretariat 
- Feith and Arnould 
------------------- 
 
2.  (C) EUR/RPM Russell met May 6th with the Council 
Secretariat Deputy Director General for ESDP, Peiter Feith. 
 
SIPDIS 
Feith reviewed the current EU state of play on Bosnia with 
Russell, underscoring his view that things were going well. 
There continued to be some unease in the EU Political and 
Security Committee (PSC) about NATO\'s lead role in detaining 
PIFWCs; Feith suggested that PSC ambassadors be briefed 
(ideally during their next trip to SHAPE) in order to better 
understand the way that PIFWCs are currently addressed in 
Bosnia.  Russell took Feith\'s suggestion under advisement, 
and agreed to follow up with SHAPE to see if something could 
be done to put the PSC in the comfort zone on this issue. 
One key point to emphasize, said Russell, was that NATO is 
simply seeking to protect an on-going program, not carve out 
something from EU control.  Feith responded that there was a 
real need to educate the PSC on this point.  On NATO\'s 
counterterrorism role, Feith expressed satisfaction with 
Russell\'s explanation of the U.S. position. 
 
3.  (C) Next Russell met with Council Secretariat Defense 
Aspects Director Claude France Arnould, who reviewed EU 
concerns about control of strategic reserves in the event of 
a major conflagration in Bosnia following an EU takeover. 
Arnould\'s concerns seemed to be based upon a 
military-theological fixation with worst-case scenarios. 
Russell noted that outstanding reserve questions needed to be 
addressed and suggested that the U.S. was taking a pragmatic 
approach to planning.  In general, he suggested that there 
was a need to establish a framework and then let military 
commanders work out the best approach to practical problems 
at the military-to-military level in the field.  Politics 
simply complicated the pragmatic solutions required for a 
successful transition in Bosnia.  On the Dayton authorities, 
Arnould suggested that the EU might require a new SOFA to 
meet its legal needs.  Russell, noting that neither he nor 
Arnould were lawyers, stated the SOFA embedded in Dayton 
offered the best terms and the U.S. opposed reopening Dayton. 
 Arnould agreed that the embedded SOFA offered the right 
terms, but continued to insist that the EU may need a new 
SOFA. 
 
---------------------- 
Bosnia General Concept 
---------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Matthew Reece, Defense Aspects Planner, briefed 
Russell on the EU\'s General Concept for Bosnia, recently 
endorsed by the EU Council.  Reece was principally 
responsible for drafting the general concept.  In particular, 
Reece underscored three concerns for the EU as it moved 
towards a possible operation in Bosnia: 
-- NATO\'s responsibility for PIFWCs; 
-- the significance of NATO\'s retention of a role in the war 
on terror; and, 
-- the necessity to go to the NAC for a decision to mobilize 
strategic reserves for an EU-led Bosnia Operation under 
Berlin Plus. 
 
5.  (C) Russell pushed back hard on all three points.  It was 
a misunderstanding of NATO\'s position to say that its 
continued PIFWCs role was undercutting the EU; it was merely 
preserving the current approach to the problem.  Regarding 
counter terrorism, NATO did have a vital role to play, which 
did not threaten the EU.   Finally, reserve issues obviously 
remained to be worked out, but the EU needed to understand 
that a decision to draw on NATO strategic reserves -- 
following a process that would have already entailed bringing 
considerable operational reserves into play -- would 
absolutely require a NATO decision.  NATO, of course, had the 
final voice in the dispensation of its own resources.  Reece 
also took the opportunity to discuss the Dayton authorities 
and the delineation of tasks.  In response to Russell\'s point 
that both EUFOR and the post-SFOR NATO force would require 
full Dayton authorities, Reece expressed concern that the EU 
should have the lead on monitoring.  Most of his concerns on 
Dayton focused on making clear EUFOR\'s lead role in Bosnia. 
 
 
--------------------- 
EUMS Liaison at SHAPE 
--------------------- 
 
6.  (C) On May 7, Russell met with Major General Jean-Pierre 
Herreweghe, EU Military Staff (EUMS) Chief of Staff (COS). 
Herreweghe expressed confidence that planning for Bosnia was 
proceeding in good order, although he was unwilling to 
express full confidence that the EU force generation process 
would be successful.  Solana\'s plan was to hold an \"informal\" 
force generation conference first to try to get an idea of 
the forces that might be available, and the shortfalls 
needing to be addressed.  After Istanbul -- and a formal NATO 
decision -- a formal process would begin, leading first to a 
CONOPS that could then lead to force generation. 
 
7.  (C) Herreweghe told Russell that the EUMS currently had 
three officers serving in the liaison cell at SHAPE; these 
officers were holdovers from the EU\'s \"Operation Concordia\". 
Herreweghe said that he is now sending five more officers to 
SHAPE, and said that these officers would be in place in the 
coming weeks.  His goal by early June, he told Russell, would 
be to have 10 officers staffing the SHAPE liaison cell full 
time.  On the question of seconding EUMS officers to AFSOUTH 
and Sarajevo, he said that this would be inappropriate, given 
the fact that SHAPE would be the EU\'s OHQ for the Bosnia 
Operation.  For the EUMS to send liaison officers to AFSOUTH 
and Sarajevo would be to second-guess the OHQ at SHAPE, he 
said.  For this reason, it was the EUMS liaison office at 
SHAPE that would determine coverage of AFSOUTH Naples and 
Sarajevo, and the officers would be rotated from the EUMS 
liaison cell at SHAPE for these jobs. 
 
8.  (C) Russell noted that another key issue was NATO and 
U.S. facilities in Bosnia, and the need for the EU to make a 
determination about what it would need.  Herreweghe responded 
that he was going to see EUCOM General Wald on Monday May 10 
at Wald\'s request in Stuttgart; he expected that EUCOM\'s need 
for more rapid EU planning on what facilities it would take 
over from NATO might be on Wald\'s agenda.  Herreweghe 
reiterated the General Concept\'s position that EUFOR planned 
to initially deploy to SFOR\'s existing headquarters. 
 
-------------------------- 
Civilian Crisis Management 
-------------------------- 
 
9.  (C) Finally, Russell reviewed the EU\'s civilian crisis 
management with Michael Matthiessen, director of the civilian 
crisis management cell of the EU.  Matthiessen reviewed the 
EU\'s police headline goal, of 5,000 police officers of whom 
up to 1,400 can be deployed in under 30 days.  Matthiessen 
underscored that the focus of the EU\'s police missions was 
non-executive policing; in other words, enhancing the 
capacities of national/local police forces to improve their 
own policing.  Currently the EU was fielding police missions 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Macedonia, and was deploying to the 
Congo in a follow-on mission to EU autonomous ESDP operation 
\"Artemis\".  Regarding the police/gendarmie elements available 
to the EU\'s possible military operation in Bosnia, 
Matthiessen noted that such forces (called \"IPU\"s -- in EU 
parlance, for \"integrated police units\", the equivalent of 
NATO \"MSU\"s or \"multinational specialized units\") were 
integrated with the military; this integration was their 
great advantage in post-crisis deployment. 
 
10.  (C) Responding to a question from Russell on the EU\'s 
police role in Afghanistan, Matthiessen noted that there had 
been considerable German opposition to an EU police role in 
Afghanistan for some time.  It was SRSG Francesco Vendrell\'s 
call for an EU police advisor that had weakened German 
resistance to the idea of an EU role in this sector.  The 
Germans were now considering how to develop an EU presence in 
Afghan policing, perhaps with Germany as lead nation.  The 
Italians, Matthiessen reported without offering specifics, 
were interested in \"a more ambitious approach\". 
Comment 
11.  (C) The consistent message from the EU Council 
Secretariat officials on Bosnia was that things are on the 
 
SIPDIS 
right track, although some concerns remain, notably on 
reserves and the Dayton authorities.  Herreweghe\'s report on 
progress towards EUMS liaison at SHAPE, if confirmed by 
events, is good news, and shows that the EU is beginning to 
get things moving in the right direction. 
 
Foster 
"
"16885","5/13/2004 15:33","04BRUSSELS2086","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04MONROVIA716","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 002086 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/W - ARIETTI; AF/RSA - SCHOFIELD; 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID FOR C. GRIGSBY; TREASURY FOR 
ALEX SEVERINS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EFIN, PGOV, LI, EUN, IMF, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EC MOVING FORWARD WITH AUDITORS FOR LIBERIA 
 
REF: MONROVIA 0716 
 
1.  Following receipt of reftel, USEU contacted DG 
Development Liberia Desk Officer Arend Biesenbroek for a 
status report on their funding of auditors to assist in the 
review of financial controls at six key government agencies. 
Biesenbroek reported that the terms of reference for this 
program had just been completed and that the next step is to 
select a company to perform the audits.  One key area of 
concern is the physical protection of the auditors. 
Biesenbroek reported that UNMIL has indicated it will cover 
the auditors protection needs. 
 
2.  Biesenbroek said that he was aware of the IMF\'s concerns 
about delays, and noted that the European Commission had used 
expedited procedures which will permit direct contracting of 
auditors for this task.  An optimistic outlook for \"financial 
boots on the ground\" is 4-5 weeks. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"16904","5/14/2004 10:40","04BRUSSELS2091","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 BRUSSELS 002091 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/RPM WAKE, RUSSELL; EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, OSCE, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU CONSULTATIONS ON OSCE 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  The EU hosted a U.S. delegation headed by 
USOSCE Ambassador Stephan M. Minikes for the biannual U.S.-EU 
\"COSCE\" consultations on the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on May 7.  Key findings were: 
 
--U.S.-EU Coordination within OSCE: cooperation between the 
U.S. and EU in Vienna is excellent.  Especially with EU 
enlargement, early consultation is important in order to 
avoid policy differences between the U.S. and EU that third 
countries (such as Russia) could exploit; 
 
--2004 Human Dimension Conferences: the Berlin anti-Semitism 
conference and the companion conference on racism and 
xenophobia planned for September display OSCE leadership on a 
fundamental issue -- how to build cohesive but diverse 
societies; 
 
--Moldova/Transnistria: Russia is stonewalling on 
Transnistria for fear of losing influence in the region; 
engagement at ministerial and head-of-state level is 
necessary for a solution; 
 
--Belarus: the U.S. and EU should keep linking closer 
relations with Belarus to progress on human rights/democracy, 
and send a tougher message on that to the GOB; 
 
--South Caucasus: recommendations on how and whether the EU 
Neighborhood Policy covers the region are set for June; 
 
--Central Asia: the Kazakhs must be informed as soon as 
possible of the reforms required for U.S. and EU support of 
their candidacy for the 2009 OSCE chairmanship; 
 
--Ukraine: U.S. and EU concerns on Ukraine are almost 
identical, and EU has confronted Ukraine on democracy/media 
freedom issues; 
 
--The Balkans: the EU, OSCE and UN all have a role in Kosovo; 
OMIK institution-building efforts should continue; 
 
--2004 OSCE Economic Forum: free markets and the rule of law, 
not more seminars, are needed in the OSCE area; the OSCE 
Economic Dimension\'s stress on good governance is appropriate; 
 
--2004 Annual Security Review Conference: high-level 
political participation is key to the success of this 
conference; 
 
--OSCE Personnel Issues: choosing a new SecGen and other 
personnel issues merit close U.S. and EU attention; 
 
--OSCE Budget: almost no one wants their assessment to go up, 
some (e.g. Russia) want substantial cuts.  No one yet has 
clear idea how to square this circle; 
 
--Sofia Ministerial: the EU said focus on priority issues -- 
Moldova, Belarus, Ukraine, Chechnya -- would result in 
higher-level turnout and increased public recognition of the 
OSCE.  The U.S. proposed a Ministerial declaration on 
tolerance and OSCE endorsement of the Container Security 
Initiative. 
 
END SUMMARY. 
 
------------ 
Participants 
------------ 
 
2. (U) 
 
EU Delegation 
------------- 
 
Ireland (current EU Presidency): 
 
Barbara Jones, Director of Russia, Eastern Europe, OSCE and 
Council of Europe Section, MFA Dublin 
Peter Fitzpatrick, Deputy Director, OSCE and Council of 
Europe Section, MFA Dublin 
 
The Netherlands (successor to Ireland in EU Presidency): 
 
Frank van Beuningen, Policy Coordinator, Security Policy 
Department/OSCE Desk, MFA The Hague 
Willemijn Kallenberg, Senior Policy Officer, Security Policy 
Department/OSCE Desk, MFA The Hague 
 
European Commission: 
 
Gilbert Dubois, Head of Unit for OSCE and Council of Europe, 
DG External Relations 
Keith Sangway, Desk Officer for OSCE, DG External Relations 
Eero Vuohula, Adviser, Unit for OSCE and Council of Europe, 
DG External Relations 
 
EU Council Secretariat: 
Stefano Tomat, OSCE and CoE Desk Officer 
 
U.S. delegation 
--------------- 
 
Stephan M. Minikes, Ambassador to the OSCE 
Daniel Russell, Office Director, EUR/RPM 
Bruce Connuck, Political Counselor, USOSCE Vienna 
Lee Litzenberger, Political Officer, USEU Brussels 
Todd Huizinga, Political Officer, USEU Brussels 
 
------------------------------------ 
Early U.S.-EU Consultation Important 
------------------------------------ 
 
3. (C) USOSCE Ambassador Minikes stated that early 
consultation with the EU in the OSCE has become even more 
important since the May 1 enlargement of the EU to 25 member 
states.  The U.S. wants to engage with the EU before its 
positions become set in stone, he said.  Barbara Jones, 
Director of the Russia, Eastern Europe, OSCE and Council of 
Europe Section of the MFA Dublin, agreed, saying that it 
should be an EU policy goal not to let gaps between the U.S. 
and EU emerge -- particularly on difficult issues.  It is 
important, she said, not to let third countries exploit 
U.S.-EU differences. 
 
4. (C) Jones said that EU enlargement would have \"a powerful 
effect\" on the EU role in the OSCE.  She said the EU OSCE 
Working Group would ask EU FonMins in June for a mandate to 
do a strategic assessment of EU policy on the OSCE.  She said 
EU member states are discussing internally various papers on 
the topic, and that they might meet at the end of May to 
discuss the way forward.  The July-December Dutch EU 
presidency, she said, would likely be tasked with finishing 
the assessment. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Coordination on Approach to Russia? 
----------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) The discussion shifted to U.S.-EU coordination on 
engaging Russia in the OSCE.  Jones, who is in charge of 
coordinating Irish EU presidency preparations for the May 21 
EU-Russia summit, said she was pessimistic about Russian 
intentions toward the OSCE.  She said the key question is 
whether the new Russian FonMin, Sergei Lavrov, will change 
the Ivanov MFA\'s coolness toward the OSCE.  On the positive 
side, Jones said that in his two meetings with the EU so far, 
Lavrov had \"talked the talk of effective multilateralism.\" 
On Chechnya, Jones said all indications are that the Russians 
will keep \"forum shopping,\" and might favor Council of Europe 
engagement over that of the OSCE.  In conclusion, Jones said 
that the EU had just presented Russia with a framework for 
dialogue based on the St. Petersburg Summit Joint Declaration 
of May 2003, emphasizing convergence with EU standards on 
democracy, respect for human rights and related issues. 
 
6. (C) Minikes said it is necessary to concentrate on areas 
in which engagement with Russia would be productive.  On some 
issues Russia is simply not willing to engage, as often 
reflected in the Russian OSCE Mission in Vienna\'s lack of 
guidance from Moscow.  On difficult issues, such as Chechnya, 
Moldova, and Georgia, ministerial-level or presidential 
engagement would be necessary to make progress. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Anti-Semitism Conference Shows OSCE Leadership 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
7. (C) Referring to the demographic perspectives for the EU, 
Minikes said the April 28-29 Berlin anti-Semitism conference 
and the companion Brussels meeting on racism and xenophobia 
planned for September are bringing OSCE into a leadership 
role on one of the fundamental issues for Europe\'s as well as 
America\'s future: how to build cohesive societies that 
respect and integrate diversity.  Both sides agreed that the 
success of the Berlin conference entailed a responsibility to 
work hard to make the Brussels conference relevant as well. 
On the idea of appointing a Special Representative on 
Anti-Semitism, Minikes said the U.S. does not want to create 
a new OSCE bureaucracy, but is not closed to the idea of a 
part-time representative modeled on Ahtisaari\'s role in 
Central Asia.  Jones said Irish FM Cowan had reacted 
positively when Bulgarian FM Passy broached the idea, but 
that most in the EU favor revisiting the issue after the 
September racism conference. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Moldova/Transnistria: Russia Stonewalling 
------------------------------------------ 
8. (C) Discussion focused on Russian opposition to the 
proposed May 4 experts\' meeting (to prepare a principals, 
meeting), and its resulting cancellation.  Both sides agreed 
that Russia is stonewalling on Transnistria for fear of 
losing influence in the region, and that engagement at 
ministerial and head-of-state level would be necessary for a 
solution.  Jones said the EU will raise Moldova (as well as 
Georgia and Chechnya) at the EU-Russia summit.  Frank van 
Beuningen, Policy Coordinator for the OSCE Desk in the Dutch 
MFA, asked whether the possibility of a Russia-NATO summit on 
the margins of the June NATO summit in Istanbul could be used 
as leverage to get the Russians to begin fulfilling their 
Istanbul commitments.  EUR/RPM Director Daniel Russell 
responded that Russia had made \"zero movement\" toward meeting 
its Istanbul commitments, both in Moldova and in Georgia.  He 
said a Russia-NATO summit would almost certainly not lead to 
progress on that front. 
 
9. (C) Minikes said he believed Putin had drawn a line in the 
sand on Moldova -- he was not going to do anything that would 
lessen Russian influence in Moldova by bringing it closer to 
the West.  The argument to make to Putin, said Minikes, is 
that Putin should make a deal now while a known quantity, 
Moldovan President Voronin, is still in office.  Only a 
high-level approach to Putin has a chance at success. 
Russell underscored that with his observation that Putin\'s 
having appointed his close associate, Deputy Head of 
Administration Dmitriy Kozak, as Russian Moldova negotiator 
made clear that the Russian MFA could not move on Moldova 
without Putin\'s involvement. 
 
10. (C) USOSCE PolCouns Bruce Connuck said that one reason 
Moscow is foot-dragging on Moldova is concern that an 
OSCE-brokered Moldova deal, that draws Moldova closer to 
Europe, might also further stimulate forces in Ukraine that 
want to distance Ukraine from Russia and align it more 
closely with the West.  Commission OSCE Unit Chief Gilbert 
Dubois underlined the need to keep pushing Ukrainian 
President Kuchma to help find a solution to the Transnistria 
problem.  Jones said the EU will raise the issue at the May 
18 EU-Ukraine Cooperation Council meeting in Brussels. 
 
11. (C) On approaching Voronin, Minikes raised the planned 
early June visit of OSCE ambassadors to Moldova and proposed 
that the visit be used to make clear to Voronin that the U.S. 
and EU will keep working for a solution.  Jones was open to 
this idea, but did not add any specifics. 
 
--------------------------- 
Belarus: EU Getting Tougher 
--------------------------- 
 
12. (C) Jones said the May 12 meeting of the EU Working Group 
on Eastern Europe (COEST) will include three Belarus-related 
items.  First on the agenda will be the text of an EU public 
statement on the Pourgourides report.  Jones said EU member 
states were extremely upset by this \"damning\" report, which 
accuses GOB officials of criminal murder and which cannot be 
dismissed, coming as it does from the COE\'s parliamentary 
assembly.  The statement, said Jones, will be tough (but fall 
short of imposing sanctions).  Jones said the EU will call 
for an independent investigation and publication of the 
report in Belarus.  Some EU members are questioning the value 
of any further engagement with Belarus until this issue is 
resolved, but Jones said she would argue that engagement 
would be necessary to deliver the tough message.  Once there 
is an agreed text, Jones said, it will be blessed by the EU\'s 
Political and Security Committee Ambassadors on May 13. 
 
13. (C) Second on the May 12 COEST agenda, said Jones, will 
be the reply to Belarus FonMin Martynov on the step-by-step 
policy.  Jones was very pleased to have received the proposed 
U.S. reply to Martynov on May 6.  She said it had been 
circulated within the EU and is key to keeping the EU on the 
same track as the U.S. in its internal discussions.  Her 
initial impression was that the U.S. reply was a bit \"soft.\" 
She indicated the EU might want to insert a reference to the 
Pourgourides report, or propose tougher language.  The EU 
COEST group would be working off the reply proposed by EU 
Minsk Heads of Mission and the U.S. text.  Jones hoped to get 
the EU reply cleared at the COEST, but said it might be 
difficult.  She appreciated U.S. willingness to coordinate 
both timing and substance and to have our missions in Minsk 
deliver the reply, or replies, on the same day. 
 
14. (C) Finally, Jones said the COEST will discuss plans for 
the May 25 visit of Belarusian opposition leaders/NGO reps to 
Brussels.  Plans now are for meetings with Irish FM Cowen, 
Chris Patten and Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen, plus a 
public press statement.  Jones said the EU does not want this 
cast as an anti-Lukashenko event, but as normal EU 
consultations with the opposition prior to elections. 
 
15. (C) Jones committed to contact us after the May 12 
meeting to coordinate follow-up.  She expressed great 
appreciation for the close cooperation with the U.S. on 
Belarus, adding that it had not been easy to get approval to 
do the recent joint U.S.-EU demarche in Minsk, but that the 
U.S. had thereby sent a \"powerful message\" to the EU that if 
the EU consulted with us, we would \"play it straight.\"  She 
also praised coordination in Minsk between U.S. Ambassador 
Krol and his French counterpart.  Jones said she wanted to 
continue the coordination; she said there is \"no daylight\" 
between the EU and the U.S.:  EU policy remains: 
 
-- step-by-step; 
-- engagement to be able to deliver tough messages; 
-- ban on high level contacts; 
-- maximum pressure for GOB progress on human 
rights/democracy. 
 
16. (C) Van Beuningen stressed the importance of the October 
parliamentary elections.  Minikes said the U.S. had told 
Bulgarian OSCE CiO FonMin Solomon Passy that, if he did visit 
Belarus in late May as he had indicated, he must press the 
GOB to agree to an election conference, to issue a timely 
invitation to ODIHR to observe the elections, and to appoint 
opposition members to electoral commissions. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
South Caucasus and EU Neighborhood Policy 
----------------------------------------- 
 
17. (C) Jones said the central question for the EU on the 
South Caucasus is whether and how the region would be 
included in the EU\'s aborning Neighborhood Policy for 
increasing assistance and coordination with Eastern European 
countries post-EU enlargement.  She said the Commission would 
issue a paper on the Neighborhood Policy on May 12 and EU 
CFSP HighRep Javier Solana is set to make recommendations on 
the Neighborhood initiative in June, including perspectives 
for the South Caucasus. 
 
18. (C) Minikes observed that the EU\'s ability to deal with 
frozen conflicts and other crises in the region appeared to 
him to be hampered by lack of guidance to EU OSCE missions in 
Vienna.  When a crisis occurred, Vienna missions tended to 
waste at least a week in indecisiveness and inaction.  Jones 
responded that she shared a sense of \"bewilderment\" as to 
what the OSCE role in conflict prevention could be. 
 
19. (C) Both sides agreed on the value of prospective OSCE 
field offices in Georgia, but noted Russian opposition and 
conflicting Georgian responses to the idea. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Kazakh Bid for 2009 Chairmanship: OSCE Leverage 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
20. (C) Minikes warned that as a practical matter, the OSCE 
decision on Kazakhstan\'s bid for the 2009 OSCE chairmanship 
has to be made by 2005 in order to have time to seek an 
alternative chair if necessary.  He said that the U.S. would 
not support the chairmanship bid of any country that holds 
political prisoners.  Connuck added that the Kazakhs should 
be told as soon as possible what reforms would be necessary 
to gain U.S. and EU support for its candidacy; the GOK would 
need time to implement those reforms.  He also urged that EU 
country embassies in Almaty consult on the ground with the 
U.S. Embassy, and that our missions on the ground make 
coordinated recommendations to Brussels and Washington on how 
to proceed concerning the Kazakh candidacy.  Minikes noted 
that a group of OSCE ambassadors (Canada, Portugal, Slovakia, 
Norway and Belgium) would visit Kazakhstan the third week of 
May, and that he would visit a week later -- it would be 
helpful to know the EU position on the Kazakh candidacy 
beforehand.  Jones agreed to draft a paper on the \"basic 
levels of achievement\" that Kazakhstan would have to 
accomplish in order to receive EU support for its candidacy. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Ukraine: U.S., EU Share Concerns 
-------------------------------- 
 
21. (C) Jones reported that the EU-Ukraine Ministerial 
meeting in Dublin on April 29 had been \"really difficult.\" 
She said the EU participants had \"really blasted\" Ukrainian 
FM Hryshchenko on media harassment and the need for an action 
plan for democratic reform, telling him that \"your European 
ambitions are in your hands.\"  She said the EU left no room 
for doubt as to its demands that Ukraine start living up to 
European standards if it wants to have closer association 
with the EU.  She said the EU shares U.S. concern that the 
October presidential election be free and fair, and on the 
value of the OSCE Project Coordinator\'s Office in Kiev.  She 
said Irish FM Cowan and External Relations Commissioner 
Patten would raise the issue of the OSCE office with the 
Ukrainians. 
 
------------------------------- 
Kosovo: EU, OSCE Both Have Role 
------------------------------- 
 
22. (C) Both sides agreed that there is no reason to transfer 
OSCE capacity-building functions in Kosovo to the EU, a 
possibility UNMIK SRSG Harri Holkeri had raised.  Van 
Beuningen said the EU believes that OSCE, the EU and UN 
should continue their cooperation in Kosovo.  Jones said the 
EU does not have a position on the Holkeri proposal; there is 
no EU \"takeover agenda.\"  Dubois noted that Holkeri would be 
a guest at the May 12-13 Council of Europe Ministerial -- it 
would be interesting to see what Holkeri would say there. 
 
 
---------------------------------------- 
OSCE Economic Forum: No Canned Speeches! 
---------------------------------------- 
 
23. (C) Minikes proposed that this year\'s Economic Forum 
dispense with the usual canned national statements that take 
time and limit real exchange.  The EU interlocutors appeared 
to agree with the idea, but lacked the will to buck the 
expected resistance of many OSCE members.  Minikes stressed 
that Economic Forum events should be relevant to real-life 
needs; what is needed are not more seminars, he said, but 
freedom, rule of law and access to capital for the many 
potential entrepreneurs who are squelched not by lack of 
business savvy, but by lack of freedom and opportunity. 
Commission OSCE Unit Adviser Eero Vuohula responded that, for 
those very reasons, he greeted the OSCE Economic Dimension\'s 
current emphasis on good governance.  Jones said the key is 
to get OSCE field workers, in following up Economic Dimension 
conferences, to think beyond their fields of specialization 
and build on colleagues\' efforts in other fields -- thus 
putting into practice the OSCE doctrine of the 
interrelatedness of security, economy, and human rights. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Annual Security Review Conference 
--------------------------------- 
 
24. (C) Minikes reported that Secretary Ridge could not 
attend the 2004 Annual Security Review Conference (ASRC), but 
that the DHS Deputy Secretary James Loy will attend.  Minikes 
stressed the importance of high-level political attendance, 
and Jones said Ireland is aiming for ministerial-level 
participation.  Minikes said the U.S. wants to use the ASRC 
to make practical progress on counter-terrorism efforts, for 
example, by ascertaining next steps for the OSCE border 
management concept and getting OSCE buy-in on the U.S.-EU 
Container Security Initiative. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Personnel Issues Deserve More Attention 
--------------------------------------- 
 
25. (C) Minikes strongly stressed the importance of getting 
the right people in OSCE jobs.  He warned that OSCE SecGen 
Kubis may find another job and leave before his mandate 
expires in June 2005.  Minikes proposed that the U.S. and EU 
consult early about candidates to succeed Kubis.  Minikes 
hoped the EU would avoid deciding on a \"EU candidate\" too 
early, because that often resulted in the appointment of the 
EU default candidate, rather than finding the best person for 
the job.  The U.S. does not want to be put in the position of 
having no choices other than acquiescing to a pre-determined 
EU choice, or to casting a veto.  Both sides agreed that the 
mandate of OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities Rolf 
Ekeus, which comes to an end on July 31, should be renewed. 
Minikes raised the importance of selecting quality OSCE Heads 
of Mission, both in the field and in Vienna, and Jones chimed 
in that candidate selection issues might be included in the 
EU policy paper on OSCE (see para 4).  Minikes also said 
that, if people in important OSCE positions are not 
performing satisfactorily, OSCE members should let them know. 
 An example of this is the performance of Bulgarian FM Passy 
as OSCE CiO -- he is not effectively dealing with human 
rights problems in Central Asia and generally avoids 
confrontation even if that means not dealing with important 
problems.  When that happens, OSCE members should send Passy 
the message that the CiO job was not being done right. 
-------------------------------- 
OSCE Budget: Keep Current System 
-------------------------------- 
 
26. (C) Van Beuningen said the EU shares the U.S. positions 
(1) against the Russian proposal to scrap the contextual 
framework for reviewing scales of assessment and move to a 
merged, unitary scale; and (2) in favor of keeping the 
present scales of assessment system.  Both sides recognized 
the dilemma of how to deal with most states, insistence on 
not increasing their assessments, and others (e.g. Russia,s) 
insistence on substantial reductions, while maintaining 
proper financing for the organization. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Sofia Ministerial: Need Focus, Preparation 
------------------------------------------ 
 
27. (C) Minikes expressed concern about the Bulgarian CiO\'s 
not yet having started consulting other OSCE members on 
preparation for the Sofia Ministerial.  He said he had 
suggested that the CiO pull together some OSCE members to 
discuss Ministerial deliverables, and outlined U.S. ideas: 
(1) translating the Berlin Declaration on anti-Semitism and 
the prospective Brussels concluding document on racism and 
xenophobia into a Ministerial document on tolerance; (2) 
bringing the 55 OSCE members behind the Container Security 
Initiative; and (3) not pinning hopes for the Ministerial on 
settlement of regional conflicts. 
 
28. (C) Jones said we should apply the lessons of the 2003 
Maastricht Ministerial:  when there is focus, more Ministers 
show up and the public takes notice.  She suggested the Sofia 
focus should be Moldova, Belarus, Ukraine, and Chechnya. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"16920","5/14/2004 15:47","04BRUSSELS2102","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE104199","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, RU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU FMS\' MEETING: KEY AGENDA ITEMS AND DEMARCHE 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 104199 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 B/D 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) The EU FMs\' General Affairs and External Relations 
Council (GAERC) meeting on May 17-18 will devote much of its 
time to Intergovernmental Conference (ICG) debates on the 
draft EU Constitutional Treaty.  Ministers (with their 
Defense colleagues also participating) will also focus on 
ESDP issues, including plans to set up a European defense 
agency and a review of capabilities under the Headline Goals. 
Over lunch, the Foreign Ministers will have a broad 
discussion of the Middle East.  Conclusions will likely track 
with the outcome of the May 4 Quartet meeting, but discussion 
could also cover the situation in Iraq and the issue of abuse 
of prisoners.  The meeting may also decide on new language 
for a non-proliferation clause to finalize an EU-Syria 
Association Agreement and issue Conclusions deploring recent 
death sentences for five Bulgarian nurses in Libya.  Other 
topics for the meeting will be the Western Balkans, with a 
focus on Kosovo, and preparations for upcoming EU Summit 
meetings with Latin America and Russia.  One possible 
additional GAERC topic could be a Danish request to have the 
EU discuss the upcoming roll-over of the UNSC\'s exemption for 
the US from ICC jurisdiction, although it is not clear that 
EU UNSC members will be interested in having any EU 
constraints put on them.  The EU will also hold meetings with 
Turkey, Ukraine and the Gulf Cooperation Council on the 
fringes of the session. END SUMMARY 
 
2. (SBU) PolOff delivered reftel points to the Council 
Secretariat\'s US desk and Nick Banner in External Relations 
 
SIPDIS 
Commissioner Patten\'s cabinet on May 13.  We also attended a 
background briefing on May 14 about the GAERC agenda by Irish 
Perm Rep Anne Anderson. 
 
IGC 
--- 
 
3. (SBU) Anderson and other IGC sources have told us that 
much of next week\'s FMs\' meeting will be taken up by IGC 
negotiations.  The Irish Presidency has made significant 
progress over the last few weeks at the senior officials 
level to resolve many issues, but over a dozen unresolved 
questions remain, and a successful conclusion to the IGC is 
still not guaranteed.  Among key issues FMs will address next 
week are whether the number of issues that would be covered 
by qualified majority voting (QMV) rather than unanimity in 
the Council will be further expanded, and who would chair 
many of the ministerial level Council formations under a new 
treaty.  The biggest remaining IGC issue -- the voting 
formula that would be used for QMV -- will not be addressed 
by FMs.  It will only be addressed at the EU Summit on June 
17. 
 
MIDDLE EAST AND IRAQ 
-------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Both Anderson and Banner said the GAERC Conclusions 
should track quite closely with the statement from the May 4 
Quartet meeting.  Anderson also noted that the lunch 
discussion of the issues would also cover recent developments 
in Iraq, including the incidents of prisoner abuse.  It was 
not clear what type of language might or might not be 
included in GAERC Conclusions, but Anderson noted that PM 
Ahern had already spoken on behalf of the Presidency about 
\"the abuse and degradation inflicted on Iraqi prisoners by 
members of the coalition military forces\" as well as the 
killing of civilians by terrorist factions. 
 
ESDP 
---- 
 
5. (U) The joint FMs/DefMins session will be largely an 
opportunity to \"take stock\" of the overall development of 
ESDP in the past six months, including progress on a variety 
of capabilities efforts including the 2010 Headline Goal, the 
Rapid Response Force and the 2004 Force Catalogue.  The GAERC 
will also take note of proposals by the European Defense 
Agency\'s Establishment Team, with a view to a formal decision 
to establish the Agency in June and the Agency actually 
beginning its work by the end of 2004. 
 
RUSSIA AND EU NEIGHBORHOOD 
-------------------------- 
 
6. (C) Banner said that the agenda for the EU-Russia Summit 
on May 21 in Moscow has been largely agreed.  The focus will 
be on work toward more detailed and concrete \"action plans\" 
for setting up the four proposed \"common spaces\" between the 
EU and Russia.  On Chechnya Banner anticipated \"the usual 
discussion\" where the EU would express its concerns, with the 
Russians responding \"not so politely\" that it was none of the 
EU\'s business, and then go on to raise concerns about 
Russian-speaking minorities within the EU.  On the latter 
issue, Patten had sent a letter to Moscow on May 13 laying 
out all the EU\'s programs to assist and protect minority 
rights, but the Duma continues to \"stir things up.\" 
 
7. (C) Concerning Russian involvement in Moldova and Georgia, 
Banner commented that reftel points \"could be our speaking 
notes.\"  He acknowledged the EU did not have much of a stick 
available to secure improved Russian behavior, but was 
hopeful Putin might eventually realize the benefits of 
delivering on Moscow\'s commitments so as to avoid the kind of 
risks that could emerge if these places increasingly become 
\"failed states.\"  Kees van Rij, the Council Policy Unit\'s 
chief for Russia, told us may 14 the EU would adopt \"a more 
active line\" on Moldova and that the Irish would likely 
demarche the Russians soon on the need to re-launch 
five-party talk.  Van Rij said they hoped to do this prior to 
the EU-Russia Summit to set the stage for an approach 
directly to Putin. 
 
8. (SBU) Banner said that the EU was pleased that increased 
EU-US coordination in countries such as Moldova, Ukraine and 
Belarus was underway, and said the EC felt that particularly 
in Belarus it appeared to be having some impact.  As for the 
EU\'s Neighborhood Initiative (which was approved by the 
Commission on May 12, but will only be presented to the 
Council on May 17 without serious discussion), Banner 
observed that extending it to cover the Caucasus was an 
\"obvious and necessary political gesture, but it is not 
trouble-free.\"  There is serious question whether the 
Georgian government has the administrative capacity to 
undertake the legislative approximation and other steps that 
the initiative should eventually encompass.  Therefore, 
assuming the Council approves the Commission proposal to 
bringing the region into the program, the first attempts at 
an action plan with Georgia would \"not be very far-reaching.\" 
 
BALKANS 
------- 
 
9. (U) Anderson noted that the GAERC Conclusions would cover 
several items, including a request to the Commission to begin 
preparing an opinion on Macedonia\'s EU membership application 
(a process that will take well over a year), and approval of 
the Commission\'s proposals for \"European Partnerships\" with 
all of the Balkan states.  Banner and other Council sources 
told us that the only item FMs will probably discuss would be 
Kosovo policy, but it is still to be confirmed whether UNMIK 
SRSG Holkeri will attend this portion of the GAERC. 
 
TURKEY/CYPRUS 
------------- 
 
10. (C) Neither is on the GAERC agenda, but the EU 
Association Council with Turkey will be held on May 18. 
Banner commented that Turkey was \"in about as comfortable a 
spot as it can be on the Cyprus issue -- no one is blaming 
it.\"  Therefore, he said it was a good thing that the GoT now 
appeared focused on continuing internal reforms, although the 
Leyla Zana case had been \"a serious setback.\"  Patten 
continues to be supportive of a positive Commission report on 
Turkey in October, and while \"some Commissioners are no 
friends of Turkey\", Banner said Patten believed the report 
would be a good one barring some negative event in the 
meantime.  On Cyprus, the Commission is still working on \"the 
precise details\" of how it can ease trade restrictions, and 
it was unlikely the Greek Cypriots would be obstructive.  But 
more political measures were \"harder.\"  Even a step such as 
opening a Commission delegation in the north posed \"legal 
problems.\" 
 
LATIN AMERICA 
------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Banner noted that different EU Member States held 
different positions on how eager the EU should be about 
regional free trade agreements.  Member States also disagreed 
about how strict the EU\'s conditionality regarding better 
regional integration should be. 
 
POSSIBLE OTHER BUSINESS: LIBYA, SYRIA, ICC, SUDAN, BURMA 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
12. (C) An unusually large number of \"other business\" items 
may still possibly be added to the GAERC agenda.  Conclusions 
are likely condemning the recent death sentences in Libya 
for five Bulgarian nurses accused of infecting children with 
HIV.  The GAERC may also try and reach final agreement on a 
non-proliferation clause for the EU-Syria Association 
Agreement currently under negotiation.  Some Member States 
may be interested in raising recent developments in Sudan and 
Burma.  The Danish FM has also suggested the EU should 
discuss its position regarding a possible UNSC roll-over of 
the U.S. exemption from the ICC\'s jurisdiction under UN 
operations, prior to the issue coming up again in the next 
couple of months in the UNSC.  Banner commented that he 
doubted the EU states on the UNSC would want their margin of 
maneuver on the issue to be restricted. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"16924","5/14/2004 16:09","04BRUSSELS2107","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS1090","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002107 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN ELECTIONS AND U.S.-EU RELATIONS 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 1090 
 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 1094 
     C. C) BRUSSELS 1736 
     D. D) LISBON 481 
     E. E) MUNICH 159 
     F. F) BRUSSELS 2061 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  Although most voters in the June 10-13 
European elections will focus mainly on bread-and-butter 
themes such as employment, health care and the like, 
transatlantic issues will also attract attention.  Brussels 
observers expect Iraq to feature more prominently in EU 
member states whose governments supported U.S. military 
intervention.  Other war-on-terrorism issues, such as 
Passenger Name Record (PNR) and Guantanamo, are also expected 
to resonate with some voters.  Some candidates have already 
indicated they will also address a more fundamental question: 
is Europe America\'s equal partner or a follower?  Another 
issue of key interest to the U.S. -- Turkish EU accession -- 
will play a major role in campaigns in some member states, 
such as Germany and France.  With tensions on Iraq and 
perceptions of U.S. unilateralism running high throughout 
Europe, U.S. Embassies in member states will face a constant 
challenge in getting the public to look at positive 
achievements in transatlantic relations in addition to the 
obvious U.S.-EU differences.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
Series Of Pre-Election Reports 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (U) This is the fourth in a series of reports on the June 
10-13 European elections.  Ref A provides general background 
on the European Parliament (EP) and the European elections; 
ref B is a broad analysis of expected campaign issues and 
election outcomes; and ref C analyzes the possible impact on 
the EP of newcomers from the 10 new EU member states. 
Subsequent telegrams will examine the reelection prospects of 
key parliamentarians (MEPs), and possible post-election 
realignment of EP party groups. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Iraq: Problem for Some U.S. Supporters 
-------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Local Brussels commentators expect Iraq to loom large 
in the political campaigning for the European Parliament. 
Center for European Policy Studies scholar Ben Crum told us 
that campaign debate about Iraq would be most important in 
the EU member states whose governments supported the U.S. 
military intervention despite opposition among voters (see 
also ref D).  Latvian EP observer Boriss Cilevics of the 
Party of European Socialists (PES) agreed, opining that Iraq 
would cause difficulties for pro-U.S. candidates in some of 
the new member states whose governments supported the U.S., 
mentioning specifically the Baltic states and Poland.  EP 
observer Toomas Ilves (PES, Estonia) echoed those sentiments, 
claiming somewhat bitterly that he had \"bought all the 
arguments\" on Iraq only to find now that the U.S. had \"run 
roughshod\" over him during the past year. 
 
4. (C) Our interlocutors tell us that in Germany, Iraq may 
spell trouble for the Christian Democratic opposition 
(CDU/CSU) that supported the U.S. effort.  Klaus Welle, EP 
Director-General of Internal EU Policies and an active CDU 
official, said the CDU would try to avoid the Iraq issue.  As 
Welle explained, talking about Iraq \"can only get us into 
trouble.\"  German Chancellor Schroeder\'s Social Democratic 
Party (SPD) apparently agrees: an SPD poster for the EP 
campaign carries a slogan giving the SPD credit for helping 
make Europe a \"Power for Peace.\"  An SPD campaign website, 
www.europakampa.de, names \"strengthening Europe as a power 
for peace\" as the first of eight reasons to vote SPD, adding, 
\"if the CDU had had its way, there would be German soldiers 
in Iraq today.\"  MEP and EP Vice President Ingo Friedrich, of 
the Christian Social Union (CSU), the CDU\'s Bavarian sister 
party, told us that transatlantic relations come up \"first 
thing\" at almost all of the events he attends with voters. 
His voters\' interest, he implied, has been magnified several 
times over by the German-American discord over Iraq. 
 
5. (C) Despite the above, it bears repeating that much will 
vary depending on the candidate and the country.  EP observer 
Magda Kosa Kovacs (PES, Hungary) opined, for example, that 
Iraq would not be a huge campaign issue in Hungary because 
all major parties had agreed on military intervention. 
Similarly, and not surprisingly, UK Conservative MEP Geoffrey 
Van Orden told us the Tories would not criticize UK 
involvement in Iraq, but rather highlight PM Tony Blair\'s 
lack of openness and trustworthiness in managing UK Iraq 
policy.  Swedish MEP Cecilia Malmstrom of the European 
Liberal Democrats affirmed that Iraq would be a campaign 
issue in the EU, but said that MEPs whose governments had 
been against the war would have difficulty leveraging Iraq 
for vote gains -- especially in France and Germany, she said, 
MEPs of the governing parties were likely to lose votes in 
the European elections for domestic reasons. 
----------------------- 
Europe as Equal of U.S. 
----------------------- 
 
6. (C) It has become a catchphrase among EU elites in 
Brussels -- on both sides of the political spectrum -- that 
the transatlantic relationship, in order to thrive, must be a 
partnership between equals.  Some candidates plan to make 
that idea a major component of their foreign-policy stance 
during their campaign.  German Socialist MEP Helmut Kuhne 
(SPD) told us that a central issue of his campaign will be a 
\"question to Europe\": does the EU have the political will to 
be an equal partner of the U.S. rather than a follower?  On 
May 7, as part of the kickoff to their campaigns, Dutch 
Greens MEP Joost Lagendijk and his compatriot Jan Marinus 
Wiersma (PES) presented their book, \"After Mars Comes Venus: 
A European Answer to Bush.\"  This book deals with the same 
question that Kuhne asks of Europe, urging the EU to realize 
its potential to become a \"civil superpower.\"  As Lagendijk 
told us, their objective is not to compete with the U.S., but 
to make the EU its equal partner and \"critical counterpart.\" 
Despite assurances to the contrary, the \"equal partner\" 
slogan often implies the need for Europe to counteract an 
allegedly unilateral and arrogant U.S. 
 
----------------------------------- 
War on Terrorism/U.S. Unilateralism 
----------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Some of our interlocutors, such as Swedish MEP 
Malmstrom, tell us that some narrower U.S.-EU issues will 
also be part of EP campaigns.  Two examples our interlocutors 
mention are the PNR agreement (International Agreement on 
Transfers of EU Passenger Name Records to the U.S. -- see ref 
F) and Guantanamo.  In both areas, many MEPs have been in 
vocal opposition to U.S. policy on human rights grounds -- 
the right to personal data protection (PNR) and the right to 
a fair trial (Guantanamo).  Voters who notice will likely 
place their views within the larger context -- the war in 
Iraq, the fight against terrorism and their perception of 
U.S. unilateralism.  Brussels contacts tell us the Guantanamo 
issue will resonate much more strongly since the Abu Ghraib 
prisoner abuse scandal. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Turkish EU Accession: An Issue with Momentum 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) The issue of Turkish EU accession could be 
particularly prominent in Germany (where, for example, the 
Bavarian CSU has made opposition to Turkish EU membership its 
central campaign theme; see ref E).  But it is expected to 
play a role in other countries as well -- including in 
France, Austria and Italy where we are told center-right and 
conservative parties also intend to campaign against Turkish 
membership.  Both Klaus Welle of the CDU and PES MEP Erika 
Mann (SPD) told us the question of Turkish EU membership 
comes up at virtually every grassroots meeting with voters 
that they attend.  Welle said German voters are worried about 
the implications of Turkish EU membership not only for the 
cohesiveness of the EU, but mainly for the identity of Europe 
as a historically Christian culture.  Although interest in 
the Turkish issue will certainly be mixed and, again, vary 
from country to country and candidate to candidate, its 
possible association in voters\' minds with unease about 
immigration, EU enlargement, a clash of cultures with 
Muslims, and the Cyprus problem provides the Turkey issue 
with noticeable staying power and high emotional content. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
COMMENT: TRANSATLANTIC FOCUS LARGELY NEGATIVE 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) According to most of our interlocutors and judging 
from party manifestos, polls and press, the deciding issues 
for most voters will be their domestic government\'s 
performance on jobs, health care and other bread-and-butter 
issues.  With the focus on what affects voters\' everyday 
lives, even the major \"European\" issues of the season, such 
as the EU constitution or the future of the Stability and 
Growth Pact, are not expected to be central in this European 
elections campaign.  Despite the domestic focus, the question 
of relations with the U.S. will be the single most important 
foreign-policy issue for most Europeans.  With U.S.-EU 
differences over Iraq, and a growing emphasis on the EU as 
\"an equal partner,\" and thus implicitly a counterweight of 
the United States, European voters may focus more on U.S.-EU 
tensions than on positive examples of transatlantic 
cooperation.  Finally, the Abu Ghraib scandal will increase 
attention to the U.S. in a manner that is certain to 
exacerbate ill will.  In this campaign environment until the 
elections at the end of June, U.S. Embassies in member states 
will face a constant challenge in getting the public to look 
at positive elements in transatlantic relations in addition 
to the obvious U.S.-EU differences.  END COMMENT. 
 
10. (C) See USEU website on classified State Intranet at 
http://useu.brussels.state.gov 
 
FOSTER 
"
"16952","5/17/2004 9:03","04BRUSSELS2114","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","03BRUSSELS5470|04BRUSSELS1907|04BRUSSELS916","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 002114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR; CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/06/2014 
TAGS: CMGT, CVIS, SMIG, ELAB, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: VISA WAIVER PROGRAM AND AN ENLARGED EU 
 
REF: (A) 03 BRUSSELS 5470 (B) BRUSSELS 1907 (C) 
     BRUSSELS 0916 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  The enlargement of the EU on May 1 raised 
the number of EU countries not included in the visa waiver 
program (VWP) from one to ten.  New Member States harbor 
hopes that their EU accession can become a way to wrest from 
the U.S. via the EU what they could not obtain bilaterally: 
inclusion in the VWP.  Under existing rules of the Schengen 
Agreement, EU Member States which are not granted visa waiver 
by third countries can in theory invoke a \"solidarity 
mechanism\" requiring automatic visa reciprocity.  The 
European Commission (EC) fears that votes might not be in 
place to override the solidarity mechanism if invoked by one 
of the new Member States, and is pressing the U.S. to expand 
VWP to include the new members.  The EC argues that 2007 
(when internal Schengen borders with the new members are 
expected to be dropped) will be the logical time for VWP 
expansion to occur.  The EU warns that failure to address the 
grievances of the new Member States over visa rules -- or 
removing any current EU Member State from the VWP -- could 
lead to a reaction both side want to avoid.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
VWP:  Impact of Enlargement 
------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) The different treatment of Member States under the 
VWP has emerged as an especially nettlesome issue with the 
enlargement of the EU.  Before enlargement, only one EU 
member state was not on VWP (Greece).  After enlargement, 
that number rises to ten.  At a time when increased scrutiny 
and tightening of the VWP is taking place in Washington, the 
EU has stepped up its lobbying campaign to expand the program 
to include all 25 EU Member States (reftel a).  Expanding VWP 
is consistently at the top of the EU\'s agenda in all 
transatlantic migration dialogues, including the inaugural 
session of the Policy Dialogue on Borders, Transportation and 
Security (PDBTS) on 4/26 (reftel b), and increasingly is in 
the media as well. 
 
3.  (C) The EU is under pressure to be seen making the case 
for new Member States which already suffer from feelings of 
second-class status.  Transitional provisions invoked by the 
15 Member States -- including restricted access to labor 
markets for up to seven years (reftel c) and internal border 
checks until at least 2007 -- have created ill will between 
the old and the new members.  The newcomers have also been 
forced to accept the Schengen Agreement\'s visa black list, 
which includes their immediate eastern neighbors with whom 
they have traditionally enjoyed strong commercial, cultural 
and political ties.  In return for accepting the burdens of 
Schengen, the new members fully expect to reap the benefits 
-- which they see as including visa free travel to the U.S. 
(Comment: In some sense, the EU is trying to salve feelings 
they have created by foisting them onto the bilateral 
relationship.  End Comment.) 
 
4. (C) While EU officials have heard our views that adding to 
the current list of VWP grantees is unlikely, and some have 
privately acknowledge they are swimming against the tide in 
this regard, others have convinced themselves that their 
rationale is persuasive and that the U.S. may in due time 
expand the VWP list.   Optimists in Brussels envision the 
following scenario for 2007, their target year for expanding 
VWP: 
 
-- all EU Member States will be issuing biometric passports 
as a result of internal EU directives (with some going beyond 
the required ICAO and U.S. domestic standards by 
incorporating both fingerprints and digitized photographs); 
-- the new Member States will have just passed a rigorous 
assessment of their border controls in order to accede to the 
benefits of the Schengen agreement as internal borders 
between old and new are removed.  (The EC stresses that this 
assessment will be more than just a pro-forma, rubber-stamp 
because of all the hysteria in the Western Europe about waves 
of \"benefit tourists\" and other hordes of migrants long 
trumpeted by the media.); 
-- the EU Border Agency, most likely to be based in either 
Warsaw or Prague, will be fully functioning and coordinating 
border security measures among the 25 Member States, 
including policy, training and equipment purchases; 
-- the upgraded lookout information system (SIS 2) will be 
providing instant access to all Member States, including 
biometrics-based data on malafide travelers and potential 
terrorists; 
-- the Member States will also be tied together by the new 
Visa Information System where visa issuances can be instantly 
verified at ports of entry; 
-- some old Member States will have opened up their labor 
markets to all new EU citizens; those Europeans eager to gain 
higher wages will have legal options nearby, reducing the 
attractiveness of the U.S. as a destination for clandestine 
laborers; 
-- as happened before with Spain, Portugal and Ireland, the 
economic and social benefits of EU membership will be felt 
most strongly after enlargement.  Labor migration will 
increasingly become cyclical; and 
-- expatriates will increasingly move home with their nest 
eggs and stimulate domestic markets, many of which have 
already been growing faster than the EU norm. 
 
------------------------ 
Solidarity Mechanism: Potential Transatlantic Risk 
------------------------ 
 
5. (C) This is obviously a rosy scenario, especially 
regarding how quickly the economic benefits of EU membership 
would penetrate to the wider population in the new member 
states.  Still, under current Schengen regulations, the EU 
could in theory be forced at any time by the new Member 
States to invoke a \"solidarity mechanism\" which might 
ultimately result in a visa requirement for all American 
citizens traveling to the 25 members of the Schengen 
Agreement.  Under existing terms, any Member State which 
suffers from a lack of visa waiver reciprocity can (but is 
not required to) invoke the solidarity mechanism.  An 
automatic visa requirement would begin after 30 days for 
citizens of that county traveling to all 25 Schengen members 
unless a qualified majority vote determined otherwise.  For 
now, EC officials have been trying to discourage new Member 
States from triggering the solidarity mechanism, but they are 
worried about their ability to manage the process. 
 
6. (C) During the PDBTS meeting, Justice and Home Affairs 
Director General Jonathan Faull stated, \"We urge you to think 
again about ways to treat all EU countries the same way in 
the foreseeable future.\"  He acknowledged Washington-based 
difficulties by noting that the expansion was not expected to 
take place immediately and that the EC would not expect all 
countries to be added simultaneously.  Faull explained that 
the EU\'s own certification process on new member compliance 
with Schengen border standards will be done on a 
country-specific basis.  This certification process, which 
must take place for new members to gain unhindered movement 
within the union, will begin in 2006.  (Note.  Although 
certification is done individually, for practical reasons it 
is likely that the eastern European countries will be brought 
in as a block.  If not, a huge effort would have to be made 
on \"temporary\" external frontiers, such as the Polish-Slovak 
border, if one of these two countries were certified before 
the other and granted full Schengen privileges.  End note.) 
 
7. (C) Faull described the internal struggle to keep \"the 
more worried, more excitable\" new Member States from invoking 
the solidarity mechanism.  \"We have had to fight to keep the 
lid on this,\" he said.  Regarding a potential visa 
requirement for Americans traveling to the Schengen area, 
Faull noted, \"We don\'t want to do that\" and added \"we\'re not 
trying to frighten\" the U.S.  He also briefly mentioned theEC might attempt to 
modify the existing solidarity mechanism 
to make reciprocity less automatic. 
 
8. (C) During separate consultations on 4/26 with CA DAS 
Janice Jacobs, DG JHA Head of Unit for Borders and Visas Jan 
de Ceuster sketched a few more details about current thinking 
to diffuse the potentially damaging nature of the solidarity 
mechanism vis-a-vis the transatlantic relationship.  This 
would include eliminating the automatic visa imposition in 
order to give the EC more room to maneuver and negotiate with 
the third party.  Another change would be taking the 
initiative from an aggrieved state to trigger the solidarity 
mechanism, and replacing it with an obligation for all states 
to notify the EC about any lack of reciprocity. 
Theoretically, this would relieve any aggrieved Member State 
from being labeled a spoiler or troublemaker.  (Greece, for 
example, has chosen to ignore the lack of reciprocity with 
the U.S. and has not invoked the solidarity mechanism.) 
 
9. (C) De Ceuster said that JHA Commissioner Vitorino was 
convinced that the agreement needed to be amended.  However, 
whether this will be possible given the highly charged 
atmosphere remains to be seen.  Already, some press reports 
characterize this rethinking of the Schengen agreement as 
\"caving in\" to the U.S. 
 
10. (SBU) Jacobs outlined the procedure for adding any new 
countries to the VWP, pointing out that the first criterion 
was B1/B2 visa refusal rates of three percent or less.  In 
the post 9/11 world, EU interlocutors have a hard time 
remembering that socio-economic factors loom large in visa 
waiver in addition to homeland security concerns.  Instead, 
they continue to pin high hopes on technological advances 
with passports and border controls. 
 
------------------------ 
Other Countries on the Radar Scope 
------------------------ 
 
11. (U) As of May 1, other developed countries have joined 
the US in treating EU Member States differently with regard 
to visas.  Because the new Member States were obliged to 
adopt the visa white list as of May 1, their Schengen 
obligations forced them to drop visa requirements for Canada, 
New Zealand, Australia and other countries on the white list. 
 These countries, by and large, have not reciprocated in 
full.  Canada retains visa requirements on all ten except 
Malta, Cyprus and Slovenia.  New Zealand\'s status is similar 
to Canada, although Hungary is also on their visa waiver 
list. 
 
12. (U) Australia recently liberalized its travel regime for 
the new EU Member States by granting \"electronic visa 
arrangements\" (EVA) for the nine new members who do not enjoy 
the \"electronic travel authority\" in place with the other 16. 
 Under the EVA, travelers submit visa requests and payments 
on line.  They can either be granted a visa electronically 
and travel without any further bureaucratic impediment, or 
they are directed to a consulate for a personal interview. 
 
13. (C) According to a Canadian immigration officer in 
Brussels, Canada fears that the new Member States might first 
invoke the solidarity mechanism against Canada rather than 
the U.S.  The political ramifications would be fewer, as 
would potential consular workload increases and disruptions 
to tourist industries. 
 
14. (C) On 5/6, New Zealand DCM told PRMOff that although New 
Zealand was not considering immediate changes to its visa 
waiver list, they had made a policy decision (which will not 
be advertised) to extend visa waiver to all 25 EU Member 
States in 2007 or as soon as the new Member States are fully 
certified to meet Schengen standards and the internal 
boundary between old and new is removed.  Meanwhile, New 
Zealand plans to expand its work holiday program (similar to 
some of our J-1 visas), and it will also open an embassy in 
Warsaw.  Officials hope these positive signals discourage any 
activation of the solidarity mechanism against New Zealand. 
Furthermore, the DCM noted that there are no significant 
Eastern European magnet communities in New Zealand (as is the 
case in the U.S., Canada and Australia) which largely fuel 
the demand for visa waiver. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
15. (C) We doubt EU dissatisfaction over the VWP situation 
will escalate to the worst-case scenario (visas all the way 
around -- except the UK and Ireland) with regard to the U.S. 
European countries are not equipped to begin issuing visas to 
Americans any more than we are prepared to ramp back up visa 
issuance for VWP-eligible countries.  The negative impact on 
U.S. tourism in Europe would also be a major disincentive. 
And peer pressure from other EU countries that benefit from 
VWP would prove a natural brake on those countries that might 
consider invoking the solidarity clause.  The EC is most 
probably \"buying time\" with the new Member States on VWP by 
selling the rationale (described in paragraph 4) that 
positive changes will come in 2007. 
 
16.  (C) Still, the risks are there.  At the Visa Working 
Group on May 12, Lithuania threatened to invoke the 
solidarity mechanism, and it reporedly took high level 
intervention from Commissioner Vitorino to dissuade them. 
Sensitivities of enlargement countries -- such as no access 
to western European labor markets and border checks remaining 
in place between old and new Member States -- give the EC 
very little room for maneuvering internally if one or more of 
the new members take up this issue with a vengeance.  For 
this reason Commissioner Vitorino raised VWP during his 
consultations in Washington on May 12.  The mention of VWP in 
the Department\'s press statement regarding his meeting with 
DepSec Armitage provoked a series of press inquiries, both to 
the Commission and to USEU, regarding the outcome of 
consultations on this issue.  Whereas interest from the 
Poles, Czechs and Hungarians has long been heard in Brussels, 
new interest is being shown by the Baltics countries. 
 
17. (C) The Washington dynamic and review process of current 
VWP Members could also precipitate a transatlantic clash over 
visas.  While we doubt the EU would have the stomach to 
provoke a visa spat over the new members, a decision to 
remove VWP privileges from one of the EU\'s older members 
would likely tip the balance within the Schengen group 
against the U.S.  In the spirit of the newly created PDTBS, 
any possible changes in the visa regime should take place 
only after close consultations with the EC, the EU Member 
States and a well-coordinated public diplomacy campaign. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17060","5/19/2004 13:46","04BRUSSELS2180","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/UMB, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/19/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KDEM, UP, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU-UKRAINE:  CONDITIONING ENHANCED TIES ON 
ELECTIONS 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  After a delay due to internal EU friction, 
the EU hopes to complete negotiation on an \"Action Plan\" for 
Ukraine in time for the July EU-Ukraine summit.  The plan 
will list political and economic reforms that Ukraine will 
undertake, in return for reciprocal EU steps to bring Ukraine 
closer to Europe.  The EU has placed one overarching 
condition on implementing the plan once it is agreed:  that 
Ukraine\'s presidential elections must pass the smell test, 
and media freedom must be respected.  If Ukraine meets this 
test, the EU is prepared to offer enhanced cooperation of 
security issues, more and better assistance, and the 
possibility for an enhanced relationship that would bring 
Ukraine one step closer to potential EU membership.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (C)  According to the EU Council Secretariat\'s Senior 
Ukraine analyst, there were \"no surprises\" at the May 18 
EU-Ukraine Cooperation Council meeting in Brussels.  Our 
contact, Sofia Moreira de Sousa (protect), said the main 
topic of discussion was the EU\'s new \"European Neighborhood 
Policy,\" which envisages joint development of an \"Action 
Plan\" to bring Ukraine closer to the EU.  The EU also pressed 
Ukraine to increase its border control cooperation with 
Moldova. The Ukrainian delegation was led by Prime Minister 
Yanukovych; the EU side was chaired by Irish FM Cowen. 
 
Internal EU friction puts Action Plans on hold 
------------------ 
3.  (C)  At the May 18 meeting, Ukraine received (at its 
request) a briefing on the EU\'s recently-approved 
Neighborhood Policy, the elaboration of which had put on hold 
earlier negotiations on a joint Action Plan for moving 
Ukraine closer to EU norms.  The European Commission had 
begun \"Action Plan\" negotiations earlier this year with both 
Ukraine and Moldova, conducting three rounds of talks and 
providing an initial draft to both countries but not, 
importantly, to EU member states.  Ukraine and Moldova each 
began to approach member states, lobbying for changes in the 
Commission\'s draft.  This prompted member states, some of 
whom were surprised to learn the details of the Commission\'s 
proposals from Ukraine and Moldova, to put both sets of 
negotiation on hold, pending elaboration by member states of 
an agreed \"strategy\" for negotiating the plans.  The new 
strategy, adopted in April, emphasizes the importance the EU 
will place on democracy, human rights, and political reform, 
as well as trade liberalization, in the Action Plans. It also 
provides for the EU Presidency and Council Secretariat 
(representing member states) to participate in the 
negotiations. 
 
Putting the Action Plan back on track 
------------------------ 
4.  (C)  With an agreed strategy now in place, the EU now 
wants to move ahead with the Action Plan for Ukraine.  Many 
EU member states are pushing to wrap up negotiations on the 
plans for both Ukraine and Moldova in time for the upcoming 
EU-Ukraine summit in July.  The Netherlands, who will be in 
the Presidency then, are among the states pushing to complete 
the Action Plan by then.  This doesn\'t leave much time -- to 
meet the July deadline, as the Action Plan will need to be 
approved by EU Ministers at their June 14-15 meeting.  The EU 
plans to hold its next round of negotiations on the Action 
Plan during the first week in June.  Getting broad agreement 
on the plan by the summmit in July would allow formal 
adoption of the Action Plan in September -- before Ukraine\'s 
presidential elections in October. 
 
EU to offer incentives 
--------------- 
7.  (C)  According to Moreira, the Action Plan will list a 
series of steps the EU expects Ukraine to take, coupled with 
steps the EU would take to integrate Ukraine more closely 
with the EU.  There will not be any explicit linkages or quid 
pro quos in the Action Plan, nor will Ukraine be allowed to 
\"cherry pick\" the steps it takes, or the EU response. 
However, the menu of incentives the EU can offer include: 
 
--  Closer ESDP (security) cooperation, including EU use of 
Ukraine airlift capability (a key objective for Ukraine), 
training for Ukrainian police deployed in Macedonia, and 
\"crisis-management\" coordination; 
--  Technical assistance in counter-terrorism and trafficking 
of persons; 
--  Increased, or targeted assistance for Ukraine 
--  Exchange of experts to facilitate harmonization of 
legislation; 
--  Border security assistance; Ukraine wants EU help in 
developing software to enhance data protection. 
What Ukraine wants: A deal on Airlift 
------------------ 
6.  (C)  Ukraine is interested in all of the above, Moreira 
said.  In particular, it hopes to nail down an agreement for 
providing airlift capacity for EU military deployments.  This 
is something Moreira said the EU can deliver -- providing 
Ukraine earns it.  The EU is also holding out the possibility 
that, if Action Plan implementation proceeds smoothly, it can 
offer a yet-to-be elaborated \"Enhanced Neighborhood 
Agreement\" that would involve closer ties than the current 
\"Association Agreement\" but still be a step short of 
candidacy for EU membership.  One element of such an enhanced 
relationship could be some kind of facilitated visa 
arrangement with Ukraine. 
EU focus:  Elections and Media Freedom are Fundamental 
------------------------- 
7.  (C)  All of the above incentives, though, are dependent 
on Ukraine holding free and fair elections and respecting 
media freedom, Moreira said.  She claimed the EU has 
consistently sent the message that performance on these 
issues is the sine qua non for moving ahead with any elements 
of an action plan.  This was the message delivered at the 
April 29 ministerial with Ukraine, and it was reiterated May 
18, both publicly and privately.  Moreira said these issues 
are key; the EU cannot \"lose face\" on this.  Member states 
will not move ahead with implementation of the Action Plan in 
the face of blatant manipulation of the media and press. 
 
Comment 
------- 
8.  (C)  The EU\'s decision -- at least in its own mind -- to 
condition implementation of the Action Plan on how the 
upcoming elections are handled reflects the uncommon but 
welcome introduction of some hard-nosed skepticism in EU 
policy.  This will make it easier for us to coordinate our 
approach to Kiev in the run up to the elections.  Given the 
GOU\'s blatant manipulation of the recent mayoral election in 
Mukacheve, though, it is not clear that the EU\'s message has 
registered fully in Kiev. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17074","5/19/2004 14:39","04BRUSSELS2181","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04DUBLIN737","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002181 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU FM TALKS RAISE DOUBTS ABOUT JUNE TARGET 
FOR CONSTITUTIONAL TREATY 
 
REF:  DUBLIN 737 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) EU Foreign Ministers in the May 17-18 
session of the Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) - 
the first since the collapse of the December 2003 
Summit - made little progress on the draft EU 
Constitutional Treaty.  Irish FM/IGC chair Cowen 
nevertheless remained confident the Treaty will be 
agreed at the June 17-18 European Council.  But 
several FMs, including UK Foreign Secretary Straw, 
Belgian FM Michel and Polish FM Cimoszewicz, gave 
gloomier predictions.  Cimoszewicz complained that 
nobody was prepared to listen to his proposals for 
resolving the key dispute over voting rights in the 
Council (\"If it goes on like that, I would not bet 
on an agreement\").  IGC negotiations will continue 
on May 24.    END SUMMARY 
 
2. (SBU) Cowen cited progress on \"a number of 
issues,\" but only pointed to a few.  One was 
apparent agreement on a proposal for teams of three 
countries to share duties over 18 months as chairs 
of ministerial level Councils (other than the 
External Relations and ECOFIN Councils, which would 
have longer term chairs).  COMMENT:  Although one of 
the Constitutional Treaty\'s purported aims is to 
make the EU easier to understand, this formula 
strikes us as no simplification of EU structures. 
END COMMENT. 
 
SCOPE OF QUALIFIED MAJORITY VOTE: DIFFERENCES REMAIN 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
3. (SBU) As anticipated by the Irish (reftel), 
agreeing on the scope of how far to extend qualified 
majority voting (QMV) in the Council continues to 
pose real problems.  Sources involved in the 
discussions told us the only additional clarity 
after this week\'s IGC meetings was that QMV would 
not be extended to foreign and security policy 
(CFSP), where countries such as the UK, Denmark, 
Latvia, Slovakia and Malta all spoke out in favor of 
retaining a requirement on consensus.  For other 
areas under debate, the Presidency refrained from 
making new proposals at this stage.  The UK restated 
its \"red lines,\" in particular for retaining the 
consensus requirement on taxation and social 
security, but also continued concern about judicial 
cooperation in criminal matters.  Luxembourg and 
several new members (Poland, Estonia, Slovakia, and 
Malta) backed the UK\'s call for a continued veto 
right on the tax and social security issues. 
 
4. (SBU) While no agreements were reached, FMs did 
reportedly discuss in some detail a possible 
\"emergency brake\" procedure that could apply to some 
areas.  This would allow a member of the Council who 
considers that a draft European framework law would 
infringe the fundamental principles of its legal 
system to request that the piece be referred to the 
European Council.  The leaders could decide to 
request a new proposal from the Commission or go 
ahead with the legislative process under QMV. 
Supporters of extending QMV to as many areas as 
possible (reported to include governments such as 
Belgium, Greece, and Spain) argue this might be a 
way of introducing QMV in more areas while still 
giving due deference to national interests. 
 
COMMISSION SIZE DEBATED 
----------------------- 
 
5. (U) Another lengthy topic of debate was the size 
of future Commissions.  The Irish tabled \"ideas\" for 
retaining the one Commissioner per country principle 
until a given date (such as 2014), after which a new 
system would take effect, based on equal rotation. 
Belgium, France and Germany were most vocal in 
calling for a reduced Commission to allow for its 
effective functioning.  The most likely option would 
be a Commission of two-thirds the number of EU 
members, but other possibilities exist.  At the 
other end of the spectrum, many new Member States as 
well as Denmark, Austria and Greece, stuck to the 
one Commissioner per country formula.  The UK argued 
the newly-created EU FM position (who would also sit 
on the Commission) should not be counted against a 
Member States rotation. 
 
FRANCE CALLS FOR MORE AGGRESSIVE APPROACH 
----------------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) French FM Barnier publicly called on the 
Presidency to produce a global compromise package: 
\"We need a moment of truth.  It\'s time for the 
Presidency to take a risk.\"  The call was perceived 
as aimed at countering efforts by the UK to broaden 
the unanimity rule in order to secure public support 
in a prospective referendum.  Speaking at his final 
press conference, Cowen politely rebuffed Barnier: 
\"It\'s not a question of taking risks.  It\'s a 
question of having sufficient discussion that will 
allow the Presidency to put forward proposals that 
will meet with agreement.\"  Cowen said the Irish 
would offer a global package when the time was 
right.  He also announced an extra IGC ministerial 
on May 24. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7. (SBU) This week\'s negotiations did not make the 
hoped-for progress, casting doubts about the 
leaders\' chances to meet their self-imposed target. 
This is not necessarily fatal for the draft 
Constitutional Treaty: the IGC\'s unofficial motto 
(\"Nothing has been agreed until everything has been 
agreed\") indicates how difficult it can be to assess 
what flexibility exists in various Member State 
positions.  The final litmus test of the Irish 
negotiating tactics will come at the June 17-18 
Summit.  But with the Euro-elections just a few days 
earlier, the stated intention of many countries to 
consider any concession on the institutions only as 
a part of a final overall package, the added 
pessimism that even a deal agreed in the IGC might 
not survive the ratification process in all 25 
Member States, and the continued uncertainty over 
the domestic political situation in Poland are all 
factors that complicate the betting and the search 
for a Constitution deal. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17208","5/24/2004 13:32","04BRUSSELS2196","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS1090","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 BRUSSELS 002196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/24/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN ELECTIONS: KEY RETURNING MEPS 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 1090 
 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 1094 
     C. C) BRUSSELS 1736 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 2061 
     E. E) BRUSSELS 2107 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  With the campaign now in full swing, 
almost all of the party lists for the June 10-13 European 
elections have been released in the 25 EU member states. 
This message describes some of the influential members of the 
European Parliament (MEPs) who, based on their party-list 
ranking, are likely to be re-elected and affect U.S. 
interests in the coming term.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
SERIES OF PRE-ELECTION REPORTS 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (U) This is the fifth in a series of reports on the 
European elections.  Ref A provides general background on the 
European Parliament (EP) and the European elections; ref B is 
a broad analysis of expected campaign issues and election 
outcomes; ref C analyzes the possible impact on the EP of 
MEPs from the 10 new EU member states; and ref E discusses 
the role of U.S.-EU relations in the elections campaign.  The 
final cable in the series will examine possible post-election 
realignment of EP party groups. 
 
------------------------- 
POETTERING FOR PRESIDENT? 
------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Hans-Gert Poettering, 58, is first on the Christian 
Democratic Union (CDU) list in the German state of Lower 
Saxony, and recognized in Germany as the CDU\'s top candidate 
nationally.  An MEP since 1979, he studied law, history and 
political science in Bonn, Geneva and at Columbia University 
in New York (in 1971), obtaining his doctorate in 1974.  He 
is an honorary professor at the University of Osnabrueck in 
the district he represents.  In the EP, Poettering has been 
Chairman of the EPP-ED group (Christian Democrats and 
Conservatives) since 1999 and is expected to keep that 
position for at least the first half of the coming term. 
 
4. (C) Poettering is a strong believer in further EU 
integration but has acted pragmatically in attempting to 
assure the EPP-ED of a continued plurality in the Parliament. 
 Earlier this year Poettering and Tory leader Michael Howard 
negotiated a deal keeping the euroskeptic UK Conservatives in 
the EPP-ED and opening the door to center-right euroskeptic 
parties from the new member states. 
 
5. (C) If the EEP-ED comes out of the June elections with its 
plurality intact, Poettering will be a prime candidate for EP 
President.  In meetings with U.S. officials, Poettering tends 
to repeat assurances that he is a friend of the U.S. while 
chiding his U.S. interlocutors at length on U.S. policy with 
which he disagrees, and alleged U.S. unilateralism and lack 
of interest in the EU. 
 
------------------------------------ 
ELMAR BROK: A GERMAN MULTILATERALIST 
------------------------------------ 
 
6. (C) Elmar Brok, 58, EPP-ED, is first on the CDU list in 
the German state of Nordrhein-Westfalen.  After earning a 
degree in law and political science, he worked for a short 
time as a journalist but quickly moved into politics.  An MEP 
since 1979, Brok was Chairman of the Foreign Affairs 
Committee this term.  As one of the EP representatives to the 
Convention on the Future of Europe, Brok has actively 
contributed to the debate on the proposed EU Constitutional 
Treaty, tabling numerous proposals and amendments.  His 
flamboyant and volatile style (at times, he seems to be 
either fast asleep or delivering a passionate discourse, 
often peppered with biting criticism) leaves few indifferent. 
 
7. (C) As Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman, Brok has made 
transatlantic relations a priority.  He believes that further 
EU integration, a Europe that speaks with \"one voice\" on 
foreign and security policy, is necessary for the equal 
partnership on which a strong U.S.-EU relationship must 
ultimately be based.  Both Brok and Poettering (see paras 
3-5) are typical German Christian-Democrat \"multilateralist\" 
MEPs, whose inclinations toward the United States waver 
between a commitment to good transatlantic relations and an 
ideological attachment to multilateralism that tends to 
entail a measure of antipathy toward the U.S.  In meetings 
with U.S. officials Brok has sometimes displayed the 
aforementioned volatility, providing his counterparts with 
frank and audible exchanges. 
 
------------------------------------ 
JAMES ELLES: TRANSATLANTIC NETWORKER 
------------------------------------ 
 
8. (C) James Elles, 54, EPP-ED, is third on the Conservative 
list in the South East region, UK.  (NOTE: With that position 
on the list, we consider his re-election probable, but not 
certain.  END NOTE.)  Elles was educated at Eton College and 
Edinburgh University.  After a stint in the private sector 
for Arthur Young, the predecessor of Ernst and Young, Ellis 
worked from 1976-84 in the European Commission. For four of 
those years, he was the Assistant to the Director-General for 
Agriculture.  Elles has been an MEP since 1984.  He is the 
first British Conservative to have been elected a Vice 
President of the EP. 
 
9. (C) Elles founded and is the principal force behind the 
Transatlantic Policy Network (TPN), an association that 
brings together members of Congress, MEPs and the American 
and European business and academic communities to \"build 
transatlantic bridges.\"  Elles is largely responsible for the 
TPN strategy for strengthening the transatlantic partnership, 
which contains formulations and recommendations that are 
gaining momentum on both sides of the Atlantic.  The foremost 
example of this is the proposal to build a fundamentally 
barrier-free \"Transatlantic Market,\" concentrating first on 
financial services and capital markets, civil aviation, the 
digital economy, competition policy and regulatory 
cooperation.   Elles also founded the European Ideas Network 
(EIN), an EPP-ED-sponsored pan-European network for exchange 
of views on the challenges facing the EU.  EIN events have 
attracted leading figures in the European center-right. 
Elles is an expert networker on both sides of the Atlantic, 
well connected in the U.S. Congress.  He is a persistent 
salesman of his ideas on transatlantic relations, and skilled 
at motivating people to support his projects. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
GRAHAM WATSON: AMBITIOUS LIBERAL DEMOCRAT 
----------------------------------------- 
 
10. (C) Graham Watson, 48, ELDR, is first on the Liberal 
Democrat list, South West region, UK.  Born and raised in 
Scotland, Watson earned his degree in modern languages.  He 
speaks four European languages and is a trained interpreter. 
From 1983-87 Watson was Head of the private office of Sir 
David Steel MP, then Leader of the Liberal Party.  Before 
joining the EP, Watson worked in London and Hong Kong for the 
Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.  An MEP since 
1994, Watson succeeded Pat Cox as the Chairman of the ELDR 
group (European Liberal Democrat and Reformist Party) when 
Cox became EP President in 2002. 
 
11. (C) Under Watson,s leadership the ELDR quickly became a 
noticeably more vocal critic of U.S. policy.  Watson has 
repeatedly spoken out on U.S. policy on many issues, calling 
again and again, for example, for trials for Guantanamo 
detainees and for U.S. support of the International Criminal 
Court (ICC).  He also is a primary advocate of increasing 
data protection measures in legislation, which has inhibited 
cooperation with the U.S. on biometrics and sharing of 
Passenger Name Records (PNR) or airline passengers.  On the 
other hand, Watson shares the U.S. view on the China arms 
embargo and has been one of the strongest opponents of the 
efforts of some member states to lift the EU embargo.  Watson 
has played a central role, along with European Commission 
President Romano Prodi and French Union for French Democracy 
(UDF) leader Francois Bayrou, in the possible formation, 
after the June elections, of a new centrist, federalist EP 
party group.  The group would include the ELDR, members of 
the French UDF, Prodi\'s Italian center-left Marguerita Party, 
and several regional parties.  Watson is personable and 
attentive in meetings.  He is ambitious and articulate. 
 
----------------------------------- 
TERENCE WYNN: POSSIBLE EP PRESIDENT 
----------------------------------- 
 
12. (C) Terence (Terry) Wynn, 57, PES, third on the Labour 
list, North West region, UK.  From 1962-74, Wynn was in the 
royal navy, starting as an engineer apprentice and leaving as 
a seagoing marine engineer.  From 1974-79, he was a works 
engineer, engineer surveyor and shipyard manager.  He worked 
as a training executive for the next ten years,  earning a 
Master\'s degree in manpower studies and industrial relations 
in 1984.  Still active as an itinerant Methodist preacher, 
Wynn is a member of the Christian Socialist Movement and 
author of the book \"Onward Christian Socialist.\"  An MEP 
since 1989, Wynn is Chairman of the Budgets Committee, which 
oversees a large part of the EU budget.  Wynn is rumored to 
be in the running for EP President, although some 
interlocutors say there may be significant opposition to 
Wynn\'s candidacy.  Wynn has been informative and responsive 
in meetings with U.S. officials; a Wynn EP presidency would 
be relatively good news for the U.S. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
MARTIN SCHULZ: BERLUSCONI-BAITER TO PES LEADER? 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
13. (C) Martin Schultz, 48, PES, is first on the Social 
Democratic Party (SPD) list in Germany.  After finishing 
school, Schulz took a two-year apprenticeship in bookselling. 
 In 1982 he opened his own bookstore, which he ran for twelve 
years.  During that period he was also active in local 
politics.  In 1987, he became mayor of his hometown of 
Wuerselen, at age 31 the youngest mayor in the state of 
Nordrhein-Westfalen.  Elected MEP in 1994, Schulz is Vice 
Chairman of the PES group and within that, Chairman of the 
German SPD group.  According to our interlocutors, Schulz is 
currently the favorite (but not a shoo-in) to become PES 
Chairman in the coming term.  Schultz made headlines 
throughout Europe in July 2003, when his baiting of Italian 
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi during an EP debate led 
Berlusconi to shoot back that Schultz reminded him of a Nazi 
concentration camp guard -- a comment for which German 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder demanded an apology.  Berlusconi 
said later he was joking, claiming according to some press 
reports that he was referring to Schulz, resemblance to 
Sergeant Schultz of the TV series &Hogan,s Heroes.8 
 
----------------------------------------- 
HANNES SWOBODA: ALTERNATIVE PES CHAIRMAN? 
----------------------------------------- 
 
14. (C) Hannes Swoboda, 57, PES, first on the Social 
Democratic Party list, Austria.  After receiving an M.A. in 
economics and a doctorate in law, Swoboda worked for the 
Vienna Chamber of Labor (Arbeiterkammer) from 1972-86, 
working especially on financial economics, environmental 
policy and municipal policy.  From 1983-96 he held various 
political offices in Vienna.  Swoboda has been an MEP since 
1996.  During the 1999-2004 term, he was a member of the 
Foreign Affairs Committee, Vice Chairman of the EP Delegation 
for Relations with Southeast Europe and member of the EP 
Delegation for Relations with the Palestinian Legislative 
Council.  A Vice Chairman of the PES group, Swoboda is a 
frequent and articulate participant in EP debates on foreign 
affairs.  He is especially interested in the Balkans and 
active in EP deliberations on the EU Stabilization and 
Association progress of countries of the former Yugoslavia. 
Swoboda is an outspoken opponent of U.S. policy in Iraq and 
of U.S. \"arrogance,\" as he once put it in a meeting with a 
U.S. official, regarding the International Criminal Court. 
Although very blunt in his criticism, Swoboda is also 
pragmatic and willing to work with the U.S. on issues before 
the EP that affect U.S. interests.  Swoboda may become 
Chairman of the PES group if Martin Schulz cannot garner 
enough support (see para 13). 
 
------------------------------------- 
EMMA NICHOLSON: ANTI-ADOPTION ENIGMA; 
SUPPORTER ON IRAQ 
------------------------------------- 
 
15. (C) Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne, 62, ELDR, 
second on the Liberal Democrat list in the South East region, 
UK.  (NOTE: Her position on the list does not guarantee her 
re-election.  END NOTE.)  A patron of over 50 charity 
organizations, Nicholson was long-time Director of 
International Development and Director of Fundraising for the 
Save the Children Fund (1974-85).  She is also a World Health 
Organization (WHO) Envoy for Health, Peace and Development. 
Before joining the Liberal Democrats in 1995, Nicholson was 
Vice Chairperson of the Conservative Party (1983-87).  She 
was elected Conservative MP in the House of Commons in 1987. 
Since 1997, she has been a Life Peer and Member of the House 
of Lords.  An MEP since 1999, Nicholson was Foreign Affairs 
Committee Vice Chairperson this term. 
 
16. (C) EP Rapporteur on Romania this term, Nicholson is best 
known to U.S. officials as an implacable foe of inter-country 
adoptions of Romanian children.  She believes the UN 
Convention on the Rights of the Child forbids inter-country 
adoption except as a very last resort, and she maintains that 
group-home-style institutionalization is a preferable 
alternative.  Nicholson is also greatly interested in the 
Islamic world, and is founder and President of the AMAR 
International Charitable Foundation that assists Marsh Arabs 
and refugees.  Unlike most of her ELDR colleagues, Nicholson 
supported U.S.-UK military action in Iraq.  In both the 
positive and negative sense, Nicholson is a crusader on human 
rights issues.  She has won -- deservedly -- both respect and 
mistrust for her single-mindedness.  Interlocutors should 
speak clearly and at appropriate volume: deaf in one ear, 
Nicholson tries, sometimes unsuccessfully, to read lips. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
DANIEL COHN-BENDIT: CHARISMATIC GREENS LEADER 
--------------------------------------------- 
17. (C) Daniel Cohn-Bendit, 59, second on the Greens list, 
Germany.  Born in France and schooled in Germany, the current 
member of the French Greens group is running on the German 
party list this time.  After having returned to France to 
study at the University of Nanterre, Cohn-Bendit became a 
leader of the May Revolution in Paris in 1968.  Known then as 
\"Dany le Rouge\" (Danny the Red), he was expelled from France 
after the May riots.  Cohn-Bendit then established himself, 
along with current German FonMin Joschka Fischer, as an 
anarcho-revolutionary activist and publisher in Frankfurt. In 
1984 Cohn-Bendit joined the German Greens party, where he, 
again with Joschka Fischer, became a prominent \"realist\" and 
opponent of the \"eco-fundamentalist\" wing of the Greens 
party.  An MEP since 1994, Cohn-Bendit has co-chaired the 
Greens/Free European Alliance group in the EP since 2002. 
His fame and charisma has brought the Greens more impact and 
visibility than their numbers would lead one to expect.  In 
February of this year, Cohn-Bendit was a driving force behind 
the founding of a \"European Green Party,\" and, although he is 
second on the German list because Greens custom demands a 
woman lead the list, Cohn-Bendit is the acknowledged leading 
figure in the Greens campaign throughout Europe. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
CAROLINE JACKSON: MEASURED AND THOUGHTFUL 
----------------------------------------- 
 
18. (C) Caroline Jackson, 57, EPP-ED, second on the 
Conservatives list in the South West region, UK.  Jackson 
studied classics and history and earned a doctorate at Oxford 
with a thesis on politics in the nineteenth century.  She is 
married to UK MP Robert Jackson.  An MEP since 1984, she was 
Chairman of the Environment, Public Health and Consumer 
Policy Committee during this term.  Articulate, intelligent 
and soft-spoken, Jackson has been a key interlocutor for U.S. 
officials in Brussels on a wide range of issues from GM foods 
to the Kyoto Protocol and the proposed Chemicals Directive 
(REACH).  Like most of her Conservative compatriots, Jackson 
is critical of the Brussels tendency to over-regulate; at the 
same time, she has made it a priority to investigate member 
states\' poor implementation of EU law.  Jackson made the news 
this spring when, after having succeeded in getting 
British-style breakfast on the EP cafeteria menu, she 
complained that \"the scrambled egg tastes (like) recycled EU 
documents...thanks to European food safety rules....\"  She 
said she would follow up with Food Safety Commissioner David 
Byrne. 
 
---------------------------------- 
SARAH LUDFORD: GUANTANAMO CRUSADER 
---------------------------------- 
 
19. (C) Baroness Sarah Ludford, 53, ELDR, first on the 
Liberal Democrat list, London, UK.  An economist, barrister 
and a life peer in the British House of Lords since 1997, 
Ludford was elected MEP in 1999.  She was an active member of 
the Citizen Rights committee this term, where she championed 
measures to protect victims of trafficking in persons, as the 
U.S. has, but consistently opposed the U.S. on Guantanamo, 
PNR and other policies she believes violate human rights. 
During a November 2003 visit to the U.S., the Washington Post 
quoted her on her views on the U.S. government:  \"We think 
(Colin Powell) is our only hope....He\'s the only one in the 
Bush administration who has some sanity about him.  The 
others are completely mad.\"  Ludford told us the quote was 
accurate, but claimed she did not know she was speaking on 
the record.  The de facto EP lead on Guantanamo, Ludford 
organized a public hearing on the issue to which she invited 
relatives of EU-member-state citizen Guantanamo detainees. 
The hearing garnered extensive TV, radio and print coverage 
-- Ludford alienates even many of her EP colleagues with her 
outspokenness and lack of discretion, but she is effective in 
bringing attention to her issues. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
ERIKA MANN: KEY PRO-U.S. SOCIAL DEMOCRAT 
---------------------------------------- 
 
20. (C) Erika Mann, 53, PES, eighth on the SPD list, Germany. 
 A business consultant by trade, Mann has been an MEP since 
1994.  In the EP, Mann focuses on industry and trade policy, 
information society and telecommunications, and transatlantic 
relations.  She is a co-founder of the Transatlantic Policy 
Network (TPN) with James Elles (see paras 8-9).  Mann is very 
active in TPN and is a key proponent of strong transatlantic 
relations in the EP.  She is key precisely because she is an 
influential MEP in the German SPD -- the largest national 
group within the Party of European Socialists (PES) and a 
group not currently known as particularly pro-American.  In 
fact, her pro-U.S. stance has earned her the occasional 
nickname of \"Am-Erica Mann.\"  She comes from the German state 
of Lower Saxony (although eighth on the SPD list nationally, 
she is the top Lower Saxony candidate), where her SPD comrade 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder hails from -- she knows 
Schroeder and is well connected to his many close SPD 
associates from Lower Saxony. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
ANDERS WIJKMAN: INTERLOCUTOR ON DEVELOPMENT 
------------------------------------------- 
 
21. (C) Anders Wijkman, 59, EPP-ED, first on the Christian 
Democrat list, Sweden.  An MEP since 1999, Wijkman has had an 
illustrious public affairs career.  He has been a member of 
the Swedish parliament (1971-78); Secretary General of the 
Swedish Red Cross (1979-88); Head of the Swedish Society for 
Nature Conservation (1989-91); and Assistant UN Administrator 
and Head of Policy at the UNDP (1995-97).  Since 1998, 
Wijkman has held the title of Ambassador in the Swedish 
Foreign Ministry.  He is a member of the Club of Rome, the 
World Academy of Art and Science and the Swedish Royal 
Academy of Sciences.  An MEP since 1999, Wijkman specializes 
in environment and development issues, with a particular 
focus on the Kyoto Protocol, renewable energy sources, 
HIV-AIDS in developing countries, and population policies. 
Wijkman has effectively pursued dialogue with U.S. officials 
on development assistance (in which the EP plays a key role). 
 He has been a key supporter of the Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM).  In meetings with 
U.S. officials, he has tempered the harsh attacks of his 
Development Committee colleagues on the USG decision to cut 
funds to UNFPA. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
KLAUS-HEINER LEHNE: BUSINESS REGS POWERHOUSE 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
22. (C) Klaus-Heiner Lehne, 46, EPP-ED, sixth on the CDU list 
in the German state of Nordrhein-Westfalen.  (NOTE: His 
re-election is probable, but not certain.  END NOTE.)  A 
lawyer by trade, Lehne studied physics, philosophy and law in 
Freiburg, Bonn, Cologne and his hometown of Duesseldorf. 
After holding several offices in local politics in 
Duesseldorf, Lehne was a member of the German parliament 
(Bundestag) from 1992-94.  An MEP since 1994, Lehne has been 
rapporteur for corporate law, harmonization of contract law, 
harmonization of civil and commercial law, and money 
laundering.  In all of the above areas and in company law in 
particular, Lehne\'s influence is felt throughout the EU 
institutions; he was a key player in the successful 
German-led effort to dissipate the reach of the European 
Commission\'s takeover proposal.  He will be heavily involved 
as rapporteur or EPP-ED leader in the EP\'s consideration this 
fall of new Commission proposals for post-Enron corporate 
governance measures and FATF-related anti-money laundering 
legislation.  Although not always fully briefed on U.S. 
positions in these areas, Lehne remains open to dialogue with 
USG interlocutors and participated earlier this year in a 
roundtable dinner for SEC Chairman Donaldson. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
PETER SKINNER: FINANCIAL SERVICES EXPERT 
---------------------------------------- 
23. (C) Peter Skinner, 44, PES, first on the Labour list in 
the South East region, UK.  After post-graduate study of 
labor law, industrial relations and education, Skinner worked 
as a trade union organizer, university lecturer, and in 
industrial relations.  An MEP since 1994, Skinner is a member 
of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee.  He is also 
in the EP Delegation for Relations with the U.S., in which he 
leads on financial affairs and regulatory cooperation.  A 
recognized expert in the EP on those issues, Skinner was EP 
rapporteur on the \"Transparency Directive,\" which established 
regular reporting requirements for companies listed on EU 
stock exchanges.  In meetings with U.S. officials, Skinner 
has shown a genuine desire to increase U.S.-EU regulatory and 
financial services cooperation, and creativity in moving that 
agenda forward.  He knows many in the USG who work on those 
issues, including Congressman Michael Oxley, Chairman of the 
House Committee on Financial Services and co-author of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (which established investor protections 
and corporate governance standards). 
 
------------------------------------------ 
ENRIQUE BARON CRESPO: CURRENT PES CHAIRMAN 
------------------------------------------ 
 
24. (C) Enrique Baron Crespo, 60, PES, third on the Spanish 
Socialist Labour Party (PSOE) list, Spain.  After studying 
law, Baron Crespo worked as a university lecturer and lawyer 
specializing in labor law.  An anti-Franco activist as a 
young man, Baron Crespo was a Deputy in the Spanish 
parliament (Cortes) from the fall of the Franco regime in 
1977 until 1986.  From 1982-85 he was Spanish Minister of 
Transport, Tourism and Communications.   Baron Crespo became 
an MEP when Spain joined the EU in 1986.  He has served as EP 
President (1989-1992) and Chairman of the Foreign Affairs 
Committee (1992-95).  He was Chairman of the PES group during 
the last term, but is not expected to return to that position 
after the elections.  In meetings with U.S. officials, Baron 
Crespo has been personable and open, but his stances on key 
issues are often strongly opposed to those of the U.S. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
GEOFFREY VAN ORDEN: VERY BRITISH EUROSKEPTIC 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
25. (C) Geoffrey Van Orden, 59, EPP-ED, first on the 
Conservative list in the Eastern region, UK.  A specialist on 
defense, Van Orden served in the British Army from 1964-94 
and retired as a Brigadier General.  His military jobs 
included member of the directing staff of the German Armed 
Forces Staff College (1985-88), Chief of Staff Berlin 
(1988-90), and Head of International Military Staff 
Secretariat, NATO Headquarters (1991-94).  From 1995-99 Van 
 
SIPDIS 
Orden worked in the European Commission, covering foreign and 
security policy and counter-terrorism.  An MEP since 1999, 
Van Orden was Vice Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee 
this term.  He is a strong Atlanticist and supporter of NATO, 
and opposes all EU defense or security initiatives; he 
believes that putting the EU label on military initiatives is 
politically motivated, ignores military realities and 
ultimately represents an attempt to compete with NATO.  An 
ardent euroskeptic, Van Orden opposes British adoption of the 
euro and the EU constitutional treaty. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
JAMES NICHOLSON: HEAD OF DELEGATION TO U.S. 
------------------------------------------- 
 
26. (C) James Nicholson, 59, EPP-ED, first on the Ulster 
Unionist Party list in Northern Ireland, UK.  The only MEP 
from his party, Nicholson belongs to the British Conservative 
group in the EPP-ED.  It is difficult to say if his party 
will get enough seats to guarantee his re-election.  As the 
2002-2004 Chairman of the EP Delegation for Relations with 
the U.S., he has been the EP lead in the biannual 
Transatlantic Legislators\' Dialogue (TLD) meetings between 
MEPs and members of the U.S. Congress.  Nicholson has also 
organized a number of digital videoconferences between MEPS 
and members of Congress on issues of transatlantic interest. 
Nicholson is a farmer by trade (one of his sons runs the 
family farm, which Nicholson likes to work on visits home). 
Informal and down-to-earth in meetings, Nicholson prefers 
being called \"Jim.\"  Nicholson is a generalist on 
transatlantic issues -- he neither possesses nor professes 
expertise in foreign affairs -- but he is an effective 
cheerleader within the EP for good relations with the U.S. 
He does not expect to remain U.S. Delegation Chairman during 
the next term, but he may still be helpful in disseminating 
U.S. views on key issues to EP colleagues. 
 
------------------------------ 
DIRK STERCKX: CONSENSUS SEEKER 
------------------------------ 
 
27. (C) Dirk Sterckx, 57, ELDR, first on the Flemish Liberal 
Democrat (VLD) list, Belgium.  After earning a degree in 
Germanic philology, Sterckx taught secondary-school Dutch, 
English and German in the Antwerp region.  From 1975-1999 
Sterckx was a TV newsman, and was anchorman on several major 
Flemish TV newscasts.  An MEP since 1999, Sterckx is Belgian 
Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt\'s \"alternate\" on the VLD list 
for the June EP elections -- Verhofstadt nominally tops the 
VLD list, but he will \"give his seat\" to Sterckx after the 
elections.  Sterckx has been an active member of the EP 
Delegation for Relations with the U.S., taking the lead in 
the Delegation\'s meetings with U.S. Congressional 
counterparts on transportation issues such as the Container 
Security Initiative.  Sterckx is personable, soft-spoken and 
a hard worker.  His political influence is greater than his 
quiet demeanor may lead one to believe -- on February 16 he 
was named VLD Chairman, and will serve in that function until 
the Flemish regional and European elections on June 13. 
 
-------------------- 
KEY MEPS NOT RUNNING 
-------------------- 
 
28. (SBU) The following key MEPs are not running for 
reelection: 
 
-- Pat Cox (Ireland ) ELDR): President of the EP (ref D). 
 
-- Christa Randzio-Plath (Germany ) PES):  Chairperson of 
the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee. 
 
-- Dietmut Theato (Germany ) EPP-ED): Chairperson of the 
Budgetary Control Committee. 
 
-- John Corrie (UK - EPP-ED): member of the Development and 
Cooperation Committee and Vice Chairman of the Joint 
Parliamentary Assembly to the African, Caribbean and Pacific 
States. 
 
-- Jannis Sakellariou (Germany ) PES): PES coordinator in 
the Foreign Affairs Committee. 
 
-- Ilkka Suominen (Finland ) EPP-ED): Vice Chairman of the 
EPP-ED group and a former Minister of Trade in Finland. 
 
-- Arie Oostlander (The Netherlands ) EPP-ED): As EP 
Rapporteur on Turkey, he drafted several reports that were 
critical of what he saw as lack of Turkish progress in 
fulfilling the conditions for EU accession. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"17236","5/25/2004 11:07","04BRUSSELS2211","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04DUBLIN686","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/24/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EI, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: BRUSSELS VIEW OF IRELAND\'S EU PRESIDENCY: A 
HOME-STRETCH REPORT 
 
REF: DUBLIN 686 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b and d 
 
1.(C) Summary: As we approach next month\'s US/EU summit, we 
give the Irish a tentative B  in how they\'ve been dealing 
with issues of concern to the US.  In general, we find the 
Irish to be reactively helpful honest brokers on most issues, 
but they have pushed their own agenda on the mid-East and 
Africa even if this means isolating the US.  For most issues, 
from the war on terrorism, the Balkans, ESDP, and getting the 
EU to have a common asylum policy, the Irish have sought to 
be constructive and helpful.  Even though the Irish are a 
\"small\" country Presidency with a very stretched Brussels 
presence, they have been attentive to transatlantic 
relations. End Summary 
 
\"Reactively Helpful\" \"Honest Brokers\" 
------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) In our interactions with the Irish Presidency in 
Brussels, we have found them \"reactively helpful.\" They have 
not been particularly forthright in tipping us off about 
potential problems, but if we raise issues and concerns with 
them, they are responsive. (The Council and the Commission 
and other PermReps remain better sources of \"early warning.\") 
As is likely the case in Dublin, we found our Irish 
interlocutors friendly and open. 
 
-- In particular, the Irish have been quite good about 
ensuring that US views are considered in internal EU 
discussion. For example, under the Irish Presidency\'s 
leadership, a French-led \"rush\" to lift the EU arms embargo 
against China was successfully slowed down.  The Irish have 
been working to kick this issue down to the Dutch Presidency 
or possibly later. This has been in the US interest and the 
Irish deserve credit for their efforts (as does the lobbying 
of our embassies in member states). 
 
-- Similarly, the Irish took pains to ensure that US views on 
nonproliferation were heard during the EU\'s decision-making 
process -- even as the Irish Presidency never wavered from 
its commitment to multilateral disarmament.  While this meant 
that Irish and US objectives were at times at odds, their 
apparent sincerity in playing \"honest broker\" by ensuring 
that our views were given a proper hearing -- alongside their 
own -- in EU policy debates, is appreciated. 
 
-- For the most part, the Irish did not push \"effective 
multilateralism\"  as hard as we might have anticipated.  The 
Commission and some EU member-states in Brussels see this 
concept as an effort to assert EU influence through the UN 
and other institutions to counterbalance US influence.  We 
note that the Dutch have stressed that this will be theme for 
their forthcoming EU Presidency later this year. 
 
Pushing their Agenda 
-------------------- 
 
3. (C//NF) However, when the Irish decide to drop their 
broker role and step up to pursue national or EU priorities, 
they sometimes have done this against US interests.  On the 
May 6 Palestinian UNGA resolution on the status of the 
occupied Palestinian territory, the Irish cut a deal with the 
Palestinians, railroaded some member states (e.g. the 
Netherlands, ref) with an end result that isolated the US. 
The Irish Presidency did something similar at the UN 
Commission on Human Rights last month, when they cut a deal 
on Sudan with the African Union and then imposed the deal on 
other EU members.  As with the UNGA resolution, the Irish 
determination to push their \"deal\" within the EU and on 
others left the US isolated. 
 
Out of step with the US on Russia? 
---------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) At a recent US/EU task force, the Irish Presidency 
revealed ambivalence about a joint US/EU statement at the 
Summit recognizing joint US/EU actions in the former Soviet 
Union.  Irish reps expressed concern that this could be seen 
by Moscow as anti-Russian.  At the May 21 EU/Russia Summit, 
the Irish seemed content to pocket Russia\'s acceptance of EU 
enlargement and not worry about \"deliverables\" for Moscow 
until the Dutch host their summit with Russia in the fall. 
 
GME/Mid-East: reactive but how helpful? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) While we can appreciate that the Irish have not 
picked transatlantic fights over the Mid-East, they (and most 
other members) have been hesitant to embrace a Greater 
Mid-East Initiative too warmly.  The Presidency has been 
virtually invisible in Brussels so far, letting the 
Commission take the lead in discussing GME with the U.S. 
However, under Irish leadership, the Irish led an effort to 
forge a new EU strategy to the region, crafting helpful 
language on the need for political and economic reform and an 
enhanced role for women in the region, as well as on EU 
readiness to achieve \"complementarity\" with the U.S.  Similar 
language was also inserted in the conclusions from the EU\'s 
May 5-6 Euromed ministerial with Arab countries in Dublin. 
From the EU perspective, the Irish have performed well in 
this defensive mode, remaining mildly responsive to our GME 
initiative while maintaining a separate profile for the EU\'s 
ties to the Arab world. 
Constructive and helpful on ongoing \"big issues\" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
6. (C) Nonetheless, on balance the Irish have tried to move 
ahead in positive ways on a number of US interests. On ESDP, 
the Irish, based in part on their Partnership-for-Peace 
experience, have been very constructive in moving discussions 
of EU/NATO relations out of the rancorous political arena to 
technical experts level talks with a focus on practical 
details.  The progress made to date on Bosnia transition owe 
much to this pragmatic approach.  The Irish have been 
positive in US/EU interactions at the OSCE -- most recently 
at the US/EU OSCE experts level consultations in Brussels and 
also the recent OSCE anti-Semitism meeting in Berlin.  The 
Irish have also been helpful on Liberia, strengthening asset 
freeze measures in the Balkans, getting internal EU agreement 
on asylum directives, and wrapping up internal EU agreement 
to go ahead with the common EU asylum procedures. 
 
Cyprus/EU: On the Irish watch but not Dublin\'s \"fault\" 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
7. (C) The Irish Presidency seems to have dodged the bullet 
for the EU\'s decision to admit a divided Cyprus into the EU 
on May 1. Although no one in the Council was willing to stand 
up and be counted prior to the referenda, the Irish leaned 
further forward than most in expressing support for the Annan 
plan and calling for a united Cyprus.  Currently, the 
Brussels blame game is pointing to the Greek Cypriots, who 
now represent Cyprus as full EU members as the \"spoilers\" of 
this historic enlargement round. The Irish did put on a good 
show in Ireland of welcoming the new members and as such have 
been as appropriately supportive of the need to celebrate the 
EU\'s 10 new members.  We don\'t foresee major decisions on 
Turkey\'s candidacy during the Irish Presidency, although we 
expect this to be a huge issue for the US and the EU during 
the Dutch Presidency. 
 
Counter-Terrorism 
----------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Following the March 11 Madrid train bombing, the 
Irish succeeded in turning European fears about domestic 
vulnerabilities into a far-reaching commitment to \"get 
serious\" about the war on terrorism.  Within days of the 
attack, the Irish had drafted a proposal calling on EU member 
states to speed implementation of previously agreed (but 
politically sensitive) measures to protect European citizens 
from terrorist attacks.  They also advocated certain new 
measures, such as the creation of an \"EU CT Czar,\" to make 
the EU a more effective and better coordinated player in the 
war on terrorism.  The refined proposal emerged two weeks 
later as an ambitious and detailed declaration by EU leaders 
at their March 25 Summit in Brussels.  This was a significant 
achievement for a Presidency with so little bureaucratic 
capacity for dealing with such a complex and sensitive policy 
area.  In so doing, the Irish also helped to reinvigorate EU 
efforts in ways that should lead to a robust package in thisarea for the US/EU 
Summit. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
9. (C) Our EU interlocutors are pleased to have a more normal 
Presidency after what they tended to see as Italy\'s eratic 
leadership.  The Irish have been relatively successful at 
being a good \"European\" presidency. In particular, the Irish 
worked quite hard to \"celebrate\" EU enlargement, and have 
tried to move the EU constitutional process forward -- 
despite deep member-state disagreements.  As a result, as the 
Irish seek to exercise their \"political will\" to move US/EU 
summit deliverables through the EU political process, they 
should be in a better position to deliver than the Italian 
Presidency. 
 
Foster 
"
"17299","5/27/2004 10:28","04BRUSSELS2262","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002262 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DEPUTY SECRETARY ARMITAGE, EUR A/S JONES, EUR PDAS 
RIES AND EUR/ERA ALLEGRONE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: USEU SCENESETTER FOR DEPUTY SECRETARY VISIT JUNE 
1-2: EU ASPECTS 
 
 
1. Sensitive but unclassified -- entire text. 
 
2. Summary:  You are coming to Brussels during a time of 
transition in the EU as it absorbs its new members and moves 
towards a new Parliament, new Commissioners and a new 
Constitutional Treaty. At the same time, the EU under the 
Irish Presidency is in the home stretch towards the 
forthcoming US/EU Summit next month. In addition to 
co-chairing the Sri Lanka\'s Donor Co-Chair meeting, you will 
be meeting with EU foreign policy czar Javier Solana. You 
will also informally meet with Commission Foreign Relations 
Head and fellow Sri Lanka meeting co-chair Chris Patten. Both 
Solana and Patten are under consideration for future 
leadership positions in the \"next\" European Union.  Solana 
and his office are heavily involved in US/EU Summit 
preparations and Solana will be very interested in engaging 
with you on Iraq, the Mid-East Peace Process and Bosnia.  End 
Summary 
 
Co-Chair Chris Patten: Lame Duck, Or Future Commission 
President? 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3.  There is real drama, from a Brussels perspective, about 
the future of your fellow European Commission Co-chair, Chris 
Patten, who is winding down his activities in Brussels as 
Commissioner for External Relations, and has already begun 
his next (unpaid) position at Oxford.  Patten has been a 
strong RELEX Commissioner, and very helpful in swaying his 
Commission colleagues to move on key US concerns in the 
Balkans and the fight against terrorism.  He played a crucial 
role in brokering a substantial EU commitment for Iraq 
reconstruction at the Madrid Conference, and also maintained 
Commission support for development needs in Afghanistan. 
Recently, Patten,s name has been frequently mentioned as a 
possible compromise candidate to replace Romano Prodi as the 
next President of the European Commission, but weak French 
language skills may hurt his chances of gaining French 
support ) despite the open backing of Valery Giscard 
d\'Estaing. 
 
4.  On the margins of the conference, you may wish to raise 
other issues with Patten.  He will be keenly interested in 
our views on developments in the Middle East, and should be 
pressed to preview for you the Commission\'s Medium-term 
strategy for assistance to reconstruction in Iraq.  You 
should also sound him out on the availability of funds to 
assist the Palestinian Authrity should Sharon follow through 
on his promises to withdraw from Gaza.  Patten can be a 
useful channel to his Commission colleagues on other issues 
of immediate concern to the US, including Romanian adoptions 
(where Enlargement Commissioner Gunther Verheugen has the 
lead), although this issue does not fall directly in Patten\'s 
purview. 
 
EU\'s Transition Overload 
------------------------ 
 
5.  Patten,s own transition mirrors a general sense of flux 
and change that permeates the EU at this moment.  At the 
beginning of May, the EU finalized its largest and most 
challenging enlargement, welcoming ten new members to the 
Union.  These ten countries, all significantly poorer and for 
the most part ardently transatlantic in their outlook, are 
likely to change the dynamic of the Union precisely at a time 
when many other changes are in the offing.  We should not 
expect that the entry of these new members will somehow tilt 
the EU to automatically become more pro-US. The Commission, 
the EU,s executive body, has already become a lame duck.  In 
the middle of June, the Irish Presidency will announce the 
agreed replacement for Prodi.  Whoever that is ) and the 
field still appears wide open ) will be charged with naming 
a new Commission.  Several of the most influential 
Commissioners (including Patten and Trade mandarin Pascal 
Lamy) have already announced they will not return to 
ministerial posts. 
 
6.  In June, voters across Europe will go the polls to elect 
a new European Parliament.   In every country, national 
issues dominate, while EU matters get second billing.  It is 
commonly assumed that these elections provide an ideal 
opportunity for a protest vote against sitting governments. 
Especially in countries where the ruling party joined the 
coalition in Iraq, their opponents are attempting to 
capitalize on widespread European disapproval of the US-led 
war to score points ) as we have seen so dramatically from 
Prodi,s campaign against Berlusconi in Italy. 
 
7.  In addition, the Irish Presidency is in the home stretch 
of efforts to finalize negotiations on a complicated 
Constitution that aims at streamlining the decision-making 
apparatus of a Union of 25 Member States.  The Irish hope to 
wrap up before their mandate ends in the last days of June, 
but the continent,s leaders remain mired in difficult 
questions of decision-making (what sort of qualified 
majorities will be applied, and what other issues will still 
require consensus decision-making).  Consumed in this effort, 
it is not surprising that Irish attention to the US-EU summit 
at the end of month has been spotty, despite a strong desire 
to make transatlantic relations a key focus of their 
Presidency. 
 
8.  If this weren\'t enough on their plates, the EU must still 
come to grips by the end of the year with one of its most 
difficult issues: whether to invite Turkey to begin accession 
negotiations.   There is little support for this move among 
the European electorate, despite the strategic importance of 
Turkey as a bridge to the neighboring Muslim world -- or the 
committed progress of the Erdogan government in meeting the 
Copenhagen political criteria or supporting a settlement in 
Cyprus.  Chris Patten will play a major role in a Commission 
recommendation due this fall; he is one of Turkey\'s strongest 
advocates. 
 
Solana: Secondary on Iraq, Key on ME Peace 
--------------------------------------- 
 
9.  A source of stability in this period of change is Javier 
Solana, the EU,s \"High Representative for a Common Foreign 
and Security Policy,\" who functions as the de facto EU 
foreign minister.  As a synthesizer of the European 
cacophony, and a voice of the European mainstream, he has no 
equal on the EU scene.  If the constitution talks succeed, 
they will create a new position that combines Solana\'s 
current functions with those of Patten on the Commission, and 
Solana is likely to be asked to remain on in that role. 
 
10.  On Iraq, however, Solana,s role is tangential.  After 
their failure to craft a united position prior to the 
invasion, the EU wants desperately to speak with one voice in 
the decisions that will be made on the future.  But the EU,s 
\"Big Three\" on the Security Council are jealously guarding 
their own prerogatives.  That leaves Solana little room to 
maneuver.  He does not play a decisive role on talks in New 
York, but he can still make important contributions behind 
the scenes in his interaction with European leaders.  Your 
approach will be most effective if it blends advocacy with a 
willingness to listen and take European views into account. 
In this regard, you can expect Solana to marshall arguments 
about sovereignty and a lead role for the UN that enjoys 
broad support in European capitals, but you should also 
expect him also to test you for areas of flexibility in the 
US position.   He would most certainly welcome your thoughts 
 
11.  Solana plays a more pivotal role in Europe,s policies 
on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict than he does on Iraq. 
The Contact Group meeting in London helped to paper over 
continued unease with the U.S. approach announced at the 
President,s meeting with PM Sharon.  The subsequent 
uncertainty caused by Sharon\'s failure to gain Likud 
endorsement for his disengagement plan, as well as the 
military actions in Rafah, have only reinforced Europe,s 
concerns that our approach is failing to deliver the 
hoped-for results.  Solana will be anxious to hear where we 
think the process is leading.  He will try to steer the EU to 
support any steps they believe will get the Road Map back on 
track. 
 
The Balkans, China Arms, and Iran\'s Nuclear Program 
------------------------------------------ 
12.  In your talks with Solana, you should also highlight 
three other areas where he has a keen interest and can play a 
decisive role: the Balkans, China arms embargo, and Iran. 
You should acknowledge his pragmatic role in ensuring that 
the transition from SFOR to an EU-led mission in Bosnia using 
NATO assets under the Berlin Plus arrangements is proceeding 
well.  He is also likely to express his concerns that the 
current stalemate in Kosovo is unsustainable. 
 
13.  Solana is on record supporting an end to the EU\'s arms 
embargo on China.  Our lobbying in European capitals has 
managed to deflect the momentum in favor of this French-led 
proposal, but it is unclear how much longer some of the 
countries will hold out.  You should make it clear to Solana 
that our concerns about the impact of such a decision remain, 
and that our study of other EU arms export controls indicate 
they are not a substitute for the current policy. 
 
14.  Finally, we will be facing another decision-point in the 
IAEA on Iran\'s nuclear program in the near future.  Solana 
was initially ignored by the British-French-German initiative 
on Iran, but has now adopted it as the EU\'s and his own.  He 
was grateful for a special intelligence briefing we offered 
him prior to his visit earlier this year, and accepts that 
Iranian compliance is far from complete and verifiable.  He 
will waffle on next steps as the EU awaits El-Baradei\'s next 
report, but you should press him on next steps should -- as 
we both expect -- the IAEA be unable to certify a complete 
and verifiable end to the Iranian enrichment program. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"17323","5/27/2004 16:26","04BRUSSELS2277","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

271626Z May 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002277 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, NEA/ARN, NP/RA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/27/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, KNNP, ETRD, SY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU AGREES NEW NON-PROLIFERATION TEXT FOR SYRIA 
ASSOCIATION AGREEMENT 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 0338 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  On May 26, the EU agreed to new 
non-proliferation language for inclusion in the draft 
EU-Syria Association Agreement.  Last December, EU member 
states rejected an ad ref text negotiated by the European 
Commission for including non-proliferation language that was 
too watered down from the EU\'s model text.  As EU president 
since January, Ireland has been working to devise new 
language that would meet member state concerns and respond to 
issues raised by Syria (e.g. reference to a nuclear weapons 
free zone).  The new language, obtained by USEU and at para 7 
below, has not been shown to Syria.  The EU proposal is to 
commit Syria to take steps to set up an effective export 
control system, and to ratify and implement all international 
agreements on non-proliferation.  It is unlikely that EU 
members could agree on any substantive changes to the text, 
and EU negotiators will basically present Damascus with a 
take-it-or-leave-it proposition.  Syria may balk at the text 
and walk away; should it instead seize the opportunity to 
demonstrate that it is not isolated internationally, an 
EU-Syria Association Agreement could be initialed as early as 
mid-June.  End Summary. 
 
EU Agrees Non-Proliferation Language for Syria 
----------------------------- 
2.  (C) On May 26, EU Permanent Representatives (COREPER) 
ended months of internal wrangling and agreed on revised 
non-proliferation language for inclusion in the EU\'s 
Association Agreement with Syria.  Last November, the EU 
endorsed \"model\" non-proliferation language that the 
Commission then negotiated with Syria, reaching ad ref 
agreement in December on language that was somewhat watered 
down from the Council\'s model text.  In January, EU member 
states rejected the Commission\'s negotiated language 
(reftel), putting the otherwise completed agreement on ice. 
Some EU members (and the Commission) argued that an agreement 
based on the negotiated text was worth more than insisting on 
more precise language and risking having Syria walk away from 
any agreement. Others (the UK, Netherlands, and Germany) 
insisted that the EU press Syria -- as a country of 
non-proliferation concern -- to agree to a comprehensive text. 
 
Irish bridge the gap 
------------------ 
3.  (C)  The Irish, as EU president since January, took two 
shots at bridging the gap between the two sides.  The first 
attempt earlier this year failed, but their second effort 
succeeded this week in garnering consensus support among all 
25 EU members.  USEU has obtained an informal copy of the 
agreed text (para seven below).  The new text is very similar 
to the (non-watered-down) model EU language originally agreed 
in November; in places even going further in specifying steps 
Syria will take in establishing an export control system. 
The agreed text also commits both parties to work toward a 
\"Middle East zone free of weapons of mass destruction,\" an 
issue raised by Syria and a reference to Israel. 
 
Complex Next Steps, Even if Syria Agrees 
------------- 
4.  (C) Syria has not seen the new text yet; the Commission 
expects to present it to Damascus in the next few weeks.  The 
Commission Syria desk (protect) expects that the language 
will be difficult to sell.  A text, if agreed to by Syria, 
will require formal approval by Syria and the European 
Parliament (for the economic areas that are in the 
Commission\'s competence) and ratification by all 25 EU member 
states (for the political components of the text, including 
the non-proliferation portion).  According to the Council 
Secretariat, the EU and Syria have already discussed 
 
SIPDIS 
implementation, on an interim basis, of the economic portion 
of the agreement once the European Parliament approves it. 
At the same time, the Council expects to begin a \"political 
dialogue\" with Syria, to include non-proliferation, 
terrorism, and human rights issues. 
 
Comment 
------- 
5.  (C)  It is possible that Syria will balk at the new 
language -- as reported reftel, Shara claimed he did not have 
complete SARG agreement on the text agreed ad ref in 
December.  On the other hand, if Syria can find a face-saving 
way to accept the new language, Damascus will have in hand 
public proof that it is not isolated in the international 
community.  This may be a powerful incentive in light of the 
recent imposition of U.S. sanctions.  At this point, the 
decision rests entirely with Damascus.  Given the 
difficulties the EU faced in reaching consensus on this 
latest text, it is unlikely to be able to agree on any 
substantive changes to it.  The Commission will thus have 
virtually no latitude in its negotiations, and Syria will be 
given a take-it-or-leave-it proposition.  Should Syria 
conclude that having an agreement now is worth accepting the 
new language, an agreement could be initialed sometime in mid 
to late June -- perhaps coinciding with the NATO summit in 
Istanbul or the US-EU summit in Ireland. 
 
6.  (C)  Comment continued.  From the EU perspective, the 
non-proliferation language gives Brussels leverage to put on 
hold the trade component of the agreement for political 
purposes.  For example, should Syria not meet EU expectations 
to establish an effective export control system, including 
for dual-use goods, the EU would have grounds for withdrawing 
(or not implementing) selected trade provisions of the 
agreement. 
 
7.  (C) Text of EU agreed language on non-proliferation. 
(Please note the text was shared informally with USEU; and 
protect the fact that we have received the text.) 
 
Begin Text: 
 
Preamble 
 
Considering that the proliferation of weapons of 
mass-destruction and their means of delivery, both to state 
and non-state actors, represents one of the most serious 
threats to international stability and security. 
 
Article 3 bis 
 
The Parties reiterate their shared objective to pursue a 
mutually and effectively verifiable Middle East zone free of 
weapons of mass destruction, nuclear, biological and chemical 
and their delivery systems.  They agree to promote jointly 
the signature, ratification and implementation by all 
Mediterranean partners of all non-proliferation instruments, 
including the NPT, CTBT, BWC and CWC. 
 
Article 4 
 
The Parties agree to co-operate and to contribute to 
countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, 
nuclear, biological and chemical, and their means of delivery 
through meeting in full their existing obligations under 
international disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and 
agreements and other relevant international obligations 
including United Nations Security Council resolutions and 
ensuring effective implementation.  The Parties agree that 
this provision constitutes an essential element of this 
agreement. 
 
They also agree to cooperate to this end by: 
 
- Taking steps towards the signature, ratification, or 
accession, as appropriate, and full implementation of the 
other relevant international instruments; 
 
- Setting up effective national systems of export, transit 
and en-use controls of WMD-related goods and technologies, 
including dual use, and containing enforcement procedures 
with appropriate penalties. 
 
The political dialogue as set out in Article 5 will accompany 
and consolidate the elements in this article. 
 
End Text 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17352","5/28/2004 15:13","04BRUSSELS2295","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 002295 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, OTRA, ECON, ETRD, EWWT, BE, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: BELGIUM COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CBP/ICE ROBERT 
ONTIVEROS 
 
REF: FAX FROM PARIS/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION 
 
1.  Country clearance is granted for visit of Customs and 
Border Protection Chief Inspector Robert Ontiveros of El 
Paso, TX, to replace a Container Security Initiative (CSI) 
team member already stationed at the port, pursuant to the 
U.S. Customs and Belgian Customs Agreement on Implementing 
CSI.  Country clearance is limited to 90 days unless Mr. 
Ontiveros arrives with the necessary Belgian visa in his 
passport. 
 
2.  Embassy Control Officer is Terri Robl, Economic Counselor 
who can be reached via the Embassy switchboard number 
322-508-2111. 
 
3.  Embassy understands that no further assistance is 
requested for this visit.  Nonetheless, Embassy would like to 
underscore the necessity of having the correct visa for an 
extended stay in Belgium.  Please check with the Belgian 
Embassy in Washington in this respect.  Also please schedule 
a security briefing with the RSO as soon as possible upon 
arrival. 
 
4. Threat Assessment: A worldwide caution regarding the 
threat of transnational terrorism was issued by the 
Department of State. (Please consult the Department\'s web 
site for text: http://travel.state.gov).  In light of this 
caution and the events of September 11, 2001, all visitors 
are encouraged to assess their security posture, and be alert 
to their surroundings.  All visitors should exercise caution 
while traveling abroad as U.S. Citizens and facilities are 
often the target of groups demonstrating opposition to the 
U.S. foreign policy. 
 
5. Belgium remains a relatively safe country but as a result 
of the war in Iraq, and sentiments expressed by its citizens 
against the war, American visitors are advised to exercise 
caution and avoid anti-American demonstrations.  Also, it is 
prudent not to wear clothes or carry articles with logos and 
emblems associated with the United States at this time.  By 
taking reasonable precautions, visitors should enjoy an 
uneventful stay. 
 
However, purse snatching and pick pocketing is occurring more 
frequently.  In Brussels, pick pocketing and purse snatching 
are prevalent in the metro system, (subway, bus tram), and at 
Brussels, three major train stations, the Gare du Nord (North 
Station), Gare Centrale (Central Station) and especially the 
Gare du Midi (South Station).  Extra caution should be used 
at the Gare Centrale station.  Victims have been asked for 
assistance by someone who appeared lost and anxious to catch 
their train.  As the victim responds to the request, a third 
person appears and steals laptop computers, and other related 
travel items.  According to the police, this is a new 
strategy by criminal gangs operating at central station. 
Apparently they prefer platforms 3 and 4, used by trains 
going to the airport and obviously carrying the best category 
of potential victims. 
 
Valuables should never be left unattended in vehicles and car 
doors should always be kept locked when driving. Carry only a 
minimum amount of cash, credit cards and id.  Expensive 
jewelry, financial records, address books and other personal 
effects should be left at home or stored in a safe place 
during your visit.  The emergency numbers for the police and 
medical assistance are 101 and 100 respectively and for 
cellular phones (locally) 112.  Visitors to Belgium requiring 
additional information should contact the Brussels Regional 
Security Office (322) 508-2370. 
 
6.  Computer and Electronics Usage:  Inter-agency security 
standards prohibit the introduction or use of non-USG owned 
computer hardware and software at all USG diplomatic 
facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios and other 
convenience electronics are prohibited in all secure areas of 
the mission. 
 
Travelers who anticipate having special needs in terms of 
either access or computer usage should contact the RSO office 
before arriving at post. 
 
7.  Systems Access:  If you are a DOS employee and would like 
to access Opennet during your visit (without taking the 30 
minute systems security briefing), please bring confirmation 
that you have attended within the last year, the \"security 
awareness briefing on Opennet Plus.\"  This can be a copy of 
the form you signed when you took the briefing, a signed 
memorandum from your systems administrator or ISSO, or an 
e-mail message from your systems administrator or ISSO to 
\"Brussels E-Mail-DL\" or brussjasisc@state.gov. 
 
Schoonover 
"
"17432","6/2/2004 14:41","04BRUSSELS2354","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002354 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DOD FOR OSD/SOLIC-SO - DAVID DES ROCHES; DEPARTMENT FOR 
AF/RSA - MBITTRICK; IO/UNP - MWEINBERG; DEPARTMENT PLEASE 
PASS USAID FOR DCHA/OFDA - AMENGHETTI; GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, MOPS, PGOV, PREL, PREF, UX, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU-FUNDED AFRICA PEACE FACILITY TO STRENGTHEN AU, 
PEACEKEEPING IN AFRICA 
 
 
1.  (SBU)  Summary.  The European Union (EU) formally 
announced the establishment of the Africa Peace Facility 
(APF), and funds are now available to support peacekeeping 
and peace-enforcing operations in Africa.  The EU aims to 
strengthen the role of the African Union (AU), particularly 
the Peace and Stability Council, through this new funding 
mechanism.  Although Africans will initiate requests for 
disbursements from the 250 million euro account, the EU will 
have final say over what can be funded.  Certain expenditures 
-- such as ammunition, arms and specific military equipment, 
spare parts for arms and military equipment, military 
salaries and military training for soldiers -- are 
prohibited.  All deployments must be consistent the UN 
principles and objectives.   The APF\'s support for 
deployments in Africa will complement the USG\'s Global Peace 
Operations Initiative.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
APF:  Based on African Ownership & Solidarity 
------------------------ 
 
2. (U) The EU used the launching of the AU\'s Peace and 
Stability Council (AU/PSC) on May 25 to announce that the 
long-awaited Africa Peace Facility is now operational.  The 
AU/PSC will play a central role in the implementation of the 
APF.  In prepared remarks for the May 25 ceremony in Addis 
Ababa, Development Commissioner Poul Nielson noted, \"The 
launching of the Peace and Security Council is both historic 
and welcome.  Based on continental solidarity and firm 
regional building blocks, the Council is destined to be a 
necessary and indispensable contribution to promoting peace 
and stability in Africa.  The EU\'s speedy approval of the 
Peace Facility recognizes the credibility and authority with 
which the AU is taking responsibility in the area of peace 
and security.  The Peace Facility gives concrete backing to 
the emerging African resolve of dealing with African 
conflicts.\" 
 
3. (SBU) On May 6, EU officials provided additional details 
to David des Roches (OSD/SOLIC-SO) and USEU personnel 
regarding the APF, a 250 million euro funding mechanism to 
support peacekeeping and peace enforcement operations in 
Africa through 2006.  DG Development Pan-African Affairs 
officer Igor Driesmans outlined EU objectives in establishing 
the AFP as follows: 
 
-- African Ownership:  At the EU/AU Maputo Summit in July 
2003, African heads of state initiated the request for the 
APF, stressing the need for the EU to support African 
solutions to African problems.  To accomplish this, most of 
the APF funds (200 million euros) will be used to support 
AU/PSC deployments or peace operations of sub-regional groups 
such as ECOWAS.  The European Commission (EC) envisions 
funding about 6-10 operations during the three-year funding 
cycle.  The balance of the funds will be used for capacity 
building activities, including the formulation of a 
comprehensive AU Peace and Security policy.  Driesmans 
stressed that either the AU or a sub-regional group will need 
to initiate a request to withdraw funds from the APF.  The EU 
will only authorize expenditures if they are consistent with 
UN sanctioned principles or objectives.  He distinguished 
between peacekeeping operations (which would require informal 
UN endorsements) and peace enforcement operations (which 
would require specific UN mandates). Furthermore, Driesmans 
noted that the EU does not plan to fully fund any single 
mission, but will favorably consider operations that have 
support from other donors. 
 
-- Use of Development Funds:  Based on the premise that 
development cannot take place without security, the APF peace 
operations are funded with European Development Funds (EDF). 
Driesmans said that the use of development funds for PKOs was 
\"taboo for a long time\" in the EU, but that after many 
deliberations a paradigm shift had been approved.  Apart from 
experimental funding for regional peacekeeping deployments in 
Burundi (AMIB), Liberia (ECOWAS) and Cote d\'Ivoire, the EC 
use of development money for peace and security has been 
limited to post-conflict rehabilitation. 
 
-- African Solidarity:  To share the financial burden of 
peacekeeping, all AU beneficiaries of EDF (the entire 
continent, minus South Africa and the Arab states of north 
Africa) agreed to cede a percentage of their national 
development funds to the APF.  Until the EU can devise for a 
formula for the other states of the continent to contribute 
financially to the APF, no deployments can be made in South 
Africa or northern Africa (and possibly no troops from these 
countries can be selected for APF-funded deployments either). 
 
4. (SBU) Driesmans clarified that the following APF 
expenditures will be prohibited:  ammunition, arms and 
specific military equipment, spare parts for arms and 
military equipment, military salaries and military training 
for soldiers.  Authorized expenses include:  per diem for 
African peacekeeping troops, communications equipment, 
medical facilities, refurbishing civilian equipment, 
transport and logistics. 
 
------------------------ 
Technical Limitations 
------------------------ 
 
5. (SBU) Regarding concern about budgetary and fiscal control 
over the APF funds, the EC stressed that the 250 million euro 
funding mechanism would be managed from Brussels and payments 
disbursed as deployments are approved.  To initiative a 
request, the AU will engage the EC delegation in Addis Ababa 
and suggest an operation.  The EC will review the request and 
forward it to EU Member States if the request is deemed 
appropriate (i.e., has a UN mandate and meets the other 
established conditions).  Once the 25 EU Member States 
approve, the EC will negotiate and review the budget request 
submitted by the AU (this frequently involves scaling back 
the requests).   The EC will then develop a specific document 
elaborating the parameters of the funding decision, including 
the amount of financial support to be withdrawn from the APF 
and the length of time the deployment would be supported, 
which will be submitted to the Member States development 
forum for final approval.  In theory, this entire process 
could be accomplished in a month.  The EC plans to reinforce 
its delegation in Addis Ababa to include someone with a 
military background. 
 
6. (SBU) LTC Joachim Elte of the EU Council\'s Military Staff 
(Operations and Exercises Divisions) stressed that the APF 
would complement -- not replace -- ESDP operations in Africa, 
such as the 2003 deployment in the Democratic Republic of 
Congo (i.e., Operation Artemis). 
 
------------------------ 
APF and GPOI 
------------------------ 
 
7. (SBU) At the meeting, des Roches briefed the EU on the 
USG\'s Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI), which also 
envisions strengthening peace operations in Africa. 
Concluding observations remarked on the complementary nature 
of the APF and GPOI, with the former focusing mainly on 
deployments and the latter concentrating on longer-term 
training and capacity building.  Another distinction between 
the two approaches was the EU\'s focus on a continent-wide 
approach and the U.S. focus on building specific national 
battalions. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
8.  (SBU)  Now that the paper work is in place, the APF 
peacekeeping funds can begin to flow.  Sudan has been cited 
as one possible venue for the inaugural use of the APF. 
Another suggestion has been prolonging the AMIB deployment in 
Burundi, if needed.  Whether the APF could be renewed after a 
three year period depends on the upcoming reformulation of 
the EU budget.  Nielson and other senior EC officials have 
suggested folding the European Development Fund into the 
general Commission budget.  Unless new rules are written for 
the general budget, the use of development funds for PKOs 
could again be halted when current APF funds expire in 2006. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"17443","6/2/2004 16:05","04BRUSSELS2360","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS1090|04BRUSSELS1094|04BRUSSELS1736|04BRUSSELS2107|04BRUSSELS2196","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002360 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN ELECTIONS: RESHUFFLING OF PARTY GROUPS? 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 1090 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 1094 
     C. C) BRUSSELS 1736 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 2107 
     E. E) BRUSSELS 2196 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY:  Since the European Parliament (EP) \"party 
groups\" are coalitions of member-state parties, their 
membership is somewhat fluid; some realignment is likely to 
result from the June 10-13 European elections.  Despite 
persistent rumors, the probable departure of some national 
parties from the Christian Democrats and Conservatives group 
(EPP-ED) is unlikely to threaten the EPP-ED\'s plurality.  The 
coalition of Socialists and Social Democrats (PES) will 
likely hold together and remain the second largest EP group. 
The Liberal Democrats (ELDR) may increase their clout if they 
succeed in forming a new centrist group.  An expected poor 
showing in the elections may move the Greens to try to join 
another party group.  In these complex Europe-wide elections, 
only one result is certain: the EP\'s new balance of political 
forces will remain a mixed bag for the U.S. -- it will be up 
to us to find effective ways to engage the EP on the 
important issues.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
SERIES OF PRE-ELECTION REPORTS 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (U) This is the final message of a series of reports on 
the European elections.  Ref A provides general background on 
the European Parliament (EP) and the European elections; ref 
B is a broad analysis of expected campaign issues and 
election outcomes; ref C analyzes the possible impact of MEPs 
from the 10 new EU member states; ref D discusses the role of 
U.S.-EU relations in the elections campaign; and ref E 
describes key MEPs who have good re-election prospects. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
EPP-ED: WILL DIVERSE PARTIES STAY TOGETHER? 
------------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) David Fieldsend, an expert NGO lobbyist at the EP, 
succinctly summed up the ever-present possibility of party 
realignment: \"the EP may have only 8 party groups, but those 
groups are made up of over 100 parties.\"  According to 
Fieldsend and other interlocutors, the center-right EPP-ED 
could change in two major ways: it could lose centrists (see 
para 5), or the euroskeptics (especially the UK 
Conservatives) could leave and form a separate group.  Which 
party group some of the new-member-state parties will join 
also remains uncertain.  In the EPP-ED\'s case, German 
Christian Democrats (especially the Bavarian CSU) might 
oppose inclusion of the Czech Civic Democratic Party (ODS) in 
the EPP-ED because of its opposition to the revocation of the 
post-war Benes decrees, under which Sudeten Germans were 
expelled after WWII from what is now Czech territory. 
 
4. (C) Despite the likelihood of some change in membership, 
though, it appears that the pragmatic desire to remain the 
EP\'s largest party group will carry the day.  Klaus Welle, a 
long-time top adviser of EPP-ED Chairman Hans-Gert 
Poettering, told us that Poettering\'s \"big tent\" strategy 
would take precedence over ideological purity.  So far, this 
has been confirmed by events.  Earlier this year, amidst 
rumors of a possible split between the pro-EU-integration 
Christian Democrats and the euroskeptic UK Tories, Poettering 
and UK Tory leader Michael Howard negotiated a deal keeping 
the Tories in the EPP-ED. On March 31, EPP-ED members 
approved the bargain by a large majority.  How tough the 
EPP-ED\'s post-election negotiating strategy will be with 
euroskeptic or center-left parties will thus depend on 
whether the EPP-ED comes out of the elections with a large 
plurality. 
 
------------------------------ 
NEW FEDERALIST \"CENTER\" PARTY? 
------------------------------ 
 
5. (C) ELDR leader Graham Watson, European Commission 
President Romano Prodi, and French Union for French Democracy 
(UDF) leader Francois Bayrou have announced the possible 
formation, after the June elections, of a new centrist, 
\"EU-federalist\" EP party group.  The group would aim to 
include the ELDR, members of the French UDF, Prodi\'s Italian 
center-left Marguerita Party, and several regional parties. 
Although some of the pronouncements of the players involved 
give the impression of a done deal, our interlocutors differ 
on how solid the agreement actually is.  Welle told us, for 
example, that Bayrou, a \"tough negotiator,\" was demanding 
that the word \"liberal\" not be included in the party name, 
something hard for ELDR members to accept.  Also, the Prodi 
party, made up of Italian former Liberals, Socialists and 
Christian Democrats, may also find it difficult to unite 
under the \"liberal\" label.   Summing it up, ELDR MEP Cecilia 
Malmstroem cautioned that \"nothing is certain\" until after 
the elections. 
------------------- 
WHITHER THE GREENS? 
-------------------- 
 
6. (C) Because virtually no Greens candidates will be elected 
from the new member states -- several reports forecast a 
single Latvian aspirant will be the only one -- the Greens 
may end up in fifth place behind the far-left EUN/NGL (even 
though polls predict that the EUN/NGL will also lose seats). 
Malmstroem went so far as to speculate that the realist wing 
of the Greens might be forced to seek a coalition with the 
ELDR.  Greens MEP Joost Lagendijk (strictly protect) also 
told us that the Greens, in the event of a poor showing in 
the elections, might make overtures to either the PES or the 
ELDR. 
 
------------------------ 
FAR RIGHT BEARS WATCHING 
------------------------ 
 
7. (C) Among the small party groups, the far right bears 
watching.  During the current term far-right parties such as 
the French National Front, the Belgian Vlaams Blok and the 
Austrian Freedom Party were non-aligned.  If they succeed in 
working together and are strengthened by allies from the new 
member states, they may form their own party group (which by 
EP rules must include MEPs from at least 5 member states) and 
thus become participants in the EP\'s committee and leadership 
structure. 
 
--------------------------------- 
COMMENT: EP TO REMAIN A MIXED BAG 
--------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Assuming the British Conservatives stay in the EPP-ED 
and it keeps its plurality, the biggest change in the 
party-group balance would probably result from the formation 
of an ELDR/centrist group.  In that case, the additional 
seats for the centrists/liberals and the probable losses of 
the Greens and the EUN/NGL would combine to enhance the ELDR 
successor\'s weight as a kingmaker between the EPP-ED and PES. 
 If this new group does come into being, we expect the 
addition of the Prodi party and others to exacerbate the 
ELDR\'s tendency to vote against U.S. interests.  In both 
legislation and \"sense of Congress\" resolutions, an ELDR 
successor would form frequent majorities with the PES and the 
far left in opposition to U.S. policy on issues such as Iraq, 
data privacy, climate change, Guantanamo, and the ICC.  One 
additional question mark is whether new member state parties 
will noticeably change the dynamics within EP party groups, 
rendering them more diverse and perhaps more open to U.S. 
input (ref C).  Regardless of the elections\' outcome, one 
result is certain: the EP will remain a mixed bag from the 
U.S. perspective.  It will be up to us to find effective ways 
to influence party groups and individual MEPs on each of the 
important issues.  END COMMENT. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17461","6/3/2004 10:42","04BRUSSELS2365","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOL FOR BLS AND ILAB 
TREASURY FOR IMI 
STATE FOR DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU-25 UNEMPLOYMENT RATE AT 9.1 PERCENT 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  The aggregate unemployment rate for 
the EU-25 published by the EU Commission\'s 
Statistical Office stood at 9.1 percent for April 
2004, unchanged from the previous month.  The 
unemployment rate for the euro zone (the twelve EU 
countries participating in the euro) was also stable 
at 8.8 percent in April 2004.  Without the 10 new 
members, the EU-15 unemployment rate was 8.1 
percent.  The overall impact of the 10 new members 
on the EU\'s unemployment rate has thus been to 
increase it by 1.0 percentage point - not exactly 
the huge and dramatic increase that conventional 
wisdom among some in the EU-15 had feared.  But the 
rate for the enlarged EU concealed wide differences 
in the rates of individual Member States ranging 
from 4.2 percent in Luxembourg to 18.9 percent in 
Poland.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  Following enlargement, the EU Commission 
Statistical Office (EUROSTAT) is now publishing 
compiled monthly unemployment data for the EU-25. 
With seasonal adjustment and compensation for 
differences in national statistical methods, the EU- 
25 rate stood at 9.1 percent in April 2004, 
unchanged in comparison to both March 2004 and April 
2003.  The unemployment rate for the euro zone stood 
at 9.0 percent in April 2004, also unchanged in 
comparison with March 2004.  The euro-zone rate was 
9.1 percent in April 2003. 
 
3.  The lowest rates among the EU-25 (April 2004 
rates unless otherwise indicated) were recorded in 
Luxembourg (4.2 percent), Cyprus (4.4 percent), 
Ireland and Austria (both 4.5 percent), the 
Netherlands (4.7 percent, March 2004) and the UK 
(4.7 percent in February 2004).  Poland (18.9 
percent), Slovakia (16.6 percent), Lithuania (11.5 
percent) and Spain (11.2 percent) showed the highest 
rates among the EU-25. 
 
4.  EUROSTAT noted that fourteen Member States 
showed an increase in their unemployment rate over 
the past twelve months, ten a decrease and one 
recorded no change.  The most significant increases 
in unemployment rates (April 2003-to-April 2004 
comparison unless otherwise noted) were recorded in 
the Netherlands (from 3.5 percent in March 2003 to 
4.7 percent in March 2004), Luxembourg (from 3.5 
percent to 4.2 percent), Sweden (from 5.4 percent to 
6.3 percent), and Malta (from 7.9 percent to 9.0 
percent).  By contrast, the largest decreases 
occurred in Lithuania (from 13.2 percent to 11.5 
percent), Estonia (from 10.4 percent to 9.2 
percent), and the UK (from 5.1 percent in February 
2003 to 4.7 percent in February 2004). 
 
5.  Based on EUROSTAT estimates, male unemployment 
reached 8.3 percent in April 2004 for the EU-25 and 
8.0 percent for the euro zone, respectively 
unchanged and up from 7.8 percent when compared to 
April 2003.    The female rate for the EU-25 was 
stable at 10.0 percent over the same period (up from 
10.2 percent to 10.3 percent for the euro zone). 
 
6.  Unemployment rates among young people under 25 
in April 2004 ranged from 7.3 percent in Austria to 
39.6 percent in Poland.  The rate for this age group 
in April 2004 was estimated at 18.1 percent for the 
EU-25 and 17.3 percent for the euro zone, compared 
to 18.4 percent (thus down 0.3 percentage point) and 
17.1 percent (up 0.2 percentage point) respectively 
in April 2003. 
 
7.  EUROSTAT estimated that 19.3 million were 
unemployed in the EU-25 in April 2004 (12.7 million 
in the euro zone).  Following is the breakdown of 
unemployment rates in ascending order for the 
individual EU Member States: 
 
(Seasonally-adjusted) 
(April 2004 unless otherwise indicated) 
 
Luxembourg          4.2 
Cyprus              4.4 
Ireland             4.5 
Austria             4.5 
Netherlands         4.7  (March 2004) 
UK                  4.7  (February 2004) 
Denmark             5.9  (March 2004) 
Hungary             5.9 
Sweden              6.3 
Slovenia            6.4 
Portugal            6.8 
Belgium             8.5 
Czech Republic      8.5 
Italy               8.5  (January 2004) 
Malta               9.0 
Finland             9.1 
Estonia             9.2 
Greece              9.3  (December 2003) 
France              9.4 
Denmark             9.8 
Latvia             10.7 
Spain              11.2 
Lithuania          11.5 
Slovakia           16.6 
Poland             18.9 
 
EU-15               8.1 
EU-25               9.1 
 
8.  The monthly rates and numbers of unemployed are 
estimated and based on data from the annual EU labor 
force survey.  The estimated rates may differ from 
national unemployment rates due to differences in 
methods and definitions of unemployment.  Unemployed 
people according to ILO criteria are those aged 15 
and over who: 
 
--   Are without work; 
 
--   Are available to start work within the next two 
     weeks; and 
 
--   Have actively sought employment at some time 
     during the previous four weeks. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17462","6/3/2004 10:46","04BRUSSELS2368","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002368 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: KEY TOPICS FOR EU FMS\' MEETING AND SUMMIT, JUNE 14 
AND JUNE 17-18 
 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reason 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.   The headline issues for the June 14 EU FMs\' meeting and 
the June 17-18 EU Summit will be the final round of 
Constitutional Treaty negotiations and the nomination of the 
next generation of key EU leaders (Commission President, CFSP 
High Rep).  But a substantial list of other topics will also 
be on the meeting agendas.  Likely topics include Iraq, Iran, 
Afghanistan, counter-terror, WMD, the EU Arms Agency, 
Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia (and possibly other Balkan topics 
such as UNMIK and Serb elections), Russia, the European 
Neighborhood Initiative, Sudan, Burma and Nepal.  The Irish 
are even pondering a \"bland\" reference to Transatlantic 
relations.  While few of these topics will actually receive 
much substantive debate at ministerial or summit level, the 
Irish Presidency is at work on draft Conclusions for nearly 
all of these topics.  END SUMMARY 
 
A BIG WEEK FOR THE EU 
--------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) The week of June 14th will be the culmination of the 
Irish EU Presidency, with Foreign Ministers meeting in 
Luxembourg on June 14 for a General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC) meeting, and gathering again with 
EU Heads of State and Government for the EU Summit meeting in 
Brussels on June 17-18.  The headline issues for both 
meetings, and -- at least within the EU -- the measure of 
whether the Irish Presidency has been a success, will be if 
the EU can successfully conclude its negotiations on a new 
Constitutional Treaty and who they pick as the next European 
Commission President and the next High Rep for the Common 
Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).  We believe the chances 
are better than even that the Irish will be able to reach an 
agreement on the Constitutional Treaty, although the specific 
details of how some issues such as voting formulas will come 
out are harder to predict.  But in any case, it is unlikely 
that significant changes will occur in policy areas of direct 
interest to the US such as the European Security and Defense 
Policy (ESDP).  The possibility that CFSP could in some 
circumstances be a matter of Qualified Majority Vote (QMV) 
rather than unanimity remains an agenda item, but we doubt it 
would be agreed.  The Commission President race, however, 
remains highly unpredictable.  The fact that there are three 
rumored \"front runners\" (Belgian PM Verhofstadt, Luxembourger 
PM Juncker and Portuguese Commissioner Vitorino) from among a 
very long list of possibilities  means that in reality there 
is no front runner and \"none of the above\" is as good a bet 
as any.  By contrast, it is almost guaranteed that Javier 
Solana will be renominated as CFSP High Rep, unless he 
emerges as a last-minute compromise candidate for Commission 
President. 
 
3. (SBU) While the above issues will be getting almost all 
the attention during the big week, the GAERC and Summit 
meetings will also have long agendas of other items, few of 
which will get much substantive discussion by FMs or Heads, 
but most of which will be discussed in the official 
Conclusions of the meetings. 
 
MIDDLE EAST, MEPP, IRAQ 
----------------------- 
 
4. (C) The Commission is due to send to the EU Member States 
on June 9 a document outlining a \"Medium Term Strategy\" for 
Iraq (septel).  FMs and Heads will \"welcome, review and 
possibly endorse\" this strategy, an Irish source told us.  A 
similar approach is possible for an anticipated \"EU Strategic 
Partnership for the Mediterranean and Middle East Regions.\" 
Finally the Summit, and possibly the GAERC as well, will 
issue Conclusions on the Middle East Peace Process, but our 
sources indicate there is unlikely to be much substance 
beyond what was discussed at the last Quartet meeting and 
familiar statements underlining the need to implement the 
road map.  The EU on June 14 will also be holding its 
inaugural Association Council meeting with Egypt, subsequent 
to the recent signing of an EU-Egypt Association Agreement. 
 
IRAN (POSSIBLY) 
--------------- 
 
5. (C) Our Irish source told us that the EU will be primed to 
respond to the most recent IAEA report and any implications 
of it for Iran\'s relationship with the EU, and will almost 
feel compelled to do so as earlier GAERC\'s have committed the 
EU FMs to actively follow the issue.  Our source confessed to 
a secret hope, however, that the IAEA report, which is 
scheduled to be presented to the IAEA Board of Governors on 
June 14, might come out so late that the EU will not have to 
offer any substantive response, since the crowded agendas of 
the meetings will make any serious discussion of the issue 
difficult. 
 
AFGHANISTAN 
----------- 
 
6. (C) EU FMs at the GAERC are to discuss what EU role might 
be possible in support of the upcoming elections.  The 
Commission, which usually organizes such activities for the 
EU, has expressed concerns about the security situation and 
burgeoning drug trade. 
 
WMD, COUNTER TERRORISM, AND OTHER JHA MATTERS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) The GAERC should review the implementation of the EU\'s 
WMD strategy and adopt a declaration on criminal sanctions on 
WMD related material.  The Summit is also likely to reiterate 
EU support for the PSI statement of interdiction principles. 
The EU Summit Conclusions should include a \"substantial 
section\" on counter terrorism efforts, based on the work of 
the EU\'s new \"anti-terror czar\" Gijs de Vries.  The Summit is 
also set to consider a Commission report (released on June 2) 
on how the EU is doing on coordination and implementation of 
other justice and home affairs (JHA) projects such as law 
enforcement cooperation and immigration policies.  This 
report comes five years after the 1999 EU Summit in Tampere, 
Finland set a lengthy agenda for such work. 
 
ESDP 
---- 
 
8. (C/NF) The meetings will conduct a traditional \"end of 
term\" review of progress and activities in developing ESDP. 
Among possible items for decision would be approval to move 
ahead on the \"battle groups\" proposal.  The Irish also remain 
hopeful that the GAERC will approve a Joint Action on 
establishment of the new EU Arms Agency.  The Agency has been 
a repeated subject of discussion just below the level of the 
Political and Security Committee as Member States such as the 
British and Dutch seek to ensure that agreed procedures 
maintain some constraints over what the Agency can do, 
particularly by ensuring that small groups cannot use the 
agency to promote projects unless a majority of Member States 
support the idea (even if they do not all choose to 
participate). 
 
ENLARGEMENT: CROATIA, ROMANIA, BULGARIA, BUT LITTLE ON TURKEY 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
9. (C) The next round(s) of EU enlargement will also figure 
on the week\'s agendas.  The Irish sound confident they will 
be able to close all of the remaining negotiating chapters 
for Bulgaria\'s accession.  They also expect to conclude some 
additional chapters with Romania, although the Irish focus 
has been on Bulgaria to \"allow the Dutch to focus on just one 
country.\"  Croatia, another Irish source told us, is 
\"virtually guaranteed\" to be named an official candidate for 
EU membership at the Summit.  But it is still a pending 
question whether the EU will fix a date for beginning 
accession negotiations with Croatia.  According to our Irish 
contact, this has nothing to do with remaining question marks 
over Croatia\'s ICTY cooperation, but are only related to 
France\'s \"enlargement fatigue\" and the worries of several 
Member States about setting a precedent for the December 
decision on Turkey.  The June Summit is expected to make at 
most cursory mention of Turkey in its Conclusions. 
 
RUSSIA AND EUROPEAN NEIGHBORHOOD INITIATIVE 
------------------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) The Summit will likely include positive language 
about developments in EU-Russia relations over the past six 
months.  The Irish Presidency appears keen to highlight what 
they see as one of their successes in \"taking a clearer look 
at identifying what we wanted out of the relationship and 
creating a proper structure for handling it.\"  They will 
likely look to highlight the results of the recent EU-Russia 
Summit.  The Summit should also approve the Commission\'s 
proposals for the European Neighborhood Initiative and 
confirm that Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan are potential 
participants within the scope of the project, with Georgia 
being the initial candidate for further interaction. 
 
SUDAN 
----- 
 
11. (SBU) The Summit is likely to issue language addressing 
the Sudan crisis, according to one of our Irish sources, but 
it was unclear what precisely the EU would include.  One 
possibility could be an offer of support for EU monitors for 
a cease-fire in the country, but that is not yet decided. 
(NOTE:  Members of the EU Military Staff have reacted very 
negatively to the prospect of being asked to undertake any 
sort of ESDP mission in Sudan at a time when they are fully 
engaged in Bosnia planning.) 
 
BURMA/ASEM AND NEPAL 
-------------------- 
 
12. (C) The EU continues to struggle with how to respond to 
the pending enlargement of ASEAN, including Burma as a 
member.  The GAERC should review the EU\'s approach to the 
problem, including the question of whether the EU would show 
up for a meeting where the Burmese regime attends (an EU-ASEM 
Summit is scheduled for Hanoi in October, with lower level 
meetings beginning under the Dutch presidency in July).  An 
Irish envoy (John Campbell) has been touring the region, but 
reportedly heard little flexibility from ASEAN countries. 
The EU FMs will likely confirm the EU\'s position that Rangoon 
should release Aung San Suu Kyi, allow greater political 
participation of her party, and improve the procedures for 
the National Conference.  At British request, the GAERC is 
also set to discuss the current situation in Nepal. 
 
TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONS 
----------------------- 
 
13. (C/NF) Based on the principle, according to our Irish 
contact, that \"if we have mentioned all these other places in 
the world, someone might ask us why we did not mention the 
U.S.\" the EU Summit\'s Conclusions will likely include a 
\"bland\" paragraph on transatlantic relations, that would do 
little more than note the EU looked forward to the US-EU 
Summit the following week.  (COMMENT:  As ever with EU 
Conclusions, the fact that a topic is simply introduced 
leaves open the possibility that one Member State or another 
will try to introduce additional language, but we wouldn\'t 
expect any such ideas to gain consensus.  END COMMENT.) 
 
BALKANS 
------- 
 
14. (C) Beyond the discussion (see para 9) on Croatia\'s EU 
application, the Balkans may not receive any ministerial 
level discussion.  GAERC Conclusions are likely, however, 
that will note Solana\'s recent visit to Kosovo, and perhaps 
the resignation of UNMIK SRSG Holkeri, as well as the 
previous weekend\'s presidential elections in Serbia. 
 
OTHER TOPICS 
------------ 
 
15.  (SBU) The meetings will also include standard \"end of 
term reviews\" of EU action on conflict prevention; 
implementation of the European Security Strategy in the four 
chosen areas (counter terrorism, Bosnia, \"effective 
multilateralism\" and the Middle East); and progress on the 
EU\'s Lisbon agenda for economic reform.  Finally, the EU 
Summit should establish a calendar for reaching agreement on 
the EU\'s 2007-2013 \"financial perspective\" or budget 
envelope.  This is set to become the EU\'s next big internal 
debate. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17464","6/3/2004 11:19","04BRUSSELS2369","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE121748","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002369 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/01/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, IZ, UNSC, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ON LATEST IRAQ DEVELOPMENTS: WHAT TO EXPECT IN 
JUNE 
 
REF: A. STATE 121748 
 
     B. STATE 121718 
     C. DUBLIN 840 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b, d) 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The EU intends to release a medium term 
strategy on Iraq at its June 17-18 Summit.  The strategy will 
govern political and economic relations with sovereign Iraq 
through the 2004-05 electoral period.  Specific proposals 
include support for the electoral process, human rights, 
democratic institutions and civil society, as well as 
regional reintegration and significant microeconomic 
assistance.  Pleased with a new government in Iraq and 
hopeful about a passage of UNSC resolution on Iraq, formal 
EU-Iraq relations will likely begin with a high level troika 
visit this summer; one of our interlocutors described as an 
EU commitment to \"progressively engage in Iraq.\" On June 2, 
Deputy Secretary Armitage raised many ref A-B points in his 
discussion on Iraq with EU Council Hi-Rep Javier Solana 
(septel). Solana is both publicly and privately supportive of 
the new government and wants the UNSC resolution on Iraq to 
go ahead. End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
EU Intends \"Progressive Engagement\" With Sovereign Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
2. (C) We called on the Council Secretariat Iraq Desk to 
discuss the draft UNSCR on Iraq and the Brahimi-al Allawi 
announcement naming an Iraqi Interim Government (IIG) 
(reftels).  Principal Administrator Lena Hove (protect) 
affirmed EU support for a return to sovereignty on June 30 
and said that \"everybody is quite happy with Brahimi\" and his 
efforts as UN Special Advisor.  She added that the EU has 
\"lots of hope and expectation for what the UN can do in 
Iraq,\" and is looking for ways to engage and assist the IIG 
in the run up to elections. 
 
3. (C) Hove reports that EU leaders hope to adopt a strategy 
at their June 17-18 Summit for engaging with Iraq throughout 
the interim period.  An Irish contact confirms the intent for 
leaders to \"welcome, review and possibly endorse\" the 
strategy, which both Hove and our Irish contact describe as a 
\"medium term\" effort intended to cover the period from July 1 
through the 2004-05 electoral period.  The draft strategy (or 
\"Communication\" in Eurojargon) is scheduled for release by 
the Commission on June 9.  Member States will have from then 
until the June 14 GAERC to review and revise the document. 
FMs could either endorse it on June 14 or mandate further 
revision prior to the June 17-18 EU Summit.  Hove said that 
in either case, the EU was determined to have a strategy in 
place by the June 30 transfer of sovereignty.  Asked if 
passage of the draft UNSCR was viewed as a prerequisite for 
adopting an EU strategy for enhanced engagement, Hove said 
no; Member States hoped that the resolution would be passed 
in time to inform the EU strategy but that that was not a 
condition.  Somewhere along the way, HiRep Solana and 
Commissioner Patten will issue a joint letter detailing a 
shared vision of the EU\'s political and security relationship 
with sovereign Iraq (Hove did not think the drafting was yet 
underway).  The letter will be addressed to FMs and Heads of 
State/Government for consideration alongside the Commission 
document. 
 
4. (C) Hove said the emerging strategy would contain an EU 
commitment to \"progressively engage in Iraq.\"  It will 
contain \"concrete proposals\" for supporting the electoral 
process, creating democratic institutions, developing civil 
society, promoting human rights standards, and promoting 
regional reintegration.  It will also describe outlines for 
the eventual negotiation of an EU-Iraq trade agreement (in 
the form of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement), and 
will propose \"significant\" near- and mid-term microeconomic 
assistance.  The Commission will also propose opening a 
delegation in Baghdad and will work with Member States to 
develop a formal political dialogue with Iraq.  Hove said 
they expected the process to start over the summer with a 
high level Troika visit to Baghdad. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Recent Public Statements by HiRep Solana and FM Cowen 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
5. (U) HiRep Solana and Irish FM Cowen (speaking for the EU 
Presidency) commented on Iraq in separate statements to the 
press June 1 and 2.  Speaking in The Hague June 1, Solana 
said, \"I hope very very much that the (UNSCR) will be 
approved, if possible unanimously, so that the government 
will have the legitimacy needed to move the country forward 
to stability.\"  On June 2, following a meeting with Deputy 
Secretary Armitage (septel), Solana praised Brahimi\'s \"good 
 
SIPDIS 
job\" and said that the EU \"was pleased to see that a 
government has been established.\" Solana also expressed hope 
that the UNSC would come out with a resolution on Iraq. The 
Irish EU Presidency also released a short statement June 1 
welcoming the formation of the IIG and conveying FM Cowen\'s 
wishes for \"every success\" as the IIG steers the country 
toward free and fair elections (ref c). 
 
6. (U) CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"17470","6/3/2004 13:37","04BRUSSELS2381","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 002381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, BK, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUR/DAS BRADTKE\'S SECURITY CONSULTATIONS WITH EU 
 
 
Classified By: USEU External Affairs Officer Andrew Erickson 
for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) EUR/DAS Bradtke met May 26 in Brussels with EU 
leaders in the PSC Troika Format including representatives of 
the EU presidency, Council, and Commission.  Bradtke and his 
EU interlocutors reviewed ESDP/NATO developments, including 
the BiH SFOR transition, the EU\'s planning for a civ-mil 
cell, EU African peacekeeping ambitions, the development of 
NRF and the EU\'s rapid response capabilities, including 
battlegroups, and finally, ways of moving forward with 
NATO-EU strategic cooperation after enlargement in both 
organizations.  The EU believes that preparations for a 
post-SFOR EU presence in Bosnia are proceeding well.  The EU 
also reviewed its non-pro efforts and views on Afghanistan; 
Bradtke briefed on Kosovo and heard a read-out of the last 
EUROMED meeting.  Finally, Bradtke reviewed with EU 
interlocutors the state of play in Moldova.  In a separate 
meeting, Bradtke met with HiRep Solana at Solana\'s request to 
hear a strong pitch for a more creative approach by NATO to 
Partnership for peace for Bosnia.  Solana also stressed his 
desire for the EU to be more active in Kosovo.  End summary. 
 
---------------------- 
Solana/Cooper Meetings 
---------------------- 
 
2.  (C) At the Hirep\'s request, Bradtke met privately with 
Solana for half an hour prior to the larger consultative 
meeting with the EU Presidency, Council, and Commission. DG 
Robert Cooper told Bradtke Solana was \"keen\" on Peter Feith 
to succeed Holkeri in Kosovo.   Solana wanted the EU to get 
\"their man\" in UNMIK because they believe the EU will 
eventually take a lead role in Kosovo.  Solana, who joined 
the meeting later, did not make a pitch directly for Feith, 
but urged a quick decision on a replacement for Holkeri in 
Kosovo.  Cautioning that he did not want to give the 
impression the EU seeks to push the US out, Solana also 
argued for the long-term \"Europeanization\" of the 
international effort in Kosovo.  He suggested the appointment 
of an EU insider to replace Holkeri as the first step toward 
creating a dual-hatted figure similar to the role played by 
Paddy Ashdown in Bosnia. 
 
3.  (C) Bradtke told Cooper that the US was well aware of 
Feith\'s strong qualifications.  While this was a European 
decision, there was concern about Feith,s key role in 
managing the Berlin Plus transition in Bosnia.  Cooper 
recognized this as a problem, and suggested that if Holkeri 
stayed on through his tenure to August, much of the heavy 
lifting on Bosnia should be completed.  Solana said the 
international community should stick with its focus on 
standards through mid-2005, but that Kosovo was facing a 
difficult period with elections on the way.  He was pleased 
with the new US-EU-NATO formula, but noted that Kostunica 
preferred the Contact Group because he could use Russia\'s 
presence to gain leverage.  That said, Solana said in his 
recent discussions with the Russians (including Putin), he 
found Moscow open to new ideas, and prepared to be 
constructive.  After the meeting, Cooper approached Bradtke 
and suggested that one option was that Declan Kelleher, the 
Irish PSC ambassador, would replace Feith on Solana,s staff. 
 The other option was that he (Cooper) would try to take on 
more responsibility for the day-to-day management of the 
Bosnia transition. 
 
-------------- 
Bosnia and PfP 
-------------- 
 
4.  (C) Solana noted that the Bosnian PM had spoken to the 
NAC/PSC at the beginning of the week, and had made a strong 
case for his country\'s commitment to reform.  Solana 
suggested that, while mindful that it was not for him to give 
advice to NATO,it might be time for NATO to rethink the 
linkage between PfP and PIFWCs, noting that PfP is a powerful 
tool to provide \"oxygen\" to militaries that enable them to 
act more responsibly, which in turn is more likely to have a 
positive impact on efforts to apprehend PIFWCs than the 
current approach.  The linkage is leading to frustration, and 
it might be time to be more creative, rather than remain 
\"trapped\" in the current policy.  Bradtke responded that the 
US had reviewed this issue at senior levels, and was not  not 
prepared to change the current policy before the Istanbul 
Summit. 
 
------------------- 
BiH SFOR Transition 
------------------- 
 
5.  (C) Following his meetings with Solana and Cooper, 
Bradtke met with the PSC Troika formation of Presidency state 
Ireland, incoming presidency state the Netherlands, EU 
Council Secretariat and Commission staff.  The Presidency 
chaired, with Irish PSC Ambassador Declan Kelleher opening by 
noting that NATO-EU cooperation on Bosnia was moving ahead 
smartly.  The EUMS is staffing its liaison positions at 
SHAPE, and will soon send a liaison to Naples.  PSC 
ambassadors will visit Naples in early June to educate 
themselves about the role of CINCSOUTH.  The EU informal 
force generation conference will take place June 8th; 
modalities for third country participation remain under 
discussion.  The EU remains concerned about the need for 
clear delineation of tasks, a clear Dayton mandate for the 
EU, and ensuring \"access to reserves at all levels.\"  Bradtke 
responded that the US was generally satisfied with the EU\'s 
general concept for Bosnia, and pleased with Pieter Feith\'s 
good cooperation with the NATO IS.  Nonetheless, the US was 
committed to the need for both NATO and the EU to have full 
access to all Dayton authorities, with Bradtke saying: 
\"Dayton gave NATO very broad authority in Bosnia; we don\'t 
want an effort to pick apart Annex 1A.\" 
 
6.  (C) Dutch PSC Ambassador Hamer told Bradtke \"what you 
have described is in line with our thoughts.\"  Council ESDP 
Deputy Director General Feith noted that the debate on 
delineation and mandate is on-going at NATO; the key is to 
\"avoid the possibility of Bosnians using NATO as an appeals 
court if EU assesses non-compliance on an issue.\"  Feith 
added that the delineation remains a political point that 
can\'t be left to authorities on the ground; the EU \"needs to 
be fully comfortable with delineation.\"  This delineation 
need not be formally endorsed by the NAC-PSC, Bradtke agreed 
with Feith.  Finally, Bradtke underscored that a NAC decision 
would be required to endorse EU access to strategic reserves. 
 
 
--------------- 
EU Civ-Mil Cell 
--------------- 
 
7.  (C) Kelleher noted that the EU cell \"is not a standing 
HQ\"; it is part of a package with the EU cell at SHAPE, and 
should be seen as such.  It will have three main functions, 
developing strategic options, assisting NHQs, and working EU 
autonomous operations without recourse to NATO assets.  The 
cell will have approximately 25 personnel, and will keep 
DSACEUR informed through consultations.  HRSG Solana\'s goal 
is to have a political way forward agreed by June; it will be 
up to the Dutch presidency (second half of 2004) to move the 
concept \"from words to work\" e.g. implementation and staffing 
of the cell.  Feith added that he believed the cell would be 
up and running by \"late 2005 or the beginning of 2006.\" 
Bradtke noted that Washington continues to follow the 
development of the cell with close interest and appreciates 
the assurances the U.S. has received regarding its 
consistency with Berlin-plus and non-duplication of NATO 
capabilities. 
 
----------- 
EU Ambition 
for Africa? 
----------- 
 
8.  (C) Although the EU is currently not actively involved in 
peacekeeping in Africa, it anticipates a surge in demand for 
African peacekeeping, according to Kelleher.  The EU\'s 
approach will be multilateral, focusing on close cooperation 
with the African Union and other regional actors.  It will 
also be, in keeping with EU doctrine: \"integrated\" -- meaning 
that it will involve all EU actors, civilian & military, for 
a coordinated approach to security restoration.  For now, the 
EU\'s ambitions are greater than its actions: one EU military 
staff liaison officer is in Addis Ababa to liaise with the 
African Union.  He is there now.  The EU also has on line its 
250 million euro African peacekeeping facility, which it has 
yet to use. 
 
--------------- 
EU battlegroups 
--------------- 
 
9.   (C) Following Bradtke\'s review of developments with the 
NATO Rapid Reaction Force (NRF), the EU briefed on its 
battlegroups (BG) concept, based upon the UK-FR-GE proposal 
for national and multinational units of 1500 troops 
deployable within fifteen days.  The concept has been 
endorsed by EU foreign ministers, and is now being fleshed 
out.  The key point for the EU was the promotion of \"mutually 
reinforcing\" capabilities; Kelleher also warned of EU 
concerns that capabilities not be \"frozen\" by commitments to 
specific duties.  The EU would seek -- and offer -- 
transparency with NATO as it developed its approach to BGs. 
Bradtke probed for specifics on how the BG concept would 
work.  It was clear that EU interlocutors had few.  The 
Council military planner speculated that \"sub-Saharan Africa 
would probably be about the limit\" of potential 
deployability. 
10.  (C) Bradtke underscored the need to keep NATO and EU 
standards aligned.  In response to Bradtke\'s question about 
whether the EU would conduct field exercises for its BGs, 
Ambassador Kelleher underscored that the EU would not conduct 
field exercises, below the force headquarters level. 
Training remains a national responsibility.  Keller also 
assured Bradtke that participation in battlegroups would be 
open to all EU members, rather than only to members meeting 
certain criteria. 
 
----------------- 
Post Enlargement 
NATO-EU relations 
----------------- 
 
11.  (C) Bradtke observed that it was important to ensure 
that enlargement not hinder NATO - EU cooperation, despite 
the challenges posed on participation by the accession of 
Cyprus and Malta, both non-PfP members.  Ambassador Kelleher 
replied that the EU\'s position on participation was that the 
use of NATO classified information -- or information derived 
from NATO classified information -- was the dividing line for 
the EU in terms of whether Cyprus and Malta would participate 
in EU consultations with NATO.  While the classification 
exclusion was certain, it also could reduce their rights as 
full EU member states.  Kelleher probed Bradtke about the 
prospect of a NATO - EU summit, or ministerial, on the 
margins of the NATO Istanbul Summit.  Bradtke said that from 
his perspective, the issue of Malta and Cyprus did not 
preclude holding NATO-EU Summits or Ministerials with the 
participation of all twenty-five EU members.  However, at 
Istanbul, the US opposed a summit and probably would not be 
enthusiastic about a ministerial, because of the time 
constraints.  Changing the subject, Bradtke praised the 
Netherlands/UK/LUX non-paper on prospective enhanced NATO-EU 
cooperation; \"let\'s operationalize it,\" he said. 
 
------ 
Kosovo 
------ 
 
12.  (C) Bradtke agreed with the EU on the need to redouble 
efforts to address Kosovo; the US and the EU agreed that 
there could be no reward for the recent violence.  Instead, 
the work of the contact group and US-NATO-EU efforts on an 
intensive dialogue, including Belgrade Serbs needed to be 
advanced more rapidly.  Standards before status remained the 
operative vision of both the EU and the US; there was a need 
for a good replacement for UNMIK chief Holkeri, and there 
were a number of excellent European candidates under 
consideration. 
 
---------------------- 
Other Issues: Non-Pro, 
EuroMed, Afghanistan & 
and Moldova 
---------------------- 
 
13.  (C) Kelleher briefly reviewed recent EU actions aimed at 
strengthening non-proliferation cooperation; Bradtke 
responded that the US was pleased with EU efforts, and looked 
forward to further cooperation.  In this regard, the US was 
looking forward to seeing the EU draft for the US-EU Summit 
Declaration.  On other issues, Kelleher, Council, and 
Commission officials made the following points: 
 
-- On Afghanistan, the Commission has set a demobilization 
goal of 40,000.  The Commission is in the midst of an 
internal debate about how to manage observing the elections; 
clearly \"a normal observation mission is impossible.\"  The EU 
will most likely seek a solution dependent upon heavy use of 
NGOs and human rights advocacy groups.  Bradtke briefed on 
the status of PRTs, and the critical need for countries to 
fulfill their assistance and security pledges with actual 
disbursements.  The EU asked for an assessment of the impact 
of the withdrawal of Russian border grounds from Tadjikistan; 
Bradtke replied that there was a need to address border 
security, but that the Russian record there had not been a 
good one. 
 
-- On the EUROMED dialogue, Kelleher noted that the most 
recent EUROMED meeting had been an informal one; the next 
formal meeting of the partners would be held during the 
Luxembourg presidency in the first half of 2005.  This 
informal was the first EUROMED meeting at 25 (the new 
accession states) plus the ten EUROMED partners; Libya 
attended as a guest.  There were two significant results. 
The first was the decision to make Alexandria the seat of the 
EUROMED foundation; this would enhance Israeli-Arab as well 
as European-Arab dialogue and intercourse.  The second 
outcome was a general agreement that at 35, a new working 
method needed to be conceived for EUROMED; this was being 
explored, but would result in a more efficient mechanism.  In 
an \"unplanned\" Troika with the Libyan FM, the EU expressed 
its strong dissatisfaction with the death sentences for the 
Bulgarian medics.  Bradtke thanked the EU for the update, and 
noted that US GME efforts were not intended to supplant EU 
efforts in the region, but rather to further dialogue among 
the parties. 
 
-- Finally, Bradtke and the EU briefly exchanged views on 
Moldova, with both sides agreeing that progress is stalled, 
and that the Russians must be held to their commitments. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"17497","6/4/2004 10:40","04BRUSSELS2389","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE10097","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002389 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA JOHN RODGERS, IO/UNP MARK WEINBERG, L/EUR 
EVAN BLOOM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, UN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DEALING WITH EU IN INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS: 
USEU FIRST IMPRESSIONS 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 10097 
 
     B. B) STATE 100881 
     C. C) UNVIE VIENNA 471 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 2292 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY:  We reviewed ref A draft guidelines on 
dealing with the EU in international organizations, and 
believe the guidelines, with a few adjustments, will provide 
what is needed: an equitable and fair framework which allows 
flexibility within broad parameters and clearly spells out 
U.S. redlines.  Below are USEU\'s overall recommendations 
(para 2), and specific comments on each of the draft 
guidelines (para 3).  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) RECOMMENDATIONS: 
 
--The guidelines should provide flexibility within broad 
parameters, but with U.S. redlines clearly explained. 
 
--Flexibility within broad parameters should help USG 
officials to apply the guidelines in a wide variety of 
circumstances and venues. 
 
--Clear red lines are needed to overcome the current lack of 
clarity and the resulting tensions between the U.S. and the 
EU. 
 
--The guidelines should be conspicuously equitable.  It 
should be emphasized that their primary purpose is to promote 
fairness for all interested parties; the guidelines should 
ultimately be shared with the EU in order to promote 
constructive U.S.-EU engagement in international 
organizations. 
 
--Department, together with Japan, Canada and Australia, 
should consider approaching the EU once the guidelines are in 
final version.  The purpose of the approach should be to get 
explicit EU agreement to the guidelines, even if that may 
require a willingness to negotiate with the EU on some of the 
fine points. 
 
END RECOMMENDATIONS. 
 
3. (C) SPECIFIC COMMENTS ON THE DRAFT GUIDELINES: 
 
--The first guideline as written -- that rules for EU 
participation must be reviewed case-by-case and no particular 
case creates a precedent for others -- could result in a 
continuation of endless haggling with the EU in each 
individual case.  We suggest the following reformulation: 
\"Equitable general guidelines should be established with 
which EU participation should comply in each particular case. 
 We do not view EU participation in any particular case as 
creating a precedent for others unless the relevant 
conditions of both cases are identically applicable.\" 
 
--On the second guideline, we would appreciate a clearer 
delineation of what type of speaking arrangements would 
confer special advantages to the EU, and what those special 
advantages would be. 
 
--On the third guideline, is the USG justified in trying to 
prevent EU member states alone from constituting a quorum at 
any meeting?  If the principle behind the guidelines is no 
additionality -- not to allow the EU and its member states to 
have an advantage over other countries simply because of the 
existence of the EU, then presumably the EU and its member 
states should suffer no disadvantage simply because of the 
existence of the EU. 
 
--On the fourth guideline, we agree that the onus should be 
on the EU to disclose fully its competence over the subject 
matter of meetings, and inform third parties who is 
negotiating for the EU.  If the EU claims mixed competency 
(competency shared by the European Commission (EC) and EU 
member states) but cannot explain how the mixed competency is 
shared or what the implications of mixed competency are in a 
particular case, the EC should not be granted any enhanced 
status. 
 
--On the fifth guideline, we propose that the sentence, \"EU 
rights at major conferences should be subject to case-by-case 
review\" be changed to \"EU rights at major conferences and 
agencies within international organizations should be subject 
to case-by-case review within established and equitable broad 
guidelines.\"  This will allow for enough flexibility to 
accommodate cases in which enhanced EU rights not only in 
conferences, but also in agencies within IOs, may be 
equitable and in the interest of the U.S. 
 
--While we understand the need to maintain flexibility, the 
sixth guideline, \"The EU should not be allowed to dominate by 
its numbers small negotiating groups,\" should be delineated 
more clearly.  What exactly is meant by \"dominate by its 
numbers?\"  What exactly are \"small negotiating groups?\"  If 
exact answers to these questions are not possible, perhaps 
Department can illustrate the overall intent of this 
guideline by including specific examples of cases in which 
the EU has dominated small negotiating groups. 
--USEU agrees with the final guideline, \"We should consult on 
any additionality questions that go beyond these basic 
guidelines.\" 
 
END COMMENTS ON DRAFT GUIDELINES. 
 
3. (C) We will continue to work this issue, and consult our 
counterparts in the Japanese, Australian and Canadian 
Missions. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"17520","6/4/2004 15:48","04BRUSSELS2410","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS2354|04DUBLIN850|04STATE122317","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002410 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PHUM, PREF, SU, PROV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE RESPONSE: EU ON DARFUR HUMANITARIAN CRISIS 
 
REF: (A) STATE 122317 (B) DUBLIN 0850 (C) BRUSSELS 2354 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
1. (C)  Summary.  The EU Council Secretariat will recommend 
to the Irish Presidency that they adopt a similar approach 
outlined in reftel A, demarching friendly Arab and African 
states over the deteriorating situation in Sudan.  The EU 
announced a 10 million euro contribution to address 
humanitarian needs in Darfur and highlighted the problems aid 
workers have experienced in obtaining access to the needy 
regions.  The EU is working on a Council Conclusion regarding 
Sudan to be issued in June which will focus on the Ceasefire 
Commission (CFC) and other positive developments.  The EU 
will authorize funds from the newly established Africa Peace 
Facility (APF) for the CFC and will contribute personnel 
including the vice chair and at least six military observers. 
 These will probably be supplied by Member States, although 
some may come from the EU Military Staff or possibly under 
the umbrella of an ESDP operation.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
EU positive on demarche initiative 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (C) Per reftel a, PRMOff delivered talking points to EU 
Council Secretariat policy advisor on Sudan Christian Manahl 
on 6/3.  He said that he personally thought the approach was 
creative and could be effective, noting the embarrassment to 
the GoS of Muslims attacking Muslims in Darfur.  He will 
raise the issue on 6/8 with the Irish Presidency in advance 
of the Africa working group meeting and hopefully gain 
consensus from the EU Member States for a similar demarche. 
Post will report on significant developments from this 
meeting. 
 
------------------------ 
Contributions/concerns over humanitarian needs in Darfur 
------------------------ 
 
3. (U) Regarding the humanitarian needs in Darfur, on 6/3 the 
EC announced 10 million euros for assistance to the region in 
conjunction with the donors\' consultative meeting in Geneva 
(reftel b).  Commissioner Poul Nielson\'s press statement 
decried the \"unnecessary bureaucratic constraints\" imposed by 
the GoS and called for unhindered access.  According to 
ECHO\'s Nairobi based officer Peter Holdsworth, the granting 
of authorizations \"seems to be totally at the whim of the 
bureaucracy and government.\"  He noted, \"The roads are very 
difficult and there are a limited number of airfields.  If 
one hasn\'t got capacity on the ground, it is very difficult 
to carry out an operation.  And the reason why there isn\'t 
capacity on the ground is because it is very difficult to get 
visas.\" 
 
4. (U) At the Geneva conference, Irish Development Minister 
Tom Kitts said that \"the most crucial elements needed in 
Darfur today are human security and protection, humanitarian 
access and respect for international human rights and 
humanitarian law.  On security it is the responsibility of 
the GoS to ensure that an immediate end is put to the massive 
displacements and to provide a safe environment to enable 
people to return to their homes.  It is vital that all 
parties to the conflict, but especially the GoS, adhere to 
the principles of humanitarian law.\" 
 
------------------------ 
Supporting the Ceasefire Commission 
------------------------ 
 
5. (C) Manahl stated the EU is working on a Council 
Conclusion for Darfur to be issued at the upcoming Foreign 
Ministers\' Summit in mid-June.  He said they had wanted a 
broader statement on the future of EU-Sudan relations, but 
since the peace negotiations in Naivasha still have not 
concluded this will have to wait until the Dutch presidency. 
The statement will commend the GoS and SPLM/A for signing the 
protocols on 5/26 in Naivasha on power sharing in the 
contentious areas of Abyei, Nuba Mountains and Southern Blue 
Nile and call on them to conclude a comprehensive peace 
agreement. 
6. (C) The statement will also welcome the signing of the 
ceasefire agreement in N\'Djamena on 4/8 and the agreement 
signed in Addis Ababa on 5/28 regarding the modalities of 
implementing a cease fire commission.  The CFC will help 
avert a \"looming humanitarian catastrophe\" and also create an 
atmosphere conducive to addressing the underlying causes of 
the Darfur crisis.  The EU has been assigned the role of the 
vice chair of the CFC which will be based in El Fasher, 
Darfur and will also contribute six observers.  These will 
probably be supplied by Member States, although some may come 
from the EU Military Staff or possibly under the umbrella of 
an ESDP operation.  The final decision might be influenced as 
much by financing options as by politics.  The statement will 
also announce use of the new EU-funded Africa Peace Facility 
by the AU to finance half of the CFC (reftel c).  The UK and 
Denmark are also expected to contribute financially to the 
CFC. 
 
Minimize considered. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"17565","6/7/2004 14:08","04BRUSSELS2437","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04GENEVA983","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 002437 
 
SIPDIS 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
STATE FOR IO/T; IO/S; DRL/IL 
STATE please pass USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ETRD, ELAB, ILO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU CONTRIBUTION TO \"SOCIAL BENEFITS OF 
GLOBALIZATION\" DEBATE 
 
REF: (A) STATE 35207; (B) GENEVA 983 
 
This is a joint USEU labor/USEU/USTR cable 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  The EU Commission recently tabled a series of 
recommendations presented as its contribution to securing 
the social benefits of globalization.  On the internal (EU) 
front, the Commission advocates full implementation of the 
Lisbon strategy to maintain Europe\'s competitiveness, 
calling for heavy investment in the skills of the EU labor 
force and for the most effective use of information 
technologies.  On the external front, the Commission calls 
upon the completion of international initiatives, such as 
the conclusion and implementation of the Doha Development 
Agenda (DDA) and delivering on the Millennium Development 
Goals, but also looks toward the promotion of social 
development via unilateral market access schemes, developing 
assistance for trade-related adjustment costs, enhancing 
corporate social responsibility, and improving governance at 
global level.  These recommendations are in response to the 
findings of the ILO\'s World Commission on the Social 
Dimension of Globalization (WCSDG) published in February and 
in preparation for the follow-up debate at the Geneva ILO 
Conference in June 2004.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  In a recent communication to the Council, European 
Parliament and other EU bodies, the Commission reviewed the 
actions undertaken by the EU both within the framework of 
the Union and on the international scene \"to ensure that 
economic and social progress go hand in hand\" and tabled a 
series of recommendations for \"concrete action.\"  The paper 
was drafted in response to the findings of the ILO\'s World 
Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization (WCSDG) 
published last February (REF A), discussed in March (REF B), 
and as a contribution to the follow-up debate to be held at 
this month\'s Geneva ILO Conference.  Although globalization 
is seen as leading to the creation of higher quality and 
higher earning jobs in parts of the world previously heavily 
dependent on agriculture, the Commission notes that the 
benefits of globalization are \"not shared equally across all 
countries and groups and that, without an effective system 
of global governance, the current model of globalization is 
generating unbalanced outcomes and is not likely to lead to 
global sustainable development.\"  The Commission notes \"a 
growing interest, including in the WCSDG report, in the EU 
approach to economic, employment and social issues\" and in 
the EU model of sustainable development. 
 
DEALING WITH GLOBALIZATION WITHIN THE EU 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3.  Overall economic gains from globalization are seen as 
\"undoubtedly positive\" for the EU.  However, for trade 
liberalization to succeed, mechanisms must be provided to 
cope with adjustment costs, in particular those associated 
with restructuring.  The paper places heavy emphasis on the 
integrated \"Lisbon strategy\" agreed by EU leaders in 2000 
with the aim of turning Europe into the most competitive, 
knowledge-based society in the world by 2010.  The strategy 
is described as the path to \"more and better jobs\" and 
increased social cohesion, by promoting \"mutually 
reinforcing policies\" to address the EU requirements in 
areas of competitiveness, employment, social progress and 
environmental sustainability.  Not surprisingly, the paper 
reiterates well-known Commission calls to increase 
investment in the skills of the EU labor force and to make 
the most effective use of information technologies:  \"All 
stakeholders are required to anticipate, trigger and absorb 
change.\" 
 
4.  The Commission also suggests that: 
 
--   EU resources from the Structural Funds be better 
     targeted to address the challenges of globalization, 
     such as promoting the adaptability and employability of 
     people and enterprises and spreading out innovation and 
     research \"more evenly throughout Europe\"; 
 
--   The European Social Fund (ESF) be used \"as a catalyst 
     for national and regional investments to contribute to 
     employment and life long learning, increased quality 
     and productivity at work and to social inclusion\"; 
 
--   EU countries should tackle all forms of discrimination 
     and inequalities within the labor market and pursue 
     education and training programs that contribute to the 
     Lisbon strategy goals; 
5.  The Commission further notes that EU legislation sets 
minimum requirements for all Member States and companies 
when contemplating large-scale jobs losses or preparing 
other decisions likely to affect workers.  Most recent texts 
in this regard promote upstream worker involvement, notably 
on strategic issues and on the foreseeable evolution of 
employment opportunities within companies.  EU legislation 
also ensures minimum standards for occupational health and 
safety and for working conditions.  Freedom of association 
and collective bargaining are enshrined in the EU Charter of 
Fundamental Rights, soon to be included in the EU 
Constitutional Treaty. 
 
EU ACTION ON THE EXTERNAL FRONT 
------------------------------- 
 
6.  The Commission recalls that EU external policies have 
always had an important social dimension, e.g. in supporting 
universal access to basic social services in the LDCs.  For 
some time now, the EU has also been promoting the 
effectiveness and coherence of global governance, including 
economic governance, through international institutions, to 
ensure that trade policy and bilateral relations with 
regions and individual countries are fully supportive of 
social development and to ensure that development and 
external cooperation contributes to maximize positive and 
minimize negative social consequences of globalization.  Six 
primary objectives are put forth by the Commission in terms 
of external action: 
 
--   Conclusion and implementation of the Doha Development 
     Agenda (DDA); 
 
--   Delivering on the Millennium Development Goals; 
 
--   P 
romoting social development via unilateral market access 
     schemes; 
 
--   Developing assistance for trade-related adjustment 
     costs; 
 
--   E 
nhancing corporate social responsibility; 
 
--   Improving governance at the global level. 
 
7.  Although regional integration can foster growth, the 
Commission emphasizes in its report that regional 
integration is only a \"second best solution\" compared to 
multilateral efforts.  Specifically the Commission refers to 
the international efforts of the Doha Development Agenda and 
the Millennium Development goals.  Reference is made to the 
World Bank, which has estimated that the gains from 
implementing the DDA could be between USD 270-520 billion in 
2015.  In order to achieve the pro-development goals of the 
WTO talks, the Commission calls not only for an improvement 
of the WTO negotiation process (i.e. increasing active 
participation of developing countries in the decision-making 
procedures), but also for increased market access, and 
specifically market access to reduce trade distortions for 
sectors and products of \"special interest to developing 
countries.\"  In this respect, the Commission points out that 
since some of the highest trade barriers exist between 
developing countries, the creation of new markets via \"south- 
south\" trade will be important and may ease concerns among 
LDCs about the impact of preference erosion. 
 
8.  The Commission report recognizes that agriculture is a 
particularly sensitive sector.  According to the Commission, 
there is high dependence of these countries on a few key 
agricultural commodities, and the solution is wider market 
access.  Two recent Commission communications suggesting 
integrated approaches to achieve sustainable practices along 
the commodity supply chain are mentioned as starting points 
for further action.  The communications are the \"proposal 
for an EU action plan on agricultural commodity chains, 
dependence and poverty\" and the \"proposal for an EU-Africa 
Partnership in support of cotton development,\" both released 
this past February. Further, the Commission refers to the 
benefits of liberalization in the services sector, and the 
importance of assisting developing countries in regulatory 
reform and the rule-making component of the DDA, as legal 
certainty will help create more optimal conditions for trade 
and investment. Regarding the Millennium Development goals, 
the Commission expresses agreement with the WCSDG report 
that these goals are part of the first steps towards 
establishing a global socio-economic base.  The \"EC will 
focus on delivering on its international commitments with 
clear targets on poverty, education, health, gender and 
environment.  The specific objectives and actions agreed in 
Monterrey and Johannesburg will set the pace and direction 
of this work.\" 
 
9.  The Commission also promotes unilateral market access 
schemes as mechanisms to secure social development. The 
Everything But Arms proposal is cited as an example, 
although the Commission report focuses on the EU\'s 
Generalized System of Preferences (GSP).  The GSP contains 
an incentive system in which compliance with rules to combat 
drug production and trafficking and core labor, 
environmental, and social standards, qualifies the 
beneficiary country with additional trade preferences.  The 
Commission refers to the upcoming reform of the present EU 
GSP scheme, which will focus on \"maximizing benefits for 
recipients and promoting the full application of core labor 
standards in beneficiary countries.\" 
 
10.  Trade-related assistance is highlighted in the 
Commission report as a priority in order to help countries 
manage economic and social adjustment due to trade 
liberalization and policy changes.  Trade reforms (such as 
adjustment of quotas, tariffs for example) often involve 
transitory costs for certain groups of the population.  The 
Commission calls upon the international community to address 
the issue of adjustment costs more systematically in order 
to minimize negative social impacts.  The IMF\'s trade 
integration mechanism to support countries under-going 
balance of payment difficulties is cited as an example.  The 
Commission states that it aims to progressively develop 
support for trade-related adjustment as part of its 
development strategy.  The support would address three 
levels: 
 
--   Domestic, institutional capacity building to support 
     policy reforms; 
 
--   Programs to ensure a more equitable spread of gains and 
     smooth transfer of resources from protected sectors; 
 
--   Programs for productive capacity development to ensure 
     that opportunities of increased market access can be 
     utilized to the full potential. 
 
Responsibility of countries themselves is not undermined. 
Although it commits itself to further develop support for 
trade-related adjustment mechanisms, the Commission also 
argues (just like the WCSDG report) that much of the 
responsibility for social development rests with the 
individual countries.  It is the responsibility of each 
country to ensure that domestic policies respect the rule of 
law, human rights and transparent and accountable 
governance. 
 
11.  According to the Commission, corporate social 
responsibility (CSR) is an approach \"which can help trade 
and investment work for sustainable development.\" 
Companies are increasingly aware that responsible business 
conduct can strengthen their competitiveness. In this 
respect, the private sector can be a powerful and 
complementary partner with governments to attain social 
goals. In order to have CSR policies be seen more than a 
simple \"PR exercise,\" the Commission calls for the policies 
to be developed transparently and in \"full consultation with 
the social partners and other relevant stakeholders.\" Best 
practices are to be further identified and the Commission 
actively supports the application of the Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Guidelines for 
Multinational Enterprises, which it will try to incorporate 
more into future bilateral agreements. 
 
12.  Lastly, on the external front, the Commission calls for 
a more \"coherent and holistic approach\" to questions 
relating to the social dimension of globalization - whether 
they be in the WTO, the International Financial 
Institutions, the International Labor Organization, or the 
United Nations.  According to the Commission, all these 
organizations must work together to towards the strategic 
goal of sustainable development.  The Commission report 
focuses specifically on the U.N., calling for the EU to 
speak more consistently with \"one voice in the whole range 
of UN fora addressing social and economic issues.\" 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
13.  This paper reflects the preoccupation of several 
Commissioners and other senior Commission officials 
regarding the volatile public debate -- internally within 
the EU, and internationally -- about the costs and benefits 
of globalization.  The document clearly sets out to portray 
existing EU polices and programs (e.g. Everything But Arms) 
as standards to be emulated by other developed economies, 
but also points to areas where the Commission would like to 
extend EU activity, including with respect to corporate 
social responsibility and trade-related technical 
assistance.  The references by the Commission to \"the EU\'s 
economic and social model\" raise questions about the 
existence of such a unified \"model,\" particularly in a newly 
expanded union of 25 member states.  USEU will continue to 
track Council reactions to the Commission\'s strategy paper 
and eventual efforts to translate certain concepts into 
policies or new programs.  One area of particular interest 
may be the concepts related to the design, implementation 
and evaluation of policies intended to balance economic and 
social objectives related to globalization. 
 
13. For further details, see 
http://europa.eu.int/comm./trade/issues/globa l/index_en.htm 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17567","6/7/2004 15:13","04BRUSSELS2442","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002442 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR D, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/07/2014 
TAGS: PREL, GZ, IS, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: THE DEPUTY SECRETARY\'S MEETING WITH EU HI-REP 
SOLANA 
 
Classified By: USEU acting POL MINS-COUNS O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b and d 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  Deputy Secretary Armitage and EU Foreign 
Policy Hi-Rep Solana met June 2 and discussed the Mid-East 
Peace Process (MEPP), Iraq and the forthcoming US/EU Summit. 
Solana said the EU would be as supportive as possible 
regarding the new government in Iraq.  He also emphasized the 
importance of getting a UNSC resolution on Iraq.  On the 
Mid-East, Solana enthusiastically embraced the possibility of 
trying to move ahead on the Roadmap this year and said he 
would be available to do whatever he could in this area.. 
Solana Cabinet member Paul Riederman told us afterwards that 
Solana was very pleased with the meeting -- particularly with 
the   discussion of the MEPP. End Summary 
 
2. (U) Deputy Secretary Armitage and EU Foreign Policy Hi-Rep 
Solana met for 45 minutes June 2 in Brussels in Solana\'s 
office.  Afterwards, Deputy Secretary Armitage and Solana 
held a joint 10 minute press conference at the EU.  Attending 
the meeting were USEU Ambassador Schnabel, D Special 
Assistant John Gastright, USEU Acting Minister-Counselor 
Harry O\'Hara (notetaker), and USEU AID Counselor Pat Lerner; 
on the EU side were Council North America Office head Jim 
Cloos, Council European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) 
Deputy Claude-France Arnoult, Council Deputy Cabinet Head 
Pedro Serrano, and Council Cabinet Advisor Paul Reiderman. 
 
IRAQ AND NEXT EC PRESIDENT 
 
3.  (C) Deputy Secretary Armitage thanked Solana for his June 
1 remarks expressing support for the creation of a new 
government in Iraq,  then updated Solana on the interim Iraqi 
government, Brahimi\'s efforts, and US efforts to ensure the 
passage of a UNSC resolution for Iraq. Solana asked how a 
deadline for a US/MNF troop withdrawal from Iraq would be 
handled. The Deputy Secretary noted that while a 12-month 
review would be automatic, the new government could ask for 
an earlier withdrawal. 
 
SOLANA/IRAQ: INCREASING LEGITIMACY OF NEW GOVERNMENT 
 
4. (C) Solana said that, much would depend on the quality of 
the people in the new government in Iraq.  He opined that 
many in Iraq seem to view their new government as a rotation 
of chairs. Solana said the new leaders would nonetheless face 
the challenge of earning legitimacy in the street and 
stressed that the EU wanted to help counter the perception 
among many Iraqis that \"nothing has changed,\" and noted that 
an Iraqi constitution, which comes later, will be a tricky 
but necessary part of the legitimization process. Deputy 
Secretary Armitage observed that getting more Iraqi faces on 
 
SIPDIS 
Iraqi television -- and less American faces -- would help 
with the image of the new government. 
 
SOLANA\'S \"STATEMENT\" 
 
5.  (C) Solana told the Deputy Secretary that he wanted to 
make a \"statement on Iraq.\" He said that the EU will be as 
supportive as possible with the new government; passage of an 
UNSC resolution is important; the EU wants success. He also 
stressed that the current atmosphere (between the US and the 
EU) is good and that we\'ve passed a hurdle (from last year, 
when transatlantic tensions were higher). 
SOLANA\'S THOUGHT-EXPERIMENTS ON IRAQ 
 
6.  (C) To the discomfort -- but not surprise -- of some of 
his staff, Solana strayed from his brief and speculated about 
how, if he was Prime Minister of Iraq, he would look at the 
200,000 Iraqis that entered the Iraqi armed forces from 
1993-2003, and try to rehabilitate them back into the Iraqi 
military. He said that such an approach could help rebuild an 
Iraqi army that could take on visible security tasks.  Deputy 
Secretary Armitage noted the importance of rebuilding the 
 
SIPDIS 
Iraqi military but he added that rebuilding the Iraqi police 
is even more pressing due to the need for  \"law and order\" as 
a top issue for a majority of Iraqis today. 
 
7.  (C) Switching gears, Solana wondered if, as a result of 
changes in Iraq and Turkey, the Turkish/Israeli \"strategic\" 
partnership was in danger. Thinking out loud, he said that an 
informal Israel-Turkey-Kurdish \"triangle\" is not functioning. 
On Turkey, Solana noted that the EU will have important 
decisions to make on Turkey and that Turkish/EU relations are 
going to have to change. Solana\'s staff told us afterwards 
that these remarks were unscripted but reflected Solana\'s 
concerns that the special Turkish-Israeli relationship is 
weakening, and that Turkey is increasingly uncomfortable with 
what Solana views as Israel\'s influence with Kurds in Iraq. 
 
MEPP/ROADMAP/QUARTET 
 
8.  (C) The Deputy noted that the May 4 Quartet talks had 
gone well.  Solana stressed the EU commitment to the roadmap 
and reported that EU special Mid-East envoy Marc Otte was in 
Cairo (June 2) and would meet with President Mubarak. 
Restating previous EU markers, Solana said that for full EU 
engagement, we need to see full Israeli withdrawal per the 
roadmap.  Solana expressed worry that the process could 
freeze and that bigger problems would emerge in 2005. He 
asked the Deputy \"how much energy can the US put into this 
during (U.S. Presidential) elections?\" Deputy Secretary 
Armitage replied that the US does not want to wait until 
after November and that the Administration  is eager to move 
the process forward if the Palestinian Authority can get 
approval from Arafat and Sharon can prevail on the Gaza 
withdrawal. Solana warmly welcomed this and said that as fast 
the US goes, the EU will go faster. Solana has been talking 
to Mubarak, and the Egyptians are also ready to go. Solana 
suggested the need to get the Quartet \"on the ground\" with 
people in the region. He argued that this would strengthen 
the ability of Jordan and Egypt to play a positive role. 
Solana continued with the need to get momentum going and 
stated that he, Solana, is ready to work this full-time, 
\"24/7.\" 
 
US/EU SUMMIT REVIEW 
 
9.  (C) In response to the Deputy Secretary,s request for an 
EU assessment of where we are concerning US/EU Summit 
preparations, Cloos acknowledged that the &air agreement8 
will not be ready for the Summit but said that even if the US 
and EU cannot have an air agreement deliverable for the 
Summit, perhaps we might find a way to say that we\'ve made 
progress. Cloos stressed how important Galileo is for the 
Summit and noted how pleased he was that Galileo is just 
about settled. Solana said that the US and the EU still have 
time to work out a Broader Middle East and Northern Africa 
(BMENA) statement. He noted EU concerns about having the 
US/EU or any other outside structure \"grading\" the affected 
countries in the region. He also reiterated an ongoing EU 
concern that their Euro-Med/Barcelona process agreements not 
be diluted at the G-8 or at the Summit. He said that the EU\'s 
concerns in the region were not just strategic but were also 
based on Europe\'s close proximity to the BMENA. He said that 
this neighborhood concern needed to be accommodated. For 
Solana, the terrorism declaration is going well and 
Washington had given the EU\'s new counter-terrorism 
coordinator, Gijs de Vries, a good and successful visit. 
 
SUDAN/DARFUR 
 
10. (C) The Deputy Secretary reviewed US concerns about the 
difficult situation in Sudan, particularly Darfur, where the 
US is pressing to ensure that humanitarian supplies get to 
people in need.  The Deputy said that the US needs to push 
the Sudanese Government to allow this to happen. Solana said 
that the EU may want to do something in the Sudan and is 
considering sending in a team to look at the situation on the 
ground. Without being more specific, Solana said that the EU 
would also want to engage. 
 
11. (U) Deputy Secretary Armitage has cleared this message. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"17634","6/9/2004 5:20","04BRUSSELS2456","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 002456 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/08/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, IR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: (C) EU/IRAN HUMAN RIGHTS DIALOGUE: LOW EXPECTATIONS 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL: Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b/d 
 
1. (C) Summary: A key EU official involved in the ongoing 
EU/Iran human rights dialogue believes that the next round of 
that dialogue (June 14-15 in Teheran) will accomplish little. 
End summary 
 
2.(C) The EU Council official responsible for organizing the 
next round of EU/Iran human rights dialogue (June 14-15 in 
Teheran) told us that while she thinks that it is important 
that the EU hear what the new Iranian government has to say, 
she does not expect much to happen next week. During the 
first day of the closed session government-to-government 
talks, the EU will raise 30 plus specific human rights 
violation cases with the Iranians as well as press for 
information on a number of Iranian Jews who have been missing 
since the 90\'s. She told us that the Iranians have also asked 
for a  discussion of torture and she wondered whether they 
want to talk about Iran or rather debate current events in 
Iraq.  She noted that while the EU does not know the new 
Iranian Parliamentarians that will be present at the talks, 
they do know the Iranian judiciary\'s reps: they are \"bad 
news.\" 
 
3. (SBU) On a more positive note for the EU, they believe 
that the public roundtable sessions on June 15, where 
academics and Iranian human rights organizations (including 
the Islamic Human Rights Commission) will participate, will 
be better. These sessions will consider \"Administration of 
Justice\" (the EU topic) and \"Enhancing Solidarity in the 
field of Human Rights (the Iranian topic). During these 
discussions, the EU team will try to focus on the need for 
Iran to comply with international human rights norms. Our EU 
interlocutor told us that the EU had insisted that they be 
allowed to bring an human rights NGO to participate and a 
Farsi-speaking rep from Amnesty International will be at the 
second day of meetings. 
 
4. (C) Particularly galling to our EU interlocutor is that 
Iranian government seems to believe that they are doing the 
EU a favor by having this round of the dialogue as a 
\"response\" or \"payback\" for no Iran human rights resolution 
at the recent CHR. In the Council\'s preliminary discussions 
with the forthcoming Dutch EU Presidency, the Dutch human 
rights experts made no secret of their distaste for moving 
\"rapidly\" on a next round of the human rights dialogue with 
Iran. 
 
Comment: 
 
5. (C) Even though EU expectations are low, they are not 
ready to throw in the towel. From our optic, one reason for 
this is that EU human rights experts do not want to give up 
on the key tracks in the overall EU/Iran political dialogue 
(human rights) as current EU policy is no EU trade and 
cooperation agreement with Iran unless all four of the EU\'s 
political conditions are met (non-proliferation, human 
rights, end to support of international terrorism, and 
support for peace in the mid-east). We also believe that this 
reflects an EU predisposition to want to believe that 
\"dialogue\" -- any dialogue and even a difficult and 
frustrating dialogue -- is better than \"no dialogue.\" 
Schnabel 
"
"17688","6/10/2004 6:09","04BRUSSELS2477","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04USEUBRUSSELS1929","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002477 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, CASC, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU FAILS TO AGREE ON NEW EUROPOL DIRECTOR 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 1929 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  EU Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) 
on June 8 failed to reach the necessary consensus on 
who will be the Director of EUROPOL as from July 1, 
2004.  Ministers reached complete agreement on the 
principle of mutual recognition of confiscation 
orders.  JHA Commissioner Vitorino reported on the 
Commission\'s assessment of the five-year EU \"Tampere 
program\" for creating an area of freedom, security 
and justice.  The Irish Presidency reported on the 
Dublin Conference that launched discussions on the 
future EU Drugs Strategy for 2005-2012.  Full text 
of the JHA conclusions has been forwarded to 
EUR/ERA.  Counter-terrorism and immigration issues 
will be reported SEPTEL(s).  END SUMMARY. 
 
NEW EUROPOL DIRECTOR 
-------------------- 
 
2.  EU Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs 
Ministers at their June 8 Council meeting in 
Luxembourg failed to decide who would be the 
Director of EUROPOL as from July 1, 2004.  The 
incumbent, Germany\'s Jrgen Storbeck, whose term 
finishes at the month\'s end, is seeking a renewal of 
his mandate with the backing of his government. 
Jacques Franquet, Director of the international and 
technical cooperation service in the French police, 
is said to be the front-runner but does not attract 
the required consensus.  Italian officer Emanuele 
Marotta is also in the running though some EU 
officials say that the race is actually between the 
French and German candidates. 
 
3.  Irish Justice Minister/Council chair McDowell 
told his post-Council press conference -- the last 
of his six-month term in office -- the Presidency 
would pursue its efforts to secure a resolution of 
the issue for the next two weeks.  He noted that if 
the position remains vacant on July 1, Storbeck\'s 
deputy would take over in an interim capacity in 
line with a provision in EUROPOL\'s statute.  Some 
observers speculated that the issue might be 
referred to EU leaders next week but McDowell did 
not raise this prospect, saying that any EU Council 
meeting could formalize an agreement before the 
month\'s end.  He conceded that failure to fill the 
position could affect EUROPOL\'s credibility.  Dutch 
Interior Minister and upcoming Council chair Remkes, 
obviously unwilling to inherit the problem next 
month, went further to describe the Council\'s 
deadlock as \"a complete disgrace.\" 
 
4.  Some sources at the meeting said German Interior 
Minister Schily consider accepting the French 
candidate if the post of Director General for JHA in 
the Council (now in Belgian hands) was offered to a 
German. 
 
MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF CONFISCATION ORDERS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5.  The Council confirmed its political agreement on 
the entire text of a Framework Decision on the 
application of the principle of mutual recognition 
of confiscation orders.  Under this piece of 
legislation, a Member State is obliged to recognize 
and execute in its territory confiscation orders 
issued by a court of another Member State competent 
in criminal matters.  The body of the draft had been 
agreed at the April 29 JHA Council meeting (REF.A). 
A certificate annexed to the instrument that will be 
used for the submission of requests for recognition 
of confiscation orders was subsequently approved at 
the level of the EU PermReps, thus enabling the 
Council to meet the June 2004 deadline set by EU 
leaders for adoption of this measure. 
 
ASSESSMENT OF TAMPERE PROGRAM 
----------------------------- 
 
6.  JHA Commissioner Vitorino reported on the 
Commission\'s assessment of the five-year EU \"Tampere 
program\" for creating an area of freedom, security 
and justice and proposals for future priorities. 
The assessment (summary forwarded to EUR/ERA) is 
generally positive, noting substantial progress in 
most JHA areas while pointing to the institutional 
constraints in this area under the current EU 
treaties.  Irish officials, who were able to record 
several achievements over the past few months, made 
it clear the identification of future priorities was 
a matter for the upcoming Dutch Presidency. 
 
FOLLOW-UP TO DUBLIN CONFERENCE ON DRUGS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
7.  The Irish Presidency reported on the Dublin 
Conference on \"EU Strategy on Drugs - The Way 
Forward\" held May 10-11 with the aim of providing an 
opportunity for Member States to exchange views on 
the 2005-2012 EU Drugs Strategy.  The Presidency 
said it was generally agreed at the conference that 
the strategy should be based on a balanced and 
multidisciplinary approach, on scientific evidence, 
on respect for the EU principles of subsidiarity and 
proportionality, and on providing added value in 
relation to the activities undertaken at national 
level. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17708","6/10/2004 12:51","04BRUSSELS2495","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04ZAGREB1025","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 002495 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, HR, SI, IT, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: CROATIA\'S PROGRESS TOWARD THE EU HITS A PATCH OF 
ROUGH WATER, BUT STILL LOOKING GOOD 
 
REF: A. ZAGREB 1025 
 
     B. ZAGREB 932 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 B/D 
 
1. (C) As reported ref B, Croatia looks very likely to be 
officially declared a candidate for EU membership at the EU 
Summit on June 17-18.  The most important possible stumbling 
block, full cooperation with the ICTY in The Hague, remains a 
non-issue for the EU as long as ICTY Prosecutor del Ponte 
gives the GoC a positive report card (ref a).  Less certain 
is whether the EU next week will actually set a date for the 
beginning of accession negotiations, but a number of contacts 
we met during the course of a USEU-organized Conference on 
the Balkans June 9 insisted that the only debate is over 
whether the date should be January, March or June 2005.  A 
French contact insisted that his government was being 
unfairly cast as a skeptic on EU enlargement in the Balkans. 
Paris is insisting (with an eye toward the December decision 
on Turkish candidacy) that the Council reaffirm its autonomy 
over the decision whether to begin accession talks no matter 
what the Commission recommendation.  But he said France was 
prepared to see the EU set a date for Croatian negotiations 
to begin in early 2005, giving the new Commission that will 
enter into office in November 2004 enough time to prepare 
such talks. 
 
2.  (C) According to Italian, Dutch and Croatian contacts in 
Brussels, the only remaining problem Croatia has is with 
Slovenia over the Adriatic.  Croatia, Italy, Slovenia and the 
Commission all met on June 4 in Brussels and reached an 
agreement on how to revise the Croatian declaration of an 
ecological and fisheries zone.  But on June 9, our Italian 
source (protect) expressed some exasperation that Slovenia 
appeared to be reconsidering whether the deal was sufficient. 
 According to him, \"Italy is prepared to accept any pragmatic 
solution, while Slovenia views the problem as a matter of 
principle.\"  Slovenia will force the EU PermReps (COREPER) to 
revisit the issue in their meeting on June 10.  But none of 
our contacts seemed to believe the problem would block a 
positive decision for Croatia next week.  Separately, when 
the Croatian Ambassador to the EU told us that \"Croatia has 
done all that it can do\" on this issue, the Commission\'s Head 
of Unit for Croatia whispered to us in an aside that \"for 
once, that probably is true.\" 
 
3. (C) COMMENT:  The Croatians, and several of the other EU 
Member States, appear to have been taken by surprise at the 
hard-line Slovene approach.  As our Italian contact put it, 
\"We\'ve spent over forty years learning how to compromise. 
Some of the new Member States are willing to block things 
even when the vote is 24 to 1.\"  While Ljubljana is 
apparently trying to get as much leverage from next week\'s 
decisions as it can, it still remains among the most active 
Member States in trying to boost EU assistance and membership 
prospects for the Balkans as a whole, arguing that all of 
those countries should be included in \"pre-accession\" aid 
programs under the EU\'s next budget framework beginning in 
2007.  END COMMENT. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"17709","6/10/2004 12:56","04BRUSSELS2496","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101256Z Jun 04

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 002496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, CASC, CVIS, RO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: VERHEUGEN RESPONSE TO DEPUTY SECRETARY ON ROMANIAN 
ADOPTIONS 
 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reason 1.4 B/D 
 
 1. (U) The cabinet of Enlargement Commissioner Gunter 
Verheugen has faxed us a letter from the Commissioner to 
Deputy Secretary Armitage, replying to the Deputy Secretary\'s 
letter of May 4 on the issue of Romanian adoptions.  The full 
text of the letter is in para 3 below, and a copy of the 
original fax with signature has been faxed to EUR/ERA and 
Embassy Bucharest. 
 
2. (C) The letter confirms what we already know from the copy 
of the report from the Commission to the GoR on the issue 
that was provided to Embassy Bucharest.  The Commission\'s 
legal experts have told the Romanian government that the 
\"proposed approach to pursue on the policy of intercountry 
adoptions with a very limited exception\" is seen as 
\"essentially in line\" with the EU\'s demands. 
 
3. (U) Beginning of Text: 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary of State, 
 
Thank you for your letter of 4 May 2004 on the issue of 
intercountry adoptions from Romania. 
 
I would like to clarify that the European Commission is not 
against intercountry adoption as such.  However, the UN 
Convention on the Rights of the Child foresees that 
inter-country adoption may be considered only if the child 
cannot be placed in a foster or an adoptive family or cannot 
in any suitable manner be cared for in the child\'s country of 
origin.  This \"last resort\" provision is consonant with the 
provision in the UN convention that refers to the 
\"desirability of continuity in a child\'s upbringing and to 
the child\'s ethnic, religious, cultural and linguistic 
background.\" 
 
All Member States of the EU have ratified the UN Convention 
on the Rights of the Child and therefore should respect the 
above mentioned principles.  Therefore the Commission 
considers that the moratorium on intercountry adoptions is 
necessary as long as no legislation is in force that fully 
complies with this convention, and as long as no 
administrative capacity exists to implement this legislation. 
 
Following Prime Minister Nastase\'s request for legal advice 
on children\'s rights and adoption, the Commission set up an 
Independent Panel of EU Member State experts on family law. 
In its latest report, which I have forwarded to Prime 
Minister Nastase, the Panel noted the fundamental change made 
by Romania on the issue of intercountry adoption.  The 
proposed approach to pursue on the policy of intercountry 
adoptions with a very limited exception was considered 
essentially in line with the UN Convention on the Rights of 
the Child. 
 
Our primordial focus must be on getting the system of child 
care in Romania right so that we get tot he usual situation 
in the Member States of the EU where international adoptions 
are the exception.  Therefore, the EU has supported Romania 
in its efforts to improve the quality of public care for 
children.  This meant that large residential establishments 
were closed down and replaced with a selection of child 
protection alternatives ranging from smaller homes and foster 
care to day-care centres.  Of course there remains work to be 
done, but Romania surely has come a long way in resolving the 
issue of children in public care. 
 
I have been informed that recently a videoconference on this 
issue was held between the Washington State Department and my 
services, and that it was considered useful to have both 
sides express their respective positions. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
     /S/ 
Gunter Verheugen 
"
"17712","6/10/2004 13:35","04BRUSSELS2498","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04USEUBRUSSELS1338","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002498 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA AND INR/EU 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU HI-REP SOLANA PROPOSES EU INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS 
INCLUDE INTERNAL THREATS 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 1338 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL: Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b and d 
 
1. (C/NF) Summary: At the EU Ministers for Justice and Home 
Affairs (JHA) June 8 meeting, Council Hi-Rep Javier Solana 
said he would call on leaders at next week\'s European Council 
to extend the scope of the EU Situation Center (SitCen) from 
external threats to internal threats within the EU. Solana 
Cabinet member and intelligence advisor William Shapcott 
(please protect) told us that he expects the Council to 
approve the recommendation and to start implementation 
soonest.    END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) EU Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) on 
June 8 prepared for next week\'s discussion by EU leaders as a 
follow-up to their March Declaration on combating terrorism. 
This involved consideration (in restricted session) of a 
number of reports requested by the leaders last March as part 
of the EU\'s response to the Madrid attacks.  EU Council 
Secretary-General/CFSP High Rep Solana presented his report 
 
SIPDIS 
on terrorism and intelligence cooperation.  Speaking at a 
joint press conference with EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator 
de Vries following his presentation to ministers, Solana said 
he was calling to build on existing cooperation within the EU 
Joint SitCen located within the Council Secretariat. 
 
3. (C/NF) Shapcott, who also heads the SitCen, told us of his 
overall staff or 65, seven analysts cover terrorist threats. 
He said that he and Solana expect the Council of Ministers to 
support the expansion of coverage to internal threats next 
week. When this happens, Shapcott plans to increase the 
number of terrorist analysts to 18.  He also hopes to bring 
in more member-states reps into the SitCen. Currently, 
analysts are seconded from UK, France, Germany, Italy, the 
Netherlands, Spain and Sweden. As an aside, he said that the 
SitCen would be \"similar to that of INR\" (he noted his visit 
to INR in 2002) in that it would do analysis, not collection, 
based on intelligence and analysis coming from the 
member-states. 
 
4. (SBU) Solana proposed that the SitCen should henceforth be 
able to analyze input on internal threats to the EU based on 
the input and staff from the Interior Ministries of the 
Member States.  Solana described the proposed mechanism as 
\"very simple,\" saying, \"It can be very efficient and 
implemented very rapidly.\"  The enlarged body would have 
communication links with EUROPOL and would be able to draw 
from the existing EU Counter-Terrorism Group that assembles 
the chiefs of intelligence agencies of the EU countries. 
Solana described his proposal as \"a first but important 
step\".\" 
 
5. (C/NF) Shapcott compared this step with US intelligence 
analysis now including material from the FBI. He said that 
planning for this had started in February and had been 
expected to take a year to bring to fruition. He noted that 
as a result of the Madrid bombings, there was increased EU 
political pressure to move quickly to \"tear down the 
invisible wall\" between the EU and the rest of the world. He 
said that the EU needs to respond to a \"logic of terrorism\" 
that does not recognize borders. 
 
6. (U) A summary of Solana\'s presentation to the ministers 
subsequently released by the Council (full text forwarded to 
EUR/ERA) notes that the heads of the security services of the 
Member States have given their support to the Solana 
proposal.  The paper highlights three core ideas on which 
Solana will seek the backing of EU leaders: 
 
--    Moves by the heads of the EU\'s 25 security services to 
meet as a group on a regular basis the format of the existing 
Counter-Terrorist Group (CTG); 
 
--    The work of the CTG would allow for closer analytical 
exchanges between Security Services and would provide scope 
for improved operational cooperation; 
 
--    Moves by EUROPOL to reactivate its Counter-Terrorist 
Task Force and efforts to improve the flow of criminal 
intelligence to EUROPOL. 
 
7. (U) Solana said his proposal would allow for: 
 
--    EU decision makers to be better informed, inter alia, 
about threats, terrorist methods, organization of terrorist 
groups, and thus better prepared to devise effective EU 
counter-terrorist policies; 
--    Member States to receive better support from European 
bodies:  They would get material from the EU\'s SitCen, and 
their police services in particular would get better support 
from EUROPOL; 
 
--    Member States to retain the lead in the operational 
field, while working more closely together through CTG, 
EUROPOL, as well as through existing bilateral arrangements, 
to strengthen information exchange and cooperation. 
 
8. (U) The Council also considered a draft report to the 
European Council on the implementation of the Declaration, 
which records progress made toward the adoption of 
implementation of a number of EU measures listed in the 
Declaration.  EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator Gijs de Vries 
told the press conference a related draft Plan of Action on 
combating terrorism, to be presented to EU leaders next week, 
would identify a number of measures to be taken by the EU 
with specific targets for adoption of the proposal by the 
Commission and final endorsement by the Council.  de Vries 
said the plan would offer a roadmap in the form of an 
18-month rolling program for the upcoming EU Presidencies 
that could be adopted every six months. 
 
9. (U) de Vries also presented two other reports, one dealing 
with peer evaluation and the other dealing with ways to 
improve the speed of implementation of legislative measures 
adopted by the Council.  Another report from EUROJUST (EU 
Prosecutors\' Office) contains recommendations to improve the 
capacity of EUROJUST to contribute to the fight against 
terrorism.  In addition, the Council adopted the EUROPOL work 
program for 2005 that takes account of the objective of 
reinforcing the role of EUROPOL in the fight against 
terrorism. 
 
10. (U) The Council adopted conclusions on the follow-up to 
the Declaration.  These also note the report on the terrorist 
attacks in Madrid prepared by the Police Chiefs Task Force 
and the review undertaken by the same group on how their 
operational capacity should be reinforced to focus on 
proactive intelligence.  Full text has been transmitted to 
EUR/ERA. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (C/NF) Solana\'s proposals are an attempt to bridge the 
gap between pillars 2 (foreign policy) and 3 (justice and 
home affairs). By consolidating national information in the 
SitCen, he hopes to build on the sort of multi-country 
synergies that led to the round-up of Islamic militants in 
several EU countries earlier this week. His proposal would 
still protect the basic principles of national competency in 
operational intelligence. Still the challenge for the SitCen 
-- to convince national security agencies in member-states to 
begin sharing more timely actionable intelligence -- remains. 
 Complicating Solana\'s efforts will be some member-state 
questions and concerns about sharing materials with all other 
EU members, Cyprus and Malta in particular. 
FOSTER 
"
"17718","6/10/2004 14:22","04BRUSSELS2502","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2009 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ROLLS OUT STRATEGY FOR PROGRESSIVE ENGAGEMENT 
WITH IRAQ 
 
REF: A. A. THE HAGUE-EUR/USEU FAX 6/10/2004 
 
     B. B. USEU 0239 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
 1.  (C) Summary.  EC Commissioner Patten, with the full 
support of EU HighRep Solana, has proposed an ambitious 
strategy for rapidly ramping up EU relations with Iraq 
following the transition to sovereignty.  In a private letter 
that complements the public strategy, Patten and Solana call 
on the EU to send election observers, help draft a 
constitution, train police, work with Iraq\'s neighbors to 
promote regional stability, and consider co-hosting an 
international conference on Iraq.  The strategy, boosted by 
the creation of the Interim Iraqi Government, UNSCR 1546 and 
the G-8 summit, will be considered by EU Foreign Ministers in 
Brussels on June 14.  The strategy is forward-leaning and 
pushes the envelope of what EU ministers will be able to 
support.  End Summary. 
 
EU Releases Strategy for FM\'s to consider 
-------------------------- 
2.  (C)  On June 9, the European Commission released a 
three-phase medium term strategy for progressive engagement 
with Iraq before, during and after elections.  In a joint 
cover letter transmitting the strategy to EU Council 
President Irish FM Cowen, Commissioner Chris Patten and EU 
High Rep Javier Solana elaborate an ambitious program to 
build close EU-Iraq ties.  The cover letter, obtained by 
embassy The Hague (ref A), has not been made public.  The 
letter and strategy will be considered for endorsement by EU 
Foreign Ministers, who meet June 14-15 in Brussels. 
 
EC Strategy:  Three phases 
------------------------------ 
3.  (SBU)  The EC proposal, available online at 
http://europa.eu.int/com/external relations/iraq/news, calls 
for engaging Iraq in three distinct phases:  pre-election, 
post-election and medium term.  Apart from being keyed to the 
elections, the phases do not have specific time limits.  This 
is primarily due to uncertainties related to the security 
situation that may affect timing of the phases. 
--Pre-election:  Election support (through civil society 
development, rule of law programs, and voter education); a 
Troika visit (possibly in the fall, in Baghdad, Amman or 
Brussels); launching a regional dialogue with Iraq\'s 
neighbors; and disbursement of 305 million euro 
reconstruction/humanitarian assistance package approved last 
fall. 
 
-- Post-election:  Launch formal political dialogue with 
provisional government, issue EU/Iraq Joint Declaration, and 
disburse CY 2005 reconstruction assistance (requested 200 
million euros).  The 2005 assistance request will be debated 
in the European Parliament this fall. 
 
-- Medium Term:  Begin negotiation of a Trade and Cooperation 
Agreement (TCA); support creation of a \"framework\" to enhance 
regional security; offer European Investment Bank lending. 
 
Solana-Patten Letter Lays Out Ambitious Agenda 
-------------------------- 
4.  (C)  The Solana-Patten letter elaborates on each of these 
phases, and lays out an ambitious agenda of comprehensive 
political engagement with Iraq\'s interim and provisional 
governments.  For example, the letter suggests a possible EU 
election observer mission, help in drafting a constitution, 
and police training as ways to support free elections.  It 
also suggests sending an exploratory mission to Iraq to 
identify other areas where EU assistance would be appropriate. 
 
Regional Security and an International Conference 
------------------ 
5.  (C)  The Solana-Patten letter also highlights the 
opportunity for the EU to promote security and stability in 
the region by sponsoring regional confidence-building 
measures.  As a first step, it calls on consulting countries 
in the region bilaterally; ultimately, the letter states, 
\"some form of ad hoc group might be required to support 
efforts by the region.\"  The letter notes that the idea of a 
regional conference to include Iraq\'s neighbors has been 
raised, and says the EU, \"in agreement with the Iraqi Interim 
Government, should support and consider co-sponsoring such a 
conference.\" 
 
Deepening Engagement 
--------------- 
6.  (C) The Solana-Patten letter also calls for increased 
visits and exchanges to \"lay the foundation for longer-term 
relations.\"  Addressing the issue of EU representation on the 
ground -- as the security situation permits -- the letter 
calls on those member states with diplomatic missions in Iraq 
\"to foster... a collective EU approach...\"  The Commission 
plans to open an office in Amman by July 1; this should move 
to Baghdad \"when conditions permit\" and the EU should 
consider appointing a Special Representative to Iraq. 
Negotiating a Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) with 
Baghdad will cap the process by institutionalizing EU ties 
with Iraq. 
 
Budget Notes 
------------ 
7.  (C)  Although the strategy is not a budget document, the 
outlines of EU assistance beyond 2004 is emerging.  The 
Commission has requested 200 million euros for reconstruction 
for 2005 (matching the pledge made at Madrid for 2004).  The 
European Parliament should debate and vote on this request in 
the fall; the security situation at that time (and the extent 
to which it has delayed disbursement of the 2004 package) 
will be key considerations.  Early in 2005, the Commission 
will prepare a proposal for 2006; Patten has hinted that it 
is likely to also be for 200 million euros.  A commission 
official has told us the EC will be looking at the expected 
growth in Iraq\'s oil revenues by then when formulating the 
2006 request. 
 
Comment 
------- 
8.  (C)  The EU strategy for Iraq is a political declaration 
of intent to progressively deepen EU engagement with Iraq. 
It reflects the personal conviction of Patten and Solana that 
the EU can\'t stay on the sidelines; a stable, democratic Iraq 
is essential to European security.  Given the EU\'s past 
divisions over the Iraq intervention, it is an ambitious and 
far-reaching proposal that the U.S. should welcome. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"17780","6/14/2004 13:57","04BRUSSELS2518","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS1736","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/14/2104 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN ELECTIONS: NEGATIVE ON EUROPE, NOT ON U.S. 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 1736 
 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 2107 
     C. C) BRUSSELS 2196 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 2360 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  The provisional results of the June 10-13 
European elections largely confirm the status quo: in a 
European Parliament (EP) that remains a complex amalgam of 
parties, nationalities and personalities, the Christian 
Democrats and Conservatives group (EPP-ED) keeps its 
plurality.  The Socialists and Social Democrats (PES) remain 
the second largest EP group.  The Liberal Democrats (ELDR) -- 
who may form the nucleus of a new \"centrist\" group -- stay in 
third place, with the Greens in fourth and the far left in 
fifth.  Relations with the U.S. (i.e., Iraq) played a role, 
but the vote was mainly about Europe and sitting governments. 
 Voters delivered a largely negative report card on 
governments in their respective member states, and the 
lowest-ever turnout of 45.5 percent revealed, at least in 
part, apathy toward the EU.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------- 
CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATS ON TOP 
-------------------------- 
 
2. (U) Based on party-group membership in the previous term, 
provisional results show the EPP-ED with 275 out of a total 
of 732 seats (37.6 percent).  The PES has 200 seats (27.3 
percent), the ELDR 66 (9.0 percent), the Greens 41 (5.6 
percent), and the far-left EUL/NGL 36 (5.0 percent).  These 
numbers will change considerably as negotiations on party 
group membership proceed, but we do not expect the changes to 
affect the balance among the largest party groups. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
NEW POSSIBILITIES ON CENTER AND FAR-RIGHT 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) The two greatest possibilities for significant change 
in the party-group make-up of the EP reside on the center and 
the far right of the political spectrum.  In the center, if 
the ELDR forms a new \"EU-federalist\" group with the 
center-left Olive Tree Coalition of European Commission 
President Romano Prodi and the French Union for French 
Democracy (ref D) -- as ELDR leader Graham Watson reiterated 
publicly on election night -- the membership of that group 
could increase by up to 32 seats.  With between 95 and 100 
seats, this enlarged ELDR would be far and away the strongest 
EP \"third force.\"  It would not be enough for either a 
center-right majority with the EPP-ED or a center-left 
majority with the PES, but it would be an important, often 
indispensable element nevertheless in getting over the 50 
percent hurdle.  On the far right, groups such as the French 
Front National, the Belgian Vlaams Blok and others, currently 
non-aligned, may try to come together to form a party group. 
If they succeed, the organized far right in the EP could have 
numbers comparable to the Greens and the far left. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
A BAD REPORT CARD FOR EU AND MEMBER STATES 
------------------------------------------ 
 
4. (U) As far as can be generalized in analyzing what were in 
effect 25 distinct member-state elections, the vote was 
principally about domestic concerns such as unemployment and 
health care.  It was a negative report card for sitting 
member-state governments primarily, and the EU itself 
secondarily.  With the exception of Spain and Greece, in 
which recently elected governing parties did well, initial 
tallies were generally dim for governing parties in the 
member states.  The results in Germany and France especially 
were disastrous for the incumbent governments, with the 
Social Democratic Party (SPD) receiving only about 22 percent 
of the vote in Germany and French President Chirac\'s party 
obtaining 16 to 17 percent.  In the UK, the Labour party 
received about 22 percent compared to approximately 27 
percent for the Conservatives.  The euroskeptic UK 
Independence Party (UKIP) was spectacularly successful, with 
about 17 percent of the vote.  In Italy, the Olive Tree 
Coalition of European Commission President Romano Prodi 
appears to have won 27 seats, while Prime Minister Silvio 
Berlusconi\'s Forza Italia won 17 seats. 
 
5. (U) The vote also revealed continuing voter apathy toward 
the EP, and significant dissatisfaction with the EU.  This 
was reflected above all in the record low turnout of about 
45.5 percent.  Especially striking was the extremely low 
figure of around 29 percent voter participation in the ten 
new member states.  Euroskeptic parties did especially well 
in the UK (see para 4 above), Poland and the Czech Republic. 
In the Netherlands and Austria voters rewarded candidates 
running on anti-corruption platforms. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
IRAQ PLAYS ROLE, BUT VOTE EUROPE-CENTERED 
----------------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Relations with the United States, i.e. Iraq, did 
play a role in the vote, but not as great a role as domestic 
and European concerns.  Prodi\'s Olive Tree Coalition, which 
ran on a peace platform, did well in Italy.  In the UK, 
Labour\'s poor showing was certainly connected to the Blair 
government\'s support of the U.S. in Iraq, but the Liberal 
Democrats, who made their opposition to the Iraq war the 
centerpiece of their campaign, received an unimpressive 15 
percent of the vote.  Comparing this to the strong showing of 
the UKIP indicates that the vote in Great Britain was more 
anti-EU than a protest of UK involvement in Iraq.  The 
German, French and Belgian governing parties all did very 
poorly, failing to profit from their opposition to U.S. Iraq 
policy. 
 
-------------------------------- 
COMMENT: EP KEEPS ITS MANY FACES 
-------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) Much could happen as party group negotiations 
progress, but the bottom line is that the balance of power in 
the EP will remain approximately what it was in the last 
term.  The EPP-ED is the largest group, but still holds less 
than 40 percent of the seats.  On the left, the PES, Greens 
and the far left do not form a majority.  This means that an 
enlarged ELDR, if it comes into being, will be a key element 
in forming majorities.  Unfortunately, the ELDR often opposes 
the U.S. on key foreign policy issues such as Iraq and 
aspects of the war on terrorism such as detaining enemy 
combatants in Guantanamo and sharing passenger name record 
data with the U.S.  In EP sense-of-Congress resolutions, the 
EP\'s preference for the broadest possible consensus -- and 
the resulting tendency to include potshots at U.S. policy 
which are popular with the center and the left-- will 
continue.  All in all, the EP will remain a complex mix, 
leaning toward opposition to U.S. policy in many areas, but 
differing from issue to issue, party group to party group, 
and MEP to MEP.  END COMMENT. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17812","6/15/2004 12:58","04BRUSSELS2541","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 002541 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA AND EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/15/2009 
TAGS: PARM, PBTS, PREL, OSCEL, EUN, MDD, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU PUZZLED BY MOLDOVA\'S STABILITY PACT INITIATIVE; 
MOSCOW RESPONSE IS KEY 
 
REF: A. A. STATE 1292081. 
 
     B. B. DUBLIN 983 
     C. C. CHISENAU 637 
     D. D. MOSCOW 8164 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
(C)  On June 14, Poloff presented ref (A) demarche to Kees 
Van Rij and Carl Hartzell of the EU Council\'s Policy Planning 
Staff.  They appreciated the information, and agreed that the 
proposed Stability Pact could have value if -- in modified 
form -- it leads to further Russian engagement.  Thus, 
Russia\'s response to the demarche would be critical, they 
said.  Van Rij will informally sound the Russians out later 
this week, he said.  If the notion has traction in Moscow, 
the EU would support further discussion, he said, but 
otherwise was skeptical of the proposal\'s usefulness. 
 
2.  (C)  Van Rij confirmed Dublin\'s readout (ref B) that EU 
Foreign Ministers meeting June 14-15 in Brussels would not 
reference the Stability Pact proposal directly in their 
public conclusions.  Ministers planned to issue conclusions 
on Moldova, but these are meant to complement an earlier 
private letter from Irish PM Ahern to Russian President Putin 
urging Russia to agree to pentagonal talks as proposed by the 
U.S.  The EU conclusions would include language stressing the 
importance of Moldova\'s \"territorial integrity,\" but the EU 
needs more time to consider the proposal before issuing a 
public statement on it. Hartzell noted that the proposal is 
viewed by opposition leaders in Moldova as \"cheap 
electioneering\" by Voronin, and the EU does not want to get 
enmeshed in election politics.  Van Rij said he would query 
Moldovan leaders the initiative later in the week, when they 
come to Brussels to wrap up discussions on a joint \"Action 
Plan\" under the EU\'s new European Neighborhood Partnership 
initiative. 
 
3.  (C)  Van Rij said he was puzzled by the Moldovan text, 
which struck him as very \"19th century\"  and anachronistic. 
It appeared to be directed at Russia and Romania, in an 
effort to elicit their endorsement of Moldova\'s borders.  He 
and Hartzell questioned how -- and whether -- the proposal 
was linked to the ongoing OSCE 5-sided initiative to resolve 
the Transnistrian conflict.  Van Rij said the Moldovan 
Ambassador in Brussels was \"utterly uninformed\" about the 
initiative, further raising questions about its origins and 
purpose.  Van Rij noted that the inclusion of Romania was 
\"complicated.\"  It could complicate further Romania\'s bid to 
join the EU in that it raises the issue of the un-signed 
Romanian-Moldovan border agreement.  The EU\'s understanding 
is that Romania\'s response to the Stability Pact has been 
\"cautious but interested.\"  On the one hand, Bucharest was 
encouraged that it was included but, on the other hand, it 
doesn\'t want to \"internationalize\" the status of the border 
agreement, which it views as a purely bilateral issue. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17899","6/17/2004 13:03","04BRUSSELS2586","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04BRUSSELS2487|04STATE100029","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR CA/PPT - ABARRETT; EUR/ERA - RBOLY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CPAS, KFRD, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU JOINT MISSION TO INTERPOL ON LOST/STOLEN 
PASSPORTS 
 
REF: (A) BRUSSELS 2487 (B) STATE 100029 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  During consultations in Brussels on 6/9 
and a subsequent joint mission to Interpol headquarters in 
Lyon on 6/10, the U.S. and EU ironed out some of the 
remaining wrinkles in plans to share information on lost and 
stolen passports through Interpol.  An EU Common Position, 
expected to be approved 6/18, will oblige all Member States 
to immediately begin transferring current and future data on 
lost/stolen passports to Interpol.  The EU will require 
reciprocity for Interpol to share this data with other 
countries. The joint mission discussed technical issues aimed 
at improving verification, feedback, data privacy and data 
protection.  Expanding access to Interpol\'s database at ports 
of entry worldwide will increase its utility.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
EU Prepares to Adopt Common Position on Lost/Stolen Passports 
------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) On 6/9, European Commission (EC) officials briefed 
Managing Director for Passport Services Ann Barrett, Senior 
Passport Operations Officer Michael Holly and PRMOff on the 
draft EU Council Common Position regarding the transfer of 
lost/stolen passport data to Interpol.  The draft received 
unanimous support at the EU Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) 
Council earlier that day and should formally be adopted by 
the EU on 6/18.  The Common Position provides a legal 
basis -- as well as an obligation -- for EU Member States to 
transfer all present and future data on lost and stolen 
passports to Interpol immediately after the passport data is 
sent to the Schengen Information System (SIS) and/or the 
national database.  Currently, only seven EU Member States 
provide passport data to Interpol.  According to JHA 
Administrator for Police Cooperation Jacques Verraes, when 
the upgraded version of the SIS comes online in 2007 the 
function of transferring passport data to Interpol will be 
assumed by the EC.  SIS-2 will have the legal and technical 
capabilities to automatically transfer data on lost and 
stolen passports. 
 
------------------------ 
Interpol Provides Conduit for Information Exchange 
------------------------ 
 
3. (SBU) In his opening remarks to the joint U.S.-EU mission 
on 6/10, Interpol Secretary General Ronald Noble said that 
the decision by the U.S. and EU to submit data on lost and 
stolen passports to Interpol will greatly increase the 
utility of its Stolen Travel Document database.  Operational 
since September 2002, the Interpol database currently 
consists of 1.5 million records from 41 countries, including 
approximately 306,000 records from the U.S.  Noble noted that 
on 6/9 the G8 called for its members to contribute their 
records on blank passports to the database by the end of 
2004. 
 
4. (SBU) Noble stressed the advantages of exchanging data 
through Interpol by describing its global communication 
system (I-24/7), which allows 106 countries to continuously 
send and receive information, as well as the Command and 
Control Center staffed round the clock with multi-lingual 
personnel.  Noble welcomed the EU\'s draft Common Position and 
said that the Interpol database could handle receiving the 
8.5 million records of stolen/lost documents currently in the 
SIS.  JHA Head of Unit for Large Scale Information Systems 
Frank Paul clarified that the 8.5 million figure includes 
national identity cards and drivers licenses, but that the 
number of passports was probably several 
million. 
 
5. (SBU) According to Interpol, its travel document database 
has only generated 149 hits so far this year.  This low 
number is attributed to a lack of access at ports of entry 
and by national officials other than 
the NCBs.  Once the database is routinely queried by POEs and 
elsewhere, the number of hits is expected to rise quickly. 
Interpol said that within three months an interim solution 
could be found to expand connectivity to ports of entry 
(contingent on approximately 100,000 euros for technical 
improvements).  This connectivity will be piloted in the US. 
A more permanent solution could be reached by 2005 and cost 
nearly a million euros.  The EU Common Position stipulates 
that \"Member States shall ensure that their police 
authorities will query the Interpol database for the purpose 
of this Common Position each time when appropriate for the 
performance of their task.  Member States will ensure that 
they set up the infrastructures required to facilitate 
on-line consultation at the latest by December 2004.\" 
 
------------------------ 
Ironing Out the Details 
------------------------ 
 
6. (SBU) Major points covered during the consultations in 
Brussels and Lyon on stolen/lost passports are as follows: 
 
-- Scope of data:  At Noble\'s request, the U.S. and EU said 
they would be receptive to contributing data on both blank 
and issued passports to the database.  He said that the date 
and location of the theft/loss was also important.  Barrett 
said that although this data was not recorded in CLASP, the 
Department could consider modifying its current procedures. 
 
 
-- Reciprocity:  The EU will demand reciprocity by only 
allowing Interpol to share EU-originated data with other 
members which provide similar information to Interpol and 
which give the EU access to it.  The EU intends to sign an 
\"appropriate instrument\" with Interpol headquarters and with 
other contributing countries to ensure reciprocity. 
According to Verraes, for the U.S. this could be accomplished 
with a simple exchange of notes and does not have to be an 
elaborate, legally binding instrument.  (Note.  The EU wants 
to guarantee that countries which sign a reciprocity 
agreement update the database in a timely and consistent 
manner -- not an issue with the U.S.  End Note.)  Barrett 
stated that the U.S. restricts its data only to the five 
officially listed state sponsors of terrorism and said the 
U.S. hopes in this way to lead by example.  Noble said he 
would remind countries at the upcoming general assembly in 
October that if they query the database they should also 
contribute data.  Barrett also mentioned that the U.S. 
intends to demarche all Interpol members to encourage them to 
share passport data. 
 
-- Data Protection:  The EU will require an \"adequate level 
of protection of the personal data concerned\" in its 
agreements with third countries.  According to JHA Special 
Assistant Luigi Soreca, this will involve a very low 
qualitative threshold because it relates to third pillar data 
protection for law enforcement purposes (which virtually all 
of the 182 Interpol members currently meet).  Soreca and Paul 
both mentioned that data protection issues were essential for 
gaining political support for the initiative from EU Member 
States.  Both the U.S. and EU expressed some concern about 
the possibility of \"data mining\" by certain governments.  To 
guard against this, Interpol allows border officials to check 
only one document at a time.  If NCBs submit large series of 
numbers for checks, Interpol only provides the first ten 
responses.  Interpol said that national security officers are 
also able to monitor, audit and analyze inquiry patterns. 
 
-- Data Privacy:  The EC expressed some data privacy 
reservations, including retention periods and rights of 
redress by the traveling public.  Regarding data retention, 
Interpol explained that the default purge date is set at five 
years.  Before the period expires, the contributing state 
will be notified and asked whether the information is still 
relevant or whether it should be purged from the system. 
Interpol noted that contributors are also given the option to 
set their own expiration dates (e.g., the UK currently uses 
10 years after the date the passport was issued).  Interpol 
also explained that citizens could file a \"freedom of 
information\" type request, but that Interpol would ask 
permission from the contributing state before providing 
information on file.  If incorrect data has been entered into 
the Interpol database, only the contributing government may 
request its alteration or deletion (not the private citizen 
or another government). 
 
-- Feedback and Verification:  Barrett stated that the top 
USG concern relates to Interpol members sharing immediate 
feedback on hits, particularly if they involve American 
citizens being stopped by border officials.  The EC also 
expressed concern about malicious reporting of stolen 
documents and inaccuracy of data entry resulting in 
legitimate travelers being stopped.  Interpol explained that 
each hit generates an automatic alarm message which states, 
\"Do not take any police action before contact is made with 
the relevant NCB.\"  The EU Common Position makes verification 
mandatory before action is taken by national officials in the 
EU.  Barrett suggested customized wording to accelerate the 
verification process.  If the automated message requested 
specific information which only a legitimate passport holder 
could answer (i.e., mother\'s maiden name, father\'s birth 
date, social security number, etc.), the verification process 
would be expedited.  Interpol said that this was technically 
feasible and they would explore this possibility further. 
When asked about system down time, Interpol explained that 
the database is replicated and that if one system should go 
down, an error report is generated and when the database is 
queried again the request is automatically routed to the 
back-up for response. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
7. (SBU) The joint mission to Interpol was useful in moving 
the information exchange on stolen/lost passports forward, as 
well as enhancing the transatlantic dialogue on border and 
transportation security.  Success in this information sharing 
effort could build confidence and lead to other initiatives 
with the EU.  CA/PPTs consultations in Brussels also allowed 
the EU to update the Department on other relevant topics such 
as including biometrics in EU passports (reftel a) and the 
effects of enlargement on the movement of American citizens 
in the Schengen area.  At Interpol, the U.S.\'s decision to 
quickly hand over passport data compared favorably to the 
EU\'s internal plodding.  Though slower, the EU\'s Common 
Position should ultimately result in an additional 18 
countries contributing to Interpol\'s  Stolen Travel Document 
database. 
 
(CA/PPT has cleared on this cable.) 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17902","6/17/2004 13:29","04BRUSSELS2589","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 002589 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DHS FOR DEPUTY SECRETARY LOY; DOJ FOR CRIMINAL DIVISION 
BRUCE SWARTZ; STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EU, PTER, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR JUNE 25 VISIT OF DHS DEPUTY 
SECRETARY ADMIRAL LOY 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 01749 
 
1.  Summary:  You are coming to Brussels during a time of 
transition in the European Union as it absorbs 10 new member 
states and moves towards a new Parliament, new Commissioners 
and possibly a new Constitutional Treaty.   At the same time, 
the EU is in the waning days of the Irish Presidency, and a 
US/EU Summit will be taking place in 
Ireland on the same day you will be visiting Brussels.  Since 
the March bombings in Madrid, the EU has taken a fresh look 
or has revisited the question of the adequacy of its efforts 
to protect EU citizens from terrorism threats, as well as 
appointed a special coordinator for terrorism.  Still, 
misunderstanding remains high in the Commission, Parliament, 
Member States and among the European population to some of 
the measures we consider essential to combat terrorism 
activities.  DHS\'  ability to successfully and fully 
implement many of the security measures aimed at protecting 
the U.S. from incoming terrorist threats will depend on 
winning EU support.  Your visit can be most helpful in this 
effort. 
 
2.  The past year has shown how prickly the EU can be when 
confronted with the fait accompli of U.S. homeland security 
measures that affect the transatlantic movement of people and 
goods.  Issues such as PNR, CSI, and Air Marshals have all 
required careful managing, and future DHS measures, such as 
CAPPSII and US VISIT, need similar attention.  The Europeans 
in general do not feel the threat of international terrorism 
as sharply as we do, nor do they share the sense of urgency 
in implementing measures we see as essential.  They are 
afraid the U.S. is moving forward blindly, indifferent to the 
effects of our measures on the rights of the individual. 
Differences among the EU member states themselves in regards 
to the scope and urgency of the threat, as well as the 
division of responsibilities between the EU and the Member 
States, make it difficult for the EU to act in unison or with 
the speed required.  The message we need to deliver is:  The 
threat of international terrorism is real and global.  The 
U.S. is taking measures it deems necessary for our security 
and wants to work with the EU and its Member States to ensure 
that those measures are as effective as possible and 
minimally disruptive to the legitimate movement of people and 
goods.  We believe that the threat is not limited to the U.S. 
and are willing to work with the EU as it takes measures to 
protect itself.  The U.S. is committed to building its 
security in a way that protects the rights of the individual 
and in conformity with democratic principles.   End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 A Period of Major Change Underway 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3.  There is a sense of flux and change that permeates the EU 
at this moment.  At the beginning of May, the EU finalized 
its largest and most challenging enlargement, welcoming ten 
new members to the Union.  These ten countries, all 
significantly poorer and for the most part ardently 
transatlantic in their outlook, are likely to change the 
dynamic of the Union precisely at a time when many other 
changes are in the offing.  However, we should not expect 
that the entry of these new members will somehow tilt the EU 
to automatically become more pro-U.S. 
 
4.  The Commission, the EU\'s executive body, has already 
become a lame duck because of the end of this term in office. 
  Several of the most influential Commissioners have already 
announced they will not return to ministerial posts.  The 
situation of Antonio Vitorino, the Portuguese Commissioner 
who manages the Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) portfolio is 
uncertain, but he is a long-shot candidate to replace Romano 
Prodi as President of the Commission.  (You will meet with 
Director General Jonathan Faull who reports to Commissioner 
Vitorino.) 
 
5.  In June, voters across Europe went to the polls to elect 
a new European Parliament.   The European Parliament has 
limited powers, since it cannot initiate legislation 
independently, and must await proposals from the Commission. 
Still, it is playing a growing role in protection of European 
standards, and has been an especially tough nut to crack on 
questions of data privacy, where a majority believes our 
efforts on border controls, biometrics, and use of Passenger 
Name Records (PNR) threaten to violate individual liberties. 
We do not anticipate any short-term changes in the attitudes 
of the Parliament to our border security program, 
 
6.  Finally, the Irish Presidency is also in the home stretch 
of efforts to finalize negotiations on a complicated 
Constitutional Treaty that aims at streamlining the 
decision-making  apparatus of a Union of 25 Member States. 
As part of this effort, the UK is attempting to protect a 
\"red line\" on national authority over criminal prosecution 
that gets to the heart of Europe-wide efforts to fully 
integrate its investigative and prosecutorial efforts 
directed at crime and terrorism:  Will final competency lie 
on the European level, or remain in the hands of national 
governments?  This has implications for the US as we attempt 
to move forward our own counter-terrorism efforts. 
 
--------------- 
Split Authority 
-------------- 
 
7.  The EU is responsible primarily for trade and customs and 
the movement of people, goods and services.  The individual 
Member States making up the Union are responsible for 
judicial, law enforcement, intelligence gathering, defense 
and security.  Cooperation between the individual  Member 
States varies.  Overall cooperation between all 25 can be 
hampered by mistrust, different views of the threat and their 
vulnerability, and  different capabilities.  We may be 
tempted in dealing with the Europeans to seek out individual 
Member States rather than with the EU as a whole, but this 
approach too has its drawbacks.  The Container Security 
Initiative (CSI)  was a good example where we negotiated  in 
good faith with individual member states only to find out 
that the Commission claimed that the Member States did not 
have the authority to enter into such agreements. (The 
Commission is ultimately responsible for customs issues.) 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Cooperation on Combating Terrorism 
-------------------------------------- 
 
8.  Following the Madrid bombings, the EU has tried to 
tighten its own counter-terrorism efforts, naming a senior 
Coordinator to oversee the process.   The Council has 
suggested setting up a nascent intelligence-sharing unit to 
help improve EU-wide responsiveness and awareness of internal 
terrorist threats.  This work is overseen by the Political 
and Security Committee (PSC) , a relatively new element of 
the EU that is responsible for the day-to-day efforts of the 
EU to establish a Common Foreign and Security Policy for the 
25-nation Union.  You will be addressing this group on Friday 
morning, and the audience will provide a useful opportunity 
to offer an overview of our homeland security efforts, and 
especially where they intersect with international 
cooperation. 
 
9.  DHS\'  ability to successfully implement many of the 
security measures aimed at protecting the US from incoming 
terrorist threats will depend on winning EU support. Over the 
past year, we have seen how difficult winning this support 
can be.  DHS has had to deal with the EU on several sensitive 
issues related to implementation of counter terrorism 
measures aimed at protecting the U.S.:  CSI, PNR, Air 
Marshalls, Bioterrorism, and CAPPSII.  In each case, the 
complexity of the EU institutions and split authority between 
the European Commission and the 25 Member State national 
governments complicated our ability to reach agreement fast. 
Complicating our task is that European leaders and the public 
lack a sense of urgency and view the international terrorist 
threat as far less serious than the U.S.  Since many in 
Europe do not share our perception of the degree of the 
threat, and because of their history of fascism and 
communism, they are more reluctant to take steps that they 
perceive as diminishing in any way the privacy and human 
rights of individuals.  This led to a long, drawn-out 
negotiation on PNR.  In fact, we only started to make headway 
when we encouraged the law enforcement and judicial side of 
the Commission to take an interest in the negotiations. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Cooperation on Border Management Issues 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
10.  The EU has been keen to enhance our transatlantic 
dialogue on border issues 
 and is appreciative of high level visits such as yours. 
Passport and visa policy 
issues are two areas which may yet cause friction between the 
U.S. and the EU. 
Should the 10/26/2004 passport deadline be extended by only a 
year, most visa 
waiver countries in the EU will not be in compliance.  At a 
June 8 JHA Council 
meeting, the EU approved the mandatory inclusion of digitized 
photographs in all 
25 Member State passports, with an option for a secondary 
biometric identifier 
(fingerprints).  The projected timeline for all EU Member 
States to begin 
incorporating biometrics in their passports is December 2005. 
 
 
11.  New Member States not on the visa waiver program (VWP) 
continue to press 
for the EU to demand reciprocity or else impose a visa 
requirement on U.S. 
citizens traveling to the Schengen area.  The Commission 
seeks to delay this 
confrontation by hinting to these Eastern European states 
that 2007 may be a more 
realistic target when they are fully certified to comply with 
Schengen border 
regulations.  You should welcome these efforts to improve 
border controls, but 
remind EU interlocutors of the legislative parameters -- 
including visa refusal 
rates of under 4 percent -- as a starting point for VWP 
consideration.  Related to this VWP 
discussion is the on-going re-certification process for 
existing VWP countries.  Any movement to suspend or remove a 
current EU Member 
State from VWP would most likely result in a visa reciprocal 
visa requirement for 
all U.S. citizens traveling to the Schengen area. 
 
12.  The EU, particularly the incoming Dutch Presidency, has 
expressed concern 
about negative public reaction to enrolling VWP travelers in 
the US VISIT program 
as of September 30.  On the one hand are practical concerns 
about slow downs at 
ports of entry given the increased number of visitors being 
enrolled in US VISIT. 
On the other hand are possible negative reactions to 
fingerprinting and photographing 
visitors at our borders. 
 
13.  The U.S. and EU have just concluded a joint mission to 
Interpol to further an 
EU-led initiative to exchange data on lost and stolen 
passports.  You should welcome 
the EU\'s commitment (to be formally adopted on June 18) to 
require all 25 Member 
States to immediately transfer all legacy and new data on 
lost and stolen passports 
to Interpol.  You should seek to build on this program by 
encouraging the EU to 
consider exchanging border lookout data with the U.S. and/or 
other forms of 
information sharing to deter terrorism or illegal 
immigration. 
 
---------------------- 
What We Need to Do 
---------------------- 
 
14.  Your visit can be most helpful in our efforts to foster 
greater U.S./EU cooperation in these areas.  In your meetings 
with the PSC and DG Faull, we need to keep the EU focused on 
the scope of the danger and to emphasize that our measures 
are meant to protect us and them.  We must point out that we 
are as devoted to human rights and democratic principles as 
they are;  that it is in our interest to be able to move 
swiftly to deal with specific threats; that we want our new 
senior-level Policy Dialogue on Border and Transport Security 
to be where we raise and solve differences and search for 
ways to reach our objectives; and that the many expert-level 
dialogues between the U.S. and the EU are valuable and we 
want to keep them up. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17917","6/17/2004 15:52","04BRUSSELS2593","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS2368|04USEUBRUSSELS2369|04USEUBRUSSELS2502","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002593 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/17/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, EAID, XA, XF, TU, HR, RO, BG, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: MANY EU SUMMIT FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY 
DECISIONS PRECOOKED 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 2368 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 2369 
     C. USEU BRUSSELS 2502 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reason 1.4 (D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) During the EU Summit June 17-18 in Brussels, EU 
sources tell us EU leaders will approve a range of pre-cooked 
decisions on a broad range of foreign policy topics so that 
they can focus on Constitutional Treaty negotiations and 
top-level appointments (septel).  EU leaders are expected to 
endorse recent proposals from High Rep Solana and 
Commissioner Patten on EU engagement in Iraq, and instruct 
foreign ministers to agree on a package of \"appropriate first 
steps.\"  The EU will also issue fairly anodyne language on 
Iran.  On the MEPP, EU leaders are to \"reaffirm the readiness 
of the EU to work with the US and other partners in 
cooperating with the countries concerned.\"  Leaders will 
agree to start drafting the Accession Treaty for Romania and 
Bulgaria in July 2004, open accession negotiations with 
Croatia \"early in 2005\", and \"welcome significant progress\" 
made by Turkey toward qualifying for the start of accession 
negotiations.  Leaders will also issue a decision outlining 
procedures for an ESDP Operations Center. Our initial read of 
this ESDP document is that it preserves UK redlines (more 
septel).  One topic that may see new language is Afghanistan, 
depending on the discussion at the Foreign Ministers\' June 17 
dinner.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU) The Irish Presidency has released (on www.eu2004.ie) 
the Draft Conclusions for this week\'s EU Summit.  Council 
sources say this draft can effectively be viewed as the final 
Conclusions, since Heads will not have any serious discussion 
of most of the topics.  At most two hours on Friday morning 
are set aside to review the text, and in those two hours the 
focus is supposed to be on the Justice and Home Affairs 
section.  EU FMs, at dinner on Thursday will discuss MEPP, 
Iran (on both of which Conclusions are already set) and 
Afghanistan (the one topic that might still be added to these 
draft Conclusions). 
 
IRAQ:  EU TO DECIDE \"FIRST STEPS\" IN JULY 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) The Summit Conclusions welcome UNSCR 1546 and the 
Commission Communication \"The EU and Iraq - A Framework for 
Engagement\" as well as the accompanying letter from High Rep 
Solana and External Relations Commissioner Patten (REFS B and 
C).  The Summit will instruct the July 12-13 GAERC to \"agree 
appropriate first steps to be taken\" that could include: 
technical, economic and reconstruction assistance; close 
engagement with UN teams, including on elections; enhancing 
EU representation in Iraq, as (security) conditions permit; 
beginning political dialogue; and urging neighbors to be 
constructive.  EU leaders also propose an EU-Iraq Troika 
(presumably at FM-level) with the \"new Iraqi government as 
soon as possible\" and an invitation to the Iraqi PM to 
address the EU\'s General Affairs and External Relations 
Council (GAERC).  Conclusions also \"welcome the possibility 
of an international meeting to support the Iraqi political 
transition and Iraqi recovery.\"  The Summit Conclusions do 
not repeat June 14 GAERC\'s mention of the prisoner abuse 
issue. 
 
BMENA: \"READINESS TO WORK WITH U.S.\" 
------------------------------------ 
 
4. (SBU) The summit will endorse the \"Strategic Partnership 
with the Mediterranean and the Middle East\" highlighting 
familiar themes.  In the section directly relevant to the 
Broader Middle East and North Africa initiative, EU 
\"reaffirms the readiness of the EU to work with the U.S. and 
other partners in cooperating with the countries concerned. 
It looks forward to reviewing the MEPP and exploring the 
possibilities for coordinating our respective efforts to 
assist the reform process at the coming EU-US Summit on 26 
June 2004.\"  The Summit will also issue a page and a half of 
Conclusions specifically on the Middle East Peace Process, 
but these include nothing of substance that the EU has not 
already said several times before, including reaffirmation of 
the centrality of the road map. 
 
IRAN: WAITING FOR THE IAEA 
-------------------------- 
 
5. (C)  In a single paragraph on Iran, the EU \"stresses the 
Union\'s desire to move towards a closer relationship with 
Iran, on the basis of action by Iran to address the EU\'s 
concerns\" on the nuclear program, terrorism, human rights and 
Iran\'s approach to the MEPP.  The Conclusions note that \"the 
EU will continue discussion in light of IAEA DG El-Baradei\'s 
report and the outcome of the IAEA Board of Governors meeting 
currently taking place in Vienna.\"  (COMMENT: These brief 
Conclusions reflect the Irish Presidency\'s desire (REF A) to 
avoid serious discussion of the Iran issue among leaders at 
this juncture.  END COMMENT.) 
ESDP Planning Cell: Careful Instructions on Next Steps 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
6. (C) The Conclusions include a remarkably detailed one-page 
section on \"NATO/EU Consultation, Planning and Operations.\" 
The EU leaders ask High Rep Solana to work toward 
establishing SHAPE and NATO liaison arrangements by end 2004. 
 Heads also will agree to \"work on establishing an operations 
centre\" by 1 January 2006 at the latest.  In fairly 
restrictive terms, the text states \"this will not be a 
standing HQ\" and that national HQs remain the \"main option\" 
for \"autonomous military operations.\"  The \"objective\" should 
be for an operations center able to plan and conduct 
operations \"on the scale of operation Artemis\" (NOTE: 
Artemis was the ESDP operation in Ituri, Congo, which was 
planned by French national HQ and involved about 1500, 
predominantly French, troops.  END NOTE).  The Summit will 
also \"welcome the understanding that the civ/mil cell and 
facilities for an operations centre should be located in the 
same building as the main structures of the EUMS, as well as, 
to the maximum extent possible, with the pol-mil structures 
of DGE.\"  This language represents an explicit effort by 
several member states, led by the UK, to limit the size of 
the operations center (details septel). 
 
Enlargement: Romania, Bulgaria, Croatia and Turkey 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
7. (SBU) Responding to a successful lobbying effort by the 
Romanians, the EU will not (at least at this point) 
\"decouple\" Bulgaria and Romania in their path to the EU; both 
are still described as singing a single Accession Treaty \"as 
early as possible in 2005\" with the aim of joining the EU in 
January 2007.  In a legally meaningless, but politically 
significant, gesture, the Summit will decide that drafting of 
the Accession Treaty for both countries will begin in July 
2004 (even if the terms for Romania aren\'t fully set yet). 
The Summit will also announce that Croatia will begin 
accession negotiations \"early in 2005\", and the Commission 
will be asked to \"prepare a pre-accession strategy\" including 
details of how and when Croatia could get access to the much 
larger pots of assistance money available in those budget 
lines.  The Conclusions do include a useful reference that 
\"emphasizes that Croatia needs to maintain full cooperation 
with ICTY and take all necessary steps to ensure that the 
remaining indictee is located and transferred to The Hague\" 
as well as mention of minority rights, refugee returns, 
judicial reform, regional cooperation and anti-corruption. 
The Conclusions make no decisions about Turkey, but 
reaffirmed that a decision on whether to open negotiations 
with Turkey will be made in December.  At this stage, the EU 
\"welcomes the significant progress made to date by Turkey in 
the reform process\" and \"the positive contribution of the 
Turkish Government\" on Cyprus.  The Conclusions do include a 
mention of the need to adapt Turkey\'s Customs Union, (a 
document known as \"the Ankara Agreement\"), to an EU of 25. 
(NOTE: This is an issue we are told arose anew in the past 
couple of weeks when Ankara said it would extend the 
Agreement to all of the new Member States, other than the 
Republic of Cyprus.) 
 
Other External Relation Topics, Including US-EU Summit 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
8. (U) The Conclusions also cover a real laundry list of 
foreign policy topics, with passing references to HIV/AIDS, 
Millennium Development Goals, ESDP in Bosnia,  WMD strategy, 
human rights, and conflict prevention.  In a list of 
references to various EU-third country Summits, the EU 
\"expresses its confidence that the strength, depth and 
significance of the EU-US relationship will be demonstrated 
in a successful EU-US Summit on 26 June; the relationship is 
also being reinforced through enhanced economic partnership 
and intensified business dialogue.\"   The EU also confirms 
its new European Neighborhood Policy will include Armenia, 
Azerbaijan and Georgia. 
 
Justice and Home Affairs 
------------------------ 
 
9. (U) The Conclusions on these topics are largely an 
inventory of achievements to date and a repetition of 
previously set deadlines.  They confirm that High Rep Solana 
is asked to create an intelligence capacity on terrorist 
threats in the Council Secretariat as soon as possible. 
Building on suggestions in the March 25 EU Summit 
Declaration, the Conclusions task the Council with drafting, 
by December 2004, a \"coherent overall approach\" to 
strengthening EU efforts to combat terrorist financing.  They 
also task the Council and Commission with developing by the 
end of 2004 an overall strategy on the protection of critical 
infrastructure, and with evaluating the capabilities of 
Member States in preventing and responding to a terrorist 
attack. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17939","6/18/2004 9:55","04BRUSSELS2605","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE132852","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 002605 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR EB DIZOGLIO AND USAID/LAC/CAR BARTH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, EFIN, HA, XL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EC RESPONSE TO HAITI DEMARCHE FOR BUDGET SUPPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 132852 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED -- PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
1.  (SBU) USEU Development Counselor presented reftel 
demarche to European Commission (EC) Desk Officer for Haiti 
Lut Fabert-Goossens, in the Directorate-General for 
Development. Fabert-Goossens said the EC appreciates concerns 
expressed by the US and concurs with our assessment of needs 
and priorities.  For its part, the EC has prepared a new 
decision for Council approval which is currently undergoing 
internal review. A final EC decision is expected in two 
weeks.  The decision will then go to Member State Ambassadors 
(COREPER) for approval and be presented to the ACP Committee, 
with the objective of getting final approval at the July 12 
-13 EU Foreign Ministers\' meeting (GAERC).  This will enable 
the EC to pledge at the July 19 - 20 Donors\' Conference which 
the EC is coordinating with other members of the Steering 
Committee. 
 
2. (SBU) The EC has also begun notification of 9th EDF to use 
funds.  The likely scenario is that the member states will 
agree to make a first tranche of funds available immediately 
and a second tranche subject to certain conditions to be 
determined.  The Directorate-General for Development is 
proposing that they use funds according to priorities in the 
interim cooperation framework donor exercise.  They have also 
asked that procedures for existing and new funds be 
accelerated. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"17946","6/18/2004 12:13","04BRUSSELS2610","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002610 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/UMB, EUR/CACEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/18/2009 
TAGS: PREL, UP, BO, MD, RS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU UPDATE ON GEORGIA, MOLDOVA, UKRAINE 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASON 1.5 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  On June 17, EU High Rep Solana\'s advisor 
for the CIS, Kees Van Rij, reviewed developments in Georgia, 
Moldova and Ukraine with visiting Coordinator for Assistance 
to Europe and Eurasia Pascual.  Van Rij gave a readout of EU 
High Rep Solana\'s meeting the day before with Georgian PM 
Zhvania, who discussed Georgia\'s improved relations with 
Russia, its policy to win the \"hearts and minds\" of South 
Ossetians, next steps on Abkhazia, and how good ties to 
Azerbaijan, Armenia and Turkey may enable Georgia to help 
resolve regional tensions.  On Moldova, Van Rij provided an 
update on EU efforts with Moscow to relaunch pentagonal 
talks, relayed Moldovan concerns that Russia may try to push 
a \"Kozak II\" plan, and offered EU views on Moldova\'s proposed 
stability pact.  On Ukraine, Van Rij said the EU would take a 
tough line at its July 18 summit with Kuchma on elections and 
arms exports.  End Summary. 
 
Georgia: Russia, S. Ossetia, Abkhazia, N-K and Turkey 
------- 
2.  (C)  On the margins of the June 16-17 Georgia Donors\' 
Conference in Brussels (septel), visiting Coordinator for 
Assistance to Europe and Eurasia Pascual met with Council 
Secretariat Senior Policy Advisor Kees Van Rij, and his 
 
SIPDIS 
assistant, Carl Hartzell, to discuss Georgia, Molodova and 
Ukraine.  On Georgia, Van Rij said EU High Rep Solana\'s June 
16 meeting with Georgian PM Zhvania confirmed the EU\'s 
impression that Zhvania plays a key \"balancing\" role in the 
cabinet, and acts as a moderating influence on President 
Saakashvili.  Zhvania stressed the priority Georgia is 
placing on improving relations with Moscow, noting 
Saakashvili\'s frequent contact with Putin.  Zhvania also said 
his personal contact with Igor Ivanov is key to improved 
relations; Ivanov is much more important an interlocutor than 
Lavrov.  Georgia is working to \"bridge the remaining gaps\" 
with Russia on an agreement to close Russian bases in 
Georgia.  One idea that seems to have caught Moscow\'s 
attention is the Georgian offer to open a joint 
Georgian-Russian Counterterrorism Institute in Tbilisi as 
\"compensation:\"  the Institute would permit Russia to 
maintain a limited military advisory presence. 
 
3.  (C)  On South Ossetia, Zhvania told Solana that Georgia 
has no plans to use force; rather Saakashvili is pursuing a 
medium- to long-term \"soft\" strategy to \"win the hearts and 
minds\" of Ossetians.  Zhvania said Georgia was pleased that 
Moscow had rejected South Ossetia\'s request to join Russia. 
On Abkhazia, Zhvania told Solana that Georgia was working for 
the return of refugees to Galia, under UN/Russian guarantees. 
 Finally, Zhvania claimed he had good relations with Azeri 
President Aliyev; the latter is very interested in how 
Georgia resolved the Ajaran crisis without resort to 
violence.  Zhvania said he also has close ties to Armenian 
President Kocharian and intimated Georgia may seek a 
mediating role in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.  Zhvania 
also told Solana that Georgia is working with Ankara to help 
Armenia reopen its border with Turkey. 
 
Georgia:  EU Rule of Law Program 
---------------- 
4.  (C)  In response to a question from Ambassador Pascual, 
Van Rij clarified the recently-announced EU Rule of Law 
Program for Georgia, which is being run as a European 
Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) program, rather than as a 
traditional assistance program under the European Commission. 
 Van Rij explained that under ESDP, the EU can launch civil 
preparedness programs in cases designated to be \"emergency\" 
situations.  The EU maintains for this purpose lists of 
European experts in various civil preparedness areas.  In the 
case of Georgia, the EU\'s Political and Security Committee 
(PSC) designated the need to reform Georgia\'s law enforcement 
and judicial institutions an \"emergency.\" 
 
5.  (C)  The EU is currently in the process of identifying 
about ten civilian experts who will be working out of 
ministries and police HQ in Tbilisi.  The program will be 
under the supervision of the EU\'s envoy to the South 
Caucasus, Heikki Talvitie, and will report to EU High Rep 
Solana.  Van Rij said the team would coordinate closely with 
U.S. advisors already working in this area in Georgia.  The 
EU designation was, in part, designed to send a clear 
political signal to the new Georgian government of EU 
commitment to support key reforms. (Comment.  Designating the 
Georgia Rule of Law program an ESDP activity also serves EU 
institutional goals:  the EU can now claim to have launched 
ESDP operations in the Balkans, Africa and the Caucasus.  End 
Comment.) 
 
Moldova: Russia, Stability Pact, and the EU Action Plan 
----------- 
6.  (C)  The EU continues to seek ways to relaunch the 
pentagonal political talks with Russia to move the 
Transnistria issue forward.  Van Rij said he had met with the 
resident Russian Charge in Brussels, and told him the EU was 
looking for a response to Irish PM Ahern\'s letter raising, 
inter alia, EU interest in the pentagonal talks (reftel). 
Van Rij said he also reminded the Russian that the EU wants 
to have an \"agenda\" with Moscow to discuss frozen conflicts, 
and the EU wants Russia to be \"predictable\" and not launch 
unilateral surprises like the Kozak plan.  Van Rij said the 
EU\'s PSC committee will have its monthly meeting with the 
Russians next week and will ask for Moscow\'s views on 
Voronin\'s stability pact proposal. 
 
7.  (C)  Van Rij said the Moldovans, who were in Brussels 
earlier in the week to finalize the EU-Moldova \"Action Plan\" 
under the EU\'s European Neighborhood Policy, had expressed 
concern that Russia would push a \"Kozak II\" plan in coming 
months.  The Moldovan reasoning, which Van Rij said he has 
not completely accepted, is that with elections coming up 
\"everywhere\" -- the U.S., Ukraine, Romania -- and with the 
changeover of the European Commissioners, Russia may try to 
press Voronin, just before Moldovan elections, to accept a 
new version of the Kozak plan. Van Rij speculated that 
Moldova\'s stability pact proposal may have been an effort to 
avert a Russian initiative; Van Rij also saw it as an attempt 
by Voronin to show Moldovans there was movement on 
Transnistria in the run up to elections.  Van Rij and 
Hartzell made clear that the only utility the EU sees in the 
stability pact proposal is as a vehicle to re-engage Russia 
and moving forward the political talks on Transnistria. 
 
Ukraine:  Tough talk at July summit? 
------- 
8.  (C)  Van Rij and Pascual discussed the upcoming elections 
in Ukraine, and whether or not Kuchma would run.  Van Rij 
said the EU\'s next summit with Ukraine will be on July 8. 
The EU debated whether to hold the summit before or after 
elections, but decided to go ahead in order to be able to 
send a strong signal to Kuchma on the need for fair 
elections.  The EU was disappointed in the manipulation of 
local elections earlier this year, and Solana had earlier 
warned Kuchma not to mix up the issue of constitutional 
changes with the presidential elections, so the EU will take 
a tough line at the summit.  Van Rij said the EU will also 
speak frankly about non-proliferation concerns with Kuchma, 
in particular regarding Ukrainian arms sales to Africa and 
Burma. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"18088","6/23/2004 15:01","04BRUSSELS2683","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04BRUSSELS139","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002683 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/PC MAREN BROOKS; USUNVIE FOR HOWARD 
SOLOMON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, KCRM, PREL, SNAR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: CENTRAL DUBLIN GROUP MEETING: JUNE 2004 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 0139 
 
 1.  This cable contains an action request.  See para. 9. 
 
2.  Summary.  During its June 22 meeting, the members of the 
Central Dublin Group (DG) reviewed regional reports from 
Eastern Europe (submitted by Germany), the Balkans and the 
Near East (Greece), Central Asia (Italy), South West Asia 
(U.K.), and South East Asia (Japan).  The U.K. and U.S. gave 
presentations on counter-narcotics efforts in Afghanistan. 
The 10 new EU accession states participated as full members 
of the Group for the first time.  The Commission and the EU 
Drug Monitoring Center attended as observers, but Europol and 
the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) did not attend. 
(UNODC was preparing for the Paris Pact meeting in Moscow.) 
DG Chair Raymond Yans of the Belgian MFA launched a 
self-examination of the Group\'s objectives, structure, work 
program, and criteria for accepting new members.  The chair 
intends to circulate a questionnaire to solicit member views 
on these issues.  Survey results will be discussed at the 
winter meeting in December.  U.S. rep to the meeting was 
USEU/NAS Frank Kerber.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Thematic Discussion on Afghanistan 
---------------------------------- 
 
3.  Lesley Pallet of the U.K.\'s FCO Department on Drugs and 
International Crime gave a general overview of 
counter-narcotics (CN) objectives and operations in 
Afghanistan.  (Entire powerpoint presentation has been faxed 
to INL/PC.)  Pallett noted that Afghanistan generates 70 
percent of the world\'s heroin.  Opium poppy covers one 
percent of the country\'s total arable land.  Seven percent of 
the population grows opium.  In 2003, 80,000 hectares were 
under cultivation, yielding 3,600 tons of opium.  The Afghan 
Narcotics Force is now operational.  Over 32 tons of opium 
have been seized and 32 heroin labs destroyed.  The Afghan 
Counter Narcotics Police, with 170 trained officers and 7 
offices nationwide, is now conducting stop and search 
operations in Kabul.  USDEL then presented an overview of USG 
assistance to the CN effort and distributed materials 
provided by INL.  Japan noted the June 14, 2004 report by 
UNODC Director Costa which was unusually candid and negative 
in its evaluation of the drug situation in Afghanistan. 
Japan noted that most interdiction assistance is targeted on 
Afghanistan\'s western borders to the neglect of its eastern 
borders.  As a result, Afghan opium flows are increasing 
toward Asia.  Several members noted the work of the Paris 
Pact in coordinating efforts to staunch opium flows from 
Afghanistan to Europe.  USDEL suggested that UNODC present a 
report at the next meeting on the Paris Pact roundtables in 
Moscow and Tashkent and on the policy planning meeting to be 
held in Vienna this fall.  Group discussion focused on the 
poor security in the countryside and the critical role of 
NATO\'s military cooperation.  In summing up the discussion, 
the Chair suggested that the thematic discussion at the next 
DG meeting be on NATO\'s efforts to secure Afghanistan.  This 
suggestion was agreed to by the members. 
 
---------------- 
Regional Reports 
---------------- 
 
4. The members reviewed regional reports from Eastern Europe 
(Germany), Balkans and the Near East (Greece), Central Asia 
(Italy), South West Asia (U.K.), and South East Asia (Japan). 
 (Reports will be sent to INL/PC.)  As instructed, during the 
discussion of the U.K report on the South West Asia, USDEL 
noted the recommendation made by the Mini Dublin Group (MDG) 
in New Delhi that capitals support the USG\'s co-funding of 
phase 2 of UNODC\'s chemical precursor control project and 
observed that these projects are among the best projects run 
by the UNODC worldwide.  This view was supported by Japan. 
USDEL also flagged the semiannual report submitted by the 
Mexico City MDG. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Self-Evaluation of the Dublin Group 
----------------------------------- 
 
5.  Chairman Raymond Yans distributed a paper entitled \"The 
Future of the Dublin Group\" in which he outlined the Group\'s 
strengths and weaknesses he has observed during his three 
years as chairman.  The DG began almost 15 years ago - at USG 
urging - as a forum for donor countries to coordinate 
anti-narcotics programs around the world.  The Group has not 
revised its operational guidelines since 2000.  The addition 
of the ten EU accession states on May 1 increased membership 
in the Group to 30, plus regular observers Europol, UNODC, 
the EU Drug Monitoring Center and the Commission.  With 
membership applications from Turkey, China, Russia and 
Thailand in the hopper and no clear criteria for accepting 
new members, Belgian Chair Raymond Yans opined this was an 
opportune time to take stock 
 
6.  In his paper, the Chair notes that the quality of the 
regional reports has improved during his chairmanship, that 
better work is being done by some - but not all - of the 
Mini-Dublin Groups, and that the \"thematic debates\" held at 
the Central DG meetings have been successful and informative. 
 On the negative side, he notes that some Mini Dublin Groups 
do not meet at all or only rarely.  Some delegates to the MDG 
meetings do not receive instructions from their capitals for 
their meetings.  The level of participation at the Central DG 
meetings continues to deteriorate.  Some delegations are now 
sending second or third secretaries who have nothing to 
contribute to the meetings.  Finally, the regional reports 
often arrive too late for translation and distribution; 
consequently, participants do not have time to read and 
reflect on the reports. 
 
7.  The chair therefore called on the Group to begin a 
process of reflection and self-evaluation.  He suggested that 
the Secretariat send out a questionnaire to all delegations 
which would solicit views on the objectives of the Dublin 
Group, its present organizational structure, the value of the 
thematic discussions and regional reports, and possible 
criteria for admitting new members.  Survey results would be 
due by the end of October and discussed at the next meeting 
in December.  Italy, Japan, the Commission and the U.S. spoke 
out in favor of the proposal. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  It is clear some regional groups are more active than 
others.  Some MDG\'s (there are currently some 75 MDGs 
worldwide) and regional chairs could be dropped entirely in 
favor of focusing on the more active ones of more concern to 
the members.  The 2000 guidelines state that regional chairs 
should be rotated every two years.   The work of the regional 
chairs currently falls disproportionately on eight countries: 
Spain, Greece, Italy, Japan, Germany, The Netherlands, France 
and the U.S.  The role of regional chairs should be spread 
more widely and regularly rotated among the other members. 
(The U.K. privately agreed with these views.) 
 
-------------- 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
9.  The annual U.S. report on Central America and Mexico is 
on the agenda for the next meeting.  The Chair has requested 
that all reports be submitted by December 1 to allow 
sufficient time for translation, distribution and 
consideration by capitals.  The evaluation questionnaire, 
along with Mission views, will be forwarded to INL/PC when 
received,  Washington is reminded that submissions will be 
due the end of October.  Finally, it is likely the 
Secretariat will approach NATO for a speaker for the next 
 
SIPDIS 
thematic discussion on NATO\'s role in facilitating CN efforts 
in Afghanistan.  However, Washington should consider whether 
we should also offer a U.S. presentation. 
 
FOSTER 
"
"18263","6/30/2004 11:05","04BRUSSELS2794","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU LEADERS NOMINATE PORTUGUESE PM DURAO 
BARROSO AS COMMISSION PRESIDENT; SOLANA REAPPOINTED 
AS CFSP HIGH REP, LATER TO BE THE FIRST EU FM 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  EU leaders on June 29 nominated Portuguese Prime 
Minister Jose Manuel Durao Barroso as the next 
Commission President effective November 1.  The 
leaders also renewed the mandate of Javier Solana as 
Council SG/CFSP High Rep with a commitment to 
appoint him as the first EU Foreign Minister once 
the EU Constitutional Treaty is in place.  Barroso, 
whose nomination remains subject to confirmation by 
the European Parliament in a July 22 vote, said the 
allocation of portfolios in his team would be his 
\"sole responsibility.\"  END SUMMARY. 
 
ONE NEW HEAD AND TWO REAPPOINTMENTS 
----------------------------------- 
 
2.  EU leaders smoothly agreed \"by consensus\" at a 
short meeting in Brussels the evening of June 29 to 
nominate Portuguese PM Jose Manuel Durao Barroso as 
the next Commission President to succeed Romano 
Prodi on November 1, 2004.  Barroso\'s confirmation 
remains subject to the approval of the European 
Parliament, which will pronounce (majority of EP 
membership) on July 22.  The EP is expected to 
endorse Barroso, a member of the conservative 
European People\'s Party (EPP) that will form the 
largest group in the newly elected EP.  However, 
other factions (Liberals, Socialists and Greens) 
will likely want to hear more from Barroso on his 
views on the EU and his approach to the job before 
deciding how to vote. 
 
3.  The leaders also reappointed Javier Solana as 
Council Secretary General/CFSP High Rep and Pierre 
de Boissieu as Deputy Secretary General of the 
Council as from October 18, 2004.  They issued a 
Declaration stating that Solana will be appointed 
Union Minister for Foreign Affairs \"on the day of 
entry into force\" of the Constitutional Treaty.  The 
implication, which was confirmed to us by a senior 
Council official, is that Solana will not/not join 
the Commission until that time.  Thus, double 
hatting (merging the current Solana and Patten jobs) 
is not anticipated.  Although the leaders invited 
the future President of the Commission and the SG/HR 
\"to organize the working relations between them in a 
way that will ensure a smooth and efficient 
transition and to take the necessary measures to 
that end,\" a senior official privately told us that 
the Council and Commission have not done anything 
yet in that respect and that they have 18 months to 
fulfill this tasker.  In the meantime, it will be up 
to Barroso to decide how the RELEX functions will be 
fulfilled in his Commission. 
 
4.  The leaders also reappointed the Frenchman 
Pierre de Boissieu as Deputy Secretary-General of 
the Council, a function that entails the day-to-day 
management of the Council Secretariat and 
organization of work, with a footnote saying that de 
Boissieu will be appointed Secretary-General of the 
Council on the day of entry into force of the 
Constitution (when Solana becomes EU FM). 
 
INTRODUCING THE NEXT COMMISSION PRESIDENT 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5.  Barroso appeared at a joint press conference 
with a jubilant Irish PM/EU chair Ahern, Solana and 
Commission President Prodi.  The performance of Jose 
Manuel Barroso (as he invited the media to refer to 
him) was highly creditable, drawing from his 
linguistic and communication skills, a sense of 
humor, and marked by a sense of respect for the 
European Parliament and the prerogatives of his 
function as enshrined in the Treaty.  Addressing the 
press in his statement and the question period in 
Portuguese, French and English, Barroso emphasized 
that his nomination was made by consensus.  He 
stressed the need for a strong Commission that 
respects \"all sensibilities in the European project\" 
and insisted that \"all conditions are there for such 
a project. 
 
6.  With the July 29 press reporting pressures on 
Barroso from France and Germany to secure top 
economic portfolios in his team, the nominee said he 
would be happy to listen to \"suggestions\" but 
insisted that the allocation of portfolios would be 
his \"sole responsibility.\"  To make things clear, he 
referred to Treaty provisions concerning the role of 
the Commission President.  He encouraged colleagues 
to propose the best candidates and especially to 
propose women as candidates.  Pending his 
confirmation, he said he was simply not in a 
position to express any position nor to give any 
undertaking with respect to portfolios.  With 
respect to the EU and its operation, Barroso 
developed a motto of \"fairness,\" highlighting the 
need for \"balance\" between big and small, rich and 
poor, the center and the periphery.  His concept of 
the Union was \"based on the principle of solidarity\" 
(read: financial transfers to poorer members). 
Barroso backed the Commission\'s proposal for the 
2007-2013 EU financial framework. 
 
NEXT STEPS 
---------- 
 
7.  Assuming Barroso passes the test of the European 
Parliament on July 22 (and we believe he will), the 
focus will turn to the formation of his team (one 
Commissioner per Member State).  The EU governments 
(excluding Portugal), in consultation with the 
President-designate, will each nominate the person 
they propose to appoint as member of the new 
Commission.  The Council will draw up a list of the 
24 designated Commissioners.  The President- 
designate will then announce the allocation of 
portfolios among the Commissioners-designate.  The 
EP will hold hearings of the proposed Commission 
members on September 27-October 1 and October 4-8. 
Following that, the President-designate and the 
other members of the Commission will be subject as a 
body to a confirmation vote by the EP (Parliament 
has no power to refuse individual members).  The EU 
Council will then formally appoint the President and 
the other members of the Commission.  This can 
happen by qualified majority. 
 
WHEN THE MUSIC STOPS: EXIT VITORINO 
----------------------------------- 
 
8.  The main victim of the leaders\' choice of 
Barroso as Commission President will be current JHA 
Commissioner Vitorino, who cannot be reappointed to 
the Commission this fall as his country is only 
entitled to have one national in the team.  The 
current Spanish Commissioner, Joaquin Almunia, now 
holding responsibility for economic and monetary 
affairs, is expected to be reappointed.  However, as 
Member States will only be allowed to have one 
Commissioner each, Almunia would have to step down 
if/when Solana combines the job of Commission Vice- 
President and EU FM (not before 2006). 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9.  Barroso\'s nomination was the result of a process 
of crossed vetoes of the leading candidates, leading 
to a desperate search for the candidate that would 
be acceptable to both the largest political group in 
the European Parliament and to all governments of 
the EU-25.  The deal ends two weeks of uncertainty, 
during whichsupporters and opponents of unofficial 
candidates were pitted against each other in a 
behind-the-scenes process in which views on the EU\'s 
future were not given primary consideration and 
exposure, fueling criticism on the lack of 
transparency of the nomination process. 
 
10.  Barroso is on the record as saying he is no 
visionary: \"I\'m a reformist, not a revolutionary, a 
centrist, not a free-market fundamentalist.\"  To 
judge from his initial comments, he can be expected 
to develop a vision of the EU based on strong, equal 
rights for Member States as well as well-funded EU 
policies to reduce internal disparities and enhance 
the EU\'s profile.  The new President will have to 
manage integration of the ten new Member States, and 
also prepare for the next wave of enlargement into 
the Western Balkans.  EU leaders are due to decide 
in December, just weeks after he takes office, 
whether to open accession talks with Turkey.  But 
drafting the Commission\'s opinion will not be his 
responsibility.  As for the organization of his 
team, Barroso may be expected to appoint up to five 
Vice-Presidents to run clusters of Commissioners in 
a more pyramidal management structure. 
 
11.  We defer to Embassy Lisbon for a fuller 
analysis of Barosso, and will be interested in any 
insights Lisbon might offer on key advisors likely 
to move with Barosso to Brussels.  Though presented 
as \"largely unknown outside Portugal,\" Barroso is 
perceived in well-informed EU circles as a market- 
oriented reformer who imposed strict austerity 
measures on his country upon taking office in 2002 
after Portugal became in breach of EU rules on 
budget deficits.  He is seen here as a staunch 
defender of the EMU Stability and Growth Pact 
underpinning the euro.  In spite of his record at 
home, Barroso objects to capping EU spending (of 
which his country is a major beneficiary), which may 
put him on a collision course with major EU budget 
funders and net contributors (Germany, France, 
Netherlands, in particular).  He may soon have to 
guide his Commission through difficult choices 
between assisting the newcomers and preserving flows 
of EU structural aid to poorer members among the 
former EU-15, including his home country. 
 
12.  A supporter of stronger ties with the U.S. and 
promoter of a strong NATO, Barroso also wants bigger 
investment in the European military:  \"Europe cannot 
be an economic elephant and a military pygmy,\" he 
once said.  \"The transatlantic relationship must be 
revitalized.  This is...a task for political 
decision-makers on both sides of the ocean we 
share,\" Barroso said in a speech in October 2003. 
\"Our planet will be much better if Europe and the 
United States work together and worse off if this 
doesn\'t happen.\" 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"18316","7/1/2004 11:49","04BRUSSELS2828","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE142628","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 002828 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/SCE, S/WCI 
TREASURY OFAC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, EFIN, ETTC, EUN, KWAC, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: OPERATION BALKAN VICE IV: EU RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 142628 
 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 903 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Maren Smith for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d 
). 
 
1.  (C) We met on June 30 with Council and Commission 
representatives to discuss ref A demarche.  Council 
Secretariat Director for the Western Balkans, Eastern Europe, 
 
SIPDIS 
and Central Asia Stefan Lehne and desk officer Helene 
Holm-Pedersen had no comment on the four entities mentioned 
in our demarche, but did note that the EU had recently added 
new people -- all of whom were directly linked to Karadzic -- 
to its visa ban list.  They said that asset freezes were 
unlikely due to EU and member-state legal constraints, but 
Holm-Pedersen suggested that the incoming Dutch Presidency 
would take a particularly strong interest in this issue.  She 
added that there is an EU measure in the works relating to 
the assets of actual indictees (not just supporters or people 
linked to suspects) (ref B).  As it requires formal 
consultation with the European Parliament, the 13 June 
elections and consequent changes in the EP have slowed the 
process.  After the EP has been consulted, the measure will 
return to the Council, where Holm-Pedersen foresaw no 
problems with its final approval. 
 
2.  (C) Patrick Rock, External Relations Commissioner Chris 
Patten\'s cabinet adviser on Balkans issues, pointed to the 30 
June EU statement offering full support for Ashdown\'s actions 
in Bosnia earlier in the day and stressing the need for full 
cooperation with the Tribunal.   Regarding visa bans, Rock 
thought that it was possible that the EU would follow the 
U.S. and add additional names recommended by Ashdown.  He was 
firm, however, in saying that the EU was not able to freeze 
assets of ICTY indictee support networks, which he attributed 
to legal issues in some member states.  Although the 
presidency country could not change member-state law, Rock 
did feel that the Dutch might be able to take a more active 
approach and encouraged our raising the issue with them. 
Rock said that the EU\'s Western Balkans Working Group (COWEB) 
would almost certainly consider the demarche at its next 
meeting and remarked that the UK \"could often be helpful.\" 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"18323","7/1/2004 13:52","04BRUSSELS2838","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04LISBON1047","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002838 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, STATE PLEASE PASS DOJ FOR BURROWS AND 
SWARTZ, PLEASE PASS DHS FOR A/S VERDERY AND U/S HUTCHINSON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT PRESIDENT\'S CALL ON AMBASSADOR 
SCHNABEL 
 
REF: A. A) LISBON 1047 
 
     B. B) BRUSSELS 2794 
     C. C) USEU TODAY 06/28/04 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 2518 
     E. E) BRUSSELS 2360 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASON 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  In a June 30 call on Ambassador Schnabel, 
outgoing European Parliament (EP) President Pat Cox defended 
his decision to ask the European Court of Justice (ECJ) to 
annul the U.S.-EU agreement on PNR data sharing, and denied 
that his press statement on that decision, released in 
Ireland on the eve of the Dublin U.S.-EU Summit, was unduly 
critical of the U.S.  Cox also discussed Portuguese Prime 
Minister Jose Manuel Durao Barroso\'s \"good, but not certain\" 
chances of receiving EP approval of his appointment as 
European Commission President (ref C).  Cox said Barroso 
would spend much of July drumming up EP support, 
concentrating on the Socialist Group (PES) and the Liberal 
Democrats (ELDR), both of whom were likely to play \"hard to 
get.\"  The EP vote on Barroso\'s nomination -- which we expect 
Barroso will win -- is scheduled for July 22.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------- 
PNR: COX DEFENDS HIS DECISION 
----------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Ambassador Schnabel told Cox his announcement that 
he would initiate an ECJ challenge to the U.S.-EU PNR deal 
hours before the President,s arrival in Ireland, as well as 
his calling U.S. Homeland Security efforts 
&extraterritorial8 was poorly received in Washington.  On 
the timing Cox said that given the vote of the EP Legal 
Affairs Committee the previous week, he, as EP President 
could either decide to announce the Parliament,s demands 
when he did or wait to bring the matter again before the next 
EP plenary session the week of July 20-23 (which will be the 
newly elected EP\'s first plenary session).  He had spoken 
with party leaders, none of whom had changed their decision, 
and decided it would be better to announce the action when he 
did rather than open a new plenary debate at the next session 
involving many new members who would be very unfamiliar with 
the issue, as well as a crush of new business including the 
selection of new committees and the votes on the new 
Commission and Parliament Presidents. 
 
3. (SBU) Cox defended his use of the term 
&extraterritorial8 as an accurate description of U.S. 
legislation that was also completely justified, and he added 
that European data protection legislation was just as 
extraterritorial.  Completing the defense he called for 
improved legislator-to-legislator dialogue to provide early 
warning on issues such as this, perhaps through the 
Transatlantic Legislators Dialogue. 
 
4. (SBU)  On the case itself, Cox contradicted reports USEU 
has received from Commission, Parliament, and Council lawyers 
by noting that the Parliament,s best chance for success 
comes from its action against the Council for concluding the 
International Agreement with the U.S. as part of the PNR 
deal. 
 
----------------------------- 
BARROSO STILL FACES EP HURDLE 
----------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Cox then moved on to an analysis of Jose Manuel 
Durao Barroso\'s chances of receiving EP confirmation as 
Commission President.  The requisite EP approval of his 
appointment, by a simple majority vote, is scheduled for July 
22.  Barroso, from the center-right, will likely receive 
nearly unanimous approval of the largest party group, the 
center-right European People\'s Party (EPP-ED), which will 
have approximately 279 members, or 38 percent of the 732 EP 
seats. (NOTE: Negotiations on party group membership are 
ongoing -- each party group\'s number of seats could change as 
a result; negotiations will probably continue until sometime 
in mid-July.  END NOTE.)  However, leaders of the EP 
Socialist Group (PES), the second largest party group in the 
EP with an estimated 199 seats (27 percent), have publicly 
criticized Barroso\'s nomination.  They have said the PES 
would vote on the basis of Barroso\'s qualifications for the 
job, and that Barroso does not appear to meet those 
qualifications.  Members of the third largest party group, 
the Liberal-Democrats (ELDR), which will form the core of a 
new \"centrist\" group called \"Alliance of Liberals and 
Democrats for Europe\" of approximately 80 seats (11 percent) 
after party realignment negotiations are finished (refs D-E), 
have also expressed misgivings about Barroso. 
 
6. (C) Cox said that both the PES and the ELDR would play 
\"hard to get\" for a while, but that most of the members of 
these groups would likely end up voting for Barroso.  Cox 
said Barroso would meet with EP party groups and their 
leaders in Brussels during the week beginning July 12.  On 
July 15, Barroso, Cox and EP leaders will be in The Hague to 
kick off the Dutch EU presidency.  There, Cox said, he might 
arrange further meetings between Barroso and EP leaders.  Cox 
said he expected Barroso to gain significant support within 
the PES and the ELDR as a result of both the Brussels and the 
Hague meetings.  Cox said he expected the PES ultimately to 
support Barroso for two reasons: (1) there will be pressure 
to do so from center-left heads of government, such as German 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, who support Barroso; and (2) 
the PES will likely cut a deal with the EPP-ED on the EP 
presidency, with a PES member becoming EP President for the 
first half of the coming five-year term; this deal will make 
it difficult for the PES to turn around and refuse to support 
Barroso, the EPP-ED candidate for Commission President.  The 
ELDR, said Cox (who is himself an ELDR member), may prove a 
tougher nut to crack.  Cox said the fourth and fifth largest 
groups in the EP, the Greens and the far-left EUL/NGL (with 
an estimated total of 79 seats -- 10.8 percent) are likely to 
vote against Barroso. 
 
--------------------------------- 
BARROSO\'S FRANCO-GERMAN CHALLENGE 
--------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Cox also commented on Germany\'s and France\'s attempts 
to claim specific Commission portfolios.  Cox lauded 
Barroso\'s response that the assignment of Commission 
portfolios would be his (Barroso\'s) decision, despite the 
German push to appoint Guenter Verheugen (current Enlargement 
Commissioner) as \"super Commissioner\" for economic reform, 
and France\'s desire to give Jacques Barrot (current 
Commissioner for Regional Policy) the Competition portfolio. 
Cox said that, with the Franco-German push publicly known, 
Barroso now already faced a crucial first challenge to his 
authority: he would be seen as being \"in the Franco-German 
pocket\" if he acquiesced. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
COX ON VERHOFSTADT, PATTEN AND EU \"JIHADISTS\" 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Cox said the aspirations of Belgian Prime Minister Guy 
Verhofstadt and outgoing External Relations Commissioner 
Chris Patten for the Commission presidency had been doomed 
from the start by the \"jihadist\" way the EU goes about 
choosing a Commission President.  He said Verhofstadt\'s 
misfortune was being known as the Chirac-Schroeder candidate 
-- the UK would not accept that; Patten, as the UK 
alternative to Verhofstadt, met with the inevitable rejection 
of France and Germany.  Thus, said Cox, \"they both had to be 
taken out back and shot.\"  Cox said he had talked to both men 
during their \"candidacies.\"  Verhofstadt, said Cox, fully 
expected to get the nod.  Verhofstadt was \"devastated\" when 
his candidacy was rejected.  Patten, on the other hand, was a 
\"very relaxed\" candidate who allowed others to throw his hat 
into the ring but never expected, nor necessarily wanted, to 
get the job. 
 
9. (C) COMMENT: On PNR, Cox was probably correct when he told 
the Ambassador he had limited ability to affect the decision 
to take our PNR deal to the ECJ, but his criticism of U.S. 
Homeland Security policy as &extraterritorial,8 as well as 
his choice of the place and timing of the announcement were 
clearly under his personal control.  On Barroso, we share 
Cox\'s analysis.  We believe that Barroso will be approved by 
the Parliament, and that his handling of the Franco-German 
push for key Commission portfolios will be an initial acid 
test of his Commission presidency.  END COMMENT. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"18374","7/2/2004 14:31","04BRUSSELS2859","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE145203","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 002859 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/02/2014 
TAGS: ETTC, PREL, CU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: CUBA -- EU RESPONSE ON LIBERTAD ACT TITLE III 
DETERMINATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 145203 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Maren Smith for reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
1.  (C)  We discussed reftel points with Karl Buck, Head of 
the Council Secretariat\'s Latin America Division, on July 2. 
Buck immediately asserted that he had not heard of any such 
paper but could not exclude the possibility of some 
member-states having prepared their own reports.  The EU 
would discuss relations with Cuba at its regularly-scheduled 
July 6 Latin America Working Group meeting; Buck expected a 
few member-states to raise specific issues, which could 
include concerns about U.S. policy.  Asked whether he thought 
the PSC might discuss Cuba the same day, he said that 
although the issue was primarily economic rather than 
political, he could not rule out the possibility that the PSC 
would consider it.  We re-emphasized that the U.S. was still 
analyzing current policies toward Cuba and had not made any 
decisions yet regarding Title III suspension.   Buck replied 
that the U.S.-EU Understanding had worked very well, and 
added that he hoped \"we were not entering very dangerous 
ground.\" 
 
2.  (C)  Points were also shared with the Dutch PSC 
Ambassador. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"18554","7/9/2004 9:00","04BRUSSELS2930","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 002930 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, ETRD, CU, VE, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU RESPONSE ON LIBERTAD TITLE III AND VENEZUELA 
REFERENDUM 
 
REF: A. STATE 147536 
     B. THE HAGUE 1700 
     C. USEU BRUSSELS 2859 
     D. STATE 145203 
 
Classified By: PolOff Rick Holtzapple, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) The European Commission is still considering whether 
or not to send an election observer mission to Venezuela. 
The EU also remains concerned about the possible outcome of 
the White House decision on suspension of Title III of the 
LIBERTAD Act.  The EU still plans to raise this issue at the 
US-EU Task Force and, possibly, Political Directors\' meetings 
next week in Brussels.  The EU will likely contend that 
anything but a blanket suspension covering all EU Member 
States will be a reversal of the US-EU 1998 understanding on 
this issue.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU) Following up on Ref C, we delivered Ref A points on 
Venezuela to Karl Buck, Head of the Council Secretariat\'s 
Latin America Division, on July 7, and sought a readout of 
the July 6 Latin America Working Group (COLAT) discussions of 
Cuba.  We also discussed Ref A points on Cuba with Council US 
desk officer Margarita Comamala on July 8. 
 
VENEZUELA 
--------- 
 
3. (SBU) According to Buck, Caracas had agreed \"after some 
pushing\" to an EU exploratory mission (advance referendum 
observer team), which the EU \"absolutely requires\" before 
sending a final mission.  Buck said that Commissioner Chris 
Patten will decide if the final mission will go. 
 
CUBA/LIBERTAD 
------------- 
 
4. (C) The COLAT discussed Cuba in some detail.  Buck 
reported that there had been a \"mix of confusion and 
astonishment\" following what he described as \"informal 
demarches\" from the US in a couple of member-state capitals. 
The follow-on points from Washington (Ref D) -- explaining 
that there was, in fact, no decision on whether Title III 
suspension would be on country-by-country basis instead of 
the EU\'s current blanket waiver -- had clarified the 
situation.  He said that the EU approach -- shared by all 25 
member-states -- is based on the Union\'s Common Position.  He 
repeated his caution about undoing the US-EU 1998 
understanding (Ref C) and expressed optimism about a positive 
Title III decision vis-a-vis the EU. 
 
5.  (C) Buck told us that the EU will raise Title III in the 
\"any other business\" part of the July 13 US-EU Political 
Directors\' meeting (in order to chime in one more time before 
the decision on Title III suspension is announced on July 
16).  Comamala, who is involved in planning the agendas for 
both meetings, clarified that, while EU participants might 
raise the issue in the July 13 PolDirs, the Secretariat\'s 
view was that this was more of an economic issue, and 
therefore the EU preferred to have more substantive 
discussion of the issue in the July 14 US-EU Task Force 
meeting.  Comamala stressed that the EU\'s position was that 
anything other than a blanket suspension covering all of the 
EU would be a reversal of the 1998 understanding under which, 
she said, the EU had agreed to suspend any WTO case against 
the Helms-Burton law. 
 
6. (SBU) COLAT participants also discussed Havana\'s recent 
release of six additional prisoners.  Although this was, in 
Buck\'s view, a positive move, he stressed that the EU did not 
currently intend to issue a public statement because it 
maintained that all political prisoners -- not just six -- 
had to be released. 
 
7. (SBU) Finally, Buck reported that he had given the COLAT a 
brief presentation on the Report of the Commission for 
Assistance to a Free Cuba (CAFC), which led to some general 
discussion. He asked us for further information on when 
President Bush might decide which CAFC proposals to implement. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"18555","7/9/2004 9:06","04BRUSSELS2931","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE147536","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002931 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, IZ, AF, HA, BM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: COMMISSION PERSPECTIVE ON JULY 12 GAERC 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 147536 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. B) THE HAGUE 1700 
     C. C) SCHOFER-HOLTZAPPLE 7/8/04 EMAIL 
     D. D) USEU BRUSSELS 2897 (NOTAL) 
     E. E) REIDHEAD-KOSTELANCIK 7/7/04 EMAIL 
     F. F) LITZENBERGER-DIBBLE 7/8/04 EMAIL 
 
Classified By: PolOff Rick Holtzapple, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) Commission officials tell us the July 12 General 
Affairs and External Relations Council (GAERC) meeting will 
not see many serious decisions before the EU FMs.  A featured 
item would be a lunch discussion with Iraqi PM Allawi (which 
we now understand may be cancelled or postponed).  The 
principal decision before the GAERC (as noted ref B) is how 
the EU will handle Burmese pariticipation at the October ASEM 
Summit. End Summary. 
 
IRAQ 
---- 
 
2. (SBU) PolOff delivered ref A points on July 8 to Nick 
Banner of External Relations Commissioner Patten\'s staff. 
Banner indicated (\"it may take a while\") the Commission was 
not likely to open an office in Baghdad soon, due to the 
security situation. He said Patten expected some Member 
States would push for the Commission to at least send an 
\"exploratory mission\" to Iraq, and that Patten was prepared 
to listen to the arguments for that.  Regarding Iraqi PM 
Allawi\'s planned lunch appearance, Banner said the EU FMs 
would be particularly interested to hear Allawi\'s plans for 
the national conference and the overall democratization 
process, as well as how the IIG planned to address the 
security situation.  (NOTE: Subsequent to our meeting, we now 
understand from The Hague - ref C - that Allawi may not make 
the GAERC.  It remains possible, but not at all certain, that 
the Iraqi FM may appear in his place.) 
 
AFGHANISTAN 
----------- 
 
3. (C) Banner said the EU aimed to \"do what we can to give 
credibility\" to the electoral process.  The Commission is 
working on plans for electoral technical assistance in Kabul. 
 But in the provinces, from the Commission\'s perspective, it 
would \"just not be safe enough to send long term election 
observers.\"  Banner stressed this was the Commission\'s 
assessment regarding an EU mission; it is not meant to 
prejudge what the OSCE would decide to do.  He commented that 
at least some EU member states were likely to push for an 
OSCE mission (Commission South Asia Director Julian Wilson 
has underscored - ref E - that while the EC\'s electoral 
support would be more limited than originally hoped due to 
security concerns, they had no intent to dissuade the OSCE or 
others from doing what they could.) 
 
BURMA/ASEM 
---------- 
 
4. (C) Banner commented that back in March, at the ASEM 
ministerial in Ireland, the EU had laid out its conditions 
for accepting full Burmese participation at the EU-ASEM 
Summit in Hanoi this October, including a credible structure 
(with NLD participation) for the national conference and 
release of Aung San Suu Kyi.  At the recent ARF meeting, the 
EU had been told by its Asian counterparts that ASEAN was 
prepared to accept an EU-ASEM Summit format where Burma would 
only attend at a much lower level than head of state or 
government.  The EU was now deliberating on whether it would 
accept such an arrangement, with some still holding out for a 
tougher line, refusing any Burmese participation until some 
positive moves are made by Rangoon -- but that would almost 
certainly mean cancellation of the Hanoi Summit.  Banner 
commented that one source of EU confusion on this issue was 
that the Dutch Presidency itself appeared divided on the 
proper course to recommend. 
 
NEW ITEMS: SUDAN, HAITI, ISRAEL; ENP DROPPED 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Banner said that the GAERC might endorse some 
additional humanitarian assistance for the Darfur crisis in 
Sudan.  He did not have a figure, but per our discussions 
with other EU officials (Ref D), we believe it could be 40 
million euros.  The EU FMs will also discuss Haiti, with 
France pushing for the Commission to commit more assistance 
funds, something Banner said was unlikely in the immediate 
future.  A final GAERC item (added on July 8, also at French 
insistence) was the EU\'s response to a recent refusal by the 
Israeli government to receive the Quartet envoys (ref F). 
Banner said GAERC Conclusions regretting the Israeli stance 
were possible, but little more than that. 
6. (SBU) Banner also said that the European Neighborhood 
Policy (ENP) Action Plans had been dropped from the GAERC 
agenda, because the only one that was ready was with Moldova. 
 The Commmission preferred to postpone the discussion until 
an autumn GAERC, when it hoped to have ready additonal Action 
Plans with Jordan, Morocco, and possibly Ukraine, Israel and 
the Palestinian Authority. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"18569","7/9/2004 14:40","04BRUSSELS2938","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS1870","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002938 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, ETRD, PGOV, CY, GR, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: NEW COMMISSION PROPOSALS FOR NORTHERN CYPRUS 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 01870 
 
     B. NICOSIA 01288 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) On July 7, EU Enlargement Commissioner Gunter 
Verheugen presented the Commission\'s plan fulfill the EU\'s 
pledge to end the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community 
following their support for the Annan Plan.  The two main 
proposals are: 1) a new \"preferential trade regime\" allowing 
direct trade between northern Cyprus and EU Member States, 
including the rest of Cyprus; and 2) an EU aid package of 259 
million euros to be spent in the North and dedicated 
primarily to infrastructure development and alignment with EU 
legislation and policies.  Verheugen emphasized the political 
significance of the package, and acknowledged that the EU has 
a special obligation to Turkish Cyprus following its approval 
of the UN reunification plan, which was rejected by the 
South.  In discussions with us, Commission officials have 
said this package represents all that the Commission can do 
for the north. 
 
2.  (U) Summary (continued): The aid package should win 
unanimous Council backing, although the means of delivering 
the aid has still to be sorted out.  The trade package is 
more controversial, as Commissioner Verheugen is attempting 
to use a qualified majority vote (QMV) procedure which 
neutralizes the influence of Cyprus and Greece on the 
package.  For this reason the trade proposals are already 
facing stiff opposition from the Greek Cypriots and from 
Greece itself, who argue, despite Verheugen\'s assurances to 
the contrary, that direct trade with the North will entail 
the tacit recognition of Turkish authorities. Nicosia has 
indicated considerable dissatisfaction with Verheugen\'s 
QMV-based approach, and has expressed its determination to 
oppose the trade proposals in the European Court of Justice 
(ECJ).  END SUMMARY. 
 
PREFERENTIAL TRADE REGIME 
------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) The Commission\'s proposal would establish direct 
trade between Turkish Cyprus and the EU under a preferential 
regime.  The Commission says that this \"should take the form 
of a tariff quota system.\"   Goods originating in Northern 
Cyprus would have to be labeled as such, and measures would 
be in place  to prevent what the Commission calls \"artificial 
trade patterns\" (i.e., transshipped goods from Turkey). 
Responsibility for this and for regulating exports in general 
would rest with the Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce. 
Additionally, the Commission proposal sets rules on taxation, 
food and product safety, inspections, and communication 
obligations, which the Turkish Cypriots would have to abide 
by.  Finally, the Commission would allow ports of Northern 
Cyprus, for the first time since 1974, to reopen to 
commercial traffic with the EU. 
 
SUBSTANTIAL AID PACKAGE 
----------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) The Commission has proposed a total package of 259 
million euros for 2004-2006, and the Council has previously 
approved this figure.  The Commission says the money will be 
directed towards aligning Turkish areas with EU regulations 
and law, programs to improve contacts between the North and 
the South, social and economic developments, and 
infrastructure improvements.  Verheugen singled out water 
treatment, tourism, agriculture, and small and medium sized 
enterprises as special areas of interest. 
 
APPROVAL LIKELY, BUT IT\'S NEVER EASY 
------------------------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) The Council is likely to approve the Commission\'s 
aid package, and the money should begin flowing into northern 
Cyprus in the near future.  The idea of providing aid is 
accepted by all in principle.  The real question is the 
degree to which Nicosia will seek to influence allocation 
decisions and methods. Notably, Verheugen said the Commission 
had not decided which delivery mechanism to use.  This is 
significant because the method of distribution promises to be 
a source of debate in the Council, as it was last time the 
Commission\'s aid proposal was discussed (REF A).  The 
Commission wants to be able to disburse the funds independent 
of the Cyprus government in Nicosia, while the latter wants a 
hand in deciding how the money will be spent.  Whether or not 
the EU will open a liaison office in the North remains an 
open question.  A member of Commissioner Patten\'s cabinet 
told us that the two most serious options under consideration 
are either an \"ad hoc\" agency with an office in northern 
Cyprus, or administering the aid via the European Agency for 
Reconstruction based in Thessaloniki, which currently runs 
Commission aid programs for Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro, 
and Macedonia.  Cyprus is concerned that a EU liaison office 
would imply tacit recognition of the Turkish Cypriot 
authorities.  While the Council (and therefore the Cypriot 
government) will have a say in this decision, the Commission 
expects to be able to implement whichever course it chooses. 
 
6. (SBU) The Commission\'s trade proposal is even more 
controversial.  Verheugen\'s decision to use Article 133 of 
the EU\'s treaties as the \"legal basis\" for the package -- 
which specifies that trade agreements with non-EU states are 
to be approved by qualified majority voting in the Council -- 
means that the measures should be easily passed in Council. 
But it is a highly contentious approach for Cyprus and 
Greece, who argue that Article 133 cannot be used for a 
territory that is legally part of the EU.  The Greek Cypriots 
have voiced their determination to challenge the Commission 
at the ECJ; and it is by no means certain that the Commission 
\'s proposed regulation would survive the court challenge. 
Our Commission contact pointed out, however, that the new 
trade arrangement should remain in effect while an ECJ ruling 
is pending, and the ECJ \"generally takes years to decide 
cases.\"  He also noted that Greek Cypriot motivations for 
their legal arguments about the applicability of Article 133 
are transparent, since Nicosia would almost certainly block 
the trade package under a consensus procedure, unless the key 
element -- the opening of direct trade between the north and 
the rest of the EU -- were withdrawn. 
 
IMPACT ON TURKISH CANDIDACY 
--------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Our Commission contact noted that there was now 
overwhelming pessimism within the EU regarding the prospects 
for progress toward a Cyprus settlement prior to the EU 
Summit\'s decision in Decemeber on whether to open accession 
negotiations with Turkey.  But he did not expect a continued 
divison of Cyprus to be an obstacle to a favorable decision, 
for all but Nicosia.  (NOTE: As Ref B explains, a settlement 
on Cyprus is a distinct issue from whether Turkey is treating 
the Republic of Cyprus, a full EU member, in a 
non-discriminatory manner.  On that question, we agree with 
Embassy Nicosia\'s assessment that Nicosia\'s legal arguments 
enjoy broad EU support.  End Note.)  While he noted that 
Greek PM Karamanlis had \"not been doing much to stand up to\" 
the Greek Cypriots, Athens was expected to be generally 
supportive of Turkey\'s candidacy.  But there was far less 
certainty about what Cypriot President Papadopoulos might do. 
 Most worrisome to him was that it appeared there would be no 
domestic political price for Papadopoulos to pay if he 
blocked Turkey solely on the basis of a lack of a 
reunification agreement for the island.  It would lead to the 
risk of a Cypriot government isolated within the EU, but 
stronger at home. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8.  (SBU) From our discussions with EU officials and the 
press reports coming out of Brussels, it is clear that the 
Cyprus government\'s intransigence over the Commission 
proposals continues to raise hackles in the Commission. 
While Turkish Cypriot authorities continue to benefit from 
post-referendum good will in Brussels, the reality of EU 
institutional functioning limits the ability of the 
Commission to play a strong hand in attempting to reward them 
for their yes vote on the Annan plan.  The Commission is 
hoping to proceed as quickly as possible to improve economic 
conditions for the people of the north, despite fierce 
resistance from Nicosia.  But the Commission is probably at 
the limit of what it will be able to do.  It may even prove 
to be beyond that limit; while Verheugen\'s effort to channel 
trade through QMV is clever strategy, it is not clear that it 
will in the end be able to survive a challenge at the ECJ. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"18582","7/9/2004 15:56","04BRUSSELS2944","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 002944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, ETRD, ZL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU CONSTRAINED ON NEXT STEPS WITH SERBIA 
 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 B/D 
 
ICTY COOPERATION 
----------------- 
 
1. (C) PolOff spoke on July 8 with Stefan Lehne, Solana\'s key 
advisor on the Balkans, almost immediately after Lehne\'s 
return from Belgrade, where he had attended the Contact Group 
session with U/S Grossman.  Lehne said that in his separate 
meetings with Serb officials the GoS was focused on the 
Mladic issue, a priority that tracked closely with the 
message delivered by U/S Grossman in the Contact Group 
meeting.  Lehne noted that he \"worried a bit\" about the focus 
on Mladic, because of the risk that it might turn out that 
\"the guy is not there.\"  He drew a distinction with the EU\'s 
approach on the ICTY cooperation issue, which has been to (as 
in the Croatia case) to say that the necessary condition is 
to satisfy ICTY.  From the EU perspective, \"the issue is what 
Del Ponte and Meron say.\"  The same principle would apply to 
the possibility of transferring cases for domestic 
prosecution.  The EU would not get involved in negotiations 
with Belgrade on this; and if ICTY agrees to the strategy, 
the EU would go along. 
 
LIMITED EU CARROTS 
------------------ 
 
2. (C) But Lehne acknowledged it is an open question what the 
EU could do even if the Serbs attained a clean bill of health 
from Del Ponte.  The Commission\'s feasibility study for a 
Stability and Association Agreement (SAA) is being held up on 
three conditions: ICTY cooperation; effective implementation 
of the Internal Market Action Plan, especially regarding 
tariffs; and a functioning state Union.  The third criteria 
was flexible and somewhat subjective, but even if Belgrade 
satisfied ICTY, the Commission would still face the hurdle of 
the tariff issue.  And that problem, Lehne said, is as stuck 
as ever, with Montenegro\'s Djukanovic hardening his line.  In 
Lehne\'s view Djukanovic, worried about failure in an 
independence referendum, was just trying to annoy Belgrade so 
much that the Serbs would tell Montenegro to leave.  This was 
a serious miscalculation, Lehne thought, as neither Kostunica 
nor Tadic appeared inclined to see Montenegro become 
independent. 
 
3. (C) This situation leaves the EU with a limited supply of 
carrots for Serbia.  There is no prospect of serious 
additional cash in the EU\'s CARDS assistance program, and SAA 
negotiations will remain bogged down over the dysfunctional 
Belgrade-Podgorica relationship.  Beyond supportive rhetoric 
about Serbia\'s European future (such as we are told to expect 
from the Conclusions of the July 12 EU FMs\' meeting), there 
is not much the EU can do.  (We heard much the same 
perspective last week from the Dutch chair of the EU\'s 
Balkans working group.)  Two possible sweeteners may be 
available, but still need more negotiation.  One is possible 
resolution of the ongoing EU-SaM dispute about fraudulent 
sugar trade, which the Commission hopes may be solved by 
August, but on which the EU will find it hard to agree unless 
Belgrade improves its customs procedures.  Another would be 
conclusion of a textile trade agreement, but it appears this 
would take at least a couple more months. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
4. (C) The EU has a long list of things it would like to 
change about Belgrade.  ICTY cooperation is a big one, and 
remains a precondition for much else.  While not all Member 
States have taken such a reactive approach, it is clear the 
EU as a body has sub-contracted out to ICTY the decision on 
what specifically Belgrade must do."
"18630","7/13/2004 4:59","04BRUSSELS2971","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 002971 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU FMS\' LUNCH DISCUSSION WITH IRAQI FM ZEBARI 
 
 
1. (U) Iraqi Foreign Minister Zebari had a lunch discussion 
with EU FMs during their July 12 General Affairs and External 
Council Relations meeting in Brussels.  As described by Dutch 
FM and GAERC Chair Bernard Bot, EU support for Iraq is 
\"demand driven\" and therefore today\'s lunch was an 
opportunity for FM Zebari to indicate areas in which the EU 
could make a contribution, mentioning such areas as 
reconstruction, humanitarian assistance, elections, and 
administrative capacity.  In the formal GAERC Conclusions, 
the EU agreed to launch a political dialogue with the IIG 
(Bot said a meeting at head of government level was likely in 
September in New York); \"examine rapidly with the Iraqi 
Authorities and the UN the possible modalities of EU support 
for the preparation of elections\"; send an exploratory EU 
mission on rule of law assistance to Iraq \"if conditions 
permit\"; enhance the representation of the EU \"as 
circumstances permit\"; \"seek the views of the IIG on the 
possibility of an international meeting to support the 
transition\"; and invite the Commission to look into 
application of trade preferences under GSP. 
 
2. (SBU) FM Zebari told the press he had asked the EU to 
provide more aid and do so more flexibly.  He also stressed 
the IIG\'s interest in the EU increasing its political 
visibility in Iraq, including via the opening of an EU office 
in Baghdad. According to Belgian FM Michel\'s background 
briefing to the press, External Relations Commissioner Patten 
told Zebari that the EC was already very flexible in how it 
has applied the EU\'s rules on assistance.  Michel also 
reported that Patten noted concern that public procurement 
rules needed to be respected in Iraq, and that these 
procurements rules should be set by the IIG, not the 
Coalition.  In response to FMs\' queries about how Iraqi 
minorities would be involved in the political process, Michel 
said that Zebari replied by noting the role of the national 
conference in this issue, and asked the EU to help facilitate 
dialogue both among Iraqi factions and with neighboring 
states. 
 
3. (SBU) Several EU FMs are also reported to have raised 
concerns with Zebari about the restoration of the death 
penalty.  Zebari expressed his own personal distaste for 
capital punishment, but noted to EU ministers that under 
Saddam\'s regime there were over a hundred capital crimes, a 
number that would be reduced sharply by the new government. 
With the press, Zebari said he understood the EU\'s position, 
but that Iraq faces serious terrorist challenges, and the 
reality on the ground requires some tough decisions and 
actions to bring the security situation under control.  The 
issue was left unresolved, although may remain a point of 
discussion.  As Belgian FM Michel put it, \"we (the EU) will 
help them, but they have to respect human rights.\" 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"18631","7/13/2004 5:02","04BRUSSELS2972","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002972 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, MARR, IS, BM, AF, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: JULY 12 GAERC DISCUSSIONS: ISRAEL, BURMA, SUDAN, 
AFGHANISTAN, BALKANS 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (U) EU FMs at their July 12 General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC) meeting discussed several issues, 
but took few concrete decisions other than a 
non-controversial approval of a Joint Action to agree on 
Operation \"ALTHEA\" as an EU Military Operation following on 
NATO\'s SFOR in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  GAERC discussions on Iraq 
and the WTO Doha Round negotiations reported separately.  End 
Summary. 
 
ISRAEL/ICJ RULING 
----------------- 
 
2. (U) Dutch FM Bot told the press after the GAERC that the 
EU still needed to look carefully at the International Court 
of Justice ruling on Israel\'s security fence and \"achieve a 
common view on its political consequences.\"  The Dutch 
Presidency also reissued it\'s statement of July 9 on the ICJ 
case, which notes that \"it will now be up to the political 
bodies of the UN to decide how to act upon the Court\'s 
Advisory Opinion.\"  Bot stressed, however, that the fence 
issue should not be dealt with in isolation, but in the 
context of the road map. 
 
ASEM/BURMA 
---------- 
 
3. (SBU) EU FMs agreed to the Dutch proposal to name former 
FM Hans van den Broek as an envoy to Asia to try and reach an 
agreement on Burmese participation that could salvage the 
planned Asia-Europe Summit (ASEM) in Hanoi in October.  Van 
den Broek should be leaving on an Asian tour (with stops in 
at least Bangkok, Tokyo and Hanoi) in the next ten days.  He 
is then expected to report to the EU\'s informal ministerial 
(Gymnich) on September 3.  While the Presidency statement 
observes that \"efforts are required on both sides\", 
Commissioner Patten and others noted that the real need was 
for some improvement in Burma\'s human rights record, and so 
far there had been \"no progress\". 
 
SUDAN 
----- 
 
4. (U) FM Bot took strong exception to the \"impression that 
has been created that the EU is not doing enough\" about the 
situation in Sudan.  He argued that the EU was involved in 
mediating the cease-fire talks, had sent observers and was 
the largest donor of assistance.  He noted that the EU was 
still working on three fronts.  First, it continued to 
provide assistance, and earlier on July 12 the Commission had 
announced a further 18 million euros in aid.  Second, it 
would maintain political pressure via high-level visits by 
High Rep Solana and others to the region.  Finally, the EU 
was considering what sanctions it might utilize against the 
government.  On this last point, Bot said the EU would 
cooperate closely with the US, UN  and African Union.  He 
expressed the hope the Sudanese government was \"finally 
understanding\" the risks it was running. 
 
AFGHANISTAN 
----------- 
 
5. (SBU) We are told GAERC discussion of Afghanistan was 
\"very brief.\"  Commissioner Patten and others expressed 
concern about the limited progress to date in political 
stabilization and noted the risk that President Karzai might 
be \"tempted\" to make political deals with various \"warlords.\" 
 FM Bot said the EU \"regretted\" the postponement of 
parliamentary elections. 
 
BALKANS/OPERATION ALTHEA 
------------------------ 
 
6. (SBU) FMs had a lengthy discussion on the political 
situation in Serbia and Kosovo, but the debate was described 
to us as \"not very illuminating.\"  EU FMs also appointed 
Swedish diplomat Michael Sahlin to serve as EU Special 
Representative in Macedonia (replacing Soren Jessen-Pedersen, 
who is now head of the UN Mission in Kosovo).  After a very 
brief presentation by High Rep Solana, EU FMs without 
discussion approved the Joint Action authorizing a new EU 
military operation (Operation ALTHEA) in Bosnia to follow-on 
NATO\'s SFOR.  The EU\'s \"aim is to deploy by the end of the 
year a robust force with a Chapter VII mission.\"  (NOTE: In 
Greek, Althea means \"healer.\"  But we cannot help but be a 
bit surprised that the EU has named its Bosnia operation 
after a mythological figure best known for causing her son\'s 
death, and then hanging herself.  END NOTE.) 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
MCKINLEY 
"
"18656","7/13/2004 14:26","04BRUSSELS2983","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE151861","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002983 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EFIN, HA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: A/S WAYNE MEETING WITH COMMISSION ON HAITI 
 
REF: STATE 151861 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified, entire text. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  In a meeting with EB Assistant Secretary 
Wayne, Commission Development Director Sipke Brouwer 
explained the Commission would pledge approximately 160 
million Euros for Haiti over the next two years including up 
to 77 million Euros as non-project (more rapidly available) 
funds, with additional funds over the medium and longer term. 
 Wayne suggested contributing election support through the 
OAS, and the Commission agreed to consider that path. 
Brouwer noted member states would be led by the French 26 
million Euro contribution.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU)  EB Assistant Secretary Wayne accompanied by Kerri 
DiZoglio EB/IFD, and emboffs, met at DG Development with 
Sipke Brouwer, Director of West and Central Africa, the 
Caribbean, and Overseas Country Territories (OCTs). Brouwer 
was joined by John Calighorou, Head of Unit for Caribbean and 
OCTs, Lut Fabert-Goossens, Administrator, Caribbean at DG 
Development to discuss funding for Haiti in light of the 
upcoming July 19-20 Haiti Donors\' Conference. 
 
3.  (SBU) Wayne opened by explaining that the U.S. was 
concerned with the vast development and humanitarian needs in 
Haiti, including for short-term rehabilitation and 
operational needs, but was encouraged by progress made by the 
interim government thus far.  Wayne said, and the Commission 
agreed, that donors should learn from mistakes of the past 
and stay constructively engaged for a longer period of time. 
 Strong pledging at the Donors\' Conference is an important 
step. 
 
4.  (SBU) Brouwer reported that the Commission has 
approximately 160 million Euros to pledge for Haiti over the 
next two years coming from 3 sources: (1) 27 million Euros in 
existing funds are authorized and fully usable from the 
Eighth European Development Fund (EDF) and approximately 50 
million Euros from miscellaneous rehabilitation funds;  (2) 
72 million Euros of Ninth EDF Envelope A funds are subject to 
the Cotonou agreement with the GOH and therefore will be 
programmed through an agreed strategy and national indicative 
program. The funds under the Ninth EDF are conditioned on 
political progress and have been partially blocked.  They 
will be unblocked when free and fair elections are held in 
Haiti.  The unblocking process is at the Council level. 
These funds are usable for regular programs, under a strategy 
agreed to by GOH and the Commission after elections, once the 
situation is normalized; (3) 23 million in Ninth EDF Envelope 
B funds are not subject to the same programming procedure as 
Envelope A funds and can be applied to unexpected 
circumstances, humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation. 
The EU will provide these \"bridge funds\" if Haiti has the 
absorption capacity.  Envelope B may be increased as a result 
of a reallocation of funds through an ongoing a midterm 
review at DG Development. 
 
5.  (SBU) Brouwer explained DG Development has earmarked 10 
million Euros for elections, although the needs assessment 
stood at 30 million Euros. Wayne noted that the U.S. would 
contribute 13 million dollars for elections through the OAS. 
Brouwer agreed that the OAS had the experience and should 
take the lead on elections. 
 
6.  (SBU) A/S Wayne noted the apparent reservation of Member 
States to provide budgetary support, especially covering 
running expenses. He pointed out the broad definition used by 
the IMF, which includes emergency rehabilitation and 
operating expenses. Wayne said this could include support for 
education, such as by providing textbooks, and encouraged the 
Commission to urge member states to provide this kind of 
off-budget contribution, as well as providing EC funds. 
Wayne asked about additional contributions from member 
states.  Brouwer said the French would lead with about 26 
million Euros with lesser amounts from the others, including 
some from Germany. 
 
7.  (SBU) Wayne asked who from the Commission would attend 
the Donors Conference.  Brouwer said Commissioner Borg 
(pronounced \"borsh\"), the new Commissioner from Malta twinned 
to DG Development, would lead the Commission delegation. 
John Calighorou, Head of Unit for Caribbean and OCTs, Lut 
Fabert-Goossens, Administrator, Caribbean and the head of the 
EC Delegation in Port-au-Prince would also attend. 
 
8.  (SBU) Calighorou expressed concern over the absorption 
capacity of Haiti, citing that up to now it has been able to 
absorb 300-350 million Euros at best and the Donors\' 
Conference anticipates raising nearly twice that much (550 
million Euros per year, including IDB money). Wayne suggested 
that donors work with the IGOH and other donors to help build 
the government\'s capacity to absorb the additional aid and to 
assure good on the ground coordination mechanisms. 
 
9. (SBU) On humanitarian assistance, Fabert-Goossens said 
that ECHO, the EU\'s humanitarian agency, would continue to 
provide approximately 7.7 million Euros in humanitarian 
assistance each year over the next two years and food aid 
would also continue. 
 
10. (SBU) Comment:  The Commission officials were committed 
but need to be pushed on timing for committing and planning 
for use of funds.  In addition to pressing for funds to help 
meet the IMF identified operational needs, project funds will 
take time to plan and disburse, a process that we should 
begin before elections are completed. 
 
McKINLEY 
"
"18692","7/14/2004 12:03","04BRUSSELS3003","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB, NEA, AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/13/2009 
TAGS: EAID, PREL, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: IRAQ:  EC MEETING WITH A/S WAYNE 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C) In a July 8 meeting in Brussels, EB A/S Wayne 
discussed next steps on Iraq with Fenando Valenzuela, Deputy 
Director General for External Relations at the Commission. 
Valenzuela was accompanied by Patrick Laurent, Head of Gulf 
Countries and Barcelona process, Richard Wright, the EC\'s new 
Transatlantic guru, and Wright\'s Deputy, Americas desk head 
Gunnar Wiegand.  A/S Wayne thanked Valenzuela for the EC\'s 
cooperation from the start on Iraq\'s reconstruction, noted 
the positive discussion on Iraq at the recent U.S.-EU summit, 
and said the U.S. was looking ahead to the mid-October 
donors\' summit in Tokyo.  As the security situation 
stabilizes, A/S Wayne noted, the U.S. hopes to see the EC 
move back to Iraq.  Laurent noted the EC has just established 
an \"Iraq coordination cell\" in Amman.  Laurent added that 
member states \"want the EC in Iraq tomorrow,\" but Valenzuela 
said the Commission would be \"prudent\" due to continuing 
security concerns.  The EC wants to see what security steps 
the Interim Government (IIG) takes and what the UN decides 
regarding its presence in Iraq. 
 
Election Support 
------------- 
2.  (C)  Valenzuela asked how the U.S. sees Iraq\'s ability to 
build a technically competent bureaucracy; A/S Wayne 
responded that officials with recent experience in the West 
are few, and there is a great need for short term training, 
and advisors to build up expertise in the IIG.  Wayne also 
briefed on the status of election support, noting that the 
UN, which has the lead in organizing electoral assistance, is 
still working on a cost estimate.  Laurent said the EU has 
already committed 50 million Euros for election support 
through the UN trust fund, and is considering other options, 
from donating additional funds to more \"direct\" involvement 
through member states.  The balance, he said, was between 
having visibility in-country, and \"getting shot.\"  Valenzuela 
told A/S Wayne that he thought France and Germany were \"more 
forthcoming\" on Iraq at a recent EU Political Directors 
meeting, but that neither country was expected to rush in and 
provide assistance; rather they will wait and see how the 
security situation evolves. 
 
Security Remains #1 Issue for EC 
----------------------- 
3.  (C)  Laurent said one concern is that political observers 
predict that the security situation in Iraq will get worse 
before it gets better.  He said he was impressed by how well 
the UN and World Bank had been able to work from Amman by 
\"remote control;\" Valenzuela wondered what UNSYG Annan\'s 
thoughts were on when the UN might go back in Iraq.  Laurent 
said the attack on the UN headquarters had left a strong 
impression that soft targets are really under a threat; the 
opposition is intelligent and has a strategy.  A/S Wayne 
responded that, with the transfer of sovereignty, Iraqis are 
now in charge of their country.  This should make it harder 
for the opposition to recruit new members and, at the same 
time, make it easier for the IIG to fill government 
positions. In response to a question from Wayne, Laurent said 
the EC has now disbursed all of its previous pledge to the 
UN/World Bank trust funds, adding that the EC will remain 
vigilant with pressure on the fund managers to disburse funds 
and begin projects in coordination with the Iraqis. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"18705","7/14/2004 15:09","04BRUSSELS3010","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USNATO672","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003010 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/I AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2009 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU-IRAQ:  DUTCH SUGGEST ZEBARI LETTER TO EU TO 
SPUR ENGAGEMENT 
 
REF: USNATO 0672 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (U) Action Request:  See para three. 
 
2.  (C) Reftel tracks well with what Dutch MFA Political 
Director Hugo Siblesz told EUR A/S Jones during the July 13 
US-EU Political Directors meeting in Brussels (septel).  In 
an aside to US delegation on the margins of that meeting, 
Siblesz said he thinks the Interim Iraqi Government (IIG) 
would be very smart to have Zebari follow up quickly the 
strong impression he made on EU Foreign Ministers with a 
letter to the EU that offers specifics of what the IIG wants 
from the EU within the EU\'s parameters.  Siblesz also 
recommended ncluding in the letter, perhaps, an invitation 
for an exploratory EU visit to Baghdad, and/or a high level 
meeting.  The letter should be sent soon, before the European 
summer holidays diffuse momentum.  If a letter came soon, 
Siblesz said, the Dutch EU presidency could galvanize member 
states to get into practical and specific actions on the 
ground in Iraq. 
 
3.  (C)  Comment/Action Request:  This is an offer we should 
encourage the IIG to accept.  Request Washington consider 
passing this request to the IIG with a strong endorsement. 
The letter could be addressed to Dutch FM Ben Bot or EU High 
Rep Solana. 
 
4.  (U)  Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
McKinley 
"
"18814","7/16/2004 16:11","04BRUSSELS3055","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE153857","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003055 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PREF, PARM, MOPS, EAID, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN SUPPORT FOR AN AU PROTECTION FORCE FOR 
DARFUR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 153857 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.4(B)(D) 
 
(C) Mission delivered reftel points to Roger Moore, DG 
Development Acting Director Horn of Africa, East and Southern 
Africa, and Joaquim Salqueiro, DG Development Officer for 
Sudan.  We also followed up with Christoph Heusgen, who heads 
Hirep Javier Solana\'s Policy Unit.  Moore stated the EU 
supports, as it has in the past, the deployment of an African 
Union protection force.  Whether this develops into a broader 
AU force, he continued, depends wholly on AU initiative.  He 
thought it likely that the EU would provide funds as long as 
the political will could be maintained. The contribution of 
forces by the EU, however, remains questionable; neither 
Moore nor Salquiero seemed willing to discuss this as a 
possibility.  Heusgen told us it was highly unlikely. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
McKinley 
"
"18815","7/16/2004 16:13","04BRUSSELS3057","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE145183","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 003057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO USADI FOR RMT DARFUR; PPC SWIFT; NAIROBI FOR SFO 
ANDERSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, EAID, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EC FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR DARFUR CRISIS: DEMARCHE 
RESPONSE FOLLOW-UP 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 145183 
 
     B. BRUSSELS 02897 
 
1. (U) Following up on reftel demarche request for further 
information on EU funding initiatives, PRM Assistant and 
USAID Advisor for Humanitarian Assistance met with Javier 
Perez, ECHO desk officer for Sudan.  According to Perez, the 
EC has mobilized nearly 70.7 million Euros from different 
budget lines for Darfur, including 14 million Euros for 
Sudanese refugees in Chad. EC contributions to Darfur include 
12.4 million in contributions to the cease-fire, 44.3 million 
Euros for on-going humanitarian activities in Darfur, and 14 
million Euros for humanitarian activities in Chad for 
refugees from Darfur.  An additional 18.1 million Euros for 
humanitarian activities in Darfur is currently under 
preparation. This will bring the total to nearly 88.8 million 
Euros for Darfur and refugees in Chad. Included in this sum 
is the July 12 funding decision of 18 million Euros, which is 
to be channeled through the Humanitarian Aid Office of the 
European Commission, ECHO. 
 
 
2. (C) PRM Assistant also spoke with Roger Moore, DG 
Development Acting Director Horn of Africa, East and Southern 
Africa, and Joaquim Salqueiro, DG Development Officer for 
Sudan.  Moore confirmed earlier reports that a possible 
budgetary shift could account for an additional 40 million 
Euros to be made available within the next six months.  The 
shift would entail the transfer of monies from the A-Envelope 
of the European Development Fund (EDF), currently reserved 
for development funds subject to agreements with the 
receiving governement, to the B-envelope of the EDF, which 
includes, but is not limited to, emerging humanitarian and 
rehabilitation needs unhindered by such constraints.  This 
would set in motion funds that have been essentially hijacked 
by the lack of progress on the peace accord.  There remains 
nearly 450 million Euros in the EDF for development projects 
in Sudan. In light of this, Moore added that the total amount 
in the A-envelope would likely be reduced and partitioned to 
other regional projects.  He also intimated that it would not 
surprise him to see more budgetary shifts into humanitarian 
accounts for Sudan and Chad if prospects for peace remain 
elusive. 
 
3. (SBU) Regarding disbursements of the aforementioned 
funding initiatives, Salqueiro stated that it should not be 
much longer before money begins moving.  Specifically, he 
said that we should expect to see the disbursement of last 
month\'s pledge of 12 million Euros for the Peace Facility 
within the next two weeks, that the delay should not pose a 
problem since funding will be retroactive to expenses already 
incurred. 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
McKinley 
"
"18834","7/19/2004 7:11","04BRUSSELS3059","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

190711Z Jul 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 BRUSSELS 003059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/18/2009 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, MOPS, ETRD, MASS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: US-EU POLITICAL DIRECTORS LOOK AT UPCOMING ISSUES 
FOR DUTCH PRESIDENCY 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1. (C)  Summary.  US-EU Political Director consultations in 
Brussels on July 13 discussed a broad agenda including summit 
follow-up, and compared notes on Russia, Ukraine, Moldova 
and Central Asia.  EUR A/S Jones told the EU now is not the 
time to lift its arms embargo on China, and urged the EU, in 
its July 16 meeting with Russia, to raise the need for Russia 
and Georgia to \"engage politically and disengage militarily.\" 
 The EU, led by Dutch MFA Political Director Hugo Siblesz, 
briefed on Iraqi FM Zebari\'s very positive July 12 visit and 
discussed the need 
for the EU to raise its \"visibility\" in Iraq.  The EU is 
frustrated by Israel\'s refusal to work with the Quartet, and 
looks to the US to reiterate with Israel the Quartet\'s 
importance.  The EU is reluctant to promote reform in the 
Middle 
East through joint action with the US.   On security issues, 
the EU wants a dialogue with NATO on more than just Berlin 
Plus issues; Turkey objects.  The EU also wants to clarify 
control of strategic reserve for its upcoming Bosnia takeover 
of SFOR. The EU may send a high level delegation to Sudan; it 
also asked for US views on out of country voting by Afghans 
in Iran and Pakistan.  End Summary. 
 
 
Next six months:  Elections, EU constitution 
---------------- 
2. (C)  A/S Jones opened the meeting by noting that there was 
much work for the US and EU to do following June\'s productive 
US-EU summit.  The next six months would also be a period of 
change, with elections in Europe, the US, in many of Europe\'s 
neighbors, and beyond.  She congratulated the EU for the 
\"huge 
accomplishment\" in drafting a constitution, and asked the EU 
to help the US understand the process as the constitution is 
implemented.  Dutch European Correspondent Joep Wijnands 
noted the constitution will be signed October 29 in Rome; 
entry into force is expected in 2006 or later.  The EU wanted 
to move 
ahead with planning for an EU Foreign Minister and a 
supporting diplomatic corps, but did not want to pre-judge 
the ratification process.  He also noted that a new 
Commission at 25 would take over in November. 
 
Russia: Difficult Issues Remain 
------ 
3.  (C)  Dutch PolDir Hugo Siblesz noted that gaining Russian 
acceptance of EU enlargement, and the extension of the 
EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), had 
been difficult.  Siblesz expected all the issues raised by 
Moscow -- e.g. Kaliningrad and the ethnic Russian minorities 
in EU accession 
countries -- to be dredged up again by the Russians.  On July 
16, the EU will hold it PolDirs meeting with Russia in 
Moscow, and Siblesz will raise Chechnya, media freedom, and 
Yukos, and the \"near abroad.\"  On Chechnya, the EU noted the 
need to keep pressure on Moscow over human rights abuses and 
the need for 
access by humanitarian organizations.  On the near abroad, 
Siblesz said the EU sees a common obligation with Russia to 
promote stability through democracy and free markets; Russia 
does not share this view.  Commission Deputy DG Valenzuela 
said that although Russia considered the EU\'s European 
Neighborhood Policy (ENP) to be beneath it, and therefore is 
not interested in an ENP Action Plan, many of the ENP 
elements are in fact applicable, and the EU will use 
\"roadmaps\" for each of the four agreed \"common spaces\" to 
force Russia to work on specific issues. 
 
EU:  Yukos Case is Troubling 
--------------- 
4.  (C)  Valenzuela and Siblesz cited the Yukos case several 
times as particularly damaging for potential investors.  A/S 
Jones shared U.S. concerns that while Putin wants strategic 
engagement, all the \"value issues\" were going the wrong way 
inside Russia.  She cited FM Lavrov\'s recent false claims 
that 
Secretary Powell did not raise Yukos in their most recent 
 
SIPDIS 
meeting, at which point Council Foreign Policy Director 
Robert Cooper quipped, \"I guess we better make sure to raise 
Yukos on Friday.\" 
 
Ukraine and ENP 
-------------------- 
5.  (C)  Siblesz briefed on the July 8 EU-Ukraine summit, 
which he noted the press had termed a \"disaster\" because of 
the failure to agree on a joint \"Action Plan\" under ENP.  In 
fact, he said, the discussions were very frank, and Kuchma 
engaged on EU concerns about democracy, media freedom and 
rule of 
law.  Valenzuela said Ukraine was unwilling to negotiate an 
Action Plan, hoping the summit might result in some 
indication from the EU on eventual membership for Ukraine. 
In the end, he said, the EU expects Ukraine to negotiate an 
Action Plan --\"it\'s not Russia, after all\" -- although the 
political reform elements of the plan won\'t be popular with 
Kiev. 
 
Georgia and Moldova/Transnistria 
------------ 
6.  (C)  A/S Jones noted concern about rising 
Georgian-Russian tensions over South Ossetia, and proposed as 
a practical step that both the EU and US push Georgia and 
Russia to \"calm down, engage politically and disengage 
militarily.\"  The US was sending it\'s Special Negotiator to 
Tbilisi to press 
Georgia and Russia to address contentious issues on South 
Ossetia; the EU might want to consider doing the same.  On 
Transnistria, A/S Jones expressed US disappointment with 
Moscow\'s complete failure on its Istanbul commitments to 
withdraw arms.  She said the US was thinking of adding names 
to the list of Transnistrian officials banned from travel to 
the US and EU countries, and would be providing the EU soon a 
proposed list.  Both sides expressed concern about the 
possibility that Russia would spring  a \"Kozak II\" unilateral 
settlement proposal in the fall -- or even sooner. 
 
OSCE:  Moving East and CIS Ideas 
----------------- 
7.  (C)  The EU asked about US views on the recent CIS summit 
proposal to strengthen the OSCE secretariat.  A/S Jones said 
the concern was that Russia\'s goal was not a stronger OSCE, 
but one that Russia could better control by seeking a key 
role in an expanded secretariat.  Cooper said the EU was 
puzzled; 
the OSCE\'s economic dimension was moving toward the EU (with 
nearly half the members now in the EU too) while the security 
component was moving closer to NATO.  Both sides agreed that 
moving some OSCE events further east made sense; 
Valenzuela noted that Slovenia has proposed taking such a 
decision in principle, but leaving implementation to the 
future.  A/S Jones said that might make sense; it was 
unrealistic to think Georgia or Tajikistan could host a huge 
OSCE event next year.  Siblesz said it made sense for the 
OSCE to look at new 
threats such as trafficking in persons and narcotics, but it 
is important the OSCE not move away from its core 
achievements in human rights, political freedoms and election 
monitoring.  Cooper said the EU was working on a paper to 
define what the OSCE could best do now to promote stability, 
security and 
reform. 
 
Central Asia 
------------ 
8.  (C)  A/S Jones described US relations as being good 
bilaterally.  U.S. military use of bases in the region for 
resupply of the Afghan effort is important, but the U.S. 
keeps \"all issues\" on the table.  She commended US-EU 
cooperation, especially in the area of border security, 
reviewed Tajikistan\'s 
desire for Russian border guards to depart, and called on the 
EU to help train Tajik border forces.  She outlined US 
training and election assistance in the region, noted Deputy 
Secretary Armitage\'s trip to the region, and said the U.S. 
 
SIPDIS 
was facing a difficult decision on whether or not to continue 
security 
assistance to Uzbekistan, which had not come through on any 
its promised political reforms.  Siblesz briefed on EU 
ministerial meetings earlier in the day with Kazakhstan and 
Kyrgyzstan, where the sides had discussed elections, media 
freedom, and rule of law.  The EU saw progress in Kazakhstan 
(A/S Jones agreed, but noted one outstanding issue -- the 
imprisonment of former official Zhakianov for political 
reasons) and Valenzuela said they planned to sign a 
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) with Tajikistan 
in the fall.  At Kazakhstan\'s request, EU High Rep Solana mayattend the 
September regional security CICA ministerial in 
Almaty as an observer.  EU assistance to the 
region has increased to 120 million euros, but this probably 
is a cap, Valenzuela said, indicating that additional funds 
for border guards was problematical.  A/S Jones offered to 
provide US assistance figures, and noted the benefit of the 
image of the US and EU pushing the same agenda in the region. 
 
Sudan 
----- 
9.  (C)  Siblesz said the EU saw eye to eye with the US on 
Sudan and the EU\'s July 12 ministerial conclusions tracked 
closely with the US position.  The EU is not present in 
Khartoum, but provides about half the aid.  The EU agreed the 
draft UNSCR was useful to keep pressure on Sudan, but noted 
importance of 
keeping policy consistent with North-South talks.  Siblesz 
said this was like \"squeezing both an egg and a tennis ball 
in the same hand.\"  Cooper said the last sentence of the EU\'s 
ministerial conclusions is key -- \"if no progress is made, 
the EU will consider other measures.\"  A/S Jones said the US 
is working closely with UNSYG Annan; security issues are key 
and EU should also coordinate closely with UN.  Siblesz said 
visibility is key and the EU may send a high level envoy to 
Darfur; German FM Fischer was just there but was told by the 
Sudanese government there is no problem, which is nonsense. 
 
Iraq: Good Zebari Visit 
---- 
10.  (C)  Siblesz said Iraq FM Zebari\'s lunch the day before 
with EU FM\'s went well; Zebari focused on what the EU could 
do to help with the political process, reconstruction, with 
the UN, and on training for police and judicial officials. 
Cooper said Zebari was \"extremely credible,\" and left a good 
impression as willing to assert independence from the U.S., 
recognizing the 
challenges ahead, and determined to meet them.  He called for 
a \"visible\" EU presence on the ground, and for direct EU aid, 
not through the UN.  Zebari also spoke cynically about 
relations with neighboring countries, recalling that when he 
was in the opposition, the only way to smuggle arms into Iraq 
was with the 
help of neighboring regimes, implying the same was true in 
today\'s Iraq.  Siblesz noted that Solana may attend a July 
meeting in Cairo to talk with Iraq\'s neighbors.  The EU side 
had made a major issue about the death penalty; Zebari 
explained it was needed as a deterrent, and may not need to 
be applied. 
 
Iraq Next Steps:  EU \"visibility\" 
------------------ 
11.  (C)  Siblesz said the EU agreed with Zebari to continue 
the political dialogue, perhaps with a high level visit to 
Baghdad.  The Commission has opened an office in Amman and 
will travel to Baghdad but there is no timeline for opening a 
Baghdad office -- that depends on the security situation. 
Cooper said the EU held an initial technical meeting July 12 
to canvas member states 
on their bilateral programs in Iraq; the EU is looking at 
whether turning them into EU-wide programs would add value. 
Once the EU has come to some conclusions, Brussels will 
consult with the US.  The key point, Cooper summarized, is 
that the EU is \"moving forward\" on Iraq. 
 
Middle East:  Summit Followup 
--------------------- 
12.  (C)  A/S Jones proposed that Senior Level follow up to 
the US-EU summit statement on the Broader Middle East and 
Mediterranean (BMENA in the US-EU context) should be 
discussed in the US-EU Task Force that would meet July 14. 
She also suggested additional US-EU digital video conferences 
on assistance, coordination on the ground between US and EC 
missions in the region, and how to work with the G8\'s 
Forum for the Future as topics for the Task Force to 
consider.  Siblesz said the EU was focusing on summit 
followup; some steps would be procedural, some would be 
substantive, but the EU and US were looking at the same 
agenda and the same goal and was conducting a 
country-by-country assessment of its programs in 
the region.  Valenzuela urged senior level follow-up to 
coordinate US-EU assistance, but urged clarifying our goals 
before \"rushing to the region,\" noted that the US and EU 
still disagree over WTO access, and added that the EU was 
also looking at how to engage with the Gulf countries and at 
the linkage to 
its policies toward Iraq and Iran.  Siblesz said the EU 
wanted to compare notes on Saudi Arabia; A/S Jones said we 
would welcome a dialogue.  Cooper noted that this summit text 
was the \"most difficult text the EU has ever negotiated;\" it 
remains a \"delicate\" subject for the EU. Differences remain 
between the US 
and EU -- the EU, for example, does not view WTO access as a 
reward; rather, it has a transforming effect that empowers 
NGO\'s and civil society. Viewed this way, he said, \"it cannot 
be a bad thing to have all countries in the region in the 
WTO, and this is an EU policy goal.\" 
 
EU Still Smarting over Israeli Snub to Quartet; ICJ opinion 
-------------------------------- 
13.  (C)  Siblesz expressed frustration with Israel\'s 
continued unwillingness to engage the Quartet, referring to 
Israel\'s refusal last week to meet with Quartet envoys to 
discuss their concerns about the Gaza withdrawal plan.  The 
EU would appreciate US support to underline to Israel the 
importance of the Quartet as the main instrument for 
international engagement in the peace process.  Cooper said 
the G8 reiterated support for the Quartet, but Israel just 
refuses; should the EU just give up on the Quartet?  A/S 
Jones reiterated US support for the Quartet as the mechanism 
to push the parties toward a negotiated solution. She noted 
that, rather than leave the Quartet, the EU should offer its 
own ideas for greater Quartet effectiveness.  Cooper urged 
close contact on this point between EU  High Rep Solana and 
Secretary Powell. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
14.  (C)  On the ICJ advisory opinion on Israel\'s security 
fence, Siblesz said that while the EU was not persuaded a 
ruling was appropriate, the substance of the decision handed 
down was in line with the EU view -- that any departure from 
the Green Line was contrary to international law.  Now, he 
said, we must 
assess the implication of this isolated legal opinion for the 
political process, which needs to be reinvigorated.  The EU 
expects the Palestinian Authority to propose a draft UN 
resolution.  A/S Jones urged the EU to consider voting 
against, or, at a minimum, abstaining on a UN resolution; the 
ICJ ruling does not help 
move ahead with the roadmap.  Siblesz replied that the EU 
position will depend on what\'s in the resolution; the EU 
cannot ignore the ICJ opinion. 
 
ESDP:  Turkey and EU-NATO dialogue 
----------- 
15. (C) Cooper commended EUR DAS Bradtke\'s efforts to work 
with the EU and NATO on security issues, and pointed to the 
recent EU approval of operation \"Althea\" in Bosnia as proof 
of the results.  Cooper noted there is an outstanding issue 
related to Berlin Plus and Turkey.  Because EU members Malta 
and Cyprus do not have a security relationship with NATO, any 
discussion with NATO of NATO classified information must be 
done at 23, not 25.  Turkey maintains that any EU-NATO 
contact must therefore be done at 23.  This, Cooper said, is 
not possible for the EU.  Malta and Cyprus, for example, are 
engaged in EU defense capability projects, which the EU would 
like to discuss with NATO.  If Turkey insists on its 
position, though, there can be no EU-NATO dialogue except on 
Berlin Plus issues.  This is an emerging problem, he 
concluded, but he questioned whether this was in the interest 
of the EU, NATO or even Turkey, and 
asked if the U.S. could raise this with Turkey. 
 
Bosnia Reserve and Berlin Plus 
---------------- 
16.  (C)  Cooper also wondered whether Berlin Plus is really 
working.  There is still a problem with the common reserve 
forces for the Bosnia mission.  The reserve is a common 
strategic reserve, and it is understandable that the NAC 
would want to approve any decision to call it up.  But the EU 
cannot understand why the reserve, if called up to support 
EUFOR, would not then be under EU control, since it is an EU 
mission and the troops in questions would all be 
European.  This needs to be clarified in a logical manner. 
Cooper said his goal is to have the EU look to SHAPE as its 
military HQ, and have SHAPE do the planning for the EU, not 
the EU doing it for SHAPE.  A/S Jones noted that this issue 
was still under review, but perhaps could be discussed in 
more detail at the September 27 US-EU PSC Troika. 
 
Cyprus 
------ 
17.  (C)  Valenzuela said that recent EU Council decisions 
would allow direct trade with Northern Cyprus, and are part 
of an effort to end Turkish Cypriot isolation.  A/S Jones 
said the US welcomed these EU steps, wanted to work with the 
EU for a Cyprus settlement, and hoped to work together for a 
strong UN 
resolution to support UNSYG Annan\'s Mission report.  Cooper 
reported that the Cypriot Ambassador to the EU was fired the 
night before, reportedly for not blocking the EU decisions toopen up trade with 
Northern Cyprus. 
 
China Arms Embargo 
---------------- 
18.  (C)  A/S Jones said now is not the time for the EU to 
lift the embargo; the human rights situation is deteriorating 
and listed numerous instances; this is important to the 
Administration and to Congress.  Siblesz said China put the 
issue on the EU\'s agenda; no decision has been taken; there 
are two angles to consider -- human 
rights and regional stability.  The EU judges the human 
rights situation as better than in 1989; the Chinese argue 
the embargo puts them in the same category as Zimbabwe or 
Burma.  The current arms embargo allows sales and does not 
cover dual use technology transfer; the EU is looking at 
enhancing its code 
of conduct so that levels of sales do not increase.  Can this 
be done?  The jury is still out.  There is no deadline, but 
the summit with China in December will increase pressure. 
The EU wants to maintain a dialogue with the US on this, and 
appreciates a frank exchange of views.  A/S Jones noted this 
was 
important; she also noted that there are draft bills in 
Congress that would sanction entities that sell arms to China. 
 
Non-Proliferation 
------------ 
19.  (C)  Siblesz noted the US-EU summit produced good 
results.  The EU was looking at working with third countries: 
 agreements concluded with Tajikistan, and under negotiation 
with Syria, Pakistan and MERCOSUR all have non-proliferation 
clauses in them.  The EU wants US support for including all 
ten new EU members in existing non-proliferation regimes. 
They will have 
access to the technology as EU members; they should therefore 
be in the regimes.  A key EU goal shared with the US is 
strengthening the IAEA.  Iran and Syria are areas where the 
US and EU may diverge.  The US is sanctioning Syria; 
EU policy is engagement.  On Iran, not clear where things are 
headed; will the US insist on taking it to the UNSC?  A/S 
Jones thanked the EU for close cooperation with us in June in 
the IAEA on Iran.  The US remains concerned by Iran\'s 
response -- continuing enrichment and not ratifying the 
Additional 
Protocol.  The international community needs to make clear 
that this is unacceptable.  If there is no Iranian 
compliance, the UNSC is the next step.  The US and EU need to 
stay in touch. 
 
Afghanistan Elections 
-------------- 
20.  (C)  Siblesz raised the decision to split the 
Presidential and Parliamentary elections, noting that this 
includes accepting out-of-country voting.  His understanding 
is that this has been agreed with Iran, but only on the 
condition that Pakistan also agrees, and asked for the US 
view.  A/S Jones promised to look into the issue and get the 
information to the EU. 
 
21. (U) A/S Jones has cleared this cable. 
 
McKinley 
"
"18874","7/19/2004 14:39","04BRUSSELS3066","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE150715","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/UMB AND EUR/RUS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, PBTS, PHUM, PGOV, RS, MD, EUN, OSCE, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ON EXPANDED TRANSNISTRIA VISA BAN:  NEED TO 
PERSUADE MEMBER STATES 
 
REF: A. STATE 150715 
 
     B. BUCHAREST 1952 
     C. TAPLIN-LITZENBERGER EMAILS 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C)  On July 19, USEU conveyed reftel non-paper to 
Council Secretariat Russia watcher Carl Hallergard, who is 
temporarily covering Moldova.  He welcomed the non-paper, and 
said he would distribute it to member states at that day\'s 
COEST Working Group meeting.  The Council Secretariat, he 
said, is convinced the EU needs to look at \"options\" such as 
the proposed expansion of the US-EU visa ban on Transnistrian 
officials.  The Council Secretariat thinks that Russia will 
try to take advantage of US presidential elections and the 
change in EU Commission members this fall to spring a \"Kozak 
II\" unilateral settlement proposal for Moldova/Transnistria. 
Hallergard said that Russian Deputy FM Chizhov told EU 
Political Directors in Moscow on July 16 (septel) that Moscow 
considers the first Kozak proposal as the \"starting point\" 
for an eventual settlement. 
 
Transnistrian actions will strengthen the case 
----------------------- 
2.  (C)  Hallergard said one option for the EU to use to 
press the Transnistrians to engage in the ongoing OSCE-led 
settlement process is expansion of the visa ban.  But, he 
cautioned, \"It will take time. Member States do not share the 
Council Secretariat\'s sense of urgency.\"  The issue of a 
possible expansion of the visa ban was discussed last week in 
Brussels and The Hague, he said; there was no consensus to 
ratchet up the travel ban.  Any discussion of sanctions, he 
added, always raises legal and technical issues by members 
states who oppose sanctions on principle.  Hallergard was 
nevertheless optimistic that the Council Secretariat would be 
able to persuade member states to support an expansion of the 
ban.  First, late last week the Transnistrians closed down a 
Moldovan school in Transnistria, an incident the EU raised 
with Moscow last Friday.  Next, he welcomed the US non-paper, 
which lays out other recent examples of Transnistrian 
obstructionism.  Third, he welcomed the US proposal for US 
and EU missions in Chisinau to coordinate a recommendation, 
acknowledging that Finally, he considers it likely that the 
Transnistrians will continue to take steps that will only 
help bolster the case for expanding the sanctions. 
 
Comment 
------- 
3.  (C) The key next step is for EU Ambassadors in Chisenau 
to get the green light to coordinate an expanded list with 
us.  Due to the August EU vacation period, this week\'s two 
COEST meetings will be the last opportunities for the working 
group to discuss Moldova until September.  It is not clear, 
though, that there will be a consensus to task Embassies to 
explore expanding the list.  At the next higher EU level, the 
Political and Security Committee is likely to meet on an 
ad-hoc basis in August, which will offer additional 
opportunities to push this issue in coming weeks.  We will 
continue to work with the Council Secretariat to this end. 
 
McKinley 
"
"18875","7/19/2004 14:39","04BRUSSELS3067","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003067 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RUS AND EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MD, RS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: BRIEF READOUT OF EU-RUSSIA POLITICAL DIRECTORS 
MEETING 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  According to an EU official present for the 
July 16 EU-Russia Political Directors\' meeting in Moscow, the 
EU raised Yukos and Moldova.  On Yukos, Deputy FM Chizhov 
agreed that foreign investment will suffer, but said it was a 
criminal case and will proceed.  On Moldova, Chizhov said 
Moscow was focused on the five-sided negotiations (which he 
said were at a \"fragile\" state) said it was a \"pity\" the 
Kozak plan did not work, and criticized the OSCE and HOM Hill 
for not coordinating recently proposed confidence building 
measures with Moscow.  The EU pitched the need for pentagonal 
talks; Chizhov was not opposed in principle, but said now was 
not the time and said Moscow might prefer meeting bilaterally 
with the EU and US instead.  The EU, convinced Chizhov is 
just stalling, is considering calling for a pentagonal 
meeting, which it would offer to host.  Our contact said that 
Moscow is slowly getting more comfortable with putting 
neighboring state issues on the agenda, but is not interested 
in a real dialogue.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C)  On July 19, EU Council Secretariat Russia Officer 
Carl Hallergard offered a readout of the EU\'s July 16 
Political Directors meeting with Russia in Moscow, which he 
attended.  The EU delegation, led by Dutch MFA Political 
Director Hugo Siblesz, met with a Russian delegation headed 
by Deputy Foreign Minister Chizhov, the EU\'s usual 
interlocutor.  Hallergard said the talks resulted in no major 
progress on any issue; they were an opportunity to exchange 
views.  Hallergard said the MFA was consumed with the ongoing 
reorganization of the ministry:  Chizhov announced he would 
be staying on; but there was still no word on who Russia\'s 
new Ambassador to the EU might be. 
 
Yukos:  It\'s a Criminal Case 
------------- 
3.  (C)  As Siblesz told A/S Jones he would do at last week\'s 
EU-US Political Directors meeting (reftel) he raised Yukos, 
noting that the case would damage Russia\'s ability to attract 
direct foreign investment.  Hallergard said that Chizhov\'s 
one-line response was, \"We agree it will hurt investment. But 
it\'s a criminal case and we will pursue it.\" 
 
Moldova:  EU pitches pentagonal talks 
-------------- 
4.  (C) Hallergard said Siblesz also made a pitch for 
reviving the proposed pentagonal talks with the EU, US, OSCE, 
Russia and Ukraine.  The Russians said they were not against 
consultations, or even a meeting in this format, but \"this 
was not the time\" and said Moscow might prefer instead to 
meet bilaterally with the EU or US.  \"Nobody is more 
interested in seeing a solution to the Transnistrian conflict 
than Russia,\" Chizhov said.  He then cautioned however that 
the current five sided negotiations are at a \"fragile\" state, 
and it was important that no one take any \"destabilizing 
steps.\" Chizhov was very critical of OSCE HOM Hill, whom he 
blamed for not coordinating with Russia and Ukraine on the 
large packet of confidence building measures he recently 
shared with Moldovan and Transnistrian officials.  Hallergard 
said that Chizhov claimed that the Transnistrians used the 
package as an excuse not to attend the last meeting, saying 
they needed time to study Hill\'s proposals.  This kind of 
action, Chizhov said, \"distracts\" the parties.  (Comment. 
Hallergard said the EU is now thinking of calling for a 
meeting, having concluded that Moscow is just stalling.  End 
Comment.) 
 
Kozak II? 
--------- 
5.  (C)  Hallergard said the Russians gave no indication that 
they were working on a \"Kozak II\" plan for resolving the 
Transnistrian crisis, but added quickly that this does not 
mean they may not be working on one.  Chizhov told the EU 
that it was \"a pity the Kozak plan did not work.\" Chizhov 
said the Russians had met with Moldovan FM Stratan on July 
15, and had focussed talks on the need to restore 
negotiations. 
Chizhov said they had also discussed the idea of a formal 
Moldovan-Romanian \"basic treaty\" to guarantee Moldova\'s 
borders, and commented that the EU could help on this. 
Hallergard says this was not a new proposal, but something 
the Russians have raised several times in the past.  The EU 
also expressed concern about the recent Transnistrian 
decision to close a Moldovan school in Transnistria; the 
Russian side did not respond. 
 
EU-Russia dialogue still thin on substance 
------------- 
6.  (C)  Hallergard said the Russians appeared slightly more 
comfortable talking to the EU about its near abroad.  In 
addition to the discussion on Moldova, the EU briefed Moscow 
on its recent summit with Ukraine; Belarus did not come up. 
On Moldova, the EU is eager to talk to Russia about border 
issues and trafficking concerns, Voronin\'s proposed Stability 
Pact, and on EU negotiation of an Action Plan with Moldova 
under its European Neighborhood Policy initiative.  But, 
Hallergard concluded, while Russia seems to be tolerating 
putting these items on the agenda, there is no interest on 
Moscow\'s part for real engagement or dialogue. 
 
McKinley 
"
"18897","7/20/2004 6:06","04BRUSSELS3072","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  European Parliament: Key Leadership 
Decisions at July 20-23 Plenary 
 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  At the July 20-23 European 
Parliament (EP) plenary session, the 732 newly 
elected MEPs from the 25 member states will formally 
take their seats.  The session\'s most significant 
event will probably be the July 22 vote on Jose 
Manuel Durao Barroso\'s nomination as Commission 
President.  MEPs will also elect the EP\'s next 
president, choosing between leading candidates Josep 
Borrell, a Spanish Socialist, and Polish Liberal 
Bronislaw Geremek.  Other items of business include 
determining new committee and inter-parliamentary 
delegation assignments, reviewing the results of the 
June 17-18 European Council and achievements of the 
Irish Presidency, and receiving a formal 
presentation of the Dutch Presidency\'s program for 
the rest of 2004. END SUMMARY. 
 
EP PRESIDENT: BORRELL OR GEREMEK? 
--------------------------------- 
 
2.  The 732 MEPs -- meeting for the first time since 
the June 13 elections -- will elect a new EP 
President on July 20, the plenary\'s opening day. 
There are three candidates for the post: 
 
-- Josep Borrell:  A Spanish socialist who was 
recently elected to the EP for the first time, 
Borrell has long been prominent on the Spanish 
political scene, most notably as Transport and 
Energy Minister in the 1990s.  More recently, 
Borrell was a member of the Spanish national 
parliamentary delegation to the Convention that 
drafted the EU Constitution.  He is expected to be 
elected EP President -- despite his lack of prior EP 
experience -- due to a \"technical agreement\" 
concluded between the EP\'s two biggest groups, the 
Christian Democrats and Conservatives (EPP-ED) and 
the Socialists (PES), that would guarantee Borrell 
the first 2-1/2 year term and an EPP-ED candidate 
(likely EPP-ED leader Hans-Gert Poettering) the 
second half-term. 
 
-- Bronislaw Geremek:  A Polish Liberal, Geremek -- 
like Borrell -- is a newcomer to the EP.  A former 
foreign minister, he was also a member of 
Solidarnosc and played an active role in the fall of 
communism in Poland.  Geremek supported U.S. 
intervention in Iraq and is considered an 
Atlanticist.  His candidacy has the support of the 
88 members of the newly created \"Alliance of the 
Liberals and Democrats for Europe\" (ALDE), composed 
of the former Liberals (ELDR) plus the French 
center-right UDF, Italian \"Margharita,\" and several 
smaller parties.  He will also be supported by the 
Greens. 
 
-- Francis Wurtz: A French Communist and leader of 
the far-left GUE-NGL group (41 members), Wurtz has 
been a MEP since the first direct EP elections in 
1979.  He has no chance of going beyond the first 
round of voting, however. 
 
3.  COMMENT:  Although Josep Borrell appears to be 
the guaranteed winner, the EPP-ED and Socialists 
have started to privately question their alliance. 
Geremek outscored Borrell in a July 13 debate; 
Borrell then angered the EPP-ED by declaring that 
since the vote would be by secret ballot, MEPs could 
not be forced to vote for the EPP-ED candidate for 
the second term -- suggesting that the PES might not 
uphold its end of the deal.  The EPP-ED on July 14 
warmly welcomed Geremek at a political group 
hearing; Poettering declared that \"even if we do not 
vote for you, you should be assured of our greatest 
esteem.\"  The atmosphere during Borrell\'s hearing 
the next day was, in contrast, extremely cold. 
 
4.  COMMENT, Continued:  Geremek\'s candidacy may 
also look more attractive to the EPP-ED due to the 
Liberals\' announcement that they will support EPP-ED 
member Jose Manuel Durao Barroso for Commission 
President -- a commitment that many socialist 
national delegations remain reluctant to make 
publicly.  Some EP observers believe that if the 
EPP-ED could guarantee an alternative center-right 
majority involving the ALDE, the technical agreement 
with the Socialists will fall apart and Geremek 
could become an unexpected winner of the July 20 EP 
Presidential vote.  Building such an alternative 
center-right majority would probably be very 
difficult, however, and would have to involve 
euroskeptic or extreme-right factions that neither 
the EPP-ED nor the ALDE wants to engage. END COMMENT 
 
BARROSO LIKELY TO GET A NARROW MAJORITY 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5.  The EP on July 22 will vote on Jose Manuel Durao 
Barroso\'s nomination as Commission President. 
Barroso, who addressed EP political groups during 
July 13-14 hearings, will have one more chance to 
convince MEPs during additional hearings on July 21. 
Although Barroso should win confirmation, the vote 
will not be unanimous: the Greens, far left, and 
many Socialists have indicated that they will vote 
against him. 
 
6.  Barroso called for close transatlantic 
cooperation during his hearings before the 
Socialists (PES) and center-right (EPP-ED), 
stressing that \"political dialogue with the U.S. is 
crucial\" and that the EU should work closely with 
its \"ally and partner.\"  He defended support for the 
US on Iraq, asserting that \"between the U.S. and 
Saddam, I chose the U.S.\".  However, during his July 
13 hearing with the Green party, he added: \"I have a 
great admiration for the United States, its civil 
society, its universities, and its vitality.  But I 
hate arrogance, militarism, and unilateralism.\" 
 
DEBATES ON IRISH AND DUTCH PRESIDENCY 
------------------------------------- 
 
7.  Also on July 21, Irish Prime Minister Bertie 
Ahern will report to MEPs on the progress made under 
the Irish Presidency.  His statement will include 
the two European Council meetings in June, which led 
to agreement on both a draft constitutional treaty 
and the nomination of Jose Manuel Durao Barroso as 
Commission President. Later in the day, Dutch Prime 
Minister Jan Peter Balkenende will lay out the Dutch 
Presidency\'s working program for July-December 2004. 
 
NEW EP COMMITTEES AND DELEGATIONS 
--------------------------------- 
 
8.  On July 22 MEPs will also decide on the 
membership of Parliament\'s committees and inter- 
parliamentary delegations (including the delegation 
responsible for relations with the United States and 
the Transatlantic Legislators\' Dialogue) for the 
next two and a half years.  That afternoon, most 
committees will hold their first meetings, at which 
they will elect their own Chairs and Vice-Chairs. 
(NOTE:  The top jobs in committees and delegations, 
as well as EP vice-presidents and quaestors, are 
distributed among the various political groups 
according to a mathematical method of calculation 
called the \"D\'hondt procedure.\"  However, we were 
told that deals between political groups can 
sometimes \"bend\" the strict attribution rules. END 
NOTE.) 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"18926","7/20/2004 15:33","04BRUSSELS3101","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04USEUBRUSSELS2477","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003101 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, SMIG, PREF, CMGT, CVIS, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU/JHA: TOWARD A NEW MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAM; 
LINKING OF CRIMINAL REGISTRIES; NO EUROPOL HEAD YET 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 2477 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  The EU Council of Ministers for Justice and Home 
Affairs (JHA) on July 19 began preparations for a 
new multi-annual JHA program building on EU work 
over the past five years to establish \"a common area 
of freedom, security and justice.\"  Noting the 
persisting deadlock on the appointment of a new 
Europol Director, the Council decided to relaunch 
the process from scratch: the Dutch Presidency now 
expects new candidacies to be presented as a way of 
overcoming the disagreement between France and 
Germany.  The Council also took stock of cooperation 
against terrorism and heard a presentation from 
Greece of security measures for the Athens Olympics. 
Ministers discussed prospects to create a pan- 
European criminal registry.  Rather than moving 
toward the creation of a brand new tool, the 
Commission will propose the interconnecting national 
registries and implementation of short-term measures 
for exchanging information on serious criminals such 
as pedophiles and serial killers.  Contrary to 
earlier indications, Hungary did not complain about 
a Commission proposal to soften the mechanism that 
allows for visas to be automatically imposed on non- 
EU countries, such as the U.S., that have a visa 
requirement for some Member States.  Full text of 
the Council conclusions has been transmitted to 
EUR/ERA and Embassy The Hague.  END SUMMARY. 
 
NEW MULTIANNUAL PROGRAM 
----------------------- 
 
2. The Council held an initial \"orientation debate\" 
on a new multi-annual program intended to build on 
EU work of the past five years (known as the 
\"Tampere agenda\") to establish \"a common area of 
freedom, security and justice\".  This discussion 
will continue at Council meetings in 
September-October, and should lead to endorsement by 
EU leaders on November 5, 2004 of policy guidelines 
covering the various JHA areas.  Speaking to the 
press, Dutch Justice Minister Donner said the 
initial debate confirmed a widespread emphasis on 
cooperation in the fight against crime and 
terrorism; on rules on the admission of aliens into 
the EU; and in civil, criminal and commercial law. 
Donner said the exchange of information among legal 
and judicial authorities of EU members would be \"of 
crucial significance\" in the years ahead.  He 
reported \"a great willingness to take further 
effective steps.\"  Dutch Interior Minister Remkes 
also noted the need to strengthen Europol (\"more 
information and more analysis, leading to 
operational action\").  Immigration ministers further 
discussed the development of a common European 
asylum policy and greater coordination on 
integration, which the Dutch suggest should become 
an essential component of a comprehensive EU 
migration policy. 
 
3.  A Presidency discussion paper on the new program 
highlights the need for implementation of the 
existing EU legal framework, integration of the new 
Member States, and creation of a European legal and 
judicial system.  Donner said the general reaction 
was supportive.  While conceding that the level of 
ambition was not uniform among delegations, he noted 
that Dutch JHA planning was based on the existing 
Treaty provisions, while the program itself would 
extend to when the EU could be governed by its new 
Constitutional Treaty.  Hence the Commission 
proposal for a mid-term review of the program that 
could coincide with the entry into force of the 
Constitution (at the end of 2006). 
 
COUNTERTERRORISM 
---------------- 
 
4.  The Council took stock of the implementation of 
the Action Plan/Roadmap following on last March\'s 
Declaration by EU leaders on combating terrorism. 
CT Coordinator de Vries recalled the CT priorities 
identified by the European Council:  financing, 
civil protection, protection of critical 
infrastructures and external relations policy. 
Commissioner Vitorino drew attention to a Commission 
communication on access to information by law 
enforcement agencies, an item that will be further 
discussed at the October 25-26 JHA Council. 
 
SECURITY AT THE OLYMPICS 
------------------------ 
 
5.  The Greek delegation reported on security 
measures adopted ahead of the Olympics.  Minister 
Donner told a press conference the Greek measures 
came across as \"extremely professional, covering the 
whole Greek territory and involving a large number 
of people in training.\" 
 
EUROPOL HEAD 
------------ 
 
6.  Ministers could not break the deadlock on 
appointment of a new Director of Europol, a position 
that has been vacant since the end of June (REFTEL). 
Germany has pressed for the reappointment of 
outgoing Director Storbeck, while France and Italy 
have pushed their own candidates.  With the required 
consensus proving impossible on any of the three 
names, Minister Remkes told the press the ministers 
concluded it would be a good idea \"to relaunch the 
procedure from scratch.\"  Remkes made it clear the 
Dutch expect new candidacies to be presented and 
that the selection procedure should lead to \"a 
sensible choice of a very good candidate.\" 
Meanwhile, Storbeck\'s Deputy, Spain\'s Mariano 
Simancas, continues as acting Director.  While 
Spanish delegates declined to say whether they would 
propose him for the top job, France is reported as 
giving up on its own candidate (Franquet). 
 
EUROPEAN CRIMINAL REGISTRY 
-------------------------- 
 
7.  Per request of the Belgian delegation, the 
Council discussed prospects for establishing a pan- 
European criminal registry.  The Belgians invoked 
the recent cross-border case of a serial killer who 
was able to work in a Belgian school although he had 
been convicted for abusing minors in France. 
Minister Donner said ministers concurred the EU 
eventually needs to develop a system whereby it 
would be possible to exchange information, but that 
a number of preventive measures were also needed for 
the short-term.  Commissioner Vitorino announced the 
Commission would present a \"white book\" on the 
subject by year\'s end, as well as legislative 
proposals on the mutual recognition of convictions 
and the interconnection of national criminal 
registries.  Prior to that, a proposal will be 
tabled in October on measures for exchanging 
information about serious criminals such as 
pedophiles and serial killers.  Donner made it clear 
the EU was not likely to move toward the creation of 
a brand new pan-European criminal registry, but 
rather a linked-up system.  He noted that France, 
Spain and Germany intended to forge ahead with plans 
to share their criminal records. 
 
NEW PAPERS ON IMMIGRATION, RETURN, INTEGRATION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
8.  Commissioner Vitorino presented a number of 
Communications to the Council, in particular: 
 
- A Communication on a common readmission/return 
  policy: This outlines the main problems 
  encountered by the Commission in its ongoing 
  negotiations for the conclusion of readmission 
  agreements.  EU sources noted that since September 
  2000, the Commission has been authorized to 
  negotiate Community readmission agreements with 11 
  non-EU countries or territories and that to date, 
  only four of these negotiations have been 
  successfully completed (with Hong Kong, Macao, Sri 
  Lanka and Albania).  The main lesson learned by 
  the Commission is that successful conclusion of 
  such negotiations often requires compensatory 
  offers or EU \"incentives.\"  Vitorino, who is 
  hoping for the conclusion of an agreement with 
  Russia \"pretty soon,\" complained limited EU 
  resources to support readmission/reintegration 
  actions (15m euro a year until 2006).  Dutch 
  Minister for Immigration and Integration Verdonk 
  said those issues would be discussed at the 
  October-November JHA Councils. 
 
- The annual report on migration and integration in 
  Europe: An overview of migration trends in Europe, 
  the report is a new instrument to review the 
  development of a common immigration policy.  It 
  underlines the need for a level-playing field in 
  terms of admission policies for economic migrants 
  and the need for strengthening and developing 
  policy instruments to address integration of non- 
  EU nationals.  Minister Verdonk said the Dutch 
  Presidency would present to the informal JHA 
  Council at the end of September \"an approach 
  involving European principles on integration,\" to 
  be followed by a conference in November. 
 
--A Communication on a single procedure for 
  processing of applications for protection: The 
  Council earlier this year formally adopted a 
  Directive on minimum standards for the 
  qualification and status of third country 
  nationals and stateless persons as refugees or as 
  persons who otherwise need international 
  protection (Qualification Directive) as well as a 
  political agreement on a Directive setting minimum 
  standards on procedures for granting and 
  withdrawing refugee status (Asylum Procedures 
  Directive).  With these two texts, the EU will 
  have completed the first stage of its legislative 
  program for the establishment of a Common European 
  Asylum System.  Meanwhile, EU leaders in June 2003 
  called for further reinforcement of asylum 
  procedures to make them more efficient and speed 
  up processing of non-protection related 
  applications.  According to the Commission, taking 
  steps toward a single procedure, whereby all 
  possible requests for protection are addressed in 
  a single examination, would answer those demands. 
 
9.  Further details on these papers are available 
from http://europa.eu.int/comm/justice_home/news. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"19021","7/23/2004 5:19","04BRUSSELS3116","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04ADDISABAB2288","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/FO, AF/E AND AF/RSA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/21/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, EAID, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DARFUR:  EU HEARING DIFFERENT STORY ON AU CASH FLOW 
 
REF: ADDIS ABAB 2288 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR KYLE SCOTT.  REASON: 1.4(B)(D) 
 
1.  (C) Mission spoke briefly to Friedrich Hamburger, Chef de 
Cabinet to Development Commissioner Nielsen, for a readout on 
where things stand on supporting deployment of the African 
Union (AU) protection element.  We relayed in general terms 
information in Addis Ababa 2288 on the AU\'s cash flow and 
logistics problems, and asked if it coincided with Commission 
understanding of the situation.  Hamburger said it did not. 
In the Commission\'s last contacts with the AU (last Friday 
according to Hamburger\'s information), the EC had been told 
the AU did not have a cash flow problem and did not expect 
one. 
 
2. (C) The EC still has not signed the AU-EU agreement 
because it is precluded from doing so by legal hurdles 
involving the EU\'s arms embargo on Sudan.  The embargo is 
expected to be officially lifted by the Council in its 
meeting next Monday, which will free the Commission to sign 
the agreement and release the funds.  For technical reasons, 
however, it could take up to ten days for the money to make 
it to the AU\'s accounts.  Although the funds are available 
retroactively (back to June 1), Hamburger conceded this will 
not help in the interim if the AU has serious cash flow 
problems.  If this is in fact the case (and he emphasized 
this is not now the Commission\'s understanding), Hamburger 
suggested another donor might have to fund the immediate cash 
shortfalls until the Commission\'s funds kick in. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
McKinley 
"
"19038","7/23/2004 10:48","04BRUSSELS3126","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

231048Z Jul 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003126 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  THE BARROSO COMMISSION: MORE OLD FACES 
THAN NEW ONES 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  The next EU Commission to take office on 
November 1, 2004, will have 25 members, including 
its President.  A majority of them are already in 
place: they are from the ten new Member States, 
having joined on May 1 and looking for a full five- 
year mandate, or from the former EU-15 and also 
expecting to be re-nominated by their governments. 
Now that the European Parliament (EP) has confirmed 
him as Commission President-elect, Jose Manuel 
Barroso will start working on the make-up of his 
team and the sensitive allocation of portfolios 
among Commission members.  END SUMMARY. 
 
ALL THE PRESIDENT\'S MEN AND WOMEN 
--------------------------------- 
 
2.   The mandate of EU Commission President Prodi 
and his colleagues in the college of Commissioners 
will expire at the end of October.  With the 
European Parliament\'s July 22 confirmation of Jose 
Manuel Barroso of Portugal as President-elect, 
Barroso must now formally begin consultations with 
EU governments to draw up the list of the other (24) 
members of his Commission (one per member State). 
 
3.  Far more complicated than compiling the list of 
24 fellow Commissioners will be divvying up the 
substantive portfolios of Commission work among 
them.  In the first instance, he needs to figure out 
how to create five more jobs with high enough 
profiles to satisfy his colleagues, when even among 
the current 20 Commissioners a few have seemed to 
lack for enough to do.  In comments to the press, he 
has expressed doubts about the wisdom of one 
proposal to create more slots  - Commission VP 
positions without direct line responsibility who 
would instead coordinate \"teams\" of other 
Commissioners for broad policy areas such as 
external affairs, economic policy, or justice and 
home affairs. 
 
4. Even more politically sensitive will be deciding 
who gets which portfolio.  Barroso\'s challenge will 
be to protect his prerogatives and resist pressure 
from governments for their nationals to receive 
specific portfolios.  France, Germany and the UK 
have already publicly voiced their desires for key 
economic portfolios.  In his June 30 appearance 
before the EU press corps and during hearings at the 
EP, Barroso invoked Treaty rules to make it clear 
that he alone will be in charge of the allocation of 
portfolios among the future Commissioners.  Barroso 
was \"prepared to listen\" if they could help him to 
assess the skills of potential nominees, but France 
and Germany were only making \"suggestions,\" he said. 
Barroso has also stressed an interest in an 
increased proportion of women on the new Commission 
(up from 8 of the current 30). 
 
5.  Following is our assessment of likely nominees 
for the Barroso Commission: 
 
JUST ARRIVED IN BRUSSELS 
------------------------ 
 
6.  A safe bet is that most, if not necessarily all, 
Commissioners who joined the Prodi team from the ten 
new Member States on May 1, 2004 will be re- 
nominated for a full five-year term.  Some 
uncertainties persist in respect of the Czech 
republic (following the change at the top of the 
government) and Hungary (where FM Kovacs may seek 
the job for himself).  These ten Commissioners 
already have full voting rights in the Prodi 
Commission but have no portfolio of their own, 
instead \"twinning\" with current Commissioners. 
Though Barroso may in some cases be prepared to play 
for continuity and give them full responsibility for 
the area they are covering only in part now, he will 
be free to reshuffle portfolios completely.  These 
Commissioners are: 
 
--Czech Republic: Pavel Telicka (\"twinned\" at Health 
  and Consumer Protection); 
 
--Cyprus:  Marcos Kyprianou (Budget); 
 
--Estonia: Siim Kallas (Economy and Finance); 
 
--Hungary: Peter Balasz (Regional Policy); 
 
--Latvia: Sandra Kalniete (Agriculture and 
  Fisheries, but with little chance to stay there); 
 
--Lithuania: Dalia Grybauskaite (unhappily \"twinned\" 
  at Education and Culture; interested in an 
  economic portfolio); 
 
--Malta: Joe Borg (Development Cooperation and 
  Humanitarian Assistance, a portfolio that is 
  likely to be split); 
 
--Poland: Danuta Huebner (Trade; said to be 
  interested in an econ portfolio); 
--Slovenia: Janez Potocnik (Enlargement and New 
  Neighborhood Policy, and rumored to be very 
  interested in staying there, where he would be 
  responsible, inter alia, for accession 
  negotiations with neighboring Croatia); 
 
--Slovakia: Jan Figel (Enterprise Policy and the 
  Information Society). 
 
ALREADY ON BOARD AS WELL 
------------------------ 
 
7.  Also likely to be reappointed are the four 
members who joined the Prodi Commission this year in 
replacement of early departures: 
 
--Greece:  Stavros Dimas, now in charge of 
  Employment and Social Affairs, would like to 
  relinquish his portfolio, perhaps for Fisheries 
  (assuming this is separated from Agriculture); 
 
--Spain:  Joaquin Almunia, now holding the Economic 
  and Monetary Affairs portfolio, expects to be 
  reappointed but would be forced to leave Brussels 
  when/if the Constitutional Treaty enters into 
  force (perhaps at the beginning of 2007) and High 
  Rep Solana officially becomes EU Foreign Minister, 
  thus landing in the Commission as a Vice- 
  President; 
 
--France:  Jacques Barrot, who handles EU Regional 
  policy, will seek an economic portfolio.  Paris is 
  eager to see him in control of Competition policy 
  to prevent further Commission blockades of French 
  state subsidies and mergers involving its major 
  companies.  However, Barrot\'s knowledge of EU 
  technicalities and his linguistic talents may not 
  meet the requirements of the job.  He may have to 
  settle for another slot (perhaps Single Market, 
  Employment/Social Affairs, or JHA); 
 
--Finland:  Olli Rehn, just chosen to succeed 
  departing Enterprise and Information Society 
  Commissioner Erkki Liikanen, will most likely seek 
  an economic portfolio. 
 
8.  Other Member States will/may re-nominate the 
current holder of their Commission slot: 
 
--Germany: Chancellor Schroeder has already 
  announced (without prior consultation with the 
  President-designate) that the mandate of 
  Commissioner Guenther Verheugen would be renewed. 
  Schroeder made it clear he would like to see 
  Verheugen become a \"super-Commissioner\" in charge 
  of economic matters.  Though widely credited for 
  his management of the complex enlargement 
  portfolio, Verheugen arguably has no specific 
  expertise in the economic area; 
 
--Italy: Mario Monti, currently in charge of EU 
  Competition policy, is willing to stay and appears 
  to have convinced PM Berlusconi to keep him in 
  Brussels, possibly with an eye on the coveted 
  Economic and Monetary Affairs portfolio.  A 
  possible replacement is Rocco Buttiglione, Italian 
  Minister for Community policies; 
 
--Sweden:  Margot Wallstroem (now holding the 
  Environment portfolio) told the press in Brussels 
  on July 7 that she would probably stay in the 
  Commission for another term; 
 
--Luxembourg:  Viviane Reding (Education and 
  Culture) can also hope for reappointment, 
  following her party\'s strong showing in the June 
  national and EP elections. 
 
SOME NEW FACES AT LEAST 
----------------------- 
 
9.  As for the other Member States, the situation 
appears to be as follows: 
 
--Austria: Franz Fischler (holder of the Agriculture 
  and Fisheries portfolio) is expected to leave 
  Brussels.  FM Ferrero-Waldner is a potential 
  candidate, but the list of would-be Commissioners 
  also includes Interior Minister Strasser, Health 
  Minister Maria Rauch-Kallat, the head of Austria\'s 
  Economic Chamber Christoph Leitl, as well as 
  Balkans Stability Pact Coordinator Erhard Busek; 
 
--Belgium: Commissioner Philippe Busquin (Research) 
  will be replaced by former FM Louis Michel, who 
  has already expressed a keen interest in the 
  Development portfolio; 
 
--Denmark: the Liberal-led government will not 
  confirm Poul Nielson (Development and Humanitarian 
  Assistance).  Former FM and Liberal party front- 
  runner Ellemann-Jensen has declined the job. 
  Coalition-member Conservative Party may put 
  forward Hans Skov Christensen, Director of the 
  Confederation of Danish Industries.  Another 
  possible candidate is Integration Minister 
  (Liberal) Bertel Haarder, but PM Rasmussen may not 
  want to do without him on the domestic front; 
 
--Ireland: the former Presidency is said to be in 
  competition with the current (Dutch) one for the 
  Agriculture portfolio.  Agriculture Minister Joe 
  Walsh and Finance Minister McCreevy (who denied 
  any interest) have been mentioned as potential 
  candidates but the game seems to remain open; 
 
--The Netherlands:  The Dutch are looking for the 
  Agriculture/Fisheries portfolio, for which they 
  would push the candidacy of their current Ag 
  Minister Cees Veerman (CDA), who already won 
  public backing from French president Chirac. 
  Other options would be former Minister Neelie 
  Kroes (VVD), who could have an eye on the 
  Transport portfolio, and former Finance Minister 
  Onno Ruding (CDA). 
 
--UK:  The front-runner for the job of Britain\'s 
  Commissioner would be PM Blair-confidant and 
  former new Labor Minister Peter Mandelson, who 
  would aim for an influential reform-oriented 
  portfolio, such as the Internal Market one. 
  Another option would be a female member of the 
  Blair cabinet such as Secretary for Industry and 
  Trade Patricia Hewitt, likely to be a contender 
  for the Single Market or Trade portfolio; 
 
COMMENT 
------ 
 
10.  Barroso will preside over a Commission that may 
actually include less than a third of newcomers. 
This should ease the transition somewhat, although 
many, if not most, in the old guard will only have 
been here for a few months.  Having relinquished the 
right to nominate a second Commissioner, the large 
Member States will put tremendous pressure on the 
President-designate to give their nominee a powerful 
portfolio.  The allocation of responsibilities has 
never been an easy task, but Barroso may find it 
even harder than his predecessors.  The make-up of 
an enlarged Commission where everybody feels at ease 
with a decent, substantial portfolio will not only 
be the first test of his talents as a manager and 
captain of the Commission ship but will also 
determine the quality of his relations with his 
former PM colleagues for many years to come. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"19047","7/23/2004 14:30","04BRUSSELS3131","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE153312","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003131 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/23/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, ELAB, CU, ILO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ICFTU AND ETUC LIKELY PARTNERS ON CUBA LABOR 
RIGHTS ISSUES 
 
REF: STATE 153312 
 
Classified By: PolOff Rick Holtzapple, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) In response to reftel action request, Post has 
identified the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC) and 
the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) 
as union organizations possibly willing to raise the issue of 
Cuban labor rights violations at regional labor meetings and 
take an active role in supporting the advancement of labor 
rights in Cuba. END SUMMARY. 
 
ETUC 
---- 
 
2. (C) The ETUC is based in Brussels and its membership 
includes 77 national trade union confederations from 35 
European countries, as well as 11 European industry 
federations, for a total of 60 million members.  Like most 
European labor organizations, the ETUC has socialist 
leanings, but it has not, to our knowledge, shown any degree 
of support for the Cuban regime or its labor practices. 
Although the ETUC concentrates almost exclusively on internal 
EU issues, it regards all EU policy relevant to labor issues 
as within its purview. It may therefore be willing to use its 
high level lobbying power in Brussels to pressure EU 
institutions to take a firmer line on Cuban labor practices. 
 
3. (C) In 1998 the ETUC passed a resolution calling on the EU 
to \"play a more decisive role in the promotion of human 
rights,\" specifically in the area of labor rights. This 
resolution expressed the ETUC\'s deep disappointment in the EU 
Council\'s decision that year not to apply the provisions in 
the GSP system on principles of the freedom of association 
and child labor to the countries of Central America.  The 
ETUC thus does look outside the geographic boundaries of 
Europe in its promotion of labor rights and has criticized 
the EU\'s past failure to exert adequate pressure on the 
countries of Central America over their labor practices. 
This indicates the ETUC could be willing to raise the issue 
of Cuban labor rights violations at the EU and European 
level. We are not aware, however, that the ETUC has ever 
taken a position on Cuba in the past, so we cannot be sure of 
how they would react if asked to take one in the present. 
 
ICFTU 
----- 
 
4. (C) The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, 
an organization of 234 affiliated organizations (including 
the AFL-CIO in the US, as well as ETUC), is also based in 
Brussels.  The ICFTU\'s main purpose is to organize and direct 
campaigns globally on labor rights issues.  It has already 
been active in raising the issue of Cuban labor rights 
violations, issuing a call in July 2003 for the release of 
trade unionists unfairly detained there and, more recently, 
preparing a very critical annual survey of trade union rights 
in Cuba in June 2004. 
 
SCOTT 
"
"19048","7/23/2004 14:36","04BRUSSELS3140","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE159301","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003140 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/FO, AF/E, AF/RSA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, EAID, SU, ET, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DARFUR: EU STRESSES STRONG GOS ACTION AGAINST 
JINGAWEIT 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 159301 
 
     B. B) SMALL-SCOTT E-MAIL OF 7/23/04 
     C. C) ADDIS ABABA 2300 AND PREVIOUS 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 3116 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL MINISTER COUNSELOR KYLE SCOTT.  REASON: 1.4(B) 
(D) 
 
 1. (C) Summary and Action Request.  Hirep Solana\'s point man 
on Sudan, Christian Manahl, stressed the importance of 
improving the security situation in Darfur to allow 
humanitarian assistance.  He ridiculed some of the GOS 
actions to date, and urged the arrest of Jingaweit leaders 
and suspension of GOS officials who have cooperated with 
them.  EU continues to believe AU has all the funds it needs 
in short run until EU funds arrive, but said the AU staff 
backstopping the effort was hopelessly understaffed and 
creating a bottleneck for timely transfer of funds to the 
region.  EU not certain of need for air surveillance in the 
region, and asks US views.  End Summary and Action Request. 
 
Need to Get Jingaweit Leaders \"Out of Action\" 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Mission spoke July 23 with Christian Manahl, the 
official in Hirep Solana\'s Policy Unit tasked with Sudan, to 
relay ref A points and to compare notes on GOS compliance 
with its commitments (ref B).  Ref B points were also passed 
directly to CFSP Director General Robert Cooper.  Manahl told 
us he is convinced the GOS can and should do more.  The 
critical issue, in his view, is disarming the Jingaweit 
militia.  So far, GOS steps have been insufficient.  He said 
the arrests made were actually a ruse: the GOS has taken 
criminals already in GOS custody and declared them Jingaweit. 
 Similarly, Manahl said the GOS was taking equally 
distasteful militia groups from Southern Sudan and placing 
them in Darfur as \"policemen\" -- a dangerous step more likely 
to exacerbate tensions than solve them. 
 
3. (C) The real test of GOS sincerity, Manahl argued, is 
whether they are prepared to arrest key Jingaweit leaders. 
These people need to be taken out of circulation immediately. 
 He said the list of top leaders the US has provided is 
basically right -- although the EU might consider one or two 
names questionable, and also believes other names should be 
added.  Nonetheless, they should be arrested without delay. 
A second key step should be the suspension of GOS officials 
who have cooperated with the militia leaders.  While 
acknowledging that the evidence may not exist to allow these 
officials to be tried for their activities at this time, 
suspension pending further investigation is the least the GOS 
could do.  By getting militia leaders and their GOS 
supporters out of action, it should help eliminate the 
attacks, Manahl said. 
 
The Situation on the Ground 
--------------------------- 
 
4. (C) The EU believes the problems of humanitarian access 
have been eased, but Manahl argued that sustained pressure is 
still required.  Relaxed GOS regulations have made access 
somewhat easier, but if the security situation does not 
improve it will not matter what procedures are in place 
regarding access. 
 
5. (C) EU understanding is that six monitoring teams should 
be fully deployed by Sunday (with the possible exception of 
the team).  Manahl supported the view we heard yesterday from 
Commission officials (ref D): the EU does not believe that 
cash-flow problems are a constraint on the AU in fielding 
teams.  They have been assured that there is enough cash in 
the bank to keep the AU missions functioning for a few more 
weeks, allowing the time needed before the EC monies arrive. 
The real problem, according to Manahl, is in the AU 
secretariat, where crucial administrative backstopping is 
 
SIPDIS 
slow, causing the AU to have difficulties getting resources 
from Addis out to El Fasher.  He cited in particular the 
staffing gaps in Amb. Ki Doulaye\'s operation, and called Ki 
Doulaye \"a racist\" for refusing to allow non-African 
additions to his staff to help facilitate operations.  In 
this regard, he noted that the EU would soon be sending a 
military operations liaison officer similar to the two US 
officials being attached to the AU effort. 
Air Surveillance: Is It Needed? - Action Request 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
6. (C) Action Request: Manahl said missions in Khartoum were 
sending conflicting reports on the utility of air 
surveillance in Darfur.  If air attacks had ceased, the need 
for air surveillance would appear to have been overcome. 
Manahl asked for US views in this regard. 
SCOTT 
"
"19093","7/26/2004 13:51","04BRUSSELS3159","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BEIJING11573","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003159 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR DRL SUSAN O\'SULLIVAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/25/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PARM, KDEM, KJUS, CH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/CHINA: READOUT OF JUNE 30 HUMAN RIGHTS SEMINAR 
ON ICCPR 
 
REF: A. BEIJING 11573 
 
     B. BERLIN 2422 
     C. BEIJING 10293 
     D. O\'HARA/FENNERTY ET. AL. E-MAIL 03/02/04 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b, d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: On June 29-30 the EU and China held a joint 
seminar on Chinese ratification of the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) (refs A, C).  EU 
reporting, relayed to poloff by a Policy Unit staffer, 
described the seminar as useful overall -- with a \"wonderful 
atmosphere\" -- despite China\'s emphasis on accomplishments 
and reluctance to discuss problems.  The Chinese stressed 
that ICCPR ratification would take years, but they looked 
forward to learning from EU experience.  While some EU Member 
States are linking progress on ICCPR to the debate over 
lifting the EU arms embargo on China, none have come out with 
specific conditions.  The Director of Human Rights Watch\'s 
Brussels office said the EU\'s HR dialogue with China was not 
credible, and called the joint seminars \"closed door little 
schmoozing shops.\"  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) According to Chris Holtby, a UK-detailee to HiRep 
Solana\'s Policy Unit, China was represented at the seminar by 
the MFA and sixteen of the other \"entities\" participating in 
a PRC task force charged with laying the ground for ICCPR 
ratification.  MFA DG Li Baodong delivered China\'s opening 
remarks, followed by VFM Zhang Yesui.  The EU was represented 
by experts from 13 Member States and the Commission. 
 
3. (C) Describing UK and EU Presidency reports of the 
seminar, Holtby said that while the EU wanted to discuss 
continuing HR deficits, the Chinese wanted to focus almost 
exclusively on past accomplishments.  As a result there was 
no real discussion of substantive issues.  The central 
Chinese message was that ICCPR ratification was a long-term 
project requiring several years of hard work to complete. 
Yet the Chinese assured the EU that Beijing had made a 
political commitment to proceed, and looked forward to EU 
assistance in doing so.  In a statement that resonated with 
the Europeans, the Chinese said they hoped to learn from the 
experience of countries like Spain and Portugal that also 
went through lengthy HR transitions.  After the seminar, 
\"There was a lot of gushing (on the EU side) about the 
wonderful atmosphere,\" Holtby said.  The Dutch EU Presidency 
now wants to form smaller EU-China focus groups to tackle 
specific aspects of ICCPR ratification, perhaps using an 
article-by-article approach.  The UK promised to supply the 
Dutch with ideas. 
 
Arms Embargo Linkage? 
--------------------- 
 
4. (C) Asked whether ICCPR ratification would figure in the 
debate over lifting the EU arms embargo on China, Holtby (who 
represents the Policy Unit in PSC and Working Group 
discussions of China), said that \"some\" Member States had 
made \"general\" linkages between progress on ICCPR and lifting 
the embargo.  But as far as he knew, none had come forward 
with specific conditions. 
 
The View from Human Rights Watch 
-------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) Asked how the HR NGO community assesses the EU-China 
HR dialogue and subsidiary seminars, Human Rights Watch 
Brussels Director Lotte Leicht argued forcefully that they 
were not credible (septel).  She viewed as \"outrageous\" the 
EU\'s unwillingness to offend China.  The EU will not even ask 
for the release of political prisoners, let alone for 
detailed information on their welfare and whereabouts, she 
said.  Calling the EU-China meetings \"closed door little 
schmoozing shops,\" Leicht said that HRW was no longer willing 
to participate for fear of becoming an accomplice of the EU\'s 
appeasement of China. (Note: Leicht had the same view of the 
EU\'s HR dialogue with Iran). 
 
Sammis 
"
"19095","7/26/2004 14:28","04BRUSSELS3174","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE160967","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003174 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/25/2014 
TAGS: KOLY, PHUM, PREL, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EXCLUDING THE BELARUSIAN SPORTS AND TOURISM 
MINISTER: EU LEAVES IT TO ATHENS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 160967 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.4(b) 
(d) 
 
(C) Mission deployed reftel points with Carl Hellergard, 
point man on Belarus in the Council Policy Unit.  He said the 
EU was aware of the issue, but considered this fundamentally 
a question for the Greeks to decide.  He encouraged US to 
concentrate our efforts in Athens.  Hellergard noted that the 
Council Secretariat was sympathetic to the views of the US, 
convinced that Sivakov was a questionable figure, and has no 
hesitation in relaying this information to Athens.  He noted, 
however, that the Greeks were already aware of Sivakov\'s 
background, had raised this matter already in Brussels, but 
were clearly struggling to find a way forward.  Athens feels 
constrained, we were told, given their belief that as host of 
the Games they should try to keep political considerations 
outside technical decisions on participation, lest it have 
wider implications on the participation of other 
countries/individuals.  Still, Hellergard understood the 
Greeks were reviewing possible ways and means to perhaps deny 
Sivakov entry without setting unfortunate overall 
consequences for the Games. 
 
Sammis 
"
"19121","7/27/2004 11:08","04BRUSSELS3190","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE152009","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003190 
 
SIPDIS 
 
IO/UNP (NARANJO) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, PHUM, KDEM, AORC, KSEP, OVIP, OTRA, UN, UNGA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ON UNGA PRIORITIES, ATTENDEES 
 
REF: A. STATE 152009 
 
     B. STATE 132748 
 
Classified By: Political Minister-Counselor Kyle Scott for reasons 1.4 
(b/d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  EU officials welcomed early consultation on 
UNGA priorities and highlighted shared interest in combating 
human trafficking and reducing the number of Middle East 
resolutions -- although they underscored several times that 
this would be best achieved by resolving the underlying 
regional crisis.  The EU is unlikely to agree on a common 
approach on human cloning, leaving delegations to follow 
national policies; the same will probably apply to any 
discussion of UN Security Council reform.  Neither the 
Council nor the Commission has decided who will attend the 
UNGA but will let us know when their delegations are set, 
probably in early September.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) We met July 19 with Jim Cloos, Council Secretariat 
Director for Transatlantic Relations, the United Nations, and 
Human Rights, to discuss ref A and B demarches on UNGA 
preparations. Cloos was joined by Council UN experts Paulo 
Oliveira and Morten Knudsen as well as Transatlantic 
Relations administrator Margarita Comamala.  Cloos thanked us 
for providing our points and said the EU looked forward to 
further discussion in New York.  He noted that the UNGA would 
also include important political issues -- particularly the 
Middle East but also elements of Iraq policy, terrorism, and 
crisis management -- which, although not part of the formal 
UNGA agenda, the EU would want to discuss on the margins. 
Asked for clarification on crisis management, Cloos said that 
this meant peacekeeping rather than humanitarian issues -- 
the EU wanted to work with the UN on coordinating operations 
in Congo as well as response to the Darfur crisis in Sudan, 
and sought to move beyond case-by-case decisions to make 
coordination \"systemic.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Advancing Economic Freedom; Trafficking in Persons 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
3.  (C) Regarding the specific priorities listed in the U.S. 
nonpaper, the EU had no substantive comment on economic 
development and our proposed focus on emphasizing in UN 
resolutions the need for improved investment conditions.  On 
trafficking, Oliveira thought the U.S. and EU could probably 
work together given our broad areas of agreement.  We noted 
that the U.S. has had problems with the Dutch on trafficking, 
although this was based on differences with regard to 
prostitution laws rather than the involvement of minors. 
Cloos agreed, saying that the Dutch delegation had been firm 
on the need to implement UN protocols, including those 
relating to the age of consent. 
 
------------------------------- 
Hesitation on Democracy Caucus 
------------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) The EU responded cautiously to our points on the 
proposed Democracy Caucus.  Asked for more detail about U.S. 
ideas, we explained that we envisioned a broad-based approach 
to support common ideas and to encourage more effective 
efforts -- from a greater number of countries -- on human 
rights.  It should not always be the Cubans pushing human 
rights resolutions, we remarked.  Cloos replied that the EU 
was hesitant about creating new groupings; use of the term 
\"caucus\" -- which was even more definitive than a \"group\" -- 
would be problematic for the EU.  He said that this was a 
purely institutional issue, however -- there was no 
difficulty with the concept\'s substance.  His second concern 
was about how membership would be determined, pointing to the 
liberal criteria applied to invitations for participation in 
the Community of Democracies.  Who would say which countries 
qualified as members of such a caucus at the UN?  The 
important thing for the EU, Cloos continued, was working for 
\"effective multilateralism,\" which he described as a \"worthy 
and important objective.\" 
 
------------------------------------- 
EU Still Divided on Human Cloning Ban 
------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (C) Noting continued U.S. support for a ban on all human 
cloning, we asked what effect the apparent lack of EU 
consensus would have on the European position on this issue. 
Cloos said he did not know how internal EU disagreements 
would play out; no one expected the issue to be settled, and 
he thought that member states would probably end up following 
their own policies at the UN. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Middle East Resolutions Require Political Solution 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6.  (C) Cloos said that the EU was looking into how to reduce 
the number of Middle East-related resolutions while retaining 
their substance.  He pointedly noted that resolving the 
Arab-Israeli crisis would put an end to the problem but 
acknowledged the difficulties involved.  According to 
Oliveira, the number of Middle East-related resolutions had 
been reduced in at least the last two UNGAs relative to 
previous sessions.  He said that the point in the EU\'s UNGA 
priority paper stressing the need for UNGA revitalization 
tied into U.S. efforts to reduce the number of resolutions 
dealing with the Middle East.  The EU agreed with the U.S. on 
the need to cut back, he said, but re-emphasized Cloos\' point 
that the issue was linked to the situation on the ground -- 
easing regional tensions would, he said, result in fewer UN 
resolutions.  Reviewing more specific elements of our points, 
Oliveira questioned the proposal to abolish organizations the 
U.S. considers biased against Israel, noting that some of the 
organizations listed did useful work.  On the proposed 
anti-Semitism resolution, Cloos said that the EU was willing 
to promote a general resolution on religious intolerance 
provided it was \"balanced\" but did not want a separate 
resolution dealing solely with anti-Semitism. 
 
------------------- 
EU Priorities Paper 
------------------- 
 
7.  (C) Oliveira reviewed key points in the EU\'s paper, which 
he said presented the EU\'s major objectives within the 
overall UN framework.  Cloos, pointing to the paper\'s 
reference to EU interest in encouraging universal 
participation in the International Criminal Court, said that 
EU found \"worrisome\" Congress\' push to strengthen sanctions 
against Rome Treaty signatories who had not signed Article 98 
agreements with the U.S.  Oliveira thought the U.S. and EU 
were in agreement on the EU goal of reforming UN staff 
recruitment and assignment of posts.  He also pointed to the 
final point, in which the EU pledged to \"support appropriate 
improvements in security for the UN, including the allocation 
of the necessary resources,\" as another area where the U.S. 
and EU could work together.  Asked whether this meant 
increased budgets, Cloos and Oliveira replied that the idea 
was to reallocate resources within the current budget rather 
than increasing the total.  Noting the reference to UN reform 
in the EU\'s paper, we asked if there was an EU position on 
UNSC reform.  Cloos said that he could not discuss this with 
third countries due to internal EU disagreement and the 
position of \"one country\" in particular.  Given the lack of 
EU consensus, this -- like human cloning -- remains an issue 
for national governments. 
 
------------------ 
UNGA Attendees TBD 
------------------ 
 
8.  (U) We asked our Council contacts as well as Kristin de 
Peyron of the Commission\'s UN office for information about 
likely UNGA attendees (ref B).  Both told us that European 
participants would not be determined until after the August 
break. 
"
"19138","7/27/2004 14:12","04BRUSSELS3195","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 003195 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AF FOR TSMITH/MBITTRICK; USAID FOR PPC/DCO, RMT DARFUR 
RHOAD, AF FOR KALMQUIST 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, SU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SUBJECT: EU/SUDAN: FMS THREATEN SANCTIONS, PLEDGE 
MORE MONEY 
 
1.  In a meeting of the General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC) 
on July 26, EU FMs threatened sanctions if Sudan does not 
soon comply with 
international expectations on Darfur.  The GAERC Conclusions 
(available at 
http://ue.eu.int/) offer a very critical assessment of 
progress on the ground, 
and call for a UNSCR \"with a view to further actions, 
including imposing 
sanctions\" if the GOS does not immediately fulfill its 
commitments.  Although 
not imposing sanctions immediately, Dutch FM Bernard Bot, 
representing the EU 
Presidency, highlighted that \"the EU will follow events very 
closely and, in 
light of further developments, will take action.\"  EU Member 
States agreed to 
continue an \"active dialogue\" with the Sudanese government 
and militia groups, 
Bot said.  He also referred to \"active policy negotiations\" 
with the UN, AU, 
and US on the issue.  He said that FMs had agreed to follow 
the path of the 
UN\'s agreement with Khartoum, which allows Sudan 90 days to 
improve the 
situation. 
 
2.  Though Bot emphasized the EU\'s demand for better 
containment of the rebels, 
he gave recognition to some of the recent measures the 
Sudanese government has 
taken to improve the situation -- e.g. the deployment of a 
police force with 
four thousand officers, increased access for nearly 120 
monitors, and the 
arrest of rebel leaders.  To determine if sanctions need to 
be applied, the EU 
will rely heavily on the reports of the monitors, as well as 
on the report of 
SYG Annan\'s special representative.  If necessary, the 
ministers will meet 
again to determine the nature of the sanctions, \"in light of 
the situation in 
the field.\"  Bot also announced an additional 12 million 
Euros for the AU 
observer mission in Sudan, bringing the total EU contribution 
for humanitarian 
relief efforts in Sudan to 213 million Euros. 
 
3.  European Commission DG AIDCO officials assured USEU 
Development Counselor 
 that in view of the urgency, funds will be disbursed to the 
African Union\'s 
bank account by the end of this week. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
Sammis 
"
"19176","7/28/2004 12:03","04BRUSSELS3205","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE159245","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/27/2014 
TAGS: PREF, PHUM, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON REPLACEMENT FOR UNRWA COMMISSIONER 
GENERAL:  EU RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 159245 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Maren Smith for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d 
). 
 
1. (C) On July 27, PRM Assistant delivered reftel points to 
Desk Officer for UNRWA Christian Berger in the Commission\'s 
External Relations Directorate-General.  Berger candidly 
remarked that despite a fair performance as UNRWA COMGEN, 
Peter Hansen\'s welcome has waned. Berger cautioned that 
rumors of Hansen seeking a fourth term continue to circulate 
and could place pressure on donors to push hard for an 
alternative.  He warned that should the rumors bear fruit, 
the EU would likely shy away from actively seeking a 
replacement.  He added, however, that if the U.S. wished to 
push for an alternative despite Hansen\'s desire for 
reinstatement, the EU would follow suit.  Unfortunately, the 
EU has yet to discuss possible replacements very seriously, 
and Berger stressed that the EU would welcome any serious USG 
suggestions at this point. 
 
2. (C) Poloff also discussed reftel points with Morten 
Knudsen of the Council Secretariat\'s UN unit on July 27. 
Knudsen had no comment on either Hansen or specific 
successors.  He told us that the EU reviews upcoming UN 
appointments during its regular UN working group meetings; 
although EU members agree on a common approach in some cases, 
decisions are frequently left to member-states.  He said that 
the EU would probably discuss UNRWA candidates at the next 
working group meeting, which will be held in New York in 
September. 
SAMMIS 
"
"19188","7/28/2004 14:03","04BRUSSELS3207","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE159970","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003207 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2014 
TAGS: PTER, KT, NP, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: MAOIST VIOLENCE IN NEPAL: NO EU CLEARINGHOUSE 
ACTION YET 
 
REF: STATE 159970 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Maren Smith for reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
1. (C) We met on July 28 with Mario Ferrucci, deputy head of 
the India, Nepal, and Bhutan unit in the Commission\'s 
External Relations directorate, to discuss reftel points.  He 
said that UK pressure for designating the Maoists as a 
terrorist organization was \"a constant\" in EU discussions, 
most recently at the July 22 COREPER meeting.  According to 
Ferrucci -- who admitted that the Commission has no role in 
the designation decision but is closely following the debate 
-- the EU\'s position has not changed due to the \"legitimate 
possibility\" that the peace process could take off.  It would 
not help, he said, to add the Maoists to the list of 
terrorist groups at this point.  Ferrucci also questioned 
whether a freeze on Maoist assets in Europe -- which he 
claimed were minimal -- would really have much of an effect 
on the group\'s activities. 
 
2. (C) Ferrucci confirmed that the Dutch Presidency was 
drafting a strong statement intended to send a parallel 
message, warning the Nepalese government to make progress on 
development, good governance, and human rights reforms while 
also threatening the Maoists with being added to the list of 
terrorist groups if they did not support peace talks.  The EU 
has agreed to review progress and reconsider designation \"by 
the end of the year,\" according to Ferrucci. 
 
3. (C) We also discussed points on July 27 with British and 
Dutch contacts, who -- like Ferrucci -- noted that some 
member states were concerned that freezing assets now would 
hurt the peace process.  The Council will revisit the issue 
in September.  According to British diplomat Anna Clunes, the 
Germans have also argued that the Maoists do not meet the EU 
criteria for designation because no competent (judicial) 
authority has started an investigation or legal proceeding. 
She suggested that it might be useful for the U.S. and the UK 
to jointly lobby the Germans on this particular question in 
September. 
"
"19195","7/28/2004 15:22","04BRUSSELS3210","Embassy Brussels","SECRET//NOFORN","04BERLIN2539","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/21/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, MARR, MCAP, PHUM, CH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/CHINA ARMS EMBARGO: BRIEFING THE PSC ON CHINA\'S 
MILITARY MODERNIZATION 
 
REF: A. BERLIN 2539 
 
     B. THE HAGUE 1846 
     C. USEU TODAY 7/23/04 
     D. REIDHEAD/ALLEGRONE ET. AL. E-MAIL 7/22/04 
     E. USEU BRUSSELS 2896 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (S/NF) SUMMARY: The EU Political and Security Committee 
(PSC) hosted an informal gathering July 22 to receive a USG 
intelligence briefing on China\'s military modernization 
efforts and implications on regional stability if the EU 
lifts its arms embargo on China.  Post-briefing readouts from 
EU participants indicate that our briefing will feature 
prominently in internal EU discussions (including the July 27 
PSC) of the strategic implications of lifting the embargo. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (S/NF) EAP China Analyst John Culver delivered the 
briefing to roughly sixty (60) EU officials, including PSC 
Ambassadors and Deputies, Council DG Robert Cooper, WMD Rep 
Annalisa Giannella, and Council and Commission officers from 
regional and functional desks.  Dutch PSC Chair Ambassador 
Hamer opened the meeting by acknowledging that many in the 
room viewed the embargo as anachronistic and not reflective 
of China\'s HR progress or of the strengthening strategic 
relationship between the EU and China.  In that context, he 
said it was important that the PSC have the opportunity to 
hear and discuss US concerns about the implications of 
China\'s military modernization on regional stability.  (NOTE: 
Under prior arrangement with the Dutch hosts, we did not 
deliver the human rights segment of the briefing, as had been 
done in Berlin and The Hague (refs A and B).  We told the 
ambassadors that our human rights briefer was in the room and 
would be available to answer questions should they arise 
(none did).  We strongly support including the HR briefing 
alongside future military modernization briefings in willing 
EU capitals.  Many thanks to DRL Senior Advisor Susan 
O\'Sullivan for being willing and available.  END NOTE.) 
 
3. (S/NF) Culver relayed an impressive amount of detail about 
China\'s military modernization program, and at the same time 
demonstrated how it was oriented toward acquiring the ability 
to defeat Taiwan, and the US forces protecting Taiwan, in a 
cross-straits conflict.  He also explained how China was 
seeking (through industrial espionage and military-commercial 
partnerships) advanced weapons and dual-use technologies from 
the West to support this modernization. 
 
4. (S/NF) None of the attendees made policy points or used 
the occasion to corner us in a debate.  There were no 
questions about human rights, the EU Code of Conduct on arms 
exports, or other policy matters.  Instead, the audience 
stuck largely to the topic at hand.  The atmosphere was 
informal, courteous and respectful.  Several Ambassadors 
asked questions following the briefing, all of which Culver 
fielded expertly: 
 
-- Dutch Ambassador Hamer: How does China\'s increase in 
defense spending relate to its dramatic increase in GDP? 
 
-- Council DG Robert Cooper:  How does the US control its 
dual-use transfers?  How much do countries that supply China 
restrict their arms transfers?  (Note: DCM McKinley answered 
the first question by referring to US sanctions on China, 
which include strict dual-use controls). 
 
-- Irish Ambassador Kelleher: How much of China\'s military 
modernization is fueled by off-the-shelf technology?  What 
should be done? 
 
-- Greek Ambassador Paraskevoupoulos:  Couldn\'t China\'s 
military modernization be defensive, not offensive, in 
nature?  Can China really threaten the US and allies? 
 
-- Italian Ambassador Melani: What percentage of China\'s 
defense spending goes toward dual-use purchases?  What is 
China getting from Israel? 
 
-- Portuguese Ambassador Pereira Gomes:  What is Taiwan\'s 
nuclear capability?  How big is the defense spending gap 
between China and Japan?  Is the US going to engage China in 
arms talks to prevent an arms race? (Note: We deferred on 
this last question.) 
 
-- UK Ambassador Gooderham:  How concerned is the US about 
recent Taiwanese rhetoric and its potential to provoke China? 
 (Note: We used EAP-supplied points to respond.) 
-- Belgian Ambassador Wouters: In terms of military 
capabilities, what does China need to invade Taiwan?  Can 
they do it yet?  Will China even be able to invade Taiwan in 
2008 (the year used for projections in the briefing)? 
 
-- Dutch Military Rep: Isn\'t China\'s submarine fleet fairly 
weak?  Why are they focusing relatively more effort on 
shorter-range diesel technologies than on their nuclear subs 
and related technologies? 
 
5. (S/NF) The Council Secretariat China Director, Ana 
Ramirez, told us afterward that while our briefing would not 
change minds on lifting the arms embargo, it would strengthen 
the hands of those who want to ensure strong controls on 
European exports to China, with or without the embargo.  She 
thought our briefing would feature prominently in upcoming EU 
debates (including the July 27 PSC).  WMD Rep Giannella\'s 
Deputy, Andreas Strub, agreed that our briefing would be 
useful as Member States debate the issue in coming months, 
but added \"not all Member States fully share your threat 
assessment.\"  Council Policy Advisor Chris Holtby thought our 
briefing -- which he described as \"wowing them with data\" -- 
had reinforced our argument that lifting the embargo might 
have unintended destabilizing consequences for the region. 
 
6. (S/NF) COMMENT:  While our briefing did not change any 
minds, it certainly impressed upon the EU the seriousness of 
China\'s military modernization program and regional goals. 
We expect that the reports going back to capitals from the 
PSC delegations will strengthen the hands of those with 
outstanding concerns about the impact of lifting the embargo 
on regional stability.  And aside from the inherent value of 
the intelligence contained in the briefing, our willingness 
to deliver it to all 25 EU Member States -- at the same time 
(as with the PSC) and individually (in the ongoing national 
briefings) -- speaks volumes about the depth of our concerns 
and resolve.  The military modernization briefing, coupled 
when possible with the HR briefing, is a good value and we 
believe it would be useful to offer it in other willing EU 
capitals. 
 
Sammis 
"
"19200","7/28/2004 15:54","04BRUSSELS3211","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE162864","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/IPA, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2009 
TAGS: EAID, PREL, IS, KWBG, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU HAS SOME QUESTIONS ON UPCOMING AHLC 
 
REF: STATE 162864 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
 1.  (C)  Summary.  The European Commission, which has the 
lead on AHLC issues, supports US goals for having the AHLC 
focus on Gaza withdrawal, but is skeptical of the proposed 
September date.  The EC questions whether Israel will have an 
agreed, concrete withdrawal plan (or, possibly even a 
government) that can make commitments to donors in September. 
 Brussels is also concerned that the Israeli delegation 
included appropriate officials, such as National Security 
Advisor Eiland, and that Israel come prepared to take action 
to release arrears and improve internal movement and 
cross-border trade.  The EC is working with the World Bank in 
Jordan to finalize the necessary technical reports by the end 
of August, and also noted that the PA has a draft mid-term 
reconstruction plan.  Finally, Commission offiicals provided 
an update on the EC\'s planned 65 million euro contribution to 
the UN West Bank/Gaza Trust Fund.  End Summary. 
 
Is September Realistic? 
------------------ 
2.  (C)  On July 28, Poloff and Development Counselor 
presented reftel demarche to Christian Berger, the 
Commission\'s official for West Bank/Gaza issues, and Nina 
Obermaier, Programming Officer for WB/Gaza and MEPP.  Berger 
responded that the EC supports the goals laid out by the U.S. 
demarche, but is skeptical that the AHLC would actually be 
held in September.  With the Israeli Knesset in recess until 
late October, he asked, will there be an approved withdrawal 
plan?  Will there be a GOI in place that can make commitments 
to donors about the withdrawal?  The key, he said, would be 
having an Israeli delegation with a mandate and a withdrawal 
plan in hand for the meeting.  He added that the Quartet 
principals\' meeting would also be critical to set the stage 
for a successful AHLC.  He noted that the EC would want the 
next AHLC agenda to include issues related to the West Bank, 
in addition to Gaza.  He liked the idea of holding a Task 
Force meeting in August, but again questioned whether there 
would be sufficient preparation to hold the AHLC by September. 
 
What -- and who -- will Israel bring to the table? 
--------------- 
3.  (C)  Berger was also concerned that Israeli 
representation at the last AHLC (FM Shalom) was not 
sufficient to address the issues donors would raise.  The 
same issues discussed then -- Israeli arrears and 
cross-border trade/internal movement -- are once again on the 
agenda; Israel had meanwhile done little to address either. 
Berger said he would hope at a minimum that Israeli National 
Security Advisor Giora Eiland would be at the AHLC, if indeed 
it would focus on Gaza withdrawal. 
 
EU will ask Questions 
------------- 
4.  (C)  Berger said the EU will ask the US and other donors 
what, concretely, we and they are prepared to do to support 
PA takeover in Gaza following withdrawal.  Berger saw the 
issue of cross-border trade and internal movement as critical 
to a successful transfer in Gaza, and wondered what kind of 
guarantees the donors would seek on this from Israel.  He 
asked how the U.S. planned to work with Israel on this and 
other issues related to unfulfilled Israeli commitments from 
the last AHLC. 
 
Econ Plan:  EU to help WB 
--------------- 
5.  (C)  On the Economic Action Plan, Obermaier said that the 
World Bank had contacted the Commission for assistance in 
finalizing the necessary technical reports in August.  The 
Commission\'s staff in Jerusalem will work with the WB on 
this; she said the expectation is that the short, succint 
10-page reports will be completed by the end of August.  She 
also reported that the PA has a draft of a proposed mid-term 
reconstruction plan. 
 
Update on Contributions to the Reform Trust Fund 
------------------- 
6.  (C) USEU Development Counselor asked for an update on EU 
efforts to secure other donor interest in joining them in 
funding the World Bank\'s new Reform Trust Fund.  Obermaier 
explained that several donors have now made commitments to 
the Trust Fund including the Australians who have paid in US 
$1 million, the Norwegians who have paid in a first tranche 
of planned US $12 million, the UK which has paid in a first 
tranche of planned US $12 million, Canada which is expected 
to disburse a first tranche of its planned US $7 million 
commitment any day now, the Japanese who are also expected to 
pay in a first tranche of their planned US $10 million 
commitment any day now and a very serious expression of 
interest from the French.  Given the other donor intentions 
to match EC funds, the EC has decided to use this vehicle for 
65 million euros of its assistance to the PA.  The 65 million 
euros will be disbursed in three tranches: 40% (26 million 
euros) within the coming days; 30% when the WB certifies 
compliance with the fund\'s conditions (which is expected 
soon), and the remaining 30% by the end of the calendar year. 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"19240","7/29/2004 15:44","04BRUSSELS3222","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE162903|04THEHAGUE1901","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 003222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, AF, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU SUPPORTIVE ON AFGHAN STABILITY, KARZAI DECISION 
ON VICE-PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 
 
REF: A. STATE 162903 
     B. THE HAGUE 1901 
 
1. (SBU) We reviewed ref A points during a July 28 meeting 
with Baltasar Benz, the Afghanistan desk officer in the 
Commission\'s External Relations directorate.  Benz said that 
the Commission -- which had been concerned about 
Afghanistan\'s warlords -- welcomed President Karzai\'s 
decision to drop Fahim Kahn as his running mate.  The 
Commission (and the EU more generally) will maintain its 
long-standing support for Afghan stability, a public focus 
since the Bonn Conference and highlighted most recently in 
the Dutch EU Presidency\'s July 27 statement (ref B).  Benz 
remarked on the close cooperation between the U.S. and the 
Commission, EU special representative, core EU member states, 
and G-8 countries on Afghan issues. 
 
2. (U) Also on July 28, CFSP High Representative Solana\'s 
office issued a press release detailing his discussion with 
Karzai earlier in the day.  Solana said that the EU supported 
Karzai\'s choice of running mates, described in the press 
release as \"persons of high standing and integrity as well as 
committed to the process of reform.\"  Solana hailed the 
Afghan people\'s interest in participating in the elections -- 
as shown by the high percentage of registered voters and the 
diversity of presidential candidates -- and called for a 
secure and open campaign process. 
 
3. (U) The Commission on July 29 approved an additional 9 
million euros for the UN-managed Elections Project, which 
will provide support for election-related activities in 
Afghanistan including voter information campaigns and 
ensuring that all candidates have media access. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"19241","7/29/2004 15:44","04BRUSSELS3223","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003223 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/FO, AF/E, AF/RSA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2014 
TAGS: EAID, ET, MARR, PREL, SU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DARFUR: EU TO AUGMENT OBSERVERS, PROPOSES 
ASSESSMENT MISSION 
 
REF: BUCKNEBERG (THE HAGUE)-BITTRICK E-MAIL OF 7/28/04 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL MINISTER COUNSELOR KYLE SCOTT.  REASON: 1.4(b/ 
d) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Hirep Solana has proposed to African Union 
(AU) an augmentation in EU representation on ceasefire 
observers to allow a European representative on each team. 
An officer has also been dispatched to backstop the AU in 
Addis, but operational details remain unsettled.  EU also 
wants to send a small EU-AU \"assessment team\" to the region 
to report on additional needs, if any.  We were told if US 
want to join mission, we should approach AU directly.  EU 
officials worry the UK idea floated over the weekend for more 
robust intervention in Darfur could be counterproductive. 
Commission officials confirm most of the 12m euro allocated 
by Foreign Ministers July 26 is already en route to AU 
account.  End Summary. 
 
Solana\'s Three Proposals to AU 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) Following the July 26 meeting of the EU foreign 
ministers, in which the EU stiffened its rhetoric toward the 
GoS and threatened to impose UN sanctions, the EU\'s Political 
and Security Committee (PSC) has met twice to discuss the 
situation in Darfur.  As a result of these meetings, Hirep 
Solana was instructed to make further proposals to the AU on 
steps to address the crisis.  In a letter dated July 27 to AU 
Commission President Konare, Solana made three proposals: 
 
-- To put an EU officer at the disposal of the AU team 
organizing the observer mission.  Christian Manahl, Solana\'s 
point man on Sudan, clarified that this military operations 
liaison officer would backstop the AU-led monitoring mission 
in Darfur.  The EU is also discussing the option of having a 
more permanent EU liaison officer to the AU put on the ground 
to enhance cooperation between the AU and the EU in security 
and conflict management matters.  However, it is not clear, 
at this stage, whether this person would be located in the EC 
Delegation (the most likely option according to Manahl), or 
set up an office of his own. The option of placing someone 
into the AU Secretariat offices has been discarded, for 
reasons of sensitivity and infrastructures.  Manahl added 
that the EU is thinking of an officer seconded by an EU 
Member State, but who would spend some time at the EU 
Military Staff to become familiar with the new institutions 
in the military/security area at HQs before assignment to 
Addis Ababa.  He confirmed that the French have in fact 
expressed interest in providing such an officer, but noted 
that they will probably rely on their Military Attach 
already posted in Addis Ababa. 
 
-- To reinforce the number of EU participants in the 
monitoring missions from nine (seven currently in place, with 
two more expected to arrive before the end of July) to twelve 
monitors in addition to the French vice president.  According 
to Manahl, this would allow the EU to deploy one EU monitor 
with each of the twelve teams. 
 
-- To send on an urgent basis a group of civilian and 
military experts to the region to identify additional steps 
the EU might need to take to reinforce the monitoring 
missions (including the force protection effort).  The EU 
envisions this assessment team going to the region in 
conjunction with the AU, and is awaiting an AU response to 
this proposal before moving ahead.  We were told the EU team 
would likely be comprised of 5-6 individuals.  It will most 
likely be led by Peter Feith, Deputy Director General for 
European Security and Defense Policy, and include 
representatives from the EU Military Staff, EU Police 
Mission, Solana\'s Policy Unit, and a representative of the 
Commission.  We were told the EU did not plan to invite the 
US to join the assessment team, but had no objections if the 
US joins in response to a request from the AU. 
 
3. (C) Manahl told us that the EU continues to encounter 
resistance from mid-level functionaries of the AU to outside 
involvement, and expected that a political decision would be 
required by Konare to accept the EU\'s proposals. 
UK Has Not Pursued Proposal for Intervention 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Manahl said the UK idea floated over the weekend in 
London for more robust intervention appeared to be a trial 
balloon that enjoys no support elsewhere in the EU.  He noted 
that the UK did not even pursue the idea at the June 26 
foreign ministers\' meeting, nor mention it at either of this 
week\'s PSC meetings on Sudan.  What it had done, Manahl 
contended, was trigger a mobilization by Arab militias in 
Sudan.  He noted that the current GoS enjoyed very little 
popular support, but suggested that an outside intervention 
would be manipulated by the government to increase domestic 
support for the regime. 
 
5. (C) Manahl said the EU was monitoring closely the 
situation elsewhere in Sudan.  He noted in particular 
worrying rumors of a possible new rebellion in Eastern Sudan. 
 
Commission Money Already En Route to AU 
--------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) Manahl confirmed that the Commission has committed to 
transfer the 12m euros allocated by the foreign ministers on 
July 26 to the AU\'s accounts (in Brussels) by the end of the 
week, i.e. July 30.  Commission official Theo Kaspers advised 
that an 80 percent advance of the 12 million euros has 
already left Commission bank account and is en route to the 
AU\'s account in Brussels. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
SAMMIS 
 
-- 
"
"19262","7/30/2004 7:18","04BRUSSELS3224","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE159971","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/UMB AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/29/2009 
TAGS: KOLY, PHUM, PREL, GR, BO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU MAY ACT TO BAN BELARUSIAN SPORTS MINISTER FROM 
OLYMPICS 
 
REF: A. STATE 159971 
 
     B. THE HAGUE 1880 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  The EU is looking seriously at steps it 
can take to ban Belarusian Sports Minister Sivakov from the 
Olympic games.  Greece supports a ban, but wants to approach 
the International Olympic Committee first, as visas are 
issued along with IOC credentials, and Sivakov is likely to 
appeal to the IOC should his visa be denied.  The EU also 
plans to approach the GOB in Minsk to dissuade Sivakov from 
traveling to Athens.  Finally, assuming the IOC will go along 
with a ban, the EU could take action as early as August 3, 
based on Minsk\'s failure to investigate several politically 
motivated disappearances reported in the \"Pourgerides Report\" 
in May.  At the time the report was released, the EU said it 
might consider further actions if the GOB did not 
investigate; the report cited Sivakov and two other GOB 
ministers as being implicated.  The EU ban would be on all 
three ministers.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) Despite earlier indications that the EU would not 
move to bar Belarusian Sports and Tourism Minister Sivakov 
from the summer Olympics, the EU is now seriously considering 
taking action.  According to the Council\'s acting Belarus 
desk officer, Carl Hallergard, the EU\'s Political and 
Security Committee (PSC) held a lengthy discussion of the 
issue on July 29. 
 
Greece supports a ban; but notes IOC wrinkle 
-------------------- 
3.  (C)  Greece supports a ban, but noted that visas for 
ministers are issued as part of the accreditation they 
receive from the International Olympic Committee (IOC). 
Belarus would likely appeal any action by Greece to cancel or 
deny a visa directly to the IOC.  Therefore, Greece plans to 
approach the IOC in coming days to see if the IOC would 
support a visa denial for Sivakov.  Greece hopes to have a 
response by the time of the PSC\'s next meeting on August 3. 
Other EU member states are free also to approach the IOC on 
this issue over the next few days.  (Comment. Presumably, the 
US and other non-EU states could do likewise; doing so would 
add weight to the argument for a ban.  End Comment.) 
 
Moral dissuasion 
-------------- 
4.  (C)  The EU also plans to approach the GOB informally in 
an attempt to dissuade Sivakov from attending the Olympics, 
regardless of whether the EU succeeds in denying him a visa. 
(Comment.  Here again, the US could consider making a 
parallel approach in Minsk, coordinated with EU missions 
there.  End Comment.) 
 
Some Members oppose a ban, but EU may have found a way... 
----------------- 
5.  (C)  Hallergard said that while some member states oppose 
a specific ban preventing Sivakov from traveling to the 
Olympics, arguing that this is an issue for Greece to decide, 
PSC Ambassadors have found an alternative means to achieve 
the  same goal.  On May 14, the EU issued a statement on the 
so-called \"Pourgerides Report\" on disappearances in Belarus. 
The statement cited three Belarusian ministers -- including 
Sivakov -- as being implicated, and included a warning that 
the EU would consider further action if the GOB did not 
investigate the disappearances.  The GOB has done nothing, 
and now PSC Ambassadors may be prepared to institute a ban on 
the three ministers cited in the report; this would prevent 
Sivakov from traveling to Athens. 
 
If all else fails, Sivakov won\'t be allowed to mingle 
-------------------- 
6.  (C)  Greece also informed the PSC that, even if Sivakov 
is able to travel to Athens, the GOG has decided not to 
invite him to the two ceremonial events where he would have 
an opportunity to mingle with other dignitaries:  at the VIP 
Tribunal for the opening ceremonies; and at the reception 
following the opening that will be hosted by the Greek 
President. 
 
Timeline 
-------- 
7.  (C)  The EU could act as quickly as next week; but much 
depends on the position of the IOC.  If the IOC will not 
dispute with Greece a visa denial, prospects are good that 
the PSC will impose a ban next week on Sivakov and the two 
other ministers named in the Pourgerides report. 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"19265","7/30/2004 7:44","04BRUSSELS3225","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04USEUBRUSSELS2938","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 003225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, ZS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU EFFORTS ON AID AND TRADE FOR NORTHERN CYPRUS 
ARE STALLING 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 2938 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 B/D 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) During meetings with Dutch Presidency, Commission and 
Council officials on July 26-27, EUR DAS Laura Kennedy was 
told the prospects for positive developments on Cyprus looked 
difficult.   The Commission\'s proposed aid and trade measures 
to \"end the isolation\" of the north of the island (reftel) 
have been stalled in the Council by Greek Cypriot insistence 
that such measures can only be approved and implemented with 
the GoC\'s agreement and involvement.  Dutch and Commission 
officials said the problem has been complicated by a 
preliminary Council legal services\' opinion that the 
Cypriot\'s legal arguments may have merit.  The Dutch said 
they have proposed a \"cooling off\" period over the August 
break, but are determined not to let the objections of two 
members (Nicosia and Athens) hold EU policy toward the 
Turkish Cypriots hostage.  A Presidency paper on September 2 
should propose possible solutions to the specific Greek 
Cypriot objections.  The Dutch hope the aid package of 259m 
euros, which must be unanimously approved by the Council, can 
be agreed at the September 13 GAERC (EU FMs\') meeting.  They 
then hope the trade measures, where there is an argument 
about whether they can be adopted by qualified majority or 
only by unanimity, would be adopted by the end of September. 
As the EU struggles to get its measures passed, all EU 
officials urged the US to move ahead with our own package of 
aid and trade opening with the north.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) This is a joint USEU/Embassy The Hague report.  DAS 
Kennedy\'s discussions on Turkey are covered septel. 
 
3. (U) On July 26 and 27, DAS Kennedy met with a team of 
Dutch Presidency officials (Pieter de Gooijer, MFA Director 
for European Integration; Hannie Pollmann-Zaal, Director for 
Western and Central Europe; and Jurriaan Kraak, Enlargement 
Counselor of the Dutch PermRep in Brussels) as well as, in 
separate sessions, with Fabrizio Barbaso, the Commission\'s 
acting Director General for Enlargement; Leopold Maurer, Head 
of the Commission\'s Cyprus Unit; and Christoph Heusgen, 
Director of the Council\'s Policy Planning Unit. 
 
TWO MEASURES TO \"END ISOLATION\" OF NORTH BLOCKED 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
4. (C) All of the EU officials began their discussion of 
Cyprus by noting that in the immediate aftermath of the 
Cyprus referendum, the EU FMs at their GAERC meeting on April 
26 expressed their \"determination to put an end to the 
isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community\" and invited the 
Commission \"to bring forward comprehensive proposals to this 
end.\"  Heusgen noted that some political steps had been 
taken, such as receiving \"TRNC Prime Minister\" Talat at a 
higher level in EU capitals.  But the real action lay with 
the proposals for increased EU aid to and trade with the 
north of the island that the Commission had brought forward 
on July 7 (reftel). 
 
5. (C) Barbaso noted the Commission had proposed three sets 
of measures.  The first, known as the \"Green Line Regulation\" 
would permit intra-island trade across the Green Line.  This 
regulation has been adopted by the Council, with the support 
of the Greek Cypriot government, and is now in the process of 
being implemented.  But the other two pieces, one for 259m 
euros of assistance that would be spent directly in the 
north, and one for approval of procedures that would allow 
for direct trade between the rest of the EU and the north, 
have been blocked in the Council by the Greek Cypriots. 
(NOTE:  Both the Commission and Dutch said that another 
Turkish Cypriot desire, direct flights into the north, had 
been \"carefully left out of the package.\"  The Commission has 
said this is an issue for individual states, not the EU as a 
whole.  END NOTE.) 
 
6. (C/NF) De Gooijer and Kraak said negotiations in the 
Council had been very difficult.  Kraak said the Commission, 
apparently \"fed up\" with the Greek Cypriots, had taken a 
\"rather inflexible\" stance and is opposing giving them any 
role in implementation of the measures other than the Line 
Regulation.  The UK and \"some of the Nordics\" had been active 
in trying to overcome Cypriot and Greek opposition, but \"many 
Member States don\'t want to get involved.\"  De Gooijer said 
the Dutch objective is to make progress as soon as possible, 
and certainly by the end of the year. 
 
GREEK CYPRIOT OBJECTIONS TO AID PACKAGE 
--------------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Both the Dutch and the Commission indicated they 
thought the 259m euro aid package would be approved in 
September, despite the requirement that it be unanimously 
adopted by all EU Member States, as Nicosia says it supports 
it.  But Kraak and Maurer both noted several outstanding 
disagreements between Nicosia and the Commission (and 
others).  The Commission would like the assistance to be used 
as broadly as possible, including for educational and 
administrative training efforts; the GoC wants the package 
focused only on economic development.  The GoC says delivery 
of the aid should not involve local \"authorities\"; the 
Commission says this is unworkable.  The GoC insists projects 
should be consulted with or even approved by them to ensure 
\"island-wide planning\"; the Commission and Dutch view this as 
a \"red herring.\"  (NOTE: DAS Kennedy noted that she had 
\"politely declined\" a similar demand by GoC FM Iacovou on the 
USG aid package for the north.  END NOTE.) The Commission 
wants the Regulation to explicitly note that Turkish Cypriot 
enterprises are eligible for tenders; the GoC objects.  The 
original Commission proposal was silent on the issue of 
expropriated property.  The GoC objected, pushing for 
language that Maurer said would imply the Commission would be 
responsible for \"compensation\" for any impact of projects on 
Greek Cypriot property; something the Commission could not 
accept.  The Commission is considering language that would 
oblige them to check that no Greek Cypriot property is 
involved in a project.  But Maurer noted that this could make 
some infrastructure projects, such as water and sewer 
projects, difficult to implement, and the UK has objected to 
such a procedure being included in the Regulation. 
 
AND ALSO OBJECTS TO THE TRADE MEASURES 
-------------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) De Gooijer commented that, even if the GoC had serious 
issues with the aid package, the proposed trade measures are 
\"even harder for them to swallow.\"  Nicosia argues that 
direct trade from the north to the rest of the EU, rather 
than via the south, will promote continued division of the 
island, not reunification.  No one else agrees with them. 
But the GoC has also argued that the \"legal basis\" chosen by 
the Commission for its trade regulation (Article 133 of the 
Treaty of the European Communities) is invalid, because it is 
supposed to be applied to \"third territories\" outside the EU. 
 The GoC says that the correct \"legal basis\" would be 
Protocol 10 of the Accession Treaty, which suspends 
application of the EU acquis communitaire to the north of the 
island.  The reason this is important is because actions 
under Article 133 can be approved by a qualified majority 
vote (QMV) of the Council, while actions based on Protocol 10 
would require unanimity, giving the GoC a veto on the 
proposal.  The GoC would almost certainly use this veto to 
demand significant changes to the package, forcing all trade 
to leave the island via the south and insisting that the GoC 
must authorize the Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce to 
issue certificates of origin and other documentation. 
(Maurer noted the Commission had accepted a requirement for 
GoC authorization of TCCoC certificates under the Line 
Regulation, but that this should not be necessary for trade 
not destined for the south of the island.  The Dutch 
Presidency, however, had been indecisive on this point so 
far.) 
 
9. (C) Unfortunately, the GoC objections to the \"legal basis\" 
have been supported by Athens and, more importantly, the 
interim oral opinion of the Council Legal Services.  The 
Commission lawyers emphatically disagree with their Council 
colleagues. (NOTE: We are told there is a history of bad 
blood between the two legal offices.)  The Commission (in a 
non-paper provided to EUR/SE) argues that Article 133 is not 
just for third countries, but has been applied to trade with 
EU territories that are not part of the EU\'s \"customs 
territory\" such as Gibraltar.  Maurer said other examples 
would include the Spanish territories of Ceuta or Melilla, 
and certain special territories in Germany and Italy. 
 
SO NOW WHAT? 
------------ 
 
10. (C) Kraak said that the Council last week had decided it 
would not force the issue through under QMV at this point. 
The Dutch decided to use the August break as a \"cooling off\" 
period.  They also are waiting to receive the Council legal 
service\'s written opinion on the \"legal basis\" question 
before plotting the way ahead.  But they plan to prepare a 
Presidency paper by September 2 that would inventory 
outstanding problems on both draft regulations, and suggest 
possible solutions.  De Gooijer said the Dutch would like to 
reach agreements as early as possible, with targets being to 
agree on the aid package at the September 13 GAERC, and the 
trade proposal by the end of September.  But he admitted it 
could take longer, saying \"we will work hard in September and 
October.\"  De Gooijer added that it could take time, but the 
23 could not be held up by just two members on this. 
\"Eventually, there will be a decision\" and there would be an 
aid package and a trade package.  He insisted Nicosia alone 
could not dictate the entire EU\'s policy toward the Turkish 
Cypriots.  On how exactly to force Nicosia\'s hand, de Gooijer 
was less precise.  He said political pressure could be 
applied and the Presidency could start exploring about \"what 
else do they want.\"  This could conceivably include some 
amendments to the package, or concessions to the GoC in other 
\"outside\" policy areas.  Somewhat offhandedly, de Gooijer 
even speculated that the Presidency could approach the issue 
\"somewhat gradually\" by accepting GoC demands that all trade 
go via the south, and then, when that failed, resuming 
pressure on Nicosia to be more flexible. 
 
11.  (C/NF) Barbaso said several scenarios are possible in 
September and much will depend on the attitude of the 
Presidency.  The Council could try to get approval of the aid 
package, unanimously, on September 13; and then go ahead and 
adopt the trade regulation under Article 133, simply 
outvoting Nicosia and Athens.  Barbaso said the GoC could 
then decide whether to contest the regulation at the European 
Court of Justice, but that while the case was being 
considered the regulation would be in place and direct trade 
could begin.  But the Commission would have to convince the 
Dutch and enough Member States to take this approach, and 
Barbaso dryly observed that such a confrontational strategy 
was \"not common practice\" in the EU.  Maurer (strictly 
protect) put the problem more bluntly, \"The Member States are 
cowards.  We are even unsure that the UK would be willing to 
push the issue that hard.\" 
 
12. (C/NF) Some states were also a bit unnerved whenever the 
Commission looks like it is taking action over the will of a 
Member State.  But the Commission also has some leverage in 
the debate.  Under the EU treaties, unless the Commission 
assents to the change, the Council can only change the legal 
basis of the regulation by unanimity, if the UK or one of the 
Nordics objects, the Council cannot act.  The Commission was 
also trying to explore the views of various Member States, 
noting they had been surprised by the \"bad behavior\" (NFI) of 
the German Ambassador during last week\'s debate.  But Maurer 
speculated that the Dutch would be very cautious because the 
overriding objective of the Presidency is to get a good 
result on the question of Turkish accession negotiations in 
December (septel) and so they need the GoC to stay reasonable. 
 
IF THEY SUCCEED 
--------------- 
 
13. (C) Maurer and Barbaso said the Commission had not yet 
done detailed planning for implementation of the aid package, 
but the Commission was leaning toward using the European 
Agency for Reconstruction (EAR), a Thessaloniki-based agency 
established to administer EU aid to Kosovo, SaM and 
Macedonia.  This would mean about 20 people on the ground in 
Cyprus to administer the aid.  Maurer said serious work on 
programming the aid would begin in the fall, but the 
Commission was already concerned about the north\'s 
\"absorptive capacity\" given that 259m euros was a lot of 
money to spend on such a small population and territory, and 
one with some reasons for concern about corruption.  The 
overall priorities, however, would track \"with what we would 
have done if a solution had been agreed.\"  Small and medium 
size enterprise development would be important, and other 
investments would focus on environmental issues such as waste 
management and sewer systems, water systems, energy networks, 
telecoms and agriculture.  Money would also probably be spent 
on developing administrative capacity, particularly on public 
health and veterinary institutes, and border and harbor 
management.  Finally, the EC would look at \"people-to-people\" 
programs including scholarships and youth exchanges. 
 
14. (SBU) As part of the Line Regulation, the Commission is 
already beginning work on expert exchanges to ensure all 
procedures are adequate, including application of strict 
rules of origin and veterinary and phyto-sanitary inspection. 
 Maurer noted that under the current regulation, trade in 
animal products (including cheese) and potatoes was excluded. 
 A quota system would also be in place to reduce the risk of 
fraudulent trade such as that found by the EU in sugar from 
the Balkan states.  In response to DAS Kennedy\'s inquiry 
whether, given the negligible quantity of trade likely from 
the north to the U.S., the EU-authorized procedures and 
certificates could be used by the U.S. for implementation of 
our own trade measures, Maurer and his staff said there was 
no problem with this from the EU side, if such documentation 
would be acceptable to US authorities. 
 
HOW THE U.S. CAN HELP 
--------------------- 
15. (C/NF) Both the Dutch and the Commission encouraged DAS 
Kennedy to have the U.S. move ahead with our own measures to 
end the north\'s isolation, and not wait for the EU.  Barbaso 
and Maurer said they hoped US implementation of aid and trade 
opening could help \"pave the way\" to EU action.  De Gooijer 
also said that US action could be a helpful signal to the GoC 
that \"this is the way things are going to go\" and might help 
show Nicosia \"the limits of their ability to oppose\" contacts 
between the Turkish Cypriots and the outside world.  De 
Gooijer noted that Papadopolous is \"not in touch with 
Brussels realities\" and needs to be led on this score.   The 
implementation of US trade measures could also demonstrate to 
Cyprus that direct trade from the north does not have to 
equate with political recognition.  De Gooijer also suggested 
that US officials, in contacts with the GoC, could help 
reinforce the Dutch message that the Commission\'s measures 
are almost inevitable by telling the Greek Cypriots that \"our 
impression after talking to folks all around the EU is that 
these decisions are going to be taken.\"  DAS Kennedy noted 
the Dutch suggestion, although it would be delicate for us to 
speak for the EU.  But we would certainly continue to work on 
our aid and trade measures. 
 
16. (C) De Gooijer also inquired as to the prospects for UN 
action.  DAS Kennedy said the UK will lead the UNSC 
discussions in the fall.  We hoped for a UNSCR endorsing the 
SYG\'s good offices report, but would not support a 
waterred-down UNSCR that did not go as far as the SYG\'s 
recommendations.  She noted there was also the upcoming 
report on UNFICYP mission would prompt consideration on what 
sort of continued UN peacekeeping mission was or was not 
appropriate, especially with so many other places in need of 
such troops. 
 
17.  (C) DAS Kennedy asked if there were EU interest in \"just 
dropping the Cyprus package,\" particularly considering a 
potential nexus with the decision on Turkish accession.  De 
Gooijer reiterated that the EU would not allow Nicosia to 
control the Union on this issue, either. \"Cyprus is a member 
state whose concerns we must take seriously,\" he offered, 
adding \"but not to the detriment to the interests of the 
whole.\" 
 
TURKISH PERSPECTIVE 
------------------- 
 
18. (C) In a separate meeting with DAS Kennedy, Mustafa Oguz 
Demiralp, Turkish Ambassador to the EU, said the GoT was very 
supportive of the Commission\'s proposals.  Turkey will 
continue to lobby for an EU decision in September, but 
Demiralp said he would not be surprised if there was no quick 
action.  He added that back in May he had already told Ankara 
not to expect too much; the Commission would draft good 
proposals, but the Council would find it hard to approve them 
because of Greek Cypriot obstructionism.  He argued that more 
important would be bilateral measures, particularly by the UK 
and US to open up to the north.  When DAS Kennedy noted that 
our aid package was far smaller than the EU\'s, but that we 
had declined GoC demands to be consulted on its disbursement, 
Demiralp replied that this political signal was far more 
important than the sum of money.  Demiralp also underlined 
how failure to make progress on opening measures would harm 
the reunification effort, as people in the north would be 
discouraged to see that despite their positive vote in April 
no real steps to end their isolation were being taken. 
Responding to DAS Kennedy\'s encouragement to the GoT to 
consider a symbolic step on troop withdrawals from the 
island, Demiralp said he understood the point, and heard it 
frequently from Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen, but that 
it would be very hard for a Turkish politician to explain the 
gesture to the public until some concrete measures had been 
taken to help the Turkish Cypriots. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
19. (C)  The GoC appears to have the EU at an impasse.  EU 
officials such as de Gooijer or Heusgen insist GoC President 
Papadopoulos does not understand how the EU works and will 
eventually have to show flexibility or \"pay the price.\"  But 
we wonder, particularly with the decision on Turkey looming 
in December, just how high a price the Dutch Presidency and 
the rest of the EU will be willing to impose.  The GoC knows 
this too, and will be looking to do as much as it can to 
water down the Commission\'s proposals come September. 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"19266","7/30/2004 7:47","04BRUSSELS3226","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04NICOSIA1288","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 003226 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/29/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ENCOURAGING SIGNALS FROM COMMISSION AND DUTCH 
PRESIDENCY ON TURKEY 
 
REF: A. NICOSIA 1288 
 
     B. PARIS 5495 
     C. USEU BRUSSELS 3225 
     D. ANKARA 4133 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reason 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) In meetings on July 26-27 in Brussels with Dutch 
Presidency, Commission and Council officials, EUR DAS Laura 
Kennedy heard guardedly optimistic assessments from all that 
the EU, at its summit this December, would reach a positive 
decision on opening EU accession negotiations with Turkey 
next year.  All officials, including acting Director General 
for Enlargement Barbaso, excluded the possibility that the 
Commission\'s October report to the EU leaders would recommend 
against opening negotiations with Turkey.   But they also 
indicated that an unequivocal \"Yes\" was also unlikely.  Much 
discussion from now to October between Commission staff, 
Commissioners, and the Dutch Presidency will be on how much 
contextual language the Commission should include about areas 
where Turkey should continue to progress.  All interlocutors 
added that while Turkey should be encouraged about a likely 
good result, Ankara must not be complacent or presumptuous 
about its status.  Nonetheless, the Dutch Presidency said its 
preference for the December decision would be a clear 
decision that sets a date, with no need for any further 
decisions by the EU prior to the commencement of 
negotiations.  If they are able to secure this outcome, any 
language on \"conditionality\" would be unimportant, and should 
not spark a negative reaction from the Turks.  Every EU 
official cited the recent visit of PM Erdogan to Paris, and 
French President Chirac\'s positive comments about Turkey\'s 
candidacy, as making a \"yes\" in December much more likely. 
At the same time, they were generally dismissive of the 
chance that the government of Cyprus would veto the decision; 
\"they wouldn\'t dare,\" said one official.  (COMMENT:  Given 
Nicosia\'s recent behavior in the Council - see REF C - we 
fear the EU may be underestimating this risk.)  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) This is a joint USEU/Embassy The Hague report.  DAS 
Kennedy\'s discussions on Cyprus are covered Ref C. 
 
3. (U) On July 26 and 27, DAS Kennedy met with a team of 
Dutch Presidency officials (Pieter de Gooijer, MFA Director 
for European Integration; Hannie Pollmann-Zaal, Director for 
Western and Central Europe; and Jurriaan Kraak, Enlargement 
Counselor of the Dutch PermRep in Brussels) as well as, in 
separate sessions, with Fabrizio Barbaso, the Commission\'s 
acting Director General for Enlargement; Matthias Ruete, DG 
Enlargement\'s Director for Turkey, Romania and Bulgaria; and 
Christoph Heusgen, Director of the Council\'s Policy Planning 
Unit.  She also met with Turkish Ambassador to the EU Mustafa 
Oguz Demiralp. 
 
COMMISSION REPORT DUE ON OCTOBER 6 
---------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Barbaso and Ruete said that the European Commission 
(EC) report on Turkey, scheduled for approval by the college 
of all 30 Commissioners on October 6, would have three parts. 
 The first part, which Barbaso said the EC had already begun 
drafting, would be an assessment of Turkey\'s progress in 
meeting the EU\'s Copenhagen Criteria (political, economic and 
administrative) for EU membership.  Most important will be on 
the political criteria, including democratic practice, rule 
of law and human rights, which must be adequately fulfilled 
before accession negotiations could begin.  The focus will be 
on Turkish progress since the EU Summit of December 2002, 
when the EU set this December as a deadline for a decision on 
Turkey\'s candidacy. 
 
5. (C) Barbaso said that in regulatory and legislative terms 
Turkey has achieved an enormous amount in the last two years. 
 A couple of necessary pieces of legislation are outstanding 
such as the revised penal code and the foundations law, but 
the EC was confident that Ankara would deliver on its 
promises to get these passed.  More difficult for the EC to 
assess is the implementation of these reforms.  Barbaso 
observed that the Member States in the EU Council clearly 
knew in December 2002 that two years was not enough time to 
allow for absolute implementation everywhere on everything. 
But Ruete commented that implementation was the \"real worry.\" 
 The key issue will be if progress appears \"sustained enough\" 
to be confident that full implementation will eventually be 
achieved. 
 
WHAT TURKEY NEEDS TO DO 
----------------------- 
 
6. (C) Ruete listed several key areas being watched and where 
Turkey should continue progress.  First was the continued 
harassment \"by the deep state\" of defenders of human rights, 
including prosecutors bringing cases against activists. 
Another was the delay in returning internally displaced 
persons and refugees to their homes, especially in the 
southeast.  On this, he said, Turkey could improve 
cooperation with the UN.  Ruete also highlighted the issue of 
religious freedom and the foundations law, where the 
Christian groups had been particularly vocal.  He described 
this as an \"exaggerated\" issue that was being treated 
disproportionately, noting that the draft report has more 
pages on this issue effecting some 60,000 people than it does 
on the Kurdish issue.  But nevertheless, religious freedom 
was a politically powerful issue for EU politicians and 
publics.  Minority rights, especially Kurdish language and 
education rights, were another big issue for implementation. 
The changes to date are \"great successes\", but progress is 
still \"in its infancy\", he said.  Ruete added we should not 
forget steps such as revision of the Penal Code, appointment 
of a civilian as head of the national security council, and 
resolution of the Leyla Zana case -- even if, for now, this 
appear well in hand. 
 
7. (C) Ruete and Barbaso noted that the EC was collecting 
information on these issues constantly, drawing on reports 
from Commission and Member State officials on the ground, 
reports and meetings with NGOs, and other sources.  Ruete 
said it was ironic that one of the most critical and negative 
assessments of Turkey in the last 12 months was the State 
Department\'s annual human rights report, which he said read 
as a simple litany of anecdotes, without any real analysis. 
He understood DAS Kennedy\'s point that certain rigidities in 
the required reporting format could make the report appear 
more critical than it was, but said it was an \"unhelpful 
distraction.\"  He was relieved to hear that the next report 
was not due until well after the EU\'s December decision. 
 
8. (C) Both Barbaso and Ruete commented on the issue of 
Turkey\'s relations with Cyprus.  Overall, the lack of a 
settlement on the island should have no connection to the 
assessment of Turkey\'s readiness for accession negotiations, 
and in any case, no one in the EU was blaming the Turks for 
the collapse of the process.  One potential problem, however, 
is Turkey\'s non-recognition of the Republic of Cyprus, and 
particularly the complications that has created in expanding 
Turkey\'s customs union (the Ankara Agreement) to cover the 
enlarged EU (REF A).  Ruete said Ankara just needs to accept 
it has to be willing to negotiate \"with all 25.\"  DAS Kennedy 
said her impression after meetings in Ankara was that the GoT 
understood the issue and was committed to reaching some 
accommodation on the issue (see Ref D for GOT comments on 
this and ohter aspects of Turkey\'s EU bid).  All EU officials 
(Commission, Council and Dutch) also commented that a 
unilateral and symbolic gesture by Turkey on troop 
withdrawals from the island would also be very well-received. 
 But they all nodded their heads vigorously in response to 
DAS Kennedy\'s observation that Turkey would find this nearly 
impossible to do as long as the EU\'s own measures to end the 
isolation of the north of the island are stalled (Ref C). 
 
ASSESSING THE IMPACT ON THE EU 
------------------------------ 
 
9. (C) The second part of the EC\'s October report will be an 
Impact Assessment of Turkish accession on the EU.  Ruete said 
that a similar report had been done by the EC in 1997 on the 
accession of the central and east European members.  So there 
is nothing new in this process, he said, and the Commission 
needed to describe to Member States what the sectoral impacts 
of adding the Turkish state and economy to the EU could be in 
areas such as labor markets, justice and home affairs, 
agriculture, as well as on the EU budget. 
 
WHAT WILL THE COMMISSION RECOMMEND? 
----------------------------------- 
 
10. (C) The most important, and most closely negotiated, part 
of the October report will be the Commission\'s recommendation 
on whether the Council should decide to open negotiations 
with Turkey.  Ruete said he had not even begun to try 
drafting this (likely brief) section, until he had a chance 
to discuss with his \"political masters,\" especially 
Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen.  Ruete anticipated these 
discussions would only begin at the end of August.  As he is 
certain these discussions would leak, he did not want them to 
begin any earlier than necessary. 
 
11. (C) None of our interlocutors, including Barbaso and 
Ruete, expect the Commission\'s recommendation would be a flat 
\"No\" or \"we\'ll look again next year.\"  Either, the Council\'s 
Heusgen said, would be a \"disaster.\"  At the same time, none 
thought it very likely that the recommendation could be a 
simple \"Yes.\"  Ruete and Barbaso stressed that the key would 
be what language came with the \"yes.\"  Would it be \"Yes, but 
only after Turkey has done X, Y and Z;\" or would it be \"Yes, 
assuming Turkey continues to make progress on issues 
including X, Y, and Z.\"  Ruete observed that there were an 
infinite variety of formulas that could be devised.  (NOTE: 
In a separate meeting, Turkish Amb. Demiralp argued that the 
\"yes, assuming...\" version would be most consistent with the 
Commission\'s most recent precedent on Croatia, where the 
Commission listed six areas within the political criteria 
requiring \"additional efforts\", but still recommended that 
negotiations \"should be opened.\"  END NOTE.) 
12.  (C) Ruete flagged that devising language that would be 
approved by the full Commission was no simple task, and all 
30 Commissioners will have a vote at the October meeting.  He 
noted that on previous occasions some Commissioners have 
tried to influence the wording of the Commission\'s 
recommendations for other candidates, and this would likely 
be true again.  Ruete said Verheugen would begin the process 
by testing his preferred version with key Commissioners, 
including President Prodi and President-designate Barroso. 
To avoid a potentially long and ugly debate, Ruete said the 
final draft of the report and recommendation would only be 
presented to the full Commission a couple of days before the 
October 6 vote.  (NOTE: De Gooijer said the Dutch Presidency 
was already in close contact with the Commission, to try and 
make sure there were \"no vetoes, no surprises.\"  END NOTE.) 
 
13. (C) Both de Gooijer and Heusgen believed, and Ruete 
implied, that  Verheugen leans strongly in favor of \"Yes, 
assuming...\".  But Ruete was concerned that a clear positive 
recommendation could be torpedoed in the full Commission, 
especially if some negative external event such as a terror 
attack or heavy-handed police action soured the mood -- and 
he warned that some anti-EU forces in Turkey might try to 
stage such an event. 
 
MORE IMPORTANTLY, HOW WILL THE COUNCIL RESPOND? 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
14. (C) Heusgen said he thought Turkey \"is a done deal\" with 
the only question being what date would be set for opening 
negotiations, since the Council might decide to follow the 
Croatia example and build in a several month period for 
\"screening legislation.\"  De Gooijer, by contrast, opened his 
discussion by saying \"it is not as if it is a done deal.\"  He 
said the Presidency would give no indications of how the 
Council will handle the issue until after the October report 
is out, other than to say that no additional criteria could 
be added to the basic Copenhagen criteria.  De Gooijer felt 
all Member States expected the Commission to be positive, but 
not definitive, with language referring to the need for 
further implementation.  De Gooijer speculated this could 
allow for a Council decision at the EU Summit on December 17 
that would set out a time frame during which these additional 
efforts could continue in preparation for beginning 
negotiations.  But de Gooijer was quite clear that the Dutch 
did not want to establish a process that would require any 
further action by the Council before negotiations began, but 
rather a decision that the negotiations should start after an 
appropriate time.  De Gooijer added that he was sure there 
would \"be lots of words around this simple conclusion\" but 
that the Dutch Presidency \"firmly intended\" to get a real 
decision on Turkey.  (NOTE: Amb. Demiralp, for his part, 
argued negotiations should open by March 2005 if they were to 
be \"without delay\" as promised in Copenhagen. END NOTE.) 
 
15. (C) This approach would be controversial with some Member 
States, de Gooijer predicted.  But it was the Presidency\'s 
responsibility to devise a formula that could bridge the 
gaps.  He said a key element of this would be for the 
December summit decision to also include some language to 
\"set the context for the negotiations.\"  \"Turkey is not 
Latvia,\" he said, and Turkey\'s eventual membership would 
compel revision of many core EU policies and programs, such 
as agricultural supports.  This will be clearer after the 
Commission\'s impact assessment, but de Gooijer said it could 
be important for the Dutch to lay out some ideas on these 
issues in order to get all Member States on board with a 
decision to open negotiations.  What it could not involve, 
however, was some sort of special or unique status for Turkey 
within the EU.  The final outcome would have to be Turkey as 
a \"Member State like all the others.\" 
 
16. (C) Asked about which Member States might balk on a 
positive decision on Turkey, all of the EU officials noted 
that President Chirac\'s positive comment (REF B) after PM 
Erdogan\'s recent visit to Paris was a very positive and 
important development.  Ruete said Austria was still very 
skeptical and faced domestic problems on the issue, and added 
that Denmark still appeared \"uncertain.\"  He also worried 
about the possibility of \"sleeper\" opposition among some of 
the new Member States such as Hungary. 
 
17. (C) And then there is Cyprus.  Barbaso and Ruete could 
not predict how Papadopoulos might behave.  Heusgen argued 
Nicosia \"wouldn\'t dare\" block consensus on such an important 
issue, and would buckle under pressure from Blair, Chirac and 
Schroeder.  Similarly, de Gooijer said that, while the GoC 
has vital interests with Turkey, so does the EU.  Nicosia 
could not be allowed to dictate EU policy toward Turkey on 
its own.  Hannie Pollmann noted that GoC officials have told 
her they would see more opportunities for leverage during 
negotiations than by blocking the opening of negotiations. 
De Gooijer also underlined the role of Greece, who the Dutch 
believe will continue to strongly favor opening negotiations 
as a way of improving vital bilateral relations with Turkey. 
He said the Dutch were very sensitive that they needed to 
\"make it possible for Athens to play a constructive role in 
December,\" implying this could lead to a softer approach in 
the ongoing debates (REF C) about taking measures to help the 
Turkish Cypriots. 
 
HOW THE U.S. CAN HELP 
--------------------- 
 
18. (C) All of the EU officials stressed that U.S. advocacy 
should be behind the scenes and not in public, to avoid any 
risk of backlash.  De Gooijer, Barbaso and Ruete all 
commented that the U.S. could help reinforce the message to 
Ankara not to be complacent, and to continue with the reform 
process.  They all specifically mentioned encouraging Turkey 
to help find a solution to the Customs Union issue over 
Cyprus.  Ruete added that it could also be helpful for the 
U.S. to bolster some of the Member States, particularly the 
new Members from central and eastern Europe, on the value of 
a positive decision on Turkey, a view UK officials also 
expressed to Kennedy in London (septel). 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"19267","7/30/2004 7:52","04BRUSSELS3227","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04CHISINAU832","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003227 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/UMB AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/29/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, PBTS, PHUM, PGOV, MD, EUN, OSCE, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU CONSIDERS VISA BAN ON 21 TRANSNISTRIAN 
OFFICIALS LINKED TO SCHOOL CLOSINGS 
 
REF: CHISINAU 832 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
 1.  (SBU)  On July 29, EU Political and Security Committee 
(PSC) Ambassadors agreed to consider imposing a visa ban on 
21 Transnistrian officials connected to the recent closing of 
Moldovan schools in Transnistria.  EU staff are preparing the 
paperwork to impose the ban; the PSC will review the issue 
again on August 3.  If there is no improvement on the ground 
regarding the school closings by then, and the EU does not 
expect any, the PSC is likely to agree on a visa ban.  The 
ban would then need to be blessed by Ministers, which could 
take an additional few days.  If the EU acts, it will not add 
these 21 names to the existing ban, but would institute a 
separate ban on officials linked to the school closings; if 
the schools issue is resolved favorably, the EU would lift 
the ban on these officials, following three months normal 
operation of the schools (see last para of list below on the 
\"exit strategy\"). 
 
2. (C)  The EU has shared the list of 21 names with us, in an 
effort to coordinate with the US, both on the names and on 
public announcement of any action taken.  Note that this list 
includes eight of the eleven names transmitted reftel (the 
three parliamentarians were dropped) with additional local 
officials from Bendery, Tiraspol and Ribnita added. 
 
Begin EU List 
 
Transnistrian \"Ministry of Education\" 
\"Minister\" Bomeshko, Elena Vasilyevna 
\"First Deputy Minister\" Gello, Valentina Alexeevna 
\"Deputy Minister\" Kriminski, Alexander Ivanovich 
\"Deputy Minister\" Surinov, Victor Georgevich 
 
From local administrations: 
 
(1.) Bendery 
City administration:  Head of city administration 
Posudnevsky, Aleksander Ivanovich 
Deputy Head of city administration on construction issues 
Galata, Victor Aleksandrovich 
Deputy Head of city administration on education issues 
Gordienco, Svetlana Aleksandrovna 
Head of city council Moskalev, A.N. 
Head of Department for education: UZUN, Svetlana Dmitrievna 
Deputy Head of Department for education: Kilivnik, Nina 
Nikolaevna 
 
(2.) Tiraspol 
City Administration: Head of city administration Kostyrko, 
Ivan Ivanovich 
Chairman of City Council: Ivanchenkov, Victor Mikhailovich 
Head of Department for education: Pashenko, Maria Rafelovna 
 
(3.) Ribnita 
City administration:  Head of city administration Platonov, 
Yuri Mokhailovich 
Deputy Head of city administation on education issues 
Cherbulenko, Alla Viktorovna 
Deputy Head of city administration on construction issues 
Gordenko, Aleksej Nikolaevich 
Department for education:  Head of department Pereli, Boris 
Ivanovich 
Deputy head of department VYRODOV, Evgenij Aleksandrovich 
Head of Militsia: Mr. Kisserman 
Deputy Head of Militsia: Mr. Malai 
 
As an appropriate exit strategy Chisinau HoMs would like to 
suggest that the ban may be lifted if schools in question 
have been reopened by September 1, 2004 and have been working 
properly and without harassment by Transnistrian authorities 
for 3 months thereafter. 
 
End Text of EU list. 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"19273","7/30/2004 9:05","04BRUSSELS3230","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003230 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RPM 
 
E.O.: 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: JOSEP BORRELL ELECTED EP PRESIDENT 
 
 
1. (U) Summary:  The European Parliament (EP) on 
July 20 elected as its new president Spanish 
Socialist Josep Borrell.  Although a former 
Fullbright scholar and active supporter of the 
Fullbright program, Borrell has been one of the 
Spanish Socialist party\'s most outspoken critics of 
U.S. policy, particularly on Iraq.  End Summary. 
 
JOSEP BORRELL 
-------------- 
 
2. (U) On July 20, at the first plenary session 
after the June European elections, MEPs elected 
Josep Borrell the new EP President.  Borrell, a 57 
year-old Spanish Catalan, is a newly elected 
Socialist MEP with little prior experience in 
international politics.  He won the EP presidency 
with 388 votes, against 208 votes for Polish liberal 
Bronislaw Geremek (candidate of the Liberal and 
Democrats\' ALDE group and the Greens) and 51 votes 
for French communist Francis Wurtz (candidate of the 
far-left GUE-NGL group.) 
 
3. (SBU) Borrell was born in 1947 in the Pyrenees 
mountains, the son of a baker.  He holds a degree in 
Aeronautic Engineering and a Doctorate in Economic 
Sciences.  According to biographical notes from the 
U.S. Embassy in Madrid, from 1973 to 1975 he studied 
at Stanford under a Fulbright grant, obtaining a 
Master\'s in Applied Mathematics-Econometrics.  He 
also received a Master\'s in Energy Economics from 
the French Petroleum Institute in Paris.  At around 
this time, he also went to Israel, attracted by the 
\"kibbutz\" experience; he met his wife, Carolina 
Mayeur, during his stay.  The couple, who separated 
in the mid-1990s, has two children. 
 
4.  (U) Borrell began his political career in 1979 
when he was elected to Madrid\'s regional government 
and given responsibilities in the area of fiscal 
policy.  In 1982, he was elected General Secretary 
of Budget and Public Spending within Spain\'s Finance 
Ministry.  Two years later, he was appointed State 
Secretary of Finances.  In 1991, Borrell was 
 
SIPDIS 
appointed Minister of Construction, Transport, and 
Environment, a position he held until 1996.  Borrell 
was tainted late in the game by the scandal that had 
chased former President and Socialist party leader 
Felipe Gonzalez from office.  Borrell\'s political 
skills won over his party\'s rank and file, however, 
and he was elected Chairman of the Mixed Commission 
of Congress-Senate for the EU.  He was chosen in 
2002 to represent the Spanish Parliament at the 
Convention that drafted the EU Constitution. 
 
A CONTESTED POLITICAL DEAL 
-------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) Borrell\'s EP Presidency election was secured 
by a deal between the two largest EP political 
groups, the Christian Democrats (EPP-ED) and the 
Socialists (PES).  Under their agreement, Borrell 
should step down halfway through the five-year 
legislature to make way for an EPP-ED president, 
expected to be the group leader, Hans-Gert 
Poettering.  This \"technical deal\" to share the 
presidency was strongly criticized by the ALDE and 
Green party but also by the press and even by some 
Socialist and EPP-ED MEPs who voted for Geremek 
against their party line.  Borrell has been 
portrayed in the press as a bureaucratic and weak 
candidate compared to charismatic and highly 
symbolic Bronislaw Geremek, a former leader of 
Solidarnosc trade union in Poland and former Polish 
Foreign Minister.  However, such an arrangement to 
share the presidency is not new:  Irish Liberal Pat 
Cox became president in 2002 thanks to a similar 
deal between his party and the EPP-ED in 1999. 
 
BORRELL AND THE UNITED STATES 
----------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) As the leader of the Spanish socialist 
delegation in the EP and as a candidate to the EP 
presidency, Borrell has been extremely critical of 
U.S. policy in Iraq and was a leading advocate of 
withdrawing Spanish troops.  During a debate with 
Geremek, he stressed his strong opposition to the 
war in Iraq as a main argument in his favor and 
attacked Geremek for having supported U.S. action. 
In an interview published on July 29 in the Wall 
Street Journal, Borrell called for Europe to 
challenge American dominance, stressing that \"Europe 
can not just be an intellectual reserve for the 
American empire.\"  He also asserted that \"we need to 
find a middle ground between force without law and 
law without force, and a pre-emptive war like Iraq 
is force without law.\"  During his inaugural speech, 
he pointed to the Middle East and the Mediterranean 
basin as top foreign affairs priorities for the EU 
but did not mention transatlantic relations. 
 
8. (SBU) However, on a more positive note, Embassy 
Madrid describes Borrell as a strong supporter of 
the Fulbright program, maintaining relations with 
the Fulbright Commission since his scholarship days. 
In 1994, as Transport and Environment Minister, 
Borrell helped establish a Fulbright program for 
Ministry employees.  A total of 13 grantees 
participated in the program from 1995-1997. 
According to Embassy Madrid, Borrell in 1993 
presented the Crown Prince with an honorary award 
during the Commission\'s 35th anniversary 
celebrations.  In his remarks, Borrell lauded U.S.- 
Spanish relations, commented favorably on his 
experience with American liberty and democracy as a 
Fulbrighter, and urged both governments to embrace 
the Fulbright program as a model of academic 
excellence and cross-cultural understanding. 
 
(DRAFTED:POL:MVANAVERBEKE) 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"19281","7/30/2004 10:56","04BRUSSELS3234","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003234 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RPM 
 
E.O.: 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT SELECTS NEW VICE- 
PRESIDENTS AND QUAESTORS 
 
 
1. (U) Summary: The European Parliament (EP) elected 
14 Vice-Presidents and 5 Quaestors (in charge of EP 
financial and administrative matters) on July 20 and 
21 in Strasbourg.  These elections -- which follow 
Josep Borrell\'s victory in the EP presidential 
election (septel) -- complete the elected leadership 
of the EP.  The Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen of 
Committees and Delegations are not elected in 
Plenary but are appointed by the political group 
leaders and then elected by acclamation during 
constitutive committee meetings:  Committee 
chairmanship and membership allocations were 
concluded on July 22-23 (septel) but Delegation 
members and leadership will not be decided until 
September.  End Summary. 
 
------------------- 
THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 
------------------- 
 
2. (U) EP vice presidents have three formal roles: 
to preside over plenary sessions when the President 
is not in the chair, to stand in for the President 
in representing the EP externally, and to take part 
in the work of the Bureau.  The Bureau, which serves 
as Parliament\'s executive committee, is made up of 
the President, 14 VPs, and 5 Quaestors (para 5). 
 
3. (U) The 14 vice presidents of the European 
Parliament, whose terms will end at the January 2007 
mid-term elections, are (in official order of 
precedence based on the number of votes received): 
 
- Alejo Vidal-Quadras Roca (EPP, Spain):  After 
receiving  Ph.D. in physics, Vidal Quadras, 59, 
taught nuclear physics at universities in Spain and 
Ireland; he is the author of a number of scientific 
publications.  In parallel, he led a political 
career in Catalonia and was elected to the EP in 
1999.  This will be Vidal Quadras\' second term as a 
vice president; he will also remain a member of the 
Industry Committee.  For the last five years, he has 
been a member -- albeit not a very active one -- of 
the Delegation for Relations with the U.S. 
 
- Antonios Trakatellis (EPP - Greece):  A medical 
doctor specializing in biochemistry, Trakatellis, 
72, studied in the U.S. and was a professor at the 
Mt Sinai School of Medicine of the City University 
of New York in the 1970s.  A rector of Aristotle 
University in Thessaloniki until 1994, he is also a 
member of the Greek National Research Advisory 
Board.  An MEP since 1994, he has been an active 
member of the Environment Committee and was in 
charge of drafting the important report on GMO 
labelling and traceability in 2001 that was closely 
followed by the USG. 
 
- Dagmar Roth-Berendt (PES - Germany):  Roth-Berendt 
was an adviser in the chancellery of the Governing 
Mayor of Berlin in the 1980s following an early 
career as a lawyer.  Elected to the EP in 1989, she 
has been the Socialist group spokesperson on 
environment, health policy, and consumer protection 
issues and was also the Chairman of the BSE 
Committee of Inquiry.  The 51-year-old Roth oversaw 
preparation of the report on animal testing of 
cosmetic products. 
 
- Edward McMillan-Scott (EPP-ED - UK):  A public 
affairs professional, McMillan-Scott, 54, has been 
an MEP since 1984.  As the leader of the British 
Conservatives in the EP until 2001, he negotiated 
the entry of the British Conservatives into the EPP- 
ED group.  He remains a member of the Foreign 
Affairs Committee. 
 
- Ingo Friedrich (EPP-ED, Germany):  Leader of the 
CSU (Bavarian Christian Democrats) delegation in the 
EP, he is a businessman and has been the President 
of the European Small Businesses Forum since 1990. 
Friedrich, 62, has been an MEP since the first 
Parliamentary elections in 1979 and a vice president 
since 1999. 
 
- Mario Mauro (EPP-ED, Italy):  Mauro, 43, has been 
an MEP since 1999.   A member of the Cultural 
Affairs Committee from 1999-2004, the former teacher 
(who has a degree in philosophy) wrote two reports 
on education and new technologies.  He will now join 
the budget committee. 
 
- Antonio Costa (PES, Portugal):  The 43-year-old 
Costa, a new MEP, is the leader of the Portuguese 
Socialist delegation.  He was Portugal\'s Justice 
Minister from 1999 to 2002.  Costa will be a member 
of the Civil Liberties Committee, which is 
responsible for Justice and Home Affairs issues. 
 
- Luigi Cocilovo (ALDE - Italy):  A lawyer and 
University researcher, he has been an MEP since 
1999.  Cocilovo, 57, was a member of the EPP-ED 
group in the last legislature but moved to the newly 
created ALDE group with the Italian \"Unita 
del\'Uliva\" list. 
 
- Jacek Emil Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED - Poland): 
Saryusz-Wolski, 56, was the chief negotiator of the 
Poland-EC Europe Agreement in 1991 and subsequently 
chairman of the office of the Polish Government\'s 
Committee for European integration.  A new MEP, he 
will be a member of the Budget Committee. 
 
- Pierre Moscovici (PES - France):  A well-known 
figure in Paris, Moscovici, 46, became Secretary 
General of the French Socialist Party in 1990 and 
was Minister-Delegate for European Affairs from 1999 
to 2002.  He represented the French government at 
the Convention on the Future of Europe that drafted 
the EU constitution.  In 2002, Moscovici became the 
French Socialist party\'s Foreign Affairs Spokesman. 
In addition to his vice-presidency, he will be a 
member of the Foreign Affairs Committee.  Moscovici 
has degrees in philosophy and economics. 
 
- Miroslav Ouzky (EPP-ED, Czech Republic):  Ouzky, 
46, is little known even in the Czech Republic 
despite having been  a member of the Czech 
Parliament since 1998.  A member of the main Czech 
opposition party, the centre-right and euroskeptic 
Civic Democrats, Ouzky -- who has a medical degree - 
- has largely focused on social policy and health 
care issues and should keep this focus as a member 
of the Environment Committee.  An observer in the EP 
since May 2001, he is now the highest-ranking Czech 
MEP. 
 
- Janusz Onyszkiewicz, (EPP-ED, Poland):  A former 
mathematician and a leader of \"Solidarnosc\" in the 
1980s, Onyszkiewicx, 67, became Poland\'s defense 
minister in 1997.  As such, he oversaw the entry of 
Poland into NATO.  Onyszkiewicz will be a member of 
the Transport Committee and of the newly created 
Subcommittee on Defense. 
 
- Gerard Onesta (Greens, France):  Founder of the 
Young European Greens, former architect, Onesta, 44, 
was an MEP from 1991 to 1994 and was re-elected in 
1999.  He has been an EP vice-president since 1999. 
 
- Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann (GUE-NGL, Germany):  A 
Japan expert, she has been Vice-Chairman of the 
German PDS since 1991.  An EP observer from 1991 to 
1994 (before German reunification was finalized), 
she has served as an MEP since then.  Kaufmann, 49, 
was an active member of the Convention that drafted 
the EU Constitution; she will remain a member of the 
Constitutional Affairs Committee. 
 
4. (U) There is some specialization among the Vice- 
Presidents, with each entrusted with general or 
specific tasks.  For example, three are appointed by 
the Political Groups as permanent members of the 
Conciliation Committee.  These Members will 
negotiate with the Council in conciliation meetings 
to find a compromise on matters where they share co- 
decision with the Council, and are still in 
disagreement after the second reading of the 
legislation.  Two Members are also appointed to lead 
Parliament\'s delegations to meetings with national 
Parliaments (COSAC meetings).  These specialized 
roles will be allocated by the President in 
September. 
 
------------- 
THE QUAESTORS 
------------- 
 
5. (U) The five Quaestors are responsible for 
administrative and financial matters concerning 
individual Members.  They cover issues such as 
external information offices, members\' assistants, 
security, and finances.  The Quaestors take part in 
the meetings of the Bureau in an advisory capacity, 
where they do not have the right to vote but can 
speak on a wide range of issues, with a strong 
Quaestor able to have considerable influence. 
 
6. (U) The 5 Quaestors of the European Parliament, 
whose appointment runs until the 2009 elections, 
are: 
 
-- Jim Nicholson (UK - EPP-ED):  The Ulster Unionist 
Party\'s only MEP, Jim Nicholson, 59, has been an MEP 
since 1989.  As Chairman of the EP delegation 
responsible for relations with the U.S., a post he 
held from 2002 to 2004, he was a close contact of 
USEU.  Nicholson worked to revive the Transatlantic 
Legislators Dialogue (TLD) that brings together MEPs 
and congressmen twice yearly, alternating between 
the U.S. and the EU.  He also introduced DVC 
dialogues on issues of common interest for 
legislators on both side of the Atlantic. 
 
- Genowefa Grabowska (PES, Poland):  A new MEP, 
Grabowska -- a 60 year-old law professor -- is the 
head of the Faculty of International and European 
Law of the Silesian University in Poland.  She is 
also a specialist in environmental law.  As the 
chairwoman of the foreign affairs and European 
integration committee of the Polish Senate, she took 
part in the convention that drafted the EU 
constitution.  Grabowska will also be a member of 
the Constitutional Affairs Committee. 
 
- Mia de Vits (PES, Belgium):  Holder of a social 
sciences degree, de Vits, 54, joined the Socialist 
Party at a young age.  She became Secretary General 
(in 1989) and then President (in 2002) of the 
Flanders branch of the main Belgian trade union. 
 
- Godelieve Quisthoudt-Rowohl (EPP, Germany):  An 
MEP since 1999, Quisthoudt-Rowohl, 57, holds a Ph.D. 
in chemistry.  A Member of the Industry Committee, 
she was responsible for reports on the fourth and 
fifth \"Research Framework Programs\".  She has been a 
quaestor since 1999 and will be a member of the new 
Committee on International Trade. 
 
- Astrid Lulling (PES, Luxemburg):  The 75-year-old 
Lulling led a long career in Luxemburg, both as a 
member of the Social Democrat party and member of 
the national Parliament, before being elected to the 
EP in 2004.  She was also very active in trade 
unions and led the European trade union secretariat 
of the food industry in the 1960s and 1970s. 
Lulling will be a member of the Committee on 
Economic and Monetary Affairs. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
7. (SBU) Among the Vice-Presidents, former French 
Minister-Delegate for European Affairs Pierre 
Moscovici, former Polish Defense Minister Januszs 
Onyszkiewicz, and former Portuguese Justice Minister 
Antonio Costa have the most experience in political 
and international affairs, including transatlantic 
relations and the fight against terrorism.  However, 
among the three, only Januszs Onyszkiewicz has 
expressed support for U.S. policy in Iraq. 
Moscovici has often been openly critical of the 
current U.S. administration.  He said in June, 
before the D-Day commemoration that \"Mr. Bush\'s 
visit should not be used as an excuse for `anti- 
Americanism\'. We have shared values and a long 
friendship with the United States.  We should 
absolutely not think that Bush and America are one 
and the same.\"  The former Chairman of the U.S. 
Delegation in the EP, Jim Nicholson, while a good 
contact for the USG, will not be active on 
transatlantic issues in his new position as 
quaestor.  He may, however, remain a member of the 
new EP delegation responsible for relations with the 
U.S., which will be shaped in September. 
 
 
(DRAFTED:POL:MVANAVERBEKE) 
SAMMIS 
"
"19409","8/4/2004 10:00","04BRUSSELS3310","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS3159","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003310 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DRL/PHD FOR SUSAN O\'SULLIVAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PARM, MARR, CH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH ON EU/CHINA ARMS EMBARGO 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 3159 
 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 2896 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) DRL Senior Advisor Susan O\'Sullivan and poloff met 
July 23 with Human Rights Watch (HRW) Brussels Director Lotte 
Leicht to discuss the EU drive to lift its arms embargo on 
China.  Leicht said that HRW is working with Amnesty 
International (AI), Human Rights in China (HRIC), and 
likeminded members of the European Parliament (EP) to develop 
a strategy for activism over the coming critical months.  HRW 
believes that European publics and parliaments need to become 
much more active in order to prevent the EU from lifting its 
embargo this fall.  Leicht said she was considering putting 
the issue on the agenda of the EP\'s Human Rights Contact 
Group, which also involves representatives from the Council 
Secretariat and Commission, during its fall term (HRW and 
 
SIPDIS 
other NGOs will collectively chair the Contact Group from 
September to December).  HRW also planned to get relatives of 
Tiananmen victims to speak out in the EP and other European 
parliaments.  Leicht encouraged the US to \"engage the full 
spectrum\" of European MPs/MEPs -- appealing to HR concerns on 
the left and Transatlantic relations on the right -- to build 
bipartisan support for maintaining the embargo.  (NOTE: USEU 
is working with Liberal-Democratic EP leader Graham Watson to 
secure another EP resolution in the September-October 
timeframe.) 
 
2. (C) Arguing forcefully that lifting the embargo would 
deliver China a huge and unearned propaganda victory, Leicht 
said that HRW was taking the position that instead of lifting 
the embargo, the EU should issue a political declaration 
laying out the specific HR steps China would need to take in 
order to lift the embargo in the future.  EU leaders should 
not be permitted to manipulate China\'s HR record in order to 
curry political or commercial favor from China, she said. 
She thought the only way to prevent that was to cultivate 
sufficient public pressure to force leaders to define tough 
conditions, including resolving all outstanding Tiananmen 
issues, for lifting the embargo. Leicht suggested that 
increased cooperation among likeminded NGOs, MPs/MEPs, and 
third countries would add value to our parallel efforts 
(NOTE: We are working with Leicht to host a small roundtable 
of likeminded groups at USEU to discuss this idea). 
 
Sammis 
"
"19453","8/5/2004 8:20","04BRUSSELS3320","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003320 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RPM 
 
E.O.: 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: THE NEW FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 
 
 
1. (U) Summary:  The new European Parliament (EP) 
Foreign Affairs Committee will be the largest EP 
committee, with 78 members.  The Committee is 
responsible for drafting reports and making 
recommendations on Common Foreign and Security 
Policy (CFSP) topics, European Security and Defense 
Policy (ESDP), enlargement of the EU, international 
agreements, and relations with other international 
organizations.  Although the EP does not enjoy much 
decision-making power in these areas compared to 
other EU policy areas, such as transport or the 
environment, the Foreign Affairs Committee remains 
one of the most prestigious of the EP\'s committees, 
and routinely attracts the largest number of 
applicants.  Two newly created subcommittees -- one 
on human rights, the other on security and defense - 
- will assist the main committee.  Elmar Brok, a 
German MEP from the center-right EPP-ED, will remain 
Committee chairman.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------- 
ROLE AND COMPETENCES 
-------------------- 
 
2. (U) The EP Foreign Affairs Committee, with 78 
members, will remain the largest EP committee. 
According to the EP\'s rules of procedure, the 
Committee is responsible for the following issues: 
CFSP and ESDP, on which it will be assisted by a 
newly created subcommittee for security and defense; 
relations with the UN and other international 
organizations; the strengthening of political 
relations with third countries through cooperation 
and assistance programs or international agreements 
such as association and partnership agreements; 
opening, monitoring, and concluding EU accession 
negotiations; and questions relating to human 
rights, the protection of minorities, and the 
promotion of democratic values in third countries, 
on which the Committee will be assisted by the new 
subcommittee on human rights. 
 
3. (U) The EP does not have much formal decision- 
making power in most foreign policy areas, 
especially defense and security matters; EU member 
states, meeting as the Council, often ignore the 
EP\'s opinion.  However, over the years, the EP has 
at times used its few available instruments -- such 
as the requirement for EP assent to Association 
Agreements with third countries and EP control over 
the EU budget -- to exert some influence in this 
area. 
 
-------------------------- 
THE MOST POPULAR COMMITTEE 
-------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Even with such limited legislative power, the 
Foreign Affairs Committee has always been considered 
the most prestigious committee in the EP, with the 
largest number of applications for membership. 
BACKGROUND:  Once elected, MEPs rank their 
preferences for committee and delegation 
assignments.  Not all MEPs, however, become members 
of their \"first choice\" committee, as committee and 
delegation memberships are assigned among the 
political groups according to the size of the 
groups.  Ensuring balanced representation from 
political groups and nationalities on all of the 
various committees is a difficult exercise.  Harsh 
negotiating is usual inside each political group -- 
both between member-state delegations and between 
individual MEPs -- for membership nominations and 
for leadership positions (chairman, vice-chairman 
and political group coordinator.) END BACKGROUND. 
 
------------------------------- 
WHO\'S WHO IN THE NEW COMMITTEE 
------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) The Committee held its constitutive meeting 
on July 22 in Strasbourg and elected its chairman 
and vice-chairmen by acclamation.  Since the 
political group leaders negotiate committee 
chairmanships in advance, the election is usually 
only a procedural action with one candidate per 
position to be filled.  The committee leaders and 
political group coordinators are (with the exception 
of the Socialist coordinator, who has not yet been 
appointed): 
 
-- Elmar Brok (Germany, EPP-ED), Chairman:  After 
receiving a degree in law and politics, Brok worked 
briefly as a journalist but quickly moved into 
politics.  An \"old-timer\" among MEPs despite being 
only 58, Brok has been in office since 1979 and was 
the Committee\'s chairman during the last 
parliamentary term.  He also was (and will almost 
certainly remain) the EPP coordinator for 
institutional issues -- he was an active participant 
in the Convention on the Future of Europe and one of 
the \"EP envoys\" to the Inter-Governmental Conference 
that negotiated the EU Constitutional Treaty.  His 
flamboyant and direct style leaves no one 
indifferent in the EP.  Like most German Christian- 
Democrat MEPs, Brok describes himself as an ally of 
the U.S. -- despite frequent criticism of U.S. 
\"unilateralism\" and his opposition to U.S. positions 
on Guantanamo, the ICC, the Kyoto Protocol, and the 
death penalty. 
 
-- Geoffrey Van Orden (UK, EPP-ED), First Vice 
Chairman:  A retired Brigadier General, 59-year-old 
Van Orden held senior positions at NATO and in the 
European Commission before being elected to the EP 
as a member of the British Conservative Party.  He 
was Vice-Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee 
in the previous Parliament and is a specialist in 
defense issues.  Van Orden, who has worked closely 
with the Mission, is among NATO\'s strongest 
advocates in the EP. 
 
-- Toomas-Hendrik Ilves (Estonia, PES), Second Vice 
Chairman:  Ilves, 49, grew up in the United States 
and spent much of his adult life there.  He studied 
psychology at Columbia University and then later 
headed Radio Free Europe\'s Estonian service from 
Munich.  He renounced his U.S. citizenship soon 
after Estonia regained independence and became 
Estonian Ambassador to the U.S. in 1993, followed by 
accreditation to Canada as well in 1994.  From 1999- 
2002, he was Estonia\'s foreign minister, playing a 
key role in negotiating Estonia\'s accession to the 
EU.  He became an EP observer for his country in 
2003.  Ilves declared in a recent interview that he 
hopes to revise the EU\'s \"naive\" policy toward 
Russia and also to focus on European security 
policy, especially terrorism. 
 
-- Baroness Emma Nicholson (UK, ALDE), Third Vice- 
Chairman:  A trained musician and computer designer, 
Emma Nicholson, 63, was also long active in the Save 
the Children fund.  She was the Vice-Chairman of the 
Conservative Party before quitting to join the 
Liberal Democrats in 1995. She has been a Life Peer 
and member of the British House of Lords since 1997. 
A close contact of USEU, Nicholson was the EP 
rapporteur on Iraq and voiced strong support for 
U.S. military action.  However, she introduced an 
ongoing source of transatlantic friction when she 
lionized the \"Romanian adoption scandal\" that led to 
the moratorium on international adoption from 
Romania. 
 
-- Jose Ignacio Salafranca (Spain, EPP-ED), EPP-ED 
coordinator:  A professor of European law, 
Salafranca was elected to the EP in 1994.  He 
retains his position as the Committee\'s EPP-ED 
coordinator and has since 2001 also been the EPP-ED 
spokesman in the NATO Parliamentary Assembly. 
Salafranca, 49, is a specialist in Latin American 
issues and, in addition to representing the EP at 
the last two EU-Latin America Summits, he was 
responsible for EP reports on EU-Latin America 
relations, Association Agreements with Chile and 
Mexico, and the Andean community.  He proved a good 
contact of the Mission during the last Parliamentary 
term. 
 
-- Armin Laschet (Germany, EPP-ED), EPP-ED 
coordinator:  A lawyer, journalist, and publisher, 
Laschet launched his political career in Germany in 
the nineties, becoming a member of the Bundestag in 
1994 and being elected to the EP in 1999. 
Particularly interested in the UN (he is a member of 
the executive council of the German United Nations 
Society), he was appointed in 2003 to draft the EP 
report on EU-UN relations. 
 
-- Annemie Neyts (Belgium, ALDE), ALDE coordinator: 
A French teacher in Flanders, the 60-year-old Neyts 
began her political career at a young age, rising 
through the Flemish Liberal Party (VLD).  She became 
the party\'s chairman for the Brussels region in 
1995.  Belgium\'s Minister of Trade during the late- 
2001 Belgian EU Presidency, she presided over the EU 
Council during the Doha trade talks. She was an MEP 
from 1994 to 1999, prior to her ministerial post. 
Neyts recently attended the U.S. Democratic 
Convention in Boston, invited by Madeleine Albright. 
 
6. (U) In addition to these key MEPs, the 
Committee\'s many high-profile members include former 
Lithuanian President Vytautas Landsbergis (EPP-ED); 
three former prime ministers -- Denmark\'s Poul Nyrup 
Rasmussen (current leader of the European 
Socialists), France\'s Michel Rocard (PES), and 
Italy\'s Massimo D\'Alema (PES); and four former 
foreign ministers -- Finland\'s Paavo Vayrynen 
(ALDE), the Czech Republic\'s Josef Zieleniec (EPP- 
ED), Cyprus\' Ioannis Kasoulides (EPP-ED), and 
Luxembourg\'s Lydie Polfer (ALDE). Other prominent 
figures include two former European Commissioners, 
Italian Emma Bonino (ALDE) and Portuguese Joao de 
Deus Pinheiro (EPP-ED); German Greens leader 
Angelika Beer; and Philippe Morillon (France, EPP- 
ED), former commander of UN forces in Bosnia. 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"19467","8/5/2004 14:01","04BRUSSELS3333","Embassy Brussels","SECRET//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003333 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, PARM, PHUM, CH, TW, JA, UK, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/CHINA ARMS EMBARGO: READOUT OF UK POLDIR SAWERS 
MEETING WITH JAPANESE DFM TANAKA 
 
REF: A. USEU TODAY 08/05/04 
 
     B. LONDON 5381 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (S/NF) SUMMARY: Japanese Mission offered us a readout of 
the July 29 meeting in Tokyo between DFM Tanaka and UK PolDir 
Sawers to discuss the China arms embargo.  Sawers told Tanaka 
that the UK wanted to de-link any decision to lift the arms 
embargo from the EU-China summit in December because of 
concerns over the potential for a rise in cross-straits 
tension during the run-up to Taiwan\'s parliamentary 
elections.  Asked whether that meant the decision would be 
taken before or after the summit, Sawers responded that the 
UK could go either way.  Japanese said the EU Code of Conduct 
on arms exports, even if strengthened, would be an 
unacceptable substitute for the arms embargo.  Sawers 
described US concerns as \"exaggerated,\" and suggested that 
even the US would come around in the end.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (S/NF) Poloff met August 5 with a counterpart from the 
Japanese Mission to the EU to get a readout of the July 29 
Tanaka-Sawers meeting in Tokyo.  Reading from Tokyo\'s 
reporting cable, the interlocutor explained that Sawers laid 
out three UK concerns about lifting the embargo: First, that 
lifting the embargo should not result in an increase in the 
\"value\" of sales currently going to China; second, that 
lifting the embargo should not damage human rights in China; 
and third, that it should in no way threaten Taiwanese 
security. 
 
Sawers: Code of Conduct Would Be Effective Substitute 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3. (S/NF) Sawers argued that a strengthened Code of Conduct 
(CoC) on arms sales could be more effective than the current 
embargo because it would be more transparent and, like the 
current CoC, cover dual-use items.  He acknowledged, however, 
that the effort to strengthen the CoC is now stalled over 
French objections.  Other EU Member States generally agree 
that strengthening the system of pre-notification (of export 
license denials) would be the best way to increase the CoC\'s 
transparency and thus its effectiveness.  Tanaka responded 
that for Japan, the effort to strengthen the CoC, while 
positive in its own right, was immaterial to the debate over 
lifting the arms embargo on China.  A strengthened CoC would 
still not be legally binding or grant veto authority to 
individual Member States, and would thus be an unacceptable 
sustitute for Japan. 
 
De-Linking Decision from Summit: Good or Bad? 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (S/NF) Sawers also noted UK concern that cross-straits 
tension might rise during the run-up to Taiwan\'s 
parliamentary elections in December.  The Tokyo reporting 
cable cites Sawers as saying that the UK was therefore 
\"anxious to de-link the EU-China summit (also scheduled for 
December) from the arms embargo.\"  Asked if that meant the EU 
might lift the embargo well before the summit, Sawers said 
that a decision to lift the embargo could come either before 
or after the summit, depending on progress in the coming 
weeks.  The UK just hoped to avoid any potentially 
inflammatory direct linkage between the embargo and the 
summit.  Sawers noted that the decision to lift the embargo 
had already been postponed twice, so a third delay might be 
possible.  (NOTE: The Tokyo reporting cable commented that 
Sawers seemed to prefer a post-summit date for lifting the 
embargo.  END NOTE.) 
 
5. (S/NF) Tanaka asked Sawers whether the EU was really 
interested in lifting the embargo as a symbolic gesture or as 
a means to selling more arms to China.  Sawers said the UK 
had asked France and China the same questions, and both had 
responded that the motive was symbolic.  (NOTE:  Human Rights 
Watch received a different response from French PSC 
Ambassador Silvie Agnes-Berhman, who told HRW\'s Brussels 
Director in July that she could not discern whether Chirac\'s 
motives were symbolic or commercial, despite her best efforts 
to pulse Paris for information.  END NOTE.)  Tanaka responded 
that even if the EU saw lifting the embargo as strictly 
symbolic, it could still lead to increased arms and 
military-related sales to China.  He said Tokyo was 
particularly concerned about European dual-use transfers and 
the risk of onward proliferation if the embargo is lifted. 
Sawers suggested Tokyo should also argue its case in Paris, 
Berlin, The Hague and Rome.  He reported that of those EU 
Member States with outstanding human rights concerns, the UK, 
Denmark and Sweden were the loudest. 
 
6. (S/NF) On US opposition to lifting the ban, Sawers 
reportedly told Tanaka that \"US claims are exaggerated,\" and 
\"even the US understands it can\'t change things.\"  He 
suggested that in time, third parties opposed to lifting the 
embargo would recognize that their fears are unwarranted and 
would become more willing to engage in dialogue about 
post-embargo controls. 
 
Sammis 
"
"19496","8/6/2004 9:22","04BRUSSELS3339","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE168747","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003339 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/AND, WHA/PDA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/05/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, VE, KPAO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU AHEAD OF THE CURVE ON VENEZUELA DEMARCHE 
 
REF: STATE 168747 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Maren Smith for reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
1.  (C) We spoke about Venezuela with Karl Buck, director of 
the Council Secretariat\'s Latin America unit, on August 5. 
The Dutch Presidency\'s August 3 declaration on the referendum 
-- in which the EU encouraged active participation by all 
voters and \"expresses its support for international missions 
that will deploy observers to the forthcoming referendum, in 
particular the role of the Carter Center and the OAS\" -- had 
already addressed most of our points.  Buck reiterated that 
the EU was extremely disappointed at not being able to send 
an observer team, but the conditions imposed on observers 
were unacceptable to the EU.  He added that he had just 
received a readout of the most recent meeting between EU 
heads of mission and the OAS, which was aware that, in 
agreeing to be present, it had accepted something that was 
not in accordance with its usual standards -- but that it 
intended to do the best it could.  Buck commented that the 
OAS and other observers faced a lose/lose situation in which 
they risked \"being abused\" while they were there, but that 
their absence would risk making the situation even worse. 
 
2.  (U) USEU PA will be monitoring the Brussels-based media 
for coverage of this issue in the run-up to the referendum 
and will be prepared to offer U.S. views as appropriate.  PA 
has posted on the Mission\'s Internet site an article about EU 
Presidency\'s Venezuela statement. 
"
"19521","8/6/2004 15:17","04BRUSSELS3358","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003358 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USAID - PPC, EGAT, DHCA, GH, AFR 
DEPT FOR E, PRM AND HIU 
GENEVA FOR KYLOH 
ROME FOR FODAG/LAVELLE 
PARIS PASS USOECD FOR CARNER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, PREF, PHUM, PREL, SMIG, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EXPERT PANEL MEETING ON DEVELOPING A 
STANDARDIZED METHODOLOGY FOR DETERMINING 
HUMANITARIAN NEEDS, BRUSSELS, JULY 13-15, 2004 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: THE G-8 ACTION PLAN FOR AFRICA FAMINE 
INITIATIVE INCLUDES SUPPORT FOR IMPROVED WORLDWIDE 
EMERGENCY ASSESSMENT AND RESPONSE SYSTEMS.  THE 
MULTI-DONOR STANDARDIZED MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT 
OF RELIEF AND TRANSITIONS (SMART) INITIATIVE IS THE 
CENTRAL FOCUS OF G-8 MEMBER SUPPORT.  AN EXPERT 
PANEL MET IN BRUSSELS, BELGIUM, JULY 13-15, 2004, 
AND AGREED ON THE TECHNICAL PARAMETERS FOR COMBINING 
THE ASSESSMENT OF NUTRITIONAL STATUS OF CHILDREN 
UNDER FIVE, CRUDE MORTALITY RATE (CMR) AND FOOD 
SECURITY IN AN INTEGRATED SURVEY PROTOCOL.  A 
PROTOTYPE WINDOWS-BASED ANALYTICAL SOFTWARE WAS 
DEMONSTRATED AND RECEIVED UNANIMOUS ENDORSEMENT FOR 
CONTINUED WORK AS IT SIMPLIFIES DATA ENTRY AND 
ANALYSIS, WITH QUALITY ASSURANCE CHECKS BUILT INTO 
THE SOFTWARE PROGRAM. THE EXPERT PANEL RECOMMENDED 
PILOT COUNTRIES FOR TESTING THE METHODOLOGY UNDER 
VARIOUS FIELD CONDITIONS.  THE PANEL ESTABLISHED THE 
INTER-AGENCY WORKPLAN WHICH IS TO HAVE A DRAFT 
MANUAL READY BY END AUGUST, FINALIZED IN SEPTEMBER 
AND PILOT-TESTED.  A MEETING OF ALL DONORS AND OTHER 
STAKEHOLDERS WILL BE CONVENED BEFORE END 2004 TO 
ROLL-OUT THE SMART METHODOLOGY.  THE STANDARDIZED 
SMART METHODOLOGY WILL HARMONIZE DATA COLLECTION AND 
NEEDS ASSESSMENT ACROSS ALL HUMANITARIAN 
ORGANIZATIONS.  END SUMMARY. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
2. THE U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(USAID) AND THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE, BUREAU OF 
POPULATION, REFUGEES AND MIGRATION (STATE/PRM) 
PARTICIPATED AT THE EXPERT PANEL MEETING ON THE 
SMART METHODOLOGY, HOSTED BY THE CENTER FOR RESEARCH 
ON THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DISASTERS (CRED). 
PARTICIPANTS INCLUDED: (1) THE HUMANITARIAN 
ASSISTANCE ADVISOR, BUREAU FOR POLICY AND PROGRAM 
COORDINATION (USAID/PPC), (2) THE POLICY ADVISOR FOR 
AGRICULTURE, BUREAU FOR POLICY AND PROGRAM 
COORDINATION (USAID/PPC), (3) THE SENIOR POLICY 
ADVISOR FOR AGRICULTURE, BUREAU FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH, 
AGRICULTURE AND TRADE (USAID/EGAT), (4) THE PUBLIC 
HEALTH ADVISOR, OFFICE OF U.S. FOREIGN DISASTER 
ASSISTANCE, BUREAU FOR DEMOCRACY, CONFLICT AND 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE (USAID/DCHA/OFDA), (5) THE 
PROGRAM MANAGER, FEWS NET, OFFICE OF FOOD FOR PEACE, 
BUREAU FOR DEMOCRACY, CONFLICT AND HUMANITARIAN 
ASSISTANCE (USAID/DCHA/FFP), (6) THE HEALTH OFFICER, 
BUREAU OF POPULATION, REFUGEES AND MIGRATION 
(STATE/PRM), AND (7) THE USAID ADVISOR FOR 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE, OFFICE OF THE USAID 
REPRESENTATIVE TO THE EUROPEAN UNION, U.S. MISSION 
TO THE EUROPEAN UNION. 
 
3. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SMART METHODOLOGY IS 
FUNDED BY THE CANADIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
AGENCY (CIDA) AS PART OF A JOINT DONOR EFFORT TO 
DETERMINE NEEDS AND REPORT ON THE IMPACT OF 
HUMANITARIAN AID BASED ON RELIABLE, STANDARDIZED AND 
COMPARABLE DATA. 
 
4. THE PURPOSE OF THE MEETING WAS TO REVIEW 
METHODOLOGY OPTIONS AND THE ANALYTICAL SOFTWARE FOR 
INTEGRATING THE ASSESSMENT OF NUTRITIONAL STATUS OF 
CHILDREN UNDER FIVE, CRUDE MORTALITY RATE (CMR) AND 
FOOD SECURITY. 
 
5. THE MEETING WAS ATTENDED BY 33 PARTICIPANTS 
REPRESENTING 17 INSTITUTIONS, INCLUDING DONORS (USG, 
DFID, EC-ECHO), UNITED NATIONS AGENCIES (FAO, U.N. 
SYSTEM STANDING COMMITTEE ON NUTRITION (UNS/SCN), 
UNICEF, WFP), UNIVERSITIES (CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF 
LOUVAIN, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, JOHNS HOPKINS 
UNIVERSITY, TULANE UNIVERSITY, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF 
INDONESIA ), REPRESENTATIVES OF TECHNICAL 
INSTITUTES/NGOS INCLUDING THE FAFO INSTITUTE FOR 
APPLIED INTERNATIONAL STUDIES (NORWAY), SAVE THE 
CHILDREN/UK, AND THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND 
PREVENTION (CDC). 
 
MEETING SUMMARY 
--------------- 
 
6. THE PURPOSE OF THE SMART METHODOLOGY IS TO 
DETERMINE NEEDS, MONITOR AND REPORT ON PROGRESS AND 
TRENDS USING STANDARDIZED DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION AND REPORTING.  THE TARGET AUDIENCE 
FOR THE SMART METHODOLOGY IS ALL HUMANITARIAN 
ORGANIZATIONS, INCLUDING HOST GOVERNMENTS.  THE 
SMART METHODOLOGY WILL BALANCE TECHNICAL SOUNDNESS 
AND AMOUNT OF DATA TO BE COLLECTED WITH PRACTICAL 
FIELD CONDITIONS. 
 
7. NUTRITIONAL STATUS AND CRUDE MORTALITY RATE ARE 
QUANTITATIVE, OBJECTIVE MEASURES OF THE BASIC WELL- 
BEING OF A POPULATION GROUP AND THE SEVERITY OF A 
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS. THEY ALSO MONITOR THE EXTENT TO 
WHICH A COORDINATED RELIEF SYSTEM IS MEETING 
EMERGENCY NEEDS AND THUS THE OVERALL IMPACT OF THE 
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE. THE INTEGRATION OF THE 
HOUSEHOLD ECONOMY APPROACH (HEA) WILL HELP EXPLAIN 
THE NUTRITION SURVEY FINDINGS AND MORTALITY, HOW THE 
CRISIS HAS AFFECTED PEOPLE\'S LIVELIHOODS AND FOOD 
ACCESS, THEIR ABILITY TO COPE WITH THE CRISIS AND 
COSTS OF COPING, AND WHAT TYPES OF EXTERNAL 
ASSISTANCE ARE REQUIRED. 
 
8. THE SMART METHODOLOGY WILL HAVE THE FOLLOWING 
ELEMENTS: (1) IT WILL BE  UPGRADED REGULARLY BASED 
ON LATEST RESEARCH WITH SMART VERSION 1 DEVELOPED 
THIS YEAR AS THE MOST BASIC, ESSENTIAL METHODOLOGY; 
(2) IT WILL INTEGRATE THREE MEASUREMENT PARAMETERS - 
NUTRITIONAL STATUS, MORTALITY RATE AND FOOD SECURITY 
- INTO A SINGLE PROTOCOL WITH A SOFTWARE PROGRAM 
THAT FACILITATES ANALYSIS AND STANDARDIZED REPORTING 
ACROSS ALL ORGANIZATIONS; AND (3) THE MANUAL WILL BE 
LINKED ELECTRONICALLY TO RELATED REFERENCES FOR A 
LAYERING OF GUIDELINES TO MEET DIFFERENT NEEDS. 
 
9. SMART VERSION 1 WILL BE BASED ON ANTHROPOMETRY 
(NUTRITIONAL STATUS ASSESSMENT) WITH THE MOST 
CRITICAL COMPONENTS OF MORTALITY AND FOOD SECURITY 
INTEGRATED.  AS RECOMMENDED AT THE JULY 2002 SMART 
WORKSHOP (WASHINGTON DC) THE EXPERT PANEL AGREED TO 
BASE THE SMART METHODOLOGY ON CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE 
METHODOLOGIES UNTIL FURTHER RESEARCH DETERMINES 
CHANGE.  THE CRITICAL SET OF QUANTITATIVE 
INFORMATION NEEDED INCLUDES WASTING RATES (MEASURED 
BY WEIGHT-FOR-HEIGHT), EDEMA, CRUDE MORTALITY RATE 
(CMR), POPULATION SIZE, AND DEMOGRAPHY. 
 
10. FOR MORTALITY ASSESSMENT, THE RECOMMENDATION IS 
TO USE CURRENT HOUSEHOLD CENSUS METHOD THAT 
DETERMINES THE NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS ALIVE AT 
THE MOMENT, THE NUMBER OF DEATHS AND BIRTHS WITHIN 
THE HOUSEHOLD DURING THE RECALL PERIOD.  MIGRATION 
IS CRITICAL AND SHOULD BE INCLUDED WITH DEATHS AND 
BIRTHS.  TO KEEP THE PROTOCOL SIMPLE, ONLY A MINIMUM 
SET OF ESSENTIAL DATA ON CAUSE OF DEATH WILL BE 
INCLUDED. SINCE CRED\'S COMPLEX EMERGENCIES 
DATABASE(CE-DAT), SUPPORTED BY STATE/PRM, WILL SERVE 
AS DATA SOURCE FOR THE CENTER FOR HUMAN SECURITY IN 
MONITORING THE GLOBAL IMPACT OF WAR ON THE HEALTH OF 
CIVILIANS, CONFLICT-RELATED DEATHS WILL BE INCLUDED 
IN THE MORTALITY PROTOCOL. 
 
11. FOR FOOD SECURITY, THE HOUSEHOLD ECONOMY 
APPROACH (HEA) IS THE ONLY LIVELIHOOD METHODOLOGY 
THAT LENDS ITSELF TO INTEGRATION TO NUTRITION AND 
MORTALITY ASSESSMENT. THE HEA METHODOLOGY WILL BE 
SIMPLIFIED BY USING KEY INFORMANTS RATHER THAN 
PRIMARY DATA COLLECTION AND REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF 
DETAILED QUANTIFICATION. THE AIM IS TO HAVE MINIMUM 
BUT SUFFICIENT INFORMATION TO SET NUTRITION FINDINGS 
IN A CONTEXT, TO ALLOW A PREDICTION ABOUT FUTURE 
CHANGES IN NUTRITION, FOOD NEEDS AND RELIEF ACTION. 
 
12. PILOT COUNTRIES: PARTICIPANTS REVIEWED POTENTIAL 
COUNTRIES FOR PILOT TESTING THE SMART METHODOLOGY. 
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT CRITERIA IS THE COMMITMENT 
OF THE HOST GOVERNMENT TO SUSTAIN THE EFFORT. 
ANGOLA WAS RECOMMENDED AT THE JULY 2002 WORKSHOP 
WITH THE PARTICIPATION OF THE ANGOLAN MINISTRY OF 
HEALTH AT THE WORKSHOP.  AFGHANISTAN AND THE 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO WERE ALSO RECOMMENDED. 
OTHER POTENTIAL COUNTRIES ARE: BURUNDI, CHAD, IVORY 
COAST, LIBERIA, MALAWI, RWANDA, SIERRA LEONE, AND 
SUDAN.  ETHIOPIA IS RECOMMENDED BY USAID/PPC BECAUSE 
OF THE G-8 FOCUS AND ONGOING EFFORT TO UNDERTAKE 
NUTRITION ASSESSMENTS. 
 
13. NEXT STEPS: (1) DEVELOP DRAFT MANUAL BY END 
AUGUST AND FINALIZE BY END SEPTEMBER, (2) SELECT 
PILOT COUNTRY AND FIELD TEST THE METHODOLOGY, AND 
(3) REFINE THE METHODOLOGY AND SOFTWARE PROGRAM AS 
NEEDED AND ROLL OUT SMART VERSION 1 BEFORE END 2004 
AT A DONOR/STAKEHOLDERS MEETING TO BE CONVENED BY 
USAID, STATE/PRM, CIDA AND OTHER PARTNERS. 
STATE/PRM, USAID/PPC AND CRED WILL CONVENE A MEETING 
WITH PVOS/NGOS AND OTHER PARTNERS IN EARLY SEPTEMBER 
(WASHINGTON DC) TO UPDATE ON RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND 
REVIEW THE DRAFT METHODOLOGY. 
 
SAMMIS 
"
"20220","8/30/2004 14:47","04BRUSSELS3624","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ATHENS, NICOSIA PLEASE PASS DAS KENNEDY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/30/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, NL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: VERHEUGEN\'S TURKEY TRIP AND DUTCH NGO STUDY 
 
REF: A. FBIS: EU SHOULD DELAY ACCESSION TALKS WITH 
 
        TURKEY EUP20040825000245 
     B. USEU-TODAY 8/27/2004 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL, Harry O\'Hara, 1.4 b/d 
 
1. (C) Summary: DG-Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen will 
use his September 4-7 trip to Turkey to review the 
Commission\'s human rights and political concerns, which he 
hopes will further enhance his credibility before the 
European Council, the European Parliament and, ultimately, 
\"European public opinion\" when he talks to them about 
Turkey\'s candidacy for EU membership this fall. The 
Commission official responsible for preparing the 
Commission\'s analysis on Turkey\'s EU candidacy in the EU told 
us that while the recent Dutch study (ref A) had no influence 
on the Commission, it could effect EU political discussion on 
Turkey if the Dutch government uses its EU Presidency 
position to promote it. End Summary. 
 
2. (C) A key DG-Enlargement official told us that the 
just-released Dutch Advisory Council on International Affairs 
Group Study on Turkey (recommending that the EU not give 
Turkey an accession date in December) would have no/no 
influence on the Commission. Speaking unofficially, he noted 
that the study, if adopted by the Dutch government, could 
influence how the Dutch Presidency shapes the EU\'s political 
discussion over Turkey, especially after the October 6 
recommendation by the Commission and before an anticipated 
final decision by European heads of state at the December 17 
European Council.  The DG-Enlargement official also said that 
the Commission had been briefed on the study.  He also told 
us that he expects additional \"advocacy\" and \"experts\" 
studies on Turkey and the EU in coming weeks and that the 
Commission would seek to avoid commenting on any of them. 
 
3.  C) Besides preparing the report on Turkey\'s accession to 
the EU, the Commission is also preparing for DG-Enlargement 
Commissioner Verheugen\'s September 4-7 trip to Turkey.  The 
Commissioner will visit Izmir, Istanbul, Ankara and 
Diyarbakir, an ethnic Kurdish area.  Our Commission 
interlocutor told us that this visit is a part of the 
Commission\'s regular political dialogue with Turkey that 
recently included joint seminars (e.g. cultural rights) and 
meetings in Brussels.  Recent meetings have concentrated on 
freedom of press, civil-military relations, and freedom of 
religion.  Our Commission interlocutor commented that the 
quality of EU-Turkey discussion on these issues and \"human 
rights in general\" is \"much better\" and \"more open\" than it 
was two years ago. 
4. (C) Although not all details of Verheugen\'s schedule in 
Turkey have been finalized, his plan is to meet with FM Gul 
and a wide range of religious leaders. As noted in ref B, 
Verheugen hopes to further enhance his credibility before the 
European Council,  the European Parliament and, ultimately, 
\"European public opinion\" when he talks to them about 
Turkey\'s candidacy for EU membership this fall. In addition, 
the Commission expects the results of Verheugen\'s trip to 
feed into the  debate by EU experts on Southern and Eastern 
Europe (COSEE) at their next meeting on September 10. 
MCKINLEY 
"
"20292","9/2/2004 7:55","04BRUSSELS3688","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003688 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOL FOR BLS AND ILAB 
TREASURY FOR IMI 
STATE FOR DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU-25 UNEMPLOYMENT DOWN TO 9.0 PERCENT 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  The aggregate unemployment rate for 
the EU-25 stood at 9.0 in July 2004, down 0.1 
percentage point from the previous month, according 
to data published by the EU Commission\'s Statistical 
Office (EUROSTAT) on September 1.  The unemployment 
rate for the euro zone (the twelve EU countries 
participating in the euro) was stable, also at 9.0 
percent in July 2004.  Without the 10 new members, 
the EU-15 unemployment rate was also stable at 8.1 
percent.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  With seasonal adjustment and compensation for 
differences in national statistical methods, the EU- 
25 rate stood at 9.0 percent in July 2004, down from 
9.1 percent in June 2004 and the four previous 
months as well as July 2003.  The unemployment rate 
for the euro zone also stood at 9.0 percent in July 
2004, unchanged in comparison with June 2004.  The 
euro-zone rate was 8.9 percent in July 2003. 
 
3.  The lowest rates among the EU-25 (July 2004 
rates unless otherwise indicated) were recorded in 
Austria (4.2 percent), Luxembourg (4.3 percent), 
Ireland, Cyprus (4.5 percent in both countries), and 
the UK (4.7 percent in May 2004).  Poland (18.8 
percent), Slovakia (15.9 percent), Lithuania (11.3 
percent) and Spain (11.0 percent) recorded the 
highest rates among the EU-25. 
 
4.  EUROSTAT noted that eleven Member States showed 
an increase in their unemployment rate over the past 
twelve months, eleven a decrease and three recorded 
no change.  The most significant increases in 
unemployment rates (July 2003-to-July 2004 
comparison unless otherwise noted) were recorded in 
the Netherlands (from 3.8 percent in June 2003 to 
4.8 percent in June 2004), Sweden (from 5.6 percent 
to 6.4 percent), Luxembourg (from 3.8 percent to 4.3 
percent), and the Czech Republic (from 7.9 percent 
to 8.8 percent).  By contrast, the largest decreases 
occurred in Estonia (from 10.3 percent to 8.8 
percent), Lithuania (from 12.6 percent to 11.3 
percent), and Slovakia (from 17.0 percent to 15.9 
percent). 
 
5.  Based on EUROSTAT estimates, male unemployment 
reached 8.3 percent in July 2004 for the EU-25 and 
8.0 percent for the euro zone, respectively 
unchanged and up from 7.9 percent when compared to 
July 2003.  The female rate was stable over the same 
period at 10.0 percent for the EU-25 and up from 
10.2 percent to 10.3 percent for the euro zone. 
 
6.  Unemployment rates among young people under 25 
in July 2004 ranged from 6.9 percent in Austria to 
39.1 percent in Poland.  The rate for this age group 
in July 2004 was estimated at 18.0 percent for the 
EU-25 and 17.4 percent for the euro zone, compared 
to 18.5 percent (down 0.5 percentage point) and 17.2 
percent (up 0.2 percentage point) respectively in 
July 2003. 
 
7.  EUROSTAT estimated that 19.3 million were 
unemployed in the EU-25 in July 2004 (12.7 million 
in the euro zone).  Following is the breakdown of 
unemployment rates in ascending order for the 
individual EU Member States: 
 
(Seasonally-adjusted) 
(July 2004 unless otherwise indicated) 
 
Austria             4.2 
Luxembourg          4.3 
Ireland             4.5 
Cyprus              4.5 
UK                  4.7  (May 2004) 
Netherlands         4.8  (June 2004) 
Denmark             5.9 
Hungary             5.9 
Slovenia            6.2 
Portugal            6.4 
Sweden              6.4 
Italy               8.5  (January 2004) 
Belgium             8.6 
Malta               8.7 
Czech Republic      8.8 
Estonia             8.8 
Finland             9.0 
Greece              9.3  (December 2003) 
France              9.5 
Germany             9.9 
Latvia             10.6 
Spain              11.0 
Lithuania          11.3 
Slovakia           15.9 
Poland             18.8 
 
Euro zone           9.0 
EU-15               8.1 
EU-25               9.0 
 
8.  The monthly rates and numbers of unemployed are 
estimated and based on data from the annual EU labor 
force survey.  The estimated rates may differ from 
national unemployment rates due to differences in 
methods and definitions of unemployment.  Unemployed 
people according to ILO criteria are those aged 15 
and over who: 
 
--   Are without work; 
 
--   Are available to start work within the next two 
     weeks; and 
 
--   Have actively sought employment at some time 
     during the previous four weeks. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"20348","9/3/2004 12:22","04BRUSSELS3729","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE188960","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003729 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2014 
TAGS: KNNP, PARM, PREL, MNUC, TRGY, IR, IAEA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU OFFICIALS ON IAEA IRAN REPORT: NOT READY FOR 
UNSC REFERRAL 
 
REF: STATE 188960 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: Poloff discussed reftel with Council 
nonproliferation and nuclear policy advisors September 2 and 
3.  While acknowledging serious unresolved issues, they 
assessed DG El Baradei\'s new report as \"overall more positive 
than the last one,\" and said that EU BOG members were 
unlikely to go along with our desire for UNSC referral, at 
least not before November.  One questioned why we were in 
such a rush.  They argued that without a plan for handling 
the issue at the UNSC, any BOG referral risked backfiring and 
undermining the UN\'s credibility.  They confirmed that the 
DG\'s report and a briefing by the EU-3 would feature 
prominently at the informal Gymnich meeting of EU FMs 
September 3 and 4, and thought that European countries might 
have a clearer idea about how to proceed in the short run 
after that meeting.  END SUMMARY. 
 
THE DG\'S REPORT: OVERALL BETTER THAN THE LAST 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Poloff discussed reftel on September 2 and 3 with 
Andreas Strub, Deputy to WMD Rep Giannella and longtime 
Solana advisor, and Stephan Klement, Council nuclear policy 
advisor and former IAEA official.  The two had just finished 
writing an assessment of DG El Baradei\'s report for HiRep 
Solana and DG Cooper to use at the September 3-4 Gymnich 
(informal meeting of EU FMs).  Strub promised to report our 
demarche and pass our paper to both men in advance of the 
Gymnich meeting.  In contrast to our interpretation, Strub 
and Klement assessed the DG\'s report as \"overall more 
positive that the last one,\" while also acknowledging that 
Iran was far from being off the hook on outstanding 
questions.  Klement highlighted HEU contamination of imported 
enrichment equipment and the Iranian P-2 program as the most 
serious of remaining open issues, but said that both would 
require better cooperation from third countries (presumably 
Pakistan) to resolve.  Many of Iran\'s explanations could be 
plausible, he said (referring especially to the HEU 
contamination issue), but there is no way the IAEA can 
determine that yet. 
 
NOT YET TIME FOR UNSC REFERRAL 
------------------------------ 
 
3. (C) Strub and Klement argued that the time was not right 
for referring the issue to the UNSC.  Citing the more 
positive tone of this report compared to the last one, 
Klement said the IAEA should be given more time to learn 
about third countries.  He also said there was a risk that 
the larger General Conference, convening just after the BOG, 
could undertake efforts contradictory to the BOG if the BOG 
reported the file to the UNSC.  He thought the DG\'s report 
did not warrant taking such a political risk and said that 
the November BOG would be the earliest politically savvy 
opportunity for any UNSC referral.  Strub agreed that now was 
not the time for a referral and thought that EU Member States 
on the BOG would be much more inclined to entertain arguments 
for referral at the November meeting. 
 
WHAT WOULD YOU DO ONCE THERE? 
----------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Strub also questioned the wisdom of proceeding to the 
UNSC without a clear strategy for success once there.  He 
said that if the Iranians decided to test the determination 
of the Security Council as well, and if the Council was 
unable to unify around a tough sanctions plan and path 
forward, it would be disastrous and undermine the credibility 
of the UN system. (COMMENT: The desire to defend the UN\'s 
credibility and to enhance its role at the center of EU 
efforts to promote \"effective multilateralism\" is a very 
powerful motivator among EU policymakers.  END COMMENT). 
Strub thought that very few European leaders would consider a 
UNSC referral without a clear and workable strategy for 
handling the next steps. 
 
THE EU-3 AND GYMNICH 
-------------------- 
 
5. (C) Strub confirmed that EU FMs, led by France, Germany 
and the UK, hoped to agree on a new or revised near-term 
approach to Iran at their September 3-4 Gymnich meeting in 
Maastricht.  Our demarche would certainly feature prominently 
in discussions, he said.  Another Commission contact 
confirmed that RELEX Commissioner Patten is frustrated that 
the EU does not speak with one voice on Iran, but accepted 
that the tone of EU discussions would depend heavily on what 
the EU-3 have to say.  Council official Klement was careful 
to distinguish between IAEA and EU-3 efforts, saying that 
while Iran has failed in its commitments to the EU-3, that 
was a separate issue and should not influence the IAEA\'s 
process. 
McKinley 
"
"20354","9/3/2004 14:47","04BRUSSELS3741","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 003741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, ECON, ECPS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: NEW COMMISSION STEPS ON HOMELAND SECURITY 
 
 
 Sensitive but unclassified, entire text. 
 
1.  This is an action message, see paragraphs 2 and 19. 
 
Introduction, Summary and Action Request 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) This message provides a snapshot of the state of 
play of homeland security initiatives and organizations 
within the Commission.  It is organized by directorates 
general.  In many cases, officials in these positions, 
following the U.S.-EU Summit statement, have requested 
additional coordination and contact with U.S. officials.  DG 
Transport and Energy (DG TREN)  has reorganized its security 
function for both energy and transport into one security 
directorate.  DG TREN is also leading the Commission\'s 
investigation into the DOE Megaports Initiative and preparing 
to implement new legislation on port and ship security.  The 
European Network and Information Security Agency will begin 
operations in January 2005.  DG Environment\'s consequence 
management emergency center stands ready to work with U.S. 
officials to implement the provisions of the consequence 
management section (paragraph 5) of the U.S.-EU Summit 
Declaration on Combating Terrorism, but note that they have 
not yet made contact with FEMA.  USEU requests contact 
information for appropriate FEMA officials to implement this 
portion on the Summit statement (See paragraph 19).  End 
Introduction, Summary, and Action Request. 
 
DG TREN: New Structure 
---------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Within DG TREN the Commission has formed a New 
Directorate J for Transport and Energy Security currently 
headed by Jean Trestour, formerly the head of a maritime unit 
within transport.  The Directorate divides into four units. 
The Unit J.1, headed by Patrick Vankerckhoven will be 
responsible for international relations and new legislation 
and will take over operation on the U.S.-EU Transportation 
Security Cooperation Group.  According to Trestour, the 
primary tasks of the new nine-member J.1 unit will include 
conceptualizing and developing new transport security 
policies, harmonization of existing member state security 
rules, defining a strategy for inspecting member state 
implementation of rules at airports and seaports, developing 
a research and development plan for transport and energy 
security, as well as appropriate funding mechanisms, 
developing a \"crisis cell\" to deal with transport and energy 
related emergencies that would operate in conjunction with 
the consequence management center already operating in DG 
ENVIRONMENT (see paragraph X) and situation rooms in the 
Council Secretariat and in DG RELEX, and coordination with DG 
TAXUD, JAI, and RELEX.  The group would also be responsible 
broadly for cooperation outside the EU and in international 
fora. 
 
4.  (SBU) Unit J.2 , Inspection, will be the largest group 
with thirty people and headed by former Safety and Security 
Unit Head Eckard Seebohm.  The group will divide further into 
subgroups on aviation and maritime.  Besides containing the 
cadre of port and airport inspectors meant to enforce 
community rules as set out in regulations 2303/2003 for 
airports and  725/2004 for seaports, the unit will develop 
harmonized rules for the qualification of member state 
inspectors and develop a peer review process for those 
inspectors, develop inspection methodologies in conjunction 
with the new European Maritime Safety Agency, and the 
maritime unit within DG TREN. 
 
5.  (SBU) A new Unit J.3 will address Energy Security to 
include protection of pipelines, electrical networks, 
transformer banks, and radioactive materials (old x-ray 
equipment, etc.) Dolores Carillo, formerly Deputy Director of 
EURATOM will head J.3 once the Unit ids formally started 
early in 2005 most likely, according to Trestour, with 5-6 
staff.  Trestour suggested that in addition to its broad 
based responsibility, the new unit J.3 will be proposing new 
directives on the management of radioactive sources, 
coordination on security issues between member states and 
utilities, and coordination with international organizations. 
 
6.  (SBU) J.4, another virtual unit slated for operation in 
2005 will cover transport of hazardous goods and intermodal 
transport.  This Unit\'s objective will be to look at the 
transport of goods across modes to ensure that regulations 
are harmonized across modes.  Wolfgang Elsner will serve as 
head of the 6 person unit.  According to Trestour, its 
primary policy focus at the outset will be to develop a 
Europe-wide policy on tracking of dangerous goods. 
 
7.  (SBU) Comment: With the recently announced split of DG 
TREN into a DG for Transport and a DG for Energy this 
structure will almost certainly change.  Trestour himself is 
not certain if the directorate will split sending unit J.3 to 
the new energy directorate with the remaining units staying 
with transport or if the entire directorate will move to the 
new DG for Justice, Liberty, and Security.  End Comment. 
 
DOE\'s Second Line of Defense 
---------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) J.1 head Patrick Van Kerckhoven is beginning to 
look at the DOE\'s Second Line of Defense program.  Within the 
Commission leadership, Van Kerckhoven, a former official at 
EURATOM worked previously on threats posed by nuclear 
materials, as a result, he, and DG TREN have been handed the 
lead on the SLD program.  USEU has previously arranged 
discussion between Van Kerckhoven and DOE officials.  In July 
2004, the government of Slovenia requested that the 
Commission approve its plan to participate in the SLD program 
allowing DOE to provide radiation detection equipment for 
installation at one Slovenian port and at one land border 
crossing.  Before the Commission gives that approval, they 
have requested further consultations with DOE on the program. 
 We have proposed consultations in Brussels September 13-15 
and are awaiting a formal EU response. 
 
EU Maritime Legislation 
----------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) In the Inspection unit, airport inspections are 
continuing as previously reported in the Transport Security 
Cooperation Group.  On the maritime side, the inspections 
unit will begin inspections of member state port facilities 
under the 2004 EU \"Regulation on Enhancing Ship and Port 
Facility Security\" 725/2004  which codified in EU law and 
made mandatory aspects of the 2002 amendments to the 1974 
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea 
(SOLAS) and the International Ship and Port Facility Security 
Code (ISPS).  In the June Summit statement, the U.S. and the 
EU committed to increase maritime, port facility, and vessel 
security through the International Ship & Port Facility 
Security Code.  The EU regulation calls for member states to 
create security plans for each port facility.  Commission 
officials would then inspect the member states to ensure that 
 plans were in place and that member states were properly 
overseeing their facilities in accordance with their plans. 
 
10.  (SBU) Earlier in June the Commission attempted to win 
passage of a directive complementary to 725/2004 to enhance 
security in areas not covered by the regulation.  The 
proposed directive would cover areas such as persons working 
at or passing through ports and infrastructure and equipment 
and does not create new obligations in areas already covered. 
 
11.  (SBU) Both pieces of legislation provide for member 
state designation of a port security authority for each port, 
the appointment of a security agent and the drafting of 
security plans. Different measures will apply according to 
risk levels that will be determined through prior assessment. 
The compromise text agreed by the Council also concerns 
controls prior to embarkation on board of Roll-on Roll-off 
ferries. 
 
12.  (SBU) The Commission was taken by surprise when member 
states moved at the June 11, 2004 Transport Council to limit 
the Commission\'s role in the complementary areas, reserving 
the area for member states.  The proposed legislation will go 
to Parliament in the fall of 2004.  Commission officials 
remain hopeful that they can reverse the Council\'s decision 
in the second reading and include these secondary aspects of 
port security under the Commission\'s ambit. 
 
DG TAXUD: New Structure 
----------------------- 
 
13.  (SBU) While DG TAXUD has not gone as far as DG TREN in 
setting up a new security directorate, in recognition of the 
additional focus on supply chain security and the work 
created by the Container Security Initiative (CSI), 
responsibility has been shifted out of the control of John 
Pulford\'s unit on Customs Policy into a new unit that would 
deal with transit  and supply chain security policy.  The 
practical effect will be that John Pulford, current head of 
Unit for Customs Policy will turn over chairmanship of the 
two CSI working groups to the new head of unit for transit an 
supply chain security policy Maria Manuela Cabral. 
 
DG INFORMATION SOCIETY: 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection 
--------------------------------------------- - 
14.  (SBU) Following up on a June 2001 Commission 
Communication on Network and Information Security, the 
Commission has recognized protecting its information 
infrastructure as an important factor for economic growth. 
While much of this responsibility rests with the member 
states, the Commission in 2002 decided to create a 
stand-alone European Network and Information Security Agency 
(ENISA).  The EU issued a regulation 460/2004 this March 
creating the organization.  ENISA\'s initial funding will be 
for five years. 
 
15.  (SBU) ENISA will help the EU and member states respond, 
address, and prevent network and information security 
problems.  It will serve as a source of expertise for Europe 
on Information and Network Security Issues.  It is meant to 
\"stimulate action between the public and private sectors, and 
it will assist the Commission in preparing and updating 
legislation in network and information security.  According 
to the responsible Commission officials, ENISA\'s strength 
will come from its ability to leverage existing European 
resources. 
 
16.   (SBU) Since passing the regulation, ENISA, to be 
located in Crete, has formed its management board (made up of 
representatives from industry, consumer groups academia, as 
well as one representative from each member state) and held 
its first meeting July 16.  The board is currently searching 
for ENISA\'s first Executive Director.  Assuming that the 
Management  Board is able to select an executive director, 
the Commission expects the agency to become operational in 
January 2005. 
 
17.  (SBU) According to the Commission officials responsible 
for launching ENISA, the Commission\'s first requests of the 
agency will include: (1) Creating an \"Inventory of Network 
Security Practices in the member states; ENISA would not do 
the work itself, but it would collect a list of member state 
network security contacts, and select a contractor for the 
study;  (2) Inventory European industry practice on risk 
preparedness and business continuity; and (3) Conduct a 
further inventory on European Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection to determine how European 
Information Infrastructure is protected. 
 
18.  (SBU) Commission officials also view ENISA as having an 
international role representing the EU and complementing 
member state participation in for a such as the OECD, ITU, 
WSIS, and in addressing and coordinating work within the G8 
on Critical Information Infrastructure Protection. 
 
 
DG ENVIRONMENT: Consequence Management 
-------------------------------------- 
 
19.  (SBU) As operators of the EU\'s \"Monitoring and 
Information Center (MIC), responsibility for Consequence 
Management within the Commission falls to Civil Protection 
Unit within DG Environment (DG ENV) this same unit will be 
responsible for following up the four recommendations within 
the consequence management portion of the U.S.-EU Summit 
Statement on Combating Terrorism. 
 
20.  (SBU) The MIC serves as a voluntary clearinghouse for 
Europe wide information on emergency response capabilities in 
the EU and in some third countries.  Deputy Director of the 
Center Gilles Vincent explained that any member state, 
candidate country, or EEA member, as well as third countries 
can choose to make use of the center after suffering an 
emergency incident, though the decision of whether to call 
upon the center\'s assistance is usually a political decision. 
 As an example, Spain called upon the center in 2002 
following the break up of the oil tanker Prestige off the 
Galician coast, but it chose to coordinate the assistance it 
received following the March 11 train bombings directly with 
France.  Additionally, the center was called upon to 
coordinate European response following the 2002 Central 
European floods, 2003 forest fires in Portugal and France, 
the 2002 SE France floods, as well as the earthquakes in Iran 
and Morocco earlier this year. 
 
21.  (SBU) When notified of an event by an official \'first 
responder\' the MIC checks its database of resources that 
could be used to respond from the information member states 
have provided.  The MIC, working with the member states and 
the affected states then makes a determination of European 
assets that could be deployed to address the problem. 
 
22.  (SBU) The MIC also conducts exercises among its contacts 
in member states to prepare for responses to natural 
disasters.  In 2005 the center plans to conduct similar 
exercises on response to terrorist attacks.  Already he noted 
that European militaries, called on by the council to provide 
an inventory of combined capabilities for responding to a 
CBRN incident, decided to use the MIC database, already set 
up to store that information giving the MIC access. 
 
23.  (SBU) In the medium term, the MIC will begin a critical 
assessment of European level requirements for capacity to 
respond to crises, though the timing of such a study remains 
undefined.  Vincent explained that the capacity question, 
both existing capacity, as well as the need for and placement 
of new assets reflects directly on national prerogatives and 
decisions and remains very controversial in Europe.  This 
political reality has prevented DG ENV from moving forward in 
this area.  Nonetheless, Vincent believed that the continued 
need to optimize resource use by member states would 
eventually lead states to coordinate more effectively. 
 
24.  (SBU) To date, Vincent has reported no contacts with 
U.S. officials, but pointed out the June  U.S.-EU Summit 
Conclusions as providing a possible pathway for U.S.-EU 
coordination. 
 
McKinley 
"
"20410","9/8/2004 5:02","04BRUSSELS3772","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS3749","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003772 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/07/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, IZ, BM, SU, SR, IR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: GYMNICH RESULTS ON BURMA, SUDAN, MIDDLE EAST AND 
BALKANS HOLD NO SURPRISES 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 3749 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) The EU Foreign Ministers\' informal \"Gymnich\" meeting 
in Maastricht on September 3-4 proceeded as expected 
(reftel).  The EU will go ahead with the Asia-EU (ASEM) 
Summit in Hanoi on October 7-9, as long as Burma attends at 
the FM or lower level, but the FMs also announced further 
sanctions they would impose unless Burma\'s human rights 
record improves by then.  To underline their concerns about 
the situation in Darfur, EU FMs asked the Council Secretariat 
to prepare a draft list of sanctions the EU could consider 
imposing on the Sudanese Government in the future.  The EU 
declared it would be prepared to respond positively if the 
African Union requests an EU Police Mission for Sudan.  On 
Iraq, the general EU mood was positive on member states 
responding to requests for financial support of a UN 
multinational force, although no Community funds can be spent 
on the force.  The EU also underlined the need for the next 
Quartet meeting in New York to propose \"concrete steps\" 
forward.  There was no agreement that the EU should support 
IAEA referral of Iran to the UNSC in September, but the EU 
still hoped to send a \"clear signal\" to Teheran.  Regarding 
the Balkans, the Commission got approval to talk separately 
to the Serbian and Montenegrin governments about negotiating 
a Stabilization and Association Agreement, although the EU 
insisted the two republics should remain one country.   The 
EU consensus on developments in Kosovo tracked very closely 
with the recent report of UN envoy Kai Eide.  End Summary. 
 
ASEM/BURMA: TIGHTENING SANCTIONS, WHILE AGREEING TO TALK 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
2. (U) EU FMs agreed on a non-paper outlining the EU\'s 
strategy, which should now be formally endorsed at the 
September 13 GAERC meeting in Brussels (copy faxed to 
EUR/ERA).  In short, EU is going ahead with the ASEM meeting 
(it would be an \"affront to the Asians\" to cancel it, Bot 
told the Dutch press).  The EU\'s \"expectation\" is that, if 
the Burmese don\'t meet the EU\'s three demands (release of 
Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest, an end to harassment of 
the National League for Democracy, and a \"genuine open debate 
in the National Convention) by then, the Burmese participant 
should be \"lower than at the the level of Head of 
State/Government\" and the summit will be \"an opportunity to 
confront Burma\" on human rights concerns.  EU would also 
adopt a revised Common Position on Burma that would \"tighten 
existing measures\" by: an expansion of its visa ban to all 
officers at Brigadier General and above and their families; 
prohibiting EU companies from \"making any finance available 
to named state-owned enterprises; EU Members States voting 
against IFI loans to Burma; and consideration of proposals to 
address illegal logging.  The EU would also increase its aid 
to health and education, in consultation with the NLD. 
 
SUDAN/DARFUR:  KEEPING THE SANCTIONS OPTION OPEN 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
3. (U)  FM Bot said the EU remains concerned about the 
situation.  It will continue its humanitarian support, and 
stands ready to provide 
necessary support to the African Union.  Specifically, the EU 
would consider launching an EU Police Mission on an 
initiative from the AU.  (Bot, External Relations 
Commissioner Patten and High Rep Solana were all keen to 
underline the need for the AU, not the EU, to have 
\"ownership\" of the Sudan problem.)  The EU Council also \"does 
not exclude the possibility\" that it will in the future need 
to impose sanctions on the GoS, and has tasked the Council 
Secretariat with drafting a list of possible sanctions the EU 
 
SIPDIS 
could impose, including a discussion of their implications. 
Asked about an oil embargo, Bot said FMs did not discuss what 
specific sanctions should be on the list, but expressed 
skepticism an EU oil embargo would be effective. 
 
IRAQ: NO EU MONEY FOR UN FORCE, BUT MAY BE FROM MEMBER STATES 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
4. (SBU)  Bot said he \"launched an appeal to colleagues\" to 
make further contributions to fund the \"1800 troops\" in a 
\"protection force for the UN\".  He said he hoped the UN force 
could be established soon, and that EU members could fund it. 
 Council contacts said that no EU Member States made any firm 
commitments in the Gymnich discussions, but the attitude was 
positive that the money could be found.  Bot said 
\"we\'ll see what happens in the coming days.\"  The EU is also 
moving ahead on other measures to contribute to Iraq.  The 
Dutch Presidency was given a mandate by the EUFMs to 
elaborate in the coming weeks on recommendations for EU 
actions from the recent exploratory mission to Baghdad and 
earlier Patten/Solana proposals.  The EU\'s focus is on police 
training (training the trainers, Solana clarified, since he 
said security makes it \"practically impossible\" to do more 
on-the-ground training), technical assistance to other 
administrative forces such as border or customs forces, and 
support for upcoming elections. 
 
MEPP 
---- 
 
5. (SBU)  The EU said the Israeli government\'s decision to 
expand 
settlements \"ignores the road map\" and \"cannot be accepted.\" 
FM Bot also insisted the EU could play a \"middle man role\" in 
making the Gaza withdrawal a \"two-sided process.\"  Bot argued 
the GoI was becoming more inclined to see a positive EU role 
in helping to reduce risk of \"chaos\" in Gaza after a 
withdrawal.  Both Solana and Bot said they looked forward to 
a Quartet meeting during UNGA week in New York, provided it 
can agree on \"concrete steps\" forward.  (Bot: \"meeting just 
for the sake of meeting doesn\'t make any sense.\"  Solana: 
\"If we can\'t give the meeting content, it may not be 
necessary to have it at this point.\")  (COMMENT:  These 
latter comments were aimed at the U.S., according to Council 
and Commisison sources, although the press seems to have 
missed them entirely.  While the EU thinks Quartet agreement 
on how to address the Gaza withdrawal is possible, the EU is 
concerned that US-EU \"divergences\" over issues such as the 
settlements and the fence could make it hard to agree on a 
Quartet statement worth making.  Our sources said by the end 
of the Gymnich session that it looked like planning for the 
Quartet meeting was progressing, and were more upbeat on the 
value of the upcoming meeting. Nonetheless, there remain 
lingering concerns in the EU that the U.S. uses the Quartet 
process to -- as one Council contact told us today -- \"keep 
the Europeans quiet and prevent us from stirring up trouble.\" 
 END COMMENT.) 
 
IRAN: A \"CLEAR SIGNAL\" TO TEHERAN, BUT NOT TO THE UNSC YET 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
6. (U) Bot, Patten, Solana, Fischer all repeatedly talked 
about the need for the EU to \"send a strong  signal\" to Iran 
on nuke concerns, and that Teheran should \"make no mistake 
about our message.\"  But they had nothing concrete to add and 
did not mention the IAEA BoG meeting in front of the press. 
Council and Dutch Presidency contacts tell us there is little 
or no EU sentiment in favor of sending it to the UNSC in 
September; \"maybe in November, depending on that report.\" 
 
BALKANS: SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO, AND KOSOVO 
------------------------------------------ 
 
7. (U) The EU (especially Solana) endorsed the EU\'s policy 
supporting the State Union.  Solana stressed that SaM\'s 
progress toward the EU \"will be much, much faster in the 
context of the State Union.\"  But FMs 
also endorsed Patten\'s proposed \"twin-track\" approach to 
handling \"technical\" issues \"of an economic and commercial 
nature\", such as negotiating the economic sections of a 
Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA).  Patten said 
the aim would be to have one SAA for SaM, 
but with some sections where Serbia and Montenegro might be 
treated separately.  As the AP accurately summarized it: \"The 
EU agrees to treat the two states separately, while insisting 
they should remain one country.\"  Solana argued emphatically 
that EU policy toward SaM \"has not changed, and will not 
change\", arguing this shift is just a technical 
adaptation of the EU\'s dealing with the governments in 
question.  Senior EU officials (Lehne and Priebe) will go to 
both Belgrade and Podgorica next week to explain the change, 
followed by Solana and Patten in a joint trip by the end of 
the month. 
 
8. (SBU) On Kosovo, the Gymnich discussion strongly supported 
all of the messages of the recent report by UN envoy Kai 
Eide.  The EU urged Kosovar Serbs to participate in 
elections.  It agreed UNMIK should look at transferring more 
powers to PISG, as long as the UNMIK SRSG\'s \"control 
functions\" are also strenghtened (a Solana staffer said 
Solana favors a \"Bosnia model\" where the local authorities 
would make the decisions, but could be overruled by the High 
Rep).  The UN standards process needs to be prioritized (with 
protection of minorities and 
refugee returns right at the top); and Serb concerns need to 
be addressed, with decentralization \"absolutely fundamental\" 
to the whole process.  Only Austrian FM (and incoming 
External Relations Commissioner) Ferrero-Waldner made any 
comment on the status issue, and that was to say it should 
only be discussed later. 
 
9. (C) Dutch and Council Secretariat sources confirmed that 
EU FMs had no serious discussion of the status question.  But 
there was a general consensus in favor of Eide\'s arguments 
that further postponement of the status issue would be a 
problem, and that it was important there be a positive 
standards review in 2005.  Solana noted to the Gymnich that 
the Contact Group would have to play a leading role in the 
process leading to status discussions, and there were no 
objections.  At the same time, there was little support for 
\"early\" (i.e., in 2004) appointment of an envoy to initiate 
discussions on status.  In a discussion on Sept. 7, a Solana 
staffer elaborated further, noting that as long as the EU 
does not discuss the status issue, then Member State 
positions will be \"all over the map.\"  But the status issue 
is far too sensitive an issue to discuss at 25, since it 
would surely leak.  That is why Solana has been pushing 
Member States to accept that the Quint needs to take the lead. 
 
10. (U) Minimize considered. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"20441","9/8/2004 14:36","04BRUSSELS3782","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 003782 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR DAS LAURA KENNEDY, EUR/CACEN, EUR/ERA TOM 
LERSTEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PGOV, EAID, GG, AM, AJ, KZ, KG, TI, TX, UZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU CONSULTATIONS ON CAUCASUS, CENTRAL ASIA 
(COEST) 
 
REF: USEU TODAY 09/02/04 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY:  On September 1 EUR DAS Laura Kennedy held 
semi-annual consultations with the EU on Caucasus and Central 
Asia (COEST).  Caucasus discussions concentrated on 
establishing a political process to resolve the South Ossetia 
conflict (Kennedy met separately on South Ossetia with Heikki 
Talvitie, EU Special Representative for the South Caucasus, 
who had just returned from the region -- see ref), and on 
reviewing the issues in play in Nagorno-Karabakh with an eye 
toward developing a comprehensive plan to move forward. 
Regarding both conflicts, interlocutors focused on getting 
the Russians to play a positive role and work with, rather 
than seek to exclude, the OSCE.  COEST participants 
consistently emphasized the need for promoting regional 
cooperation in both the Caucasus and Central Asia.  On 
Central Asia, both sides agreed on the importance of building 
civil society and coordinating U.S. and EU promotion of 
democratic reform and development assistance.  Noting this 
summer\'s terrorist attacks in Uzbekistan, the EU said the 
Uzbeks had asked them to designate Hizb-ut Tahrir as a 
terrorist group (the U.S. has not designated Hizb-ut Tahrir). 
 END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
SOUTH OSSETIA: STARTING A POLITICAL PROCESS 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Jan Lucas Van Hoorn, Director of the Southeast and 
Eastern Europe Department in the Dutch MFA (the Netherlands 
is the current EU president), said the key in South Ossetia 
was to keep hostilities from flaring up and introduce 
confidence-building measures.  He supported Tbilisi OSCE HOM 
Roy Reeve\'s idea of setting up confidence-building working 
groups focused on key issues.  After those groups had made 
progress, added van Hoorn, then a higher-level process could 
begin, either via the Joint Control Commission (JCC) or by 
reviving the Baden process, as proposed by the U.S.  Van 
Hoorn noted that the EU would have its Cooperation Council 
meetings with all three Caucasus countries on September 14. 
On September 13, Dutch FM Bot and EU HighRep Solana would 
have dinner with the three FM\'s from Georgia, Armenia and 
Azerbaijan.  Van Hoorn implied that the EU intended to raise 
and endorse Reeve\'s CBM proposal at these meetings. 
 
------------------------------------- 
MEANING OF SOUTH OSSETIAN \"AUTONOMY?\" 
------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Van Hoorn lamented the lack of clarity on how the 
Georgians planned to flesh out the concept of autonomy for 
South Ossetia.  He said Georgia should be encouraged to make 
progress on defining the autonomy for Ajara; that would send 
an important, positive signal to the South Ossetians and the 
Russians.  Kennedy noted the difference between the 
situations but agreed that the definition of autonomy was a 
crucial element for the future of South Ossetia.  She 
underlined the role of positive public signals; she said, for 
example, that supportive statements such as Georgia had made 
to the Russians regarding the recent hostage-taking in North 
Ossetia could go a long way toward defusing the tensions with 
Russia that were complicating the search for a solution in 
South Ossetia.  We had consistently urged Saakashvili to 
cease inflammatory rhetoric.  Now that he had disengaged 
militarily, we need to push the Russians to engage 
politically. 
 
----------------------------------- 
ABKHAZIA: PROGRESS AFTER ELECTIONS? 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) On Abkhazia, Kennedy suggested that the U.S. and the 
EU explore the possibilities for new movement after the 
October Abkhaz elections, perhaps by revitalizing the 
\"Friends of Georgia\" process.  Van Hoorn agreed, but said the 
Dutch experience as 2003 OSCE Chairman-in-Office (CiO) had 
been that Abkhazia is \"the hardest nut to crack\" of all of 
the conflicts in the region.  He suggested that Georgian 
public acceptance of the concept of dual Georgian/Russian 
nationality for South Ossetians and Abkhazians could lead to 
progress in both Abkhazia and South Ossetia.  Kennedy 
cautioned that such a move would reward the Russian policy of 
liberally granting Russian citizenship in those regions, and 
could be unacceptable to the Georgians. 
 
----------------------------- 
IMPORTANCE OF ECONOMIC REFORM 
----------------------------- 
5. (C) Both sides agreed that continued pursuit of economic 
reform was a key factor in increasing political stability in 
Georgia and the Caucasus in general.  Aid channelled through 
the Millenium Challenge Corporation -- with its emphasis on 
reform -- was key in Georgia.  Also, the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan 
(BTC) oil pipeline would be vital to the future of Georgia 
not only as an energy corridor, but also as an example to 
other investors of the attractiveness of doing business 
there.  Kurt Juul, Head of Unit for South Caucasus and 
Central Asia in the External Affairs Directorate of the 
European Commission, said Commission President Romano Prodi 
planned to underscore the importance of economic reform when 
he visits the region on September 16.  Both sides agreed on 
the importance of sending a clear message to Georgian 
President Saakashvili that he must not divert his focus from 
the need to follow through on his economic reform 
initiatives. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
NAGORNO-KARABAKH: STATE OF PLAY AND RUSSIA 
------------------------------------------ 
 
6. (C) Van Hoorn noted that the September 14 EU Cooperation 
Council meeting with the three Caucasus countries would take 
place just before the CIS Summit in Astana.  Now that 
Azerbaijan\'s President Aliyev has been in office for a year, 
the EU hopes to see a clear indication that he will make 
progress, van Hoorn asserted.  He added that Armenia was 
concerned, with good reason, about being excluded from the 
development of infrastructure in the region. 
 
7. (C) Kennedy noted that the Azeri and Armenian foreign 
ministers had met in Prague earlier in the week.  U.S. Minsk 
Group Co-Chair Steve Mann had reported on a positive meeting; 
its focus on technical matters  -- access issues, for example 
-- was useful. Perhaps after another similar session, the 
parties could consider an overall plan.   The Azeri foreign 
minister seemed to be growing into his role.  Kennedy agreed 
that the Astana meeting between the leaders was the next key 
step. 
 
8. (C) COEST participants discussed the need to watch 
carefully Russian President Putin\'s upcoming meeting with his 
Armenian and Azeri counterparts in Astana.  Putin had 
essentially invited himself, possibly intending to cut the 
OSCE and the Minsk Group out of future negotiations.  Michael 
Swann, South Caucasus and Central Asia Desk Officer in the EU 
Council Secretariat, remarked that some -- especially in 
Azerbaijan -- had \"had it\" with the Minsk Group, and might 
thus be receptive to Putin\'s efforts to sideline it.  Van 
Hoorn underscored that the EU would have to provide 
Azerbaijan and Armenia with a clear message in support of the 
Minsk Group at the upcoming Cooperation Council.  Kennedy 
added that we also needed to urge the Russians at all levels 
to endorse the OSCE and the Minsk Group -- of which Russia is 
one of the co-chairs.  Van Hoorn said he expected the EU 
would take this up at the November 11 EU-Russia Summit in The 
Hague. 
 
----------------------------- 
CAUCASUS: A REGIONAL APPROACH 
----------------------------- 
 
9. (C) COEST participants consistently emphasized the need 
for a regional -- vice country-by-country -- approach to both 
the Caucasus and Central Asia.  As Juul portrayed the 
Commission point of view, the U.S. and the EU have regional 
assistance programs, but interactions with the recipients 
tend to focus on individual countries -- this provided each 
with the opportunity to blame its problems and failings on 
its neighbors.  Taking a collective approach and working with 
recipient countries as a unit could help break this pattern, 
he suggested.  On the Caucasus specifically, he commented 
that Commission President Prodi\'s September 16 meetings with 
all three leaders (Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia) would 
provide the best near-term opportunity to reinforce messages. 
 He pointed to the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) as an 
example of the EU -- or at least Commission -- interest in 
addressing the region more broadly.  Energy would be a 
particularly important agenda item in EU discussions with 
these three countries, he said.  Armenia\'s nuclear power 
plant -- now run by Russians -- was unsafe; the EU had been 
trying for years to get it closed.  According to Juul, the 
Commission was prepared to convene a donors\' conference to 
raise funds for alternate energy sources; he had hoped the 
Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) would be a source of 
contributions, but it appeared that the MCA was focused on 
poverty reduction instead. 
------------------------------------ 
CENTRAL ASIA: BUILDING CIVIL SOCIETY 
------------------------------------ 
 
10. (C) On Central Asia, both sides agreed on the difficulty 
and importance of helping to build civil society.  Swann 
commented that the EU had to deal with \"substandard 
governments and substandard civil society\" -- the governments 
were suspicious of efforts to reach out to NGOs and other 
groups, while NGOs and the press tended to take irresponsible 
actions that aroused further government suspicion.  The U.S. 
and EU, suggested van Hoorn, needed to call all parties on 
their behavior -- and to encourage further contact between 
government and civil society representatives. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
CENTRAL ASIA:  PROMOTING DEMOCRACY, COORDINATING AID 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
11. (C) Kennedy solicited EU support for several assistance 
projects in Central Asia.  Money was still needed to complete 
the bridge from Tajikistan into Afghanistan and the road 
leading up to the bridge, she said, and an EU contribution 
would be appreciated.  The EU declined to respond directly, 
but noted that the EU would sign its Partnership and 
Cooperation Agreement with Tajikistan in October.  Juul 
pointed out that again, the key was a regional approach; and 
Afghanistan is also a part of the region.  He said the 
Commission was trying to get the Central Asian countries to 
work together wherever possible on poverty reduction, 
fighting drugs and crime, and governance. 
 
12. (C) Key to the regional approach, Kennedy pointed out, 
was the OSCE.  Kazakhstan\'s desire for 2009 OSCE Chairmanship 
offered the U.S. and EU the opportunity to press for 
political reform and better respect for human rights.  An 
important near-term indicator would be how Kazakhstan 
conducted its September elections.  Van Hoorn agreed, saying 
Kazakhstan today was a poor candidate, but the decision 
doesn\'t need to be made until 2008.  In the meantime, the EU 
has not reached a \"common position\" on Kazakhstan\'s bid but 
will wait and see how it evolves.  Given Russia\'s concerns 
with the OSCE, he said, it would be \"interesting\" to have a 
CIS country as chairman.  However, he noted that Kazakhstan 
had signed the CIS statement critical of the OSCE; he added 
that the EU had pointed out to the Kazakhs that this was 
inconsistent with seeking the OSCE chairmanship.  Van Hoorn 
said Commissioner Patten had leaned heavily on Kazakhstan 
during his March visit on issues such as the proposed media 
law and elections.  The media law has since been withdrawn, 
and Van Hoorn concluded that U.S. and EU efforts can lead to 
changes in Kazakhstan. 
 
13. (C) It was also important that Turkmenistan, despite its 
autocratic dictatorship, not be isolated.  A central factor 
in keeping engaged with Turkmenistan would be to find a 
successor for the OSCE HOM in Ashgabat, Paraschiva Badescu, 
who could be equally effective in pressing for human rights 
and civil society.  Kennedy urged U.S.-EU cooperation in the 
search for the right successor; the worst signal that could 
be sent to Ashgabat would be if no qualified candidate could 
be found. 
 
14. (C) Returning to the topic of civil society and 
coordinating assistance, Kennedy urged the EU to support 
independent media in Kyrgyzstan by funding the Freedom House 
printing press there.  Juul noted that the Commission\'s TACIS 
program was not structured for this type of assistance, but 
Van Hoorn and the Council Secretariat were receptive to using 
the EU\'s COEST Working Group to identify possible EU member 
states who could provide bilateral assistance.  (USEU 
subsequently provided the EU Council with a non-paper 
outlining the need for donors to support independent media in 
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, and with details on the road spur 
between the Afghan border and the Tajik town of Dusti.) 
 
------------------------ 
UZBEKISTAN AND TERRORISM 
------------------------ 
 
15. (C) EU representatives were very interested in how 
Tashkent had reacted to the U.S. decision earlier this year 
not to certify Uzbekistan, and sought U.S. views on the 
likelihood of instability in a post-Karimov era.  Kennedy 
noted our hopes to continue to engage Uzbekistan on the 
reform front; we hoped to send a senior official to discuss 
economic reform.  Noting this summer\'s terrorist attacks on 
US and Israeli embassies, Van Hoorn asked whether we had 
added a group called Hizb-ut Tahrir to our list of terrorist 
groups; he said that the EU would consider this soon but he 
was not himself convinced that the group should be so 
designated.  Van der Togt opined that there are no legal 
grounds for banning them in most other EU countries, 
especially given the group\'s vague message -- it is hard, he 
said, to determine exactly what the organization stands for 
or intends to do.  Van der Togt added that the Uzbeks raise 
this group with the Dutch \"all the time\" in meetings.  (NOTE: 
 Uzbekistan has also approached the U.S. repeatedly with the 
same request, but the USG has not designated the group as a 
terrorist organization.  END NOTE.) 
 
16. (C) COMMENT:  In the course of discussions, Kennedy 
suggested that the agenda for the next COEST meeting include 
a more detailed discussion of coordination of development 
assistance and offered to include a representative from 
EUR/ACE on the U.S. delegation for that purpose.  The EU 
welcomed the proposal.  END COMMENT. 
 
17. (U) This message has been cleared by EUR DAS Laura 
Kennedy. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20476","9/9/2004 14:04","04BRUSSELS3813","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE193217","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003813 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2014 
TAGS: EAID, PREL, SU, UNSC, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SUDAN: EU SUPPORTS KEY ELEMENTS OF UNSC RESOLUTION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 193217 
 
Classified By: POL M/C KYLE SCOTT.  REASON: 1.4(b)(d) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  EU agrees on all main elements of UNSC 
draft.  EU not ready to declare situation genocide, but agree 
it is \"ethnic cleansing.\"  Africa experts believe Pronk Plan 
is fatally flawed, but believe it is important for 
international community to stand together.  They also worry 
that it might take the AU as long as four months or more to 
expand their current operation.  EU ready to provide support 
for a police unit, and asked for details on US plans to 
deploy observers.  Action request: para 7. End Summary. 
 
GAERC Draft Conclusions Track Closely with UNSC 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
2. (C) Council officials shared with us the draft conclusions 
on Sudan being prepared for the EU FMs meeting September 
13-14.  Although minor adjustments may still be made, we were 
told the main elements are already agreed.  They dovetail 
with the main elements of our draft UNSC resolution, 
including: 
-- a call for a moratorium on all military air operations; 
-- a statement of dissatisfaction with Sudanese 
implementation of its commitments to disarm militia groups; 
-- concerns about \"continuing reports about massive human 
rights violations, including systematic rape of women; 
-- support for creation of an international commission of 
inquiry; 
-- willingness to further support an expansion of the AU 
observer mission; and 
-- a warning of possible sanctions against the GoS if no 
tangible progress is made. 
 
No Genocide, Wary of Pronk Plan 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) EU Africa experts are not ready to declare that the 
situation amounts to genocide, believing the UN is the 
appropriate body to make that determination.  In any case, 
they are convinced that ethnic cleansing is underway.  The 
dividing line, as they see it, is linguistic: IDP camps are 
populated almost entirely by those who do not speak Arabic as 
their mother tongue. 
 
4. (C) The Council\'s main Sudan-watcher, Christian Manahl, 
told us he believes the Pronk plan is fatally flawed, because 
the safe areas were negotiated unilaterally with the GoS, 
without buy-in from the rebels.  That has allowed the GoS to 
argue that military operations were all aimed at expanding 
the safe zones, and helped stall the Abuja talks as rebel 
groups refuse to discuss safe zones they were never party to 
creating in the first place. 
 
5. (C) Manahl also worried that the AU lacked the capacity to 
field a strengthened mission any time in the near future.  He 
predicted that even if the UN\'s proposals are adopted, 
political haggling and logistical bottlenecks within the AU 
would prevent them from deploying a significantly larger 
mission until early next year at the earliest.  Manahl 
preferred that the AU take its time to prepare for a \"proper\" 
PKO rather than rush toward a disaster. 
 
EU Police Mission 
----------------- 
 
6. (C) EU remains ready to field a police support mission, 
but Manahl told us this idea is currently stalled.  Much 
would depend on the GoS response to the UN\'s proposals.  The 
GoS invited participation in a police monitoring mission, the 
EU is ready to support with 25-150 people, depending on 
needs. 
 
Where Are the American Observers? 
--------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Manahl noted that the Addis Ababa agreement had 
authorized a maximum of 18 foreign observers.  The EU 
understood the US intended to supply half, with the EU 
supplying the rest.  The EU has currently has fielded 10 
observers, but understands the US has only provided two or 
three thus far.  Manahl asked for additional information on 
US planning, noting that the EU would be ready to supply more 
observers to make up the 18-person limit if the US did not 
intend to supply more observers.  ACTION REQUEST: Please 
advise. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20479","9/9/2004 15:13","04BRUSSELS3821","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS3778","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003821 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, ETRD, ZS, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU AID/TRADE FOR NORTH CYPRUS STALLS 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 3778 
 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 3225 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b/d. 
 
 1.  (C) Summary: EUR DAS Kennedy\'s Brussels consultations 
coincided with an important September 2 COREPER meeting in 
which EU member states were unable to find a way to move the 
Commission\'s proposed trade preferences for Northern Cyprus 
ahead -- leaving the EC\'s trade/aid package effectively 
frozen for now. The Dutch Presidency might have to delink 
trade and assistance in order to get the assistance through. 
The Commission and the Turkish Mission to the EU are 
concerned that delinking the packages might have a negative 
impact on those in the North who voted for reunification. On 
the other hand, there is broad understanding that a nasty 
public spat among EU member states over North Cyprus could 
spill over, and adversely impact this fall\'s intense debate 
on whether to offer EU accession talks to Turkey.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (C) On September 2, EUR DAS Kennedy met key European 
Commission officials involved in the formulation of the EC\'s 
trade and assistance package for North Cyprus and in the 
preparation of the EC\'s October 6 Report for Turkey. (Turkey 
discussions ref A.) Kennedy also met with Turkish Mission to 
the EU officials, Council Secretariat officials including 
Director General Robert Cooper and, via a telephone 
conference, with Dutch MFA European Affairs Official Pieter 
de Gooijer. During her visit, the EU Perm-Rep Ambassadors 
also discussed the Commission\'s proposed trade and aid 
proposals for North Cyprus at their September 2 COREPER (EU 
decision making body made up of the EU member state Perm-Reps 
assigned to the EU) meeting.  Both Commission and the Council 
Secretariat officials expressed concern over Cypriot 
 
SIPDIS 
resistance to EU trade preferences to North Cyprus. 
 
Trade preferences in trouble 
---------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) Pierre Mirel (please protect throughout), 
DG-Enlargement head of unit for the Cyprus Task Force, 
expressed worry to Ambassador Kennedy that the EU member 
states will not/not extend EU trade preferences to North 
Cyprus. He was concerned that this blockage will undercut 
pro-unification forces in North Cyprus, particularly Talat. 
Though he had no evidence that Denktash is interested in 
running again in next elections in North Cyprus, he felt that 
direct trade with the EU was absolutely critical to show 
those who supported the Annan plan that they would get 
\"something\" from the EU for their efforts. He noted that the 
EU\'s 259 million Euro aid package to North Cyprus (over three 
years) will take much longer to show \"visibility\" than trade. 
 Mirel wondered if this \"visibility\" of trade, when compared 
to the slower disbursement of an aid package, is why the 
Greek Cypriots are so vigorous in their opposition to the 
trade preferences.  Nonetheless, he also expressed concern 
that the Greek Cypriots might \"stall\" the aid package until 
they get assurances from the other member states in the 
Council that the trade part of the deal is \"dead.\" (Mirel was 
speaking to us even before the COREPER discussion on Cyprus 
had taken place.) Kennedy urged the Commission to continue to 
pursue their proposed measures for the Turkish Cypriots, even 
if the measures were ultimately not realizable, in order to 
send a positive signal to Talat and prevent Papadoupolos from 
becoming further emboldened in the run-up to the December 
vote on Turkey,s EU accession.  She noted this would 
maintain awareness among EU member states that the Greek 
Cypriots were the obstructionists in these efforts. 
 
Dutch opposed to unbundling trade and aid 
----------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Dutch MFA official De Gooijer said that the Dutch 
Presidency wants to go ahead with both trade and aid. The 
Cypriots had told him, he said, that they could \"live\" with 
aid but hold \"considerable concerns -- even objections -- to 
direct trade.\" In Cyprus, they had told visiting Dutch 
Minister for European Affairs Atzo Nicolai that they want to 
be \"flexible\" on the North -- though it remains unclear what 
they are prepared to be flexible about. 
 
\"Hiding\" behind dueling legal interpretations? 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5.  (C) Mirel told us that some member states are hiding 
behind the current disagreement between the Commission and 
the Council Legal Services over the legal basis of EU trade 
preferences for North Cyprus. (ref  B). This disagreement 
allows some member-states (he specified Italy, Germany, and 
France) to avoid weighing in on this issue. He also said that 
Cyprus has been very active in working member states to get 
support, not only for their position, but also to get their 
\"solidarity.\" In this context, \"solidarity\" for Cyprus would 
mean that other member-states would join up with Cyprus so as 
to prevent a \"new\" member state from being isolated or 
\"embarrassed\" in a public and open fashion. He suggested that 
other member-states might also be sympathetic to a \"small\" 
state standing up for what it believes in and might decide to 
support Cyprus on this basis.  States might also link the 
Cyprus problem to their own unique concerns (i.e. Spain and 
Gibraltar) and side with Cyprus in the hopes they are spared 
from a similar situation later on.  In light of these 
potential internal EU sentiments, Mirel told us that it is 
hard to see how the Commission\'s interest in extending trade 
preferences to North Cyprus can move in a positive direction. 
 
Possible next steps on Cyprus; spill-over on Turkey 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
6.  (C) Mirel wondered if the Dutch Presidency might decide, 
or feel compelled, to decouple the aid package and the trade 
preferences at the end of September or beginning of October. 
To avoid this, he understood that some in the Commission seem 
to believe that by letting the Cypriots \"win\" the argument 
over which legal service advice to follow (i.e. go with the 
Council ruling that it should be consensus, and not qualified 
majority voting, for trade preferences to North Cyprus), 
Nicosia would be inclined to accept trade preferences.  Mirel 
expressed skepticism that giving the Cypriots what they want 
in this area would move Cyprus to accept trade in any case. 
Enlargement Director General Fabrizio Barboso told DAS 
Kennedy that Turkish FM Gul had written to CFSP High-Rep 
Solana asking that the trade and aid packages not be 
delinked.  In discussions with key Solana advisor, Robert 
Cooper, he suggested a blow-up among the member-states over 
North Cyprus could endanger a positive EU judgment on 
offering accession talks. Cooper suggested that this could 
affect strong Greek support for Turkey and could also lead 
the Dutch to postpone the trade part of the North Cyprus deal 
until after Turkish accession issues are settled this fall. 
 
7.  (C) Mirel suggested that Turkey\'s decision to limit it 
customs union to the \"EU-minus Cyprus\" had been a mistake. He 
wondered, however, whether Cyprus would permit aid to go 
ahead even with an accommodation by Turkey on this. 
Currently, Cyprus has been working to modify the Commission\'s 
aid proposal and to introduce new concerns about it. The 
Cypriots are now asking the Commission to exclude any 
assistance to public administrators in North Cyprus, to 
provide guarantees that no Commission money will go to 
\"contested properties,\" and that the EC not \"sign\" any 
documents that would provide any kind of implicit recognition 
of North Cyprus or its officials. Turkish diplomatic 
officials here told Kennedy that Ankara would be ready to 
find a way to extend their current Customs Union with the EU 
to all 25 members, but feel that they need to get something 
in return. Kennedy urged that Turkey not delay on this issue. 
 
The Greek/Turkey Factor 
----------------------- 
 
8.  (C) Mirel said that one factor working against asking the 
Greeks to lean on the Cypriots to solve the current impasse 
is the wider Turkish game. Greece needs Cyprus to agree to 
offer Turkey a date for EU talks, and does not want to do 
anything to get in the way of this critical Greek political 
objective. De Gooijer also told us that during his visit, 
Dutch Minister Nicolai told the Cypriots that the EU expects 
the Greek Cypriots to keep their concerns about North Cyprus 
\"bilateral\" and not carry them out \"at the expense of EU-25 
decisions on Turkey.\"  De Gooijer also said that the Dutch 
Prime Minister had urged Greek PM Karamanlis not to let 
Greek/Turkey bilateral issues become problems in the EU\'s 
relationship with Turkey.  The Dutch have also been telling 
the Turks to avoid controversial actions, including at the 
forthcoming Organization of Islamic Conferences (OIC) 
meeting, where the Northern Cypriots will allegedly be 
described as the Turkish Cypriot state.  In a separate 
conversation with Turkish Mission to the EU Ambassador 
Demiralp, Demiralp denied that this was the case and 
emphasized that the Northern Cypriots were part of the 
organization under the name of the Turkish Cypriot 
constituent state, a name drawn from the Annan plan. 
 
EU Cyprus Package Stalls; \"political\" decision next? 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
9.  (C) In the end, Cyprus did hold tough at the COREPER 
meeting, and no EU member state was willing to push them to 
back off.  EU-Enlargement Director-General Barboso and his 
staff members told Kennedy that the Commission legal service 
was asked to write another paper analyzing the Council\'s 
legal opinion. Some member-states had proposed a contact 
group meeting and others suggested a trip to Cyprus. In light 
of Dutch Minister Nicolai\'s recent visit, neither idea went 
anywhere at COREPER. Another idea that was floated at 
COREPER, per Barboso, was taking this to the EU Foreign 
Ministers at the September 13-14 General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC) on the grounds that it is becoming 
a political decision. Barboso noted that this could really 
open the discussion on North Cyprus in an unpredictable 
fashion with a different set of interlocutors.  But, he said, 
for him the most important thing to come out of COREPER is an 
understanding that the EU differences are \"political,\" not 
\"legal.\" 
 
10. (C) Cooper agreed that the North Cyprus problem is no 
longer legal but is political.  Cyprus continues to oppose 
direct trade links, and remains \"quiet\" on the EU\'s 259 
million Euro assistance package to North Cyprus. Cooper said 
that the EU lacks a strategy for reunification of Cyprus; 
rather what the EU has is trade/aid package that is a 
\"reward\" to North Cyprus for its recent vote for 
reunification. Ambassador Kennedy noted the importance 
maintaining the linkage in the trade/aid package, and advised 
against dropping either or both parts of the package, noting 
this strategy helps keep hardliners from reemerging in North 
Cyprus. Cooper replied that the EU has made a commitment to 
North Cyprus that will not be dropped. However, timing is 
also important and the EU doesn\'t want a political battle 
over North Cyprus, if this could hurt Turkish membership in 
the EU. 
 
Gloom? 
------ 
 
11. (C) Our gloomy Commission interlocutors characterized 
COREPER as \"frozen\" and the GAERC route as a \"dangerous 
option.\" Barboso concluded that COREPER opened up a \"new 
wrinkle of uncertainty\" on Cyprus. 
 
12. (U) EUR DAS Kennedy cleared this message. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"20498","9/10/2004 10:42","04BRUSSELS3840","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS3822|04STATE193154","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003840 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, IZ, IR, BK, SU, EAID, BU, CY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ANTICIPATED RESULTS OF SEPTEMBER 13 GAERC 
 
REF: A. STATE 193154 
     B. BRUSSELS 3822 
     C. USEU TODAY 09/08/2004 
 
Classified By: Kyle Scott, PolMinCouns, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) We have discussed reftel A points on the EU FMs\' 
General Affairs and 
External Relations Council (GAERC) meeting on Sept. 13 with a 
variety of EU 
officials.  EU Conclusions on Sudan should dovetail with the 
main elements of 
our draft UNSC Resolution.  On Iran, we understand the EU 
will issue a 
statement (although perhaps not formal Conclusions) calling 
on Iran to comply 
with its IAEA obligations.  For Iraq, EU officials expect 
that EU Member State 
contributions will cover a substantial part, if not all, of 
the funds needed 
for the UN force, and are talking to the UN about additional 
support for 
elections.  Iraqi PM Allawi will be invited to the EU\'s 
November 5 Summit.  The 
GAERC will also formally approve, without discussion, the 
Concept of Operations 
(CONOPS) for the upcoming EU force in Bosnia.  Other issues 
that should be 
covered at the GAERC are Burma, Belarus, the Great Lakes and 
(possibly) Serbia. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
Sudan/Darfur 
------------ 
 
2. (C) Council officials shared with us the draft conclusions 
on Sudan being 
prepared for the September 13 GAERC.  Although minor 
adjustments may still be 
made, we were told the main elements are already agreed. 
They dovetail with 
the main elements of our draft UNSC resolution, including: 
-- a call for a moratorium on all military air operations; 
-- a statement of dissatisfaction with Sudanese 
implementation of its 
commitments to disarm militia groups; 
-- concerns about \"continuing reports about massive human 
rights violations, 
including systematic rape of women; 
-- support for creation of an international commission of 
inquiry; 
-- willingness to further support an expansion of the AU 
observer mission; and 
-- a warning of possible sanctions against the GoS if no 
tangible progress is 
made. 
The EU will also dispatch a fact-finding mission to see where 
additional EU support 
may be needed. 
 
EU will issue statement on Iran 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) While Dutch PermRep de Bruijn has told a background 
press briefing that 
Iran will be discussed in restricted session at lunch, and 
lead to no formal 
Conclusions, according to Council Secretariat officials 
Sophie Kisling and 
Andreas Strub, who work respectively on Iran and 
Non-Proliferation issues, EU 
ministers will issue a statement on Iran on the margins of 
the GAERC.  The 
statement, which Strub had just drafted, will call on Iran to 
comply with IAEA 
guidelines and its international obligations, consistent with 
the EU\'s 
long-standing policy on Iran\'s nuclear program.  Ministers 
will seek to agree 
on a common press line on Iran, which will express support 
for the EU-3 
efforts, and which will coincide with the start of the IAEA 
Board meeting. 
Strub said he understood that the EU-3 continue to work on a 
common text for a 
proposed IAEA Board resolution on Iran, and will brief 
ministers at the GAERC. 
 
4. (C)  On the issue of referring Iran to the UNSC, Strub 
said the recent IAEA 
DG\'s report \"could have been worse\" for Iran.  It shows, he 
said, some Iranian 
responsiveness to the IAEA.  For example, the issue of 
contamination, he said, 
may never be clarified without Iran\'s suppliers coming clean 
on what they 
provided Iran -- and moving the issue to the Security 
Council, where Russia is 
a member -- won\'t necessarily help. In Strub\'s view, moving 
the issue to the 
Security Council will require carefully defining what Iran 
must do to comply 
with the IAEA:  exactly which dual-use activities will the 
UNSC insist Iran 
halt, which will be permitted, and will these standards apply 
to other 
countries (e.g. Israel)?  How the UNSC frames these issues 
will influence 
Iran\'s response, Strub said, and this should be carefully 
considered before 
moving to the UNSC. 
 
Iraq:  Funding UN Security Force 
-------------------------------- 
 
5. (C)  The GAERC Conclusions on Iraq have already been 
agreed at PermRep level 
and will endorse the EU\'s plan to meet with the Iraqi Interim 
Government in New 
York during UNGA week, as well as an invitation to PM Allawi 
to attend the 
November 5 EU Summit in Brussels.  A discussion of the 
Italian and French 
hostages in Iraq is also expected.  Kisling, who also covers 
Iraq at the 
Council, said that the legal basis for funding Iraq does not 
allow funding for 
military operations, although the Commission, Council and 
member states are 
looking carefully at this issue.  She said a legal brief is 
being prepared, but 
she has not seen it.  At present, the best option is for 
funding to come from 
member states, as Dutch FM Bot has asked them to do.  She 
said the Dutch have a 
contribution in mind, and the Germans are willing to use some 
of their pledge 
for election support to fund the UN protection force.  Other 
member states are 
working in capitals to see what they can pledge, and this 
will be discussed at 
the GAERC.  Kisling commented that the sum in question -- $26 
million -- was 
not huge; she did not know if member states would make up the 
full amount but 
thought it likely they would cover a substantial part of this 
sum. 
 
Iraq:  UN Election Appeal 
------------------------- 
 
6. (C)  Kisling said the Commission has pledged 15 million 
euros, and is 
talking to the UN and the Iraqi Election Commission.  The EU 
is not likely to 
fund the entire shortfall, she said, but the Commission was 
talking to the UN 
about reallocating some of its 2004 80 million euro 
contribution to the UN 
Trust Fund (under the International Reconstruction Fund for 
Iraq) for election 
support. 
 
Iraq:  Election Observation -- maybe a lite version 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
7. (C)  Kisling said that Iraq is on the EU\'s list for 
possible observation, 
but all is contingent on the security situation. 
Commissioner Patten is dead 
set against sending EU personnel to Iraq, so she did not 
foresee an election 
observation mission under the current Commission (whose 
tenure ends November 
1).  She thought perhaps the EU could send election experts 
and, at the most, 
possibly offer the kind of monitoring that it has undertaken 
in Afghanistan, 
but this was her personal opinion.  A parliament contact told 
us security 
concerns would result in few MEP volunteers for an 
observation mission. 
Operation Althea: Bosnia Handover 
--------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) The CONOPS has been finalized by the PSC and should be 
approved at the 
September 13 GAERC as an \"A point\" (adopted without any 
discussion).  We have 
been assured by planners within the EU Military Staff that 
things are moving 
forward as anticipated.  A force generation conference is 
scheduled for 
September 15, and an OPLAN should be completed shortly.  The 
EU Military 
Committee should sign off on the OPLAN by the end of 
September. While there 
remains some uncertainty about the date for the Transfer of 
Authority, the EU 
Military Staff (EUMS) is aware of US plans to depart MNB 
North on November 30, 
and they are keen to avoid any gaps in on-the-ground 
presence. A formal 
decision by the EU to launch the operation is expected in 
November. That 
decision will establish an official takeover date. 
 
Other Issues: Burma, Belarus, Great Lakes, and Serbia 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
9. (C) PermRep de Bruijn said the Presidency \"expects that 
(the Gymnich) 
conclusions will be confirmed\" on EU consideration of tougher 
measures against 
Burma (Ref B), despite reports of French objections (French 
FM Barnier was 
unable to attend the Gymnich meeting) in particular to 
proposed restrictions on 
EU companies investing in named Burmese state-owned 
enterprises.  A Council 
staffer told us that bilateral discussions between Barnier 
and Dutch FM Bot 
would likely continue over the weekend, and that a last 
minute PermRep 
Committee (COREPER) meeting early in the morning on Sept. 13 
was still 
possible.  But the UK and others have signaled clearly they 
have no margin for 
flexibility to back down vis-a-vis Burma at this point. 
 
10. (C) Due in particular to the insistence at least one of 
the Baltic states, 
the GAERC will also consider how the EU should respond to 
Belarusian President 
Lukashenko\'s announcement of an impending referendum there. 
A Dutch Presidency 
source told us that the Political and Security Committee has 
prepared a forceful 
message to be issued as Council conclusions.  As reported REF 
C, the EU\'s Political 
and Security Committee has agreed the EU should impose travel 
restrictions on Belarus 
officials, although we are told the final list will likely be 
decided after the GAERC. 
 
11. (SBU)  The FMs\' luncheon on Sept. 13 will also cover the 
situation in the 
Great Lakes region in Africa, in particular the government 
crisis in Kinshasa, 
but no decisions or Conclusions are anticipated.  EU member 
states are still 
seeking an agreed approach on MONUC renewal.  The key 
question is whether to 
extend the existing mission, or seek to reinforce it. 
Finally, the Hungarian 
government was pushing add the treatment of the Hungarian 
ethnic minority in 
the Serbian province of Vojvodina to the GAERC agenda. 
According to our 
source, there was no enthusiasm from other EU Member States 
for raising the 
issue to the ministerial level at this point, but Budapest 
\"appeared intent\" on 
forcing a discussion of the issue. 
 
12. (U) Minimize considered. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20502","9/10/2004 11:40","04BRUSSELS3843","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04USEUBRUSSELS3497","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003843 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/10/2014 
TAGS: PARM, PINR, IT, FR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ANNALISA GIANNELLA, LEADING THE EU AGAINST WMD 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 3497 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Maren Smith for reasons 1.4(b/d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Annalisa Giannella, EU High Representative 
Solana\'s Personal Representative for WMD Non-Proliferation, 
is the key official shaping the EU approach to 
nonproliferation and disarmament.  Her results-oriented 
approach, record of close cooperation with the US, and 
European contacts make her a valuable partner in our efforts 
to counter WMD.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Javier Solana, the EU High Representative for Common 
Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP), on October 10, 2003 named 
Annalisa Giannella his personal representative on WMD issues. 
 The decision to make Giannella Solana\'s personal 
representative--a position in which she is directly 
accountable only to him--was intended to facilitate her 
appointment and to ensure that Solana, rather than the 
member-states, remained in overall control of developing the 
EU\'s approach to WMD.  However, she has generally good 
relations with the Member States and is a trusted caretaker 
of their collective nonproliferation interests.  Giannella\'s 
appointment came too late to give her a significant role in 
developing the EU\'s WMD Strategy, approved by the European 
Council in December 2003.  She did contribute to updating and 
merging the two documents that formed the Strategy\'s base, 
the Action Plan and the Declaration of Principles, both of 
which had been drafted by the early-2003 Greek EU Presidency 
(with significant contributions from Robert Cooper, Solana\'s 
primary strategic thinker; reftel profiles Cooper).  Since 
December 2003, Giannella has worked tirelessly to implement 
the Strategy, which she views as her mandate and roadmap. 
 
------------- 
An EU Veteran 
------------- 
 
3. (U) Giannella was born in Bari, Italy in 1949 and joined 
the Council Secretariat in October 1972.  In addition to 
Italian, she speaks fluent English and French.  Until 1994, 
she worked on economic affairs, including environmental 
protection policy and completion of the internal market, with 
a focus on financial services and company law.  She also 
participated in a variety of international negotiations, 
overseeing the Council Secretariat\'s participation in an 
EEC-Switzerland agreement on insurance, the Lugano Convention 
with EFTA countries, and the International Bankruptcy 
Convention.  Giannella moved to the foreign policy and 
defense sphere in April 1994, when she was appointed Head of 
Division for Security Issues. 
 
---------------------------- 
History of Precedent-Setting 
---------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Promoted in September 1999 to Director of the 
Council Secretariat\'s European Security and Defense Policy 
Directorate, she was charged with building a unit that had 
not previously existed.  At the start of the Convention on 
the Future of Europe (which drafted the EU\'s Constitutional 
Treaty), Giannella was seconded to the Convention 
Secretariat, where she was Secretary-General Sir John Kerr\'s 
 
SIPDIS 
deputy.  In addition, as the senior Convention staffer on 
defense issues, she worked closely with the chairman of the 
Defense Working Group, Michel Barnier (a Commissioner later 
plucked from Brussels to become the French foreign minister), 
in drafting what became the Constitutional Treaty\'s 
provisions on ESDP.  At the close of the Convention, Solana 
approached her directly to offer her the WMD post. 
 
---------------------------------- 
A Forthright and Effective Partner 
---------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) We have been extremely impressed by the energy and 
zeal with which Giannella has attacked her work, taking 
charge quickly and getting results fast.  For example, 
earlier this year she proposed that the EU cosponsor with the 
IAEA a series of conferences on fissile material in the 
Caucasus region.  She presented her proposal to the Political 
and Security Committee (PSC), which sent it to Council for 
ministerial-level approval.  Two weeks later, Giannella 
received 3 million euros to support the three conferences--a 
result unprecedented in our experience working with the EU in 
terms of speed and ability to work outside standard 
decision-making lines, and a tactical success that we expect 
her to seek to replicate strategically.  (Note: The 3 million 
euros was disbursed from member state-controlled and very 
hard to tap CFSP funds, not Commission funds, which reflected 
Giannella\'s desire to both think creatively about funding 
options and to get member states more directly involved in EU 
nonproliferation assistance.)  On the down side, however, we 
have seen her apply the same energy to bad ideas as she does 
to good ones, as when she tried to push ASEAN in a 
politically impossible direction; fortunately, her ideas thus 
far have most often been good. 
 
6. (C) Giannella has also impressed us with her skill in 
assembling a strong team to support her.  Prior to her 
appointment, there were two people in the Council working on 
WMD, proliferation, and disarmament issues.  In less than a 
year, she has expanded her office to eight officers, taking 
advantage of the discretion granted by Solana to select her 
own team without having to factor in member-state 
requirements or political choices.  The quality of her staff 
members--several of whom, including her deputy, Andreas 
Strub, are long-time USEU contacts--reflects Giannella\'s 
personal recruiting clout as well as her success in making 
her office an appealing and prestigious place despite long 
hours and hard work. 
 
7. (C) Giannella\'s growing staff reflects her success in 
extending Council competence into new areas.  Her goal, 
however, is not to advance Council interests or build her own 
empire--she is results-oriented, and applies a uniquely 
non-bureaucratic vision to a position that she has had to 
develop from scratch.  Her focus on getting things done has 
led her to circumvent established procedures and 
institutional niceties; as a result, she is not liked by many 
in the Commission, who see her as intruding on their turf. 
 
--------------------- 
Working with the U.S. 
--------------------- 
 
8. (C/NF) Giannella has demonstrated a strong interest in 
collaborating with the U.S., which she accepts as the EU\'s 
key partner on proliferation-related issues.  She and her 
staff are consistently approachable and eager to remain in 
close contact.  Although friendly, Giannella is focused on 
business twenty four hours a day--on one occasion, when laid 
up due to back surgery, she held a meeting with a visiting 
PDAS at her home.  In her interactions with us, Giannella has 
been very forthcoming and willing to share information 
without hesitation or restraint--including EU documents that 
would be highly classified in any other system.  She told us, 
for example, about the non-proliferation provisions in the 
draft EU Association Agreement with Syria before the 
Commission and Syrians themselves were informed.  Although 
she has significant influence, her tendency to get out in 
front of the rest of the bureaucracy can also come back to 
bite her, however.  In negotiations of the non-proliferation 
text for this year\'s U.S.-EU summit, she was forced to walk 
back ad referendum agreements on several issues after a PSC 
meeting, in which member states refused to go along with some 
of the agreed language. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20560","9/13/2004 15:54","04BRUSSELS3881","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

131554Z Sep 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003881 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RUS, EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/13/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, RS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUR DAS TEFFT REVIEWS RUSSIA, UKRAINE, MOLDOVA AND 
BELARUS WITH EU OFFICIALS 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
 1.  (C)  Summary.  In meetings with EU officials on 
September 10, EUR DAS Tefft discussed recent events in 
Russia, Ukraine, Moldova and Belarus.  EU officials viewed 
the Beslan attack as a failure of Putin\'s Chechnya policy, 
expected him to respond by doing more of the same, and 
predicted cooler EU-Russian relations as Putin moves away 
from the shared values embodied in the OSCE.  Free and fair 
presidential elections in Ukraine would \"change everything\" 
in EU relations with Kiev.  The EU agreed to consider the US 
draft text on Moldova\'s security pact initiative, both as a 
means of blocking a possible \"Kozak II\" plan from Russia and 
to spur a pentagonal meeting.  Lukashenko\'s announced 
referendum was a step backward for Belarus, and EU officials 
suggested DAS Tefft explore with his Dutch counterpart the 
timing and purpose of a possible joint demarche to Minsk in 
October.  EU officials in the Council and Commission 
expressed firm commitment to coordinating policy and actions 
in the region with the US.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) On September 10, EUR DAS John Tefft met with Council 
Secretariat and Commission officials to discuss recent events 
 
SIPDIS 
in and US-EU coordination on Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and 
Moldova.  At the Council Secretariat, DAS Tefft met with 
Robert Cooper, Solana\'s Foreign Policy Advisor; Stefan Lehne, 
Cooper\'s Unit Chief for Balkan and CIS issues; Jukka Leskala, 
Section head for Russia, Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus; and Carl 
Hallergard, Ukraine desk.  DAS Tefft met separately with Kees 
van Rij, CIS Task Force head for Solana\'s Policy planning 
unit, and with Hugues Mingarelli, Commission director for CIS 
programs. 
 
Cooper on Russia 
------ 
3.  (C)  DAS Tefft provided a readout of his meetings the day 
before in Moscow.  Cooper said the EU had sensed Russia 
taking a tougher line on foreign policy issues for some time, 
and is concerned that the Beslan attack will reinforce 
Putin\'s authoritarian tendencies.  Cooper observed that every 
18 months or so, Russia has a major disaster (Cooper referred 
to the submarine incident), following which Russia goes 
through a period of turmoil, but in the end nothing changes. 
Cooper said the Beslan incident illustrates the complete 
failure of Putin\'s Chechnya policy.  What\'s worrisome, he 
added, is that since what he\'s done has failed, Putin will do 
more of it.  Discussing how to persuade Putin that Beslan 
demonstrates the need for Russia to resolve other frozen 
conflicts (e.g. South Ossetia), Cooper said perhaps the EU 
should offer to work with Russia to enhance border security. 
The turmoil inside Russia would continue for some time, he 
said, but it might be worthwhile to get some ideas in there 
now.  Maybe Russia could be persuaded of the benefits of 
dealing \"with the easy bits around the edges\" of Chechnya. 
 
4.  (C)  Lehne observed that Putin, in his speech after 
Beslan, seemed to blame the incident on the breakup of the 
Soviet Union.  Hartzell observed that Russia feels weak after 
Beslan, and won\'t want to make any deals on frozen conflicts 
now.  Russia prefers to negotiate from a position of 
strength.  Cooper agreed that Beslan would make it harder to 
engage Russia productively on Transnistria, noting that Putin 
may \"win\" Transnistria but, in the process, lose Moldova. 
Hartzell commented that Russia always seems to support 
yesterday\'s people; Cooper added that one never loses credit 
in the Russian MFA for failing to reach a political 
settlement. 
 
CIS Summit will criticize OSCE 
------------- 
5.  Van Rij informed Tefft that the CIS summit in Astana on 
September 16 will adopt a \"very bad\" statement critical of 
the OSCE.  The CIS states want the OSCE to focus on terrorism 
and security issues, rather than on democracy or human 
rights.  Van Rij, who has seen the draft text, believe an 
increasingly nationalistic Russia, less interested in common 
values with Europe, is behind the document.  He said Russia 
wants to use the CIS summit to bring Ukraine, Moldova and 
Georgia \"back into the fold\" and predicted a difficult period 
ahead in EU-Russian relations, should Russia continue to 
distance itself from basic OSCE values. 
 
Ukraine:  Elections and Transnistria 
------- 
6.  (C) Following DAS Tefft\'s assessment of the upcoming 
presidential elections in Ukraine, Cooper noted that free and 
fair elections \"would change everything\" for the EU in terms 
of its engagement with Kiev.  Cooper said he tells the Poles, 
who urge closer EU ties to Ukraine, \"if the EU takes Turkey, 
it can\'t say no to Ukraine.\"  Van Rij said he was impressed 
with new First Deputy FM Motsyk, who recently took a line 
different from Kuchma -- even in talks with Smirnov -- and 
said that Urkaine agreed with the EU on some things regarding 
the recent school closings in Transnistria. Van Rij relayed 
recent rumors, which he found eminently plausible -- that 
Urkainian elites including Medvedchuk, Kuchma relatives and 
even Chernomyrdin had recently acquired equity holdings in 
Transnistrian steel.  Thus, van Rij saw little hope that 
Ukraine would take a tough stand on Smirnov in Transnistria. 
 
7.  (C)  At the Commission, Mingarelli said the EU\'s 
Neighborhood Policy goal for Ukraine is to integrate the 
country into the EU\'s internal market.  The EU will open up 
its markets following Ukraine\'s WTO accession, help Ukraine 
meet EU commercial standards, and wants to integrate Ukraine 
into Europe\'s transportation network.  The EU also plans to 
ease the movement of people by introducing a short-term visa 
for Ukraine, working to enhance border controls, and funding 
exchanges in the areas of research, education, energy and 
transport.  EU assistance in these areas will be conditioned 
on democratic reform, with initial focus on the Presidential 
elections, where EU observers will work under an OSCE 
mandate.  Mingarelli said Kuchma complained at last July\'s 
EU-Ukraine summit that the EU criticized Kiev for its 
elections, but said nothing about Russia\'s presidential 
elections. 
 
Moldova/Transnistria 
-------------- 
8.  (C)  DAS Tefft shared with Cooper and van Rij the US 
draft text of a Stability Pact statement on Moldova.  Cooper 
saw merit in the exercise as a way to show Voronin the US and 
EU took his initiative seriously, and to give the Moldovans 
an alternative to a possible Russian \"Kozak II\" plan.  Cooper 
also thought the EU could use the text as an opportunity to 
try and organize a pentagonal meeting as well, once the 
school crisis is resolved.  Van Rij agreed that the text 
could be useful to block a Kozak II initiative from Moscow. 
He expressed relief that Voronin would not be traveling to 
Astana for the CIS summit; the EU was concerned Moscow would 
use the event to press Voronin to accept a Kozak II plan. 
Van Rij said the EU was working on a medium-term strategy 
paper on Moldova that analyzes the potential roles of 
Moldova\'s neighbors in resolving Transnistria. 
 
9.  (C)  Cooper said Smirnov sees an opportunity -- due to 
the changed mood in Moscow -- to \"pinch out a salient\" and 
take steps toward Transnistrian independence.  This explained 
Smirnov\'s recent closing of Moldovan language schools and his 
actions with the railways.  The Russians are trying to smooth 
things over, Cooper said, but in ways that help Smirnov 
consolidate his gains.  Cooper said the EU, in addition to 
the visa ban on education officials in Transnistria, was also 
looking at freezing bank accounts. 
 
Belarus 
------- 
10.  (C)  Cooper said Lukashenko\'s referendum annoucement 
introduced a new element in the equation, and the US and EU 
should think carefully about timing and purpose of a joint 
demarche to Minsk.  Lehne commented that Lukashenko would not 
have announced the referendum without being confident he 
would win.  Both predicted Putin would not block Lukashenko; 
Cooper said the Russians refuse to put Belarus on the agenda 
with the EU -- at one point remarking, \"soon Belarus will be 
an internal issue.\" 
 
11.  (C)  Van Rij said the EU would soon be ready to announce 
a travel ban on three former Belarusian ministers (Cooper 
noted Hungary had raised a point of concern that might delay 
announcement).  He said the EU was looking at further steps, 
too, should the situation warrant them, and had included in 
its recent statement on the referendum that it was 
considering \"possible further steps.\"  DAS Tefft raised a 
question about the timing of announcing an expanded visa ban. 
 He suggested that we have limited leverage with Belarus and 
that perhaps we should consider holding off on the visa ban 
for use at the most optimum moment. 
 
12.  (C)  Mingarelli argued that Europe should engage Balarus 
more actively and at higher levels than at present.  In 
response to DAS Tefft\'s arguments against this line of 
reasoning, Mingarelli acknowledged that although he 
personally wants to step up the dialogue, this is not the 
prevailing view in Brussels. 
 
13.  (U) This cable was cleared by DAS Tefft. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20576","9/14/2004 11:02","04BRUSSELS3892","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003892 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/ERA AND EUR/RPM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/14/2009 
TAGS: MARR, PARM, ETRD, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN DEFENSE AGENCY: TAKING SHAPE 
 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Michael McKinley for reasons 1.4 
 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The establishment of a European Defense 
Agency (EDA) to harmonize moves to boost European military 
capacity might -- with important caveats -- develop in a way 
that is in accord with US and NATO interests.  However, we 
should be wary of any EU Member State effort to employ the 
proposed Permanent Structured Cooperation mechanism, which 
allows a self-selected group of Member States to participate 
in advanced defense cooperation projects.  US defense 
industry representatives have expressed concern that such an 
evolution could have a detrimental effect on the ability of 
US companies to have open access to the European market.  End 
Summary 
 
The Goal: A Continental-Scale Defense Market 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) EDA was established by European foreign ministers in 
November 2003.  As outlined, the EDA\'s essential functions 
are: identify European defense capability objectives and 
priorities and recommend and evaluate Member State 
contributions; and address the fragmentation and 
inefficiencies of the European armaments industry by 
fostering collaboration and harmonization among Member States 
in the area of military procurement and production. The 
stated goal is the \"continental-scale demand and market which 
industry needs.\" The EDA is not intended to serve as an EU 
procurement agency. 
 
Organizational Structure 
------------------------ 
 
3. (U) The EDA currently exists only on paper.  A study 
prepared by the Agency Establishment Team in April 2004 has 
proposed an organizational structure for the agency. Its 
decision making arm would be comprised of a Steering 
Committee, whose members include the Defense Ministers of 
participating Member States. Javier Solana, the EU\'s High 
Representative for Common Foreign and Security policy, will 
chair the 
committee. EDA is ramping up rapidly: there are presently 80 
staff members, and this number is projected to increase to 
over 200 during 2005. 
 
EDA Currently Only Empowered to Make Recommendations 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
4. (SBU) The EDA will be only empowered to make 
recommendations; as such, in the early stages it will 
function as little more than an advisory group - although it 
will be able to exert political pressure on Member States 
through EU channels.  The Agency Establishment Team paper 
states that Steering Committee decisions will identify 
priorities and approaches for a group of, or all, 
participating Member States to pursue, without compelling any 
to do so.  The paper emphasizes that the EDA should \"face 
outwards\" and that \"complementarity and transparency with 
NATO will be assured.\" 
 
Three Possible Paths of Development 
----------------------------------- 
 
5. (C)  Our interlocutors in Brussels suggest there are at 
least three possible paths of development for this nascent 
arms agency. One would be consistent with current EU 
literature and would be in the best interests of the US and 
NATO. The second path would entail the EDA gaining the powers 
necessary to intervene directly in the European armaments 
market, which could open the door to protectionist policies, 
centralized EU arms procurement, and possibly even the 
development of a \"fortress Europe.\" NATO standards, 
commitments, and interoperability would be at risk.  A third 
foreseeable path is for a group of participating Member 
States to move ahead of the others in the establishment of an 
interventionist armaments policy, which could entail, for 
example, Franco-German collaboration on the creation of a 
larger-scale and protected armaments industry in these two 
countries. The EDA would provide the mechanism for the 
advanced \"structured cooperation.\" 
 
Path 1: EDA As an Advisory and Advocacy Group 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Many EU member states remain reluctant to cede 
national competence in defense-related areas.  Given the 
limits on EU jurisdiction in defense, this may reduce the 
EDA\'s ability to mandate changes in national defense policy 
or Member State collaboration.  Nonetheless, the EDA could 
very well encourage Member States to work together on defense 
projects, and even eventually pressure them to make purchases 
without regard to national preferences. The agency is likely 
to suggest policies designed to promote the harmonization and 
consolidation of the EU defense industry. Because of the 
strong attachment of many Member States to NATO, the EDA 
could face resistance if it pressed policies that would not 
complement Alliance goals. If the EDA were to succeed in 
increasing the productivity of the EU arms industry and the 
interoperability of Member State defense forces in a way that 
is consistent with NATO standards and requirements, this 
could increase European military capabilities and those of 
NATO at the same time. 
 
7. (C)  We are told that European political integration is as 
much of a driving force behind the EDA as the desire for 
military development. Although the EDA\'s stated purpose is to 
increase the efficiency of the European armaments industry, 
many Brussels insiders see this goal as subordinate to that 
of simply creating a new area of cooperation among EU Member 
States. Some in Brussels are also intent upon achieving 
eventual decisionmaking autonomy from the Member States in 
the realm of defense planning; and the EDA represents one way 
in which it could achieve this goal.  By itself, this does 
not necessarily mean that EU policy will move in directions 
incompatible with US and NATO interests.  Greater EU 
authority and Member State cooperation could be achieved 
without necessarily embarking upon controversial policies 
that would undermine status quo Member State commitments. 
 
Path 2: Fortress Europe:  Possible, But Hard to Pull off 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
8. (C) Some supporters of the EDA envisage a more powerful 
and interventionist organization, one that could run counter 
to US and NATO interests.  Given the imbalance between the 
EDA\'s stated task and the means at its disposal, the creation 
of the \"continental-scale demand and market\" will likely 
require far more coercive policies than those laid out in the 
EU literature.  Effective creation of continental demand in 
the long run would require the centralization of European 
arms procurement at the EU level, and a decision by Member 
States to \'buy European first.\' In the competition for the 
modern fighter aircraft sales in new EU member states, for 
instance, the arguments to \"buy European\" were a factor in 
decisions taken.  Taken to extremes, centralization of 
European procurement efforts could also lead to subsidization 
of European arms manufacturers. The EDA could also recommend 
that Member States standardize their equipment in a manner 
incompatible with US manufacturing capabilities. 
 
Path 3: Structured Cooperation An Open Door to Stronger EDA 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
9. (C) Brussels contacts have suggested that another 
direction the EDA could take would be for a small group of EU 
Member States to decide to engage in what is referred to as 
Permanent Structured Cooperation (PSC). PSC is contained in 
the draft EU Constitution, which is now subject to member 
state ratification, a process that will take at least two 
years. This proposed ESDP mechanism would allow Member States 
who so desire to make more binding commitments to each other 
in the area of defense cooperation. Although vague, it could 
offer an open door to the establishment, under EU-auspices, 
of a more consolidated, unified -- and possibly protected -- 
defense program within any group of Member States. France and 
Germany, for example, may be able to use the EDA as a vehicle 
to centralize procurement and capabilities/industrial 
planning. Moreover, other Member States, facing the prospect 
of a capabilities gap between their own forces and those of 
the group engaged in PSC, could decide to join the group in 
question. Late-stage participation in PSC is explicitly 
allowed under the new European Constitutional treaty, 
although only with the approval of those Member States 
already engaged in it. There is nothing in the status quo to 
prevent member states from cooperating in the areas of 
procurement or defense industry planning, but to do so under 
the umbrella of the EU is currently prohibited. 
 
10. (SBU) Predicting PSC is difficult. The language 
concerning its operation in the Constitutional Treaty is 
vague; it seems to allow what was in earlier drafts more 
clearly specified. That is, once the Council votes through 
qualified majority voting (55% of Council representing 65% of 
EU population) to establish PSC, the participating states 
will have a free reign to pursue whatever ESDP policies they 
can agree on. The Constitutional Treaty states that decisions 
adopted within the framework of PSC will be voted on only by 
those states participating in it and not by the Council as a 
whole.  We have been told that the standard for participation 
in PSC, as laid out in the newly approved protocol governing 
its operation, is the ability to make a \"tactical 
contribution\" to an EU defense force, so participation in the 
Battlegroups initiative would be an obvious way to gain 
general PSC eligibility.  As noted in USNATO 746, meeting the 
standards necessary to participate in Battlegroups could 
enhance EU Allies\' military capabilities.  A possible 
downside, however, would be for Battlegroup nations in a PSC 
format to use the EDA to move forward in defense 
collaboration, possibly in a way that would be incompatible 
with their commitments to NATO and/or negatively affect the 
arms trade between the US and the relevant EU Member States. 
 
EDA a Source of Apprehension For US Defense Corporations 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
11. (SBU) At a recent meeting here in Brussels of Amcham EU, 
the European arm of the American Chamber of Commerce, 
representatives from the European branches of several major 
American defense companies - including Boeing, GE, and United 
Technologies - voiced their concerns over the EDA and its 
possible connection to what they see as a growing tendency in 
the EU to increase the defense contract share of EU companies 
to the detriment of their US counterparts, often as a result 
of direct political pressure. US defense company 
representatives suspect that the EDA will compound their 
already significant problems in the European market, 
providing a new and more effective vehicle for European 
governments to intervene in the procurement process in favor 
of European contractors. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
12. (C)  EDA is in its formative period.  If it results in a 
structure that will allow European allies to pool their 
resources more effectively, and provide an EU-veneer for 
increased (or at least more efficient) European military 
procurement, it could dovetail with US security goals.  The 
traditional fragmentation and in-fighting among European 
defense industries is a clear limiting factor in building 
genuine European capabilities that will need to be overcome. 
That same fragmentation will also limit the EDA\'s ability to 
bring about meaningful consolidation.  But we also expect 
that EDA will result in political pressures to pool EU 
resources to \"buy European.\"  As part of our effort to 
monitor the evolution of the EDA, Paul Collins, seconded from 
the EU Military Staff to work on the establishment of the 
agency, was invited to attend a ten-day voluntary visitor 
program from September 20 to October 15 2004.  His US visit 
may -- if it takes place -- afford an opportunity to share 
our perspectives and register our concerns. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"20590","9/14/2004 13:29","04BRUSSELS3897","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04USEUBRUSSELS3822|04USEUBRUSSELS3840","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 003897 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, IZ, BM, SU, SR, IR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU FMS SEND LOTS OF SIGNALS, BUT MAKE FEW 
DECISIONS, AT SEPT. 13 GAERC 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 3840 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 3822 
 
(U) This cable contains information that is SENSITIVE BUT 
UNCLASSIFIED and should be protected accordingly.  Not for 
 
SIPDIS 
Internet distribution. 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) The September 13 General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC) meeting of EU Foreign Ministers 
refined EU positions spelled out over previous months and 
recently discussed at the Sept. 3 Gymnich (ref B).  On Sudan, 
the EU noted some progress, but insisted the GoS has not 
complied sufficiently with its obligations to the UNSC.  The 
EU continues to hold out the possibility of applying 
sanctions, but has taken no decision yet.  It also supports a 
UN inquiry into whether genocide has occurred.  On Iraq, the 
EU reaffirmed a series of steps to politically engage with 
the Interim Iraqi Government (IIG) and agreed to continue 
examining what kinds of additional assistance it can provide, 
including by Member States, to the UN Protection Force.  On 
Iran, the EU\'s attention remains focused on Vienna, not New 
York.   The GAERC reaffirmed the EU\'s intention to impose 
further measures against Burma, if there is no improvement 
there prior to the Asia-EU Meeting (ASEM) in Hanoi on October 
8.  And the EU expressed \"well-grounded doubts\" about the 
planned Belarusian referendum and stressed that a bad 
referendum would have negative consequences on Belarus\' 
relations with the EU.  The Italians also appear to have 
renewed their effort to loosen the EU arms embargo on Libya. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
SUDAN/DARFUR 
------------ 
 
2. (U) Ministers agreed on conclusions formalizing the 
outcome of discussions at Gymnich.  Dutch FM Bot told the 
press \"it is clear GoS has not complied sufficiently\" with 
the UNSC\'s conditions, although the GAERC Conclusions note 
some areas of improvement.  But they also conclude that 
\"there is no indication the GoS has taken real and verifiable 
steps to disarm and neutralize these militia and the 
janjaweed.\"  Bot added that if there were no further 
progress, the EU is prepared to envision further measures, 
including sanctions.  The Conclusions also note that the EU 
\"would welcome steps by the UNSG to establish as soon as 
possible an international commission of inquiry in order to 
immediately investigate all violations of human rights and 
humanitarian law, and to determine whether acts of genocide 
have occurred.\"  A Council official explained to us that this 
addition was meant to put the language more in line with the 
U.N. process.  Asked by the press about the Secretary\'s 
comments on genocide, Bot replied \"you have to read carefully 
what he said.\"  (A Council source told us the EUFMs engaged 
in some detailed textual analysis of the Secretary\'s Senate 
testimony during the GAERC.  Our source added that the 
general feeling in the EU was that it was up to the UN to 
decide if genocide had occurred; it would be governments\' job 
to decide what they were going to do about it.)  UK FM Straw 
in a separate press conference also noted GoS progress on 
humanitarian access.  Asked about genocide, Straw said 
judgments are being made in NY about GoS cooperation, and the 
international community clearly looks for better cooperation 
on law and order, and safety.  Straw said he had pushed for 
the enhancement of GAERC Conclusions to include the request 
for a UN investigation into genocide. 
 
IRAQ 
---- 
 
3. (U) The GAERC Conclusions reaffirmed a series of steps for 
the EU\'s political engagement with Iraq: EU Troika meetings 
with the IIG in NY; an invitation to PM Allawi to come to EU 
Summit on Nov. 5; and an EU civilian crisis management 
fact-finding mission (to look at police, rule of law and 
public administration).  The EU also underlined that 
\"preparation of elections in close coordination with the UN 
is the overriding priority for EU support.\"  Finally, the 
GAERC \"decided that a positive response should be given to 
the request of the UNSG for EU support to the UN Protection 
Force in Iraq.  The Council is now examining how substantial 
contribution can be made.\"  A Council source told us that 
pledges to help fund this were \"a bit more concrete than at 
the Gymnich\", and some Member States (she could not remember 
precisely which ones) had said they would put up some new 
money. 
 
IRAN 
---- 
 
4. (U) The GAERC Conclusions make only brief reference to 
Iran, reiterating the EU\'s request for \"full compliance by 
Iran with suspension commitments\".  FM Bot said the most 
important thing is that cooperation with IAEA should be 
intensified.  The EU expects Iran to agree with a full 
suspension of its enrichment activities.  Once that is 
entirely complied with, the EU would be prepared to envisage 
further cooperation with Iran.  Bot also announced the EU 
would co-sponsor a Canadian resolution on human rights in 
Iran, because the EU is \"convinced the human rights situation 
has deteriorated.\"  French FM Barnier told the press 
separately that \"we can take it to the UNSC, but we would 
prefer to have it solved in Vienna.\" 
 
ASEM/BURMA 
---------- 
 
5. (U) The GAERC Conclusions made minor changes to the 
Gymnich text on Burma, to clarify the process of tightening 
the EU measures against Burma if the Burmese authorities have 
not fulfilled the EU\'s conditions by the time of the Hanoi 
Summit (October 8).  The text now commits the EU to taking 
action at its subsequent GAERC meeting on October 11.  FM Bot 
disputed a reporter\'s assertion that the list of Burmese 
companies that would be covered by sanctions has not been 
discussed.  Bot said the EU FMS have clearly discussed the 
kind of companies that would be covered.  But External 
Relations Commissioner Patten noted that the EU still needed 
to discuss the precise distinction between private and state 
enterprises, presumably in order to come up with the list of 
\"named state-owned enterprises\" referred to in the 
Conclusions. 
 
BELARUS, THE BALKANS, AND LIBYA 
------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) GAERC Conclusions say the Council \"has serious and 
well-grounded doubts as to whether the necessary conditions 
for holding a free and fair referendum in Belarus are 
fulfilled.\"  They go on to note that a badly done referendum 
\"cannot remain without its consequences for the relations\" 
with the EU.  On Bosnia, EU FMs approved without discussion 
the Concept of Operations (CONOPS) for Operation ALTHEA, 
which will follow on NATO\'s SFOR mission in B-H.  Hungarian 
FM Kovac also raised concerns about the treatment of ethnic 
Hungarians in the Serbian province of Vojvodina.  The GAERC 
simply asked that EU missions in Belgrade prepare a report on 
the issue. 
 
7. (U) In an unanticipated move, the last sentence of the 
GAERC Conclusions notes that \"the Italian delegation asked 
for the question of possible derogation to the arms embargo 
against Libya, to allow for cooperation in the field of fight 
illegal immigration (sic), to be taken up rapidly in the 
Council bodies.\" 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20649","9/15/2004 15:49","04BRUSSELS3926","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE195819","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003926 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SA/FO FOR MQUINN, EUR/ERA FOR KVOLKER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/14/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AF, IR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU AFGHAN ELECTION SUPPORT MISSION PLANS VISITS TO 
IRAN AND PAKISTAN 
 
REF: STATE 195819 
 
Classified By: USEU Political Military Officer Jeremy Brenner for reaso 
ns 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: The EU Democratic Election Support Mission 
(DESM) in Afghanistan will send small teams to Pakistan and 
Iran to assess out-of-country registration procedures for 
Afghan refugees. This is not intended as a formal diplomatic 
monitoring mission.  The preregistration visit to Islamabad 
is scheduled for September 19-21.  End summary. 
 
2. (C) We raised reftel points on out-of-country registration 
September 15 with Jonathan Hatwell, EU Commission Afghanistan 
desk officer.  He specified that the EU is not planning a 
formal diplomatic monitoring mission in Pakistan or Iran, but 
rather the election support team now in Afghanistan will make 
a series of visits to examine provisions for out-of-country 
registration of Afghan refugees. 
 
3. (C) Hatwell told us that the EU Democratic Election 
Support Mission (DESM) in Afghanistan consisting of 
approximately 25 people will send a team of two to four 
experts to make two visits -- one preregistration and one 
during the registration process -- to Islamabad. The 
preregistration visit, scheduled for September 19-21 will 
look at the processes put in place for registration, and the 
team will share its views of the state of preparations.  They 
will visit again October 1-3 to examine the registration 
process in action. The DESM teams will return to Afghanistan 
for election day. 
 
4. (C)  DESM plans one pre-voting visit to Teheran, where 
they will receive logistical support from the Netherlands 
embassy.  There is an existing registration program in place 
in Iran, so the assessment process is expected to be quicker. 
 
5. (C)  According to Hatwell, visa problems encountered 
earlier by IOM monitors have largely been resolved, although 
he suggested that there remain some question marks concerning 
the team\'s entry to Iran.  DESM has already made application 
for entry visas to Pakistan, and there is no immediate 
indication of a problem. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"20693","9/16/2004 15:52","04BRUSSELS3948","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE195507","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 003948 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR CA - JJACOBS; EUR/ERA - PCHASE; DHS FOR BTS 
- SVERDERY; DOJ FOR CRIMINAL DIVISION - BSWARTZ; THE HAGUE 
FOR POL - DMANN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2014 
TAGS: CVIS, PREL, KOCI, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE RESPONSE: REVISED US VISIT POLICY AND 
OTHER BORDER MANAGEMENT ISSUES 
 
REF: (A) STATE 195507 (B) THE HAUGE 1775 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  The initial reaction from the European 
Commission on the FBI\'s enhanced access to US VISIT databases 
was low key.  Major concerns focused on types of law 
enforcement activities for which the data would be used and 
about delays at ports of entry following changes on 9/30 and 
12/31.  The Commission urged the U.S. to step up its 
information campaign so that travelers from visa waiver 
countries are aware they will be fingerprinted at ports of 
entry.  New Member States continue to press for a unified EU 
approach towards the U.S. visa waiver program and have 
indicated they will not agree to changes concerning the 
Schengen Agreement\'s solidarity mechanism.  The recent 
U.S.-Poland bilateral agreement to screen passengers at the 
Warsaw airport has also fueled resentment in European 
circles.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On 9/14, PRMOff delivered reftel talking points to 
Diederich Paalman at DG Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) 
regarding changes to the US VISIT program, including enhanced 
FBI access to the database.  Paalman referred to the phone 
conversation between DHS DAS Verdery and JHA Director General 
Jonathan Faull, but said the Commission would prefer to react 
after it had a chance to read the revised privacy policy and 
related documents (available only after COB in Brussels that 
day). 
 
------------------------ 
US VISIT: Workloads of More Concern than Policy Changes 
------------------------ 
 
3. (C) On 9/16, PRMOff met with JHA Director for Immigration, 
Asylum and Borders Jean Louis de Brouwer, JHA External 
Relations Head of Unit Lotte Knudsen, and JHA 
Biometrics/Privacy Policy Officer Silvia Kolligs for a more 
in depth discussion.  De Brouwer expressed appreciation for 
efforts made by the USG to notify the Commission before 
changes were publicized.  Reactions to the changes themselves 
were muted.  De Brouwer had two basic questions which PRMOff 
answered using the Q & A\'s included in reftel A:  (a) what 
\"enhanced\" access meant and (b) how the information would be 
used by the FBI.  De Brouwer pressed hardest on the second 
point.  PRMOff stressed, according to Question 11, that data 
would be used \"to investigate crimes related to national 
security, immigration offenses and other major crimes, such 
as murder, rape, robbery, organized crime and drug 
trafficking.\"  De Brouwer seemed satisfied that use would not 
extend to investigations regarding less serious types of 
offenses like civil matters. 
 
4. (C) After making a pro-forma pitch about the importance of 
ensuring privacy under the new information sharing 
arrangements, de Brouwer focused his comments on upcoming 
changes, both on 9/30 and at the end of the year.  Regarding 
new procedures to enroll VWP travelers in US VISIT as of 
9/30, de Brouwer strongly urged the U.S. to intensify its 
information campaign to alert VWP travelers to the new 
requirements.  \"What you are doing is perfectly legitimate, 
but you need to explain it well (to the traveling public) in 
advance,\" he said.  He predicted a spate of highly 
unfavorable press articles if certain travelers with strong 
privacy instincts -- or \"opinion leaders\" -- were unaware of 
changes at the border and made to surrender prints (or worse, 
be turned around at ports of entry). 
 
5. (SBU) PRMOff stressed that previous rollouts involving 
digital scans -- at consulates abroad and at POEs for those 
entering with visas -- had not resulted in significant public 
relations problems.  To the contrary, the moves had a very 
high level of public acceptance.  De Brouwer pointed out that 
with the vast increase in numbers exclusively involving 
travelers from developed countries (where privacy concerns 
are greatest), the dynamic could shift.  Kolligs showed a US 
VISIT pamphlet she had received during her voluntary visitor 
program on biometrics and related privacy concerns, 
suggesting they be distributed at airline counters abroad for 
travelers headed to the U.S. from VWP countries.  Those with 
strong objections could decide not to board and thus avoid 
unpleasant turn-arounds. 
 
6. (SBU) The second item of concern connected to 9/30 raised 
by de Brouwer was the expectation of long delays at ports of 
entry caused by increased US VISIT workloads.  Kolligs said 
that in a briefing she had received from Cogent Incorporated, 
about 70,000 new biometric records are added to the US VISIT 
each day.  Consequently, the response time has decreased from 
15 seconds in March until 20 seconds today.  PRMOff pointed 
out that even with this increase, the inspector at the port 
of entry would be using the response time to conduct an 
interview with the passenger in order to determine 
admissibility to the U.S.  PRMOff predicted that after a 
brief period of adjustment to accommodate the increased 
number of passengers being enrolled in US VISIT, DHS would 
succeed in minimizing delays at POEs. 
 
7. (U) De Brouwer also asked about workload management at 
land borders following the expansion of US VISIT at the end 
of the year.  PRMOff explained that although US VISIT did not 
apply to U.S. citizens, most Canadians or Mexicans using the 
biometrically enabled border-crossing cards, there was still 
a need to plan well for these changes.  Because the EU is 
intensely interested in the management of land borders (as it 
tries to figure out how to cope with its own new external 
frontier in the east), de Brouwer requested that the U.S. 
make a presentation on this theme at the upcoming CIREFI 
(Centre for Information, Discussion and Exchange on the 
Crossing of Frontiers and Immigration) meeting with the U.S. 
and Canada scheduled for 10/29 in Brussels. 
 
------------------------ 
VWP: Still Causing Angst 
------------------------ 
 
8. (C) De Brouwer used the meeting to discuss several related 
issues, particularly in light of the upcoming meetings in The 
Netherlands with Secretaries Ridge and Ashcroft.  Regarding 
the visa waiver program, he said that \"pressure is increasing 
every month\" from the new Member States.  De Brouwer reported 
that during an internal EU meeting of the SCIFA (Strategic 
Committee on Immigration, Frontiers and Asylum) group on 
9/15, new members voiced firm opposition to the Commission\'s 
proposal on visa reciprocity which would take the teeth out 
of the Schengen agreement\'s \"solidarity mechanism.\"  He said 
Poland, Hungary and the Baltic states made it clear they 
would not agree to changes which would eliminate the 
possibility of automatic imposition of visas on countries 
like the U.S. that do not treat citizens of all Schengen 
states equally.  Responding to a Commission suggestion that 
they \"use it or lose it,\" the aggrieved states of Eastern 
Europe also made it clear they are not prepared to invoke the 
retaliatory mechanism for the time being.  (Note.  Meanwhile, 
the EU scored a small victory with New Zealand\'s decision to 
extend visa waiver equally to all Member States as of April 
1, 2005 -- meaning Poland, Slovakia, Cyprus, and the Baltic 
states will no longer require visas after that date.  End 
Note.) 
 
9. (SBU) De Brouwer said that the Commission strongly 
supports the idea of the U.S. meeting as a group with the 
Member States not on VWP to review the technical criteria of 
the program (and, by doing so, send a political message that 
there is a certain path towards visa free status).  He also 
mentioned the political significance of the U.S. meeting 
these countries as a group, instead of bilaterally.  De 
Brouwer asked whether Secretary Ridge would make such an 
offer at his upcoming visit in The Hague, as he had heard 
from an anonymous source. 
 
10. (U) In the same vein, he urged the U.S. to consider the 
Commission\'s counter-proposal to the U.S. idea of creating a 
working group at the expert level to discuss visa issues 
(reftel B).  Instead of just looking at technical issues 
related to information sharing, he said this group could also 
discuss VWP and other areas of interest to the EU.  PRMOff 
explained that VWP was more appropriate to senior level 
consultations which are already occurring on a regular basis. 
 
 
------------------------ 
Poland:  Bilateral Agreement Resented 
------------------------ 
 
11. (C) De Brouwer also raised Poland\'s bilateral agreement 
with DHS/CBP for an \"Immigration Advisory Program\" at the 
Warsaw airport.  He reported that the Czechs were furious at 
this perceived advantage given by the U.S. to Poland (which 
they felt would somehow enable Poland to qualify more quickly 
for VWP).  The Czechs reportedly also complained about 
Poland\'s lack of solidarity by agreeing to such a deal.  De 
Brouwer said the Commission finds itself in a \"rather 
ambiguous\" situation and inquired whether the U.S. would be 
seeking out more countries for bilateral agreements.  PRMOff 
reviewed the context which led to the bilateral agreement 
with Poland, describing it as a re-packaging of existing 
programs around the world (i.e., immigration liaison 
officers) to help local officials identify fraud and other 
problems before boarding.  When asked about pre-clearance in 
Ireland, de Brouwer noted that Ireland was outside the 
Schengen area and thus could do as it pleased.  He also said 
that the Netherlands might be considered in breach of the 
Schengen agreement for programs at Schiphol airport, but 
noted there was no written agreement and that the activities 
there could be considered experimental or a pilot project. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
12. (C) The mild reaction on 9/16 regarding enhanced FBI 
access may not fully represent the Commission\'s feelings once 
the news circulates and more information becomes available to 
European interlocutors.  De Brouwer was evidently more 
concerned with the internal deliberations of the SCIFA group 
and the pressures of the day (visa reciprocity, treatment of 
EU travelers at U.S. borders, etc.).  Even de Brouwer\'s 
interest in our management of land borders represents a 
pressing problem in Europe:  how to deal with communities 
that have thrived on cross border movements (i.e., between 
Poland and Ukraine, Slovenia and Croatia, etc.).  Shortly 
after the meeting, USEU was contacted by a reporter asking 
about enhanced FBI access; although the reporter would not 
name her source, she mentioned it was a European official. 
In short, the Commission may take its concerns about 
tightened border procedures in the U.S. to the court of 
public opinion.  Enhanced access to US VISIT will also 
certainly be raised during the visits of Secretaries Ridge 
and Ashcroft to The Netherlands. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"20746","9/17/2004 16:53","04BRUSSELS3979","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE200753","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 003979 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, SOCI, OSCE, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE TO EU: OSCE ANTI-SEMITISM AND TOLERANCE 
REPS 
 
REF: STATE 200753 
 
(SBU) On September 17 Poloff delivered reftel demarche to 
Gilbert Dubois, Head of the OSCE Affairs Unit in the External 
Relations Directorate-General of the European Commission. 
Dubois thanked us for sharing U.S. views and promised they 
would be considered at the September 20 EU OSCE Working Group 
meeting.  He said he expected the Dutch proposal to establish 
an OSCE \"Panel of Experts\" on tolerance issues to be 
\"carefully considered\" at the September 20 meeting, as the 
Dutch currently hold the EU presidency.  That said, though, 
he affirmed that EU member-state views differed.  He said it 
was impossible to predict what -- or whether -- the EU would 
decide at its meeting. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"20761","9/20/2004 4:45","04BRUSSELS3983","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 003983 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, NEA/I, S/P FOR DIRECTOR REISS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2009 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, MOPS, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU MEMBER STATE CONTRIBUTIONS FOR UNPROFOR IRAQ: 
10 MILLION EUROS SO FAR 
 
REF: A. PM/GRESS-USEU/LITZENBERGER EMAIL 09/15/2004 
 
     B. EUR/SAARNIO-USEU/LITZENBERGER EMAIL 09/16/2004 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF Lee Litzenberger; reasons 1.4 (b,d) 
 
1.  (C)  According to a Council Secretariat official 
(protect) working on Iraq issues, EU member states have 
offered to date a total of 10 million euros ($12 million) to 
fund the UN Protection Force in Iraq.  In addition, the UK 
has pledged to provide an unspecified monthly sum of money to 
ensure that the UNPROFOR will be funded.  However, the EU is 
still not clear on what the funding requirement for UNPROFOR 
will be; apparently member states are hearing that while the 
total required is $26 million, the UN in fact only has a 
shortfall of $10 million (USEU passed the non-paper provided 
by PM ref A) 
 
2.  (C)  The current country-by-country breakout, according 
to our contact, follows below.  Our source cautioned, 
however, that many pledges are oral and some are 
controversial within member state governments, and some 
countries have yet to respond, so the numbers are likely to 
change. 
 
Czech Republic (oral pledge)   500,000 euros 
Portugal (oral pledge)         500,000 euros 
Finland (written pledge)     1,000,000 euros 
Denmark (oral pledge)          500,000 euros 
Germany (oral pledge)        5,000,000 euros 
Sweden (written pledge)      1,500,000 euros 
Netherlands* (written pledge)1,000,000 euros 
------------------- 
Total                       10,000,000 euros 
 
*Netherlands has also pledged to provide an additional 
500,000 euros to UNSECOOR, which our contact understood was 
separate from the UNPROFOR mission. 
 
We Note that the information provided to USEU above tracks 
generally with that provided to EUR/ERA (ref B) with the 
following differences: 
 
-- Portugal is 500,000 euros vice 50,000; Denmark is 500,000 
vice 2.0 million (apparently there\'s a dustup between MFA and 
MOD over who pays, and whether ODA can be spent for an 
UNPROFOR mission); 
-- Germany stated all 5 million of its electoral assistance 
funds could be allocated to UNPROFOR. 
 
3.  (C)  Our contact confirmed that the Commission is, in 
fact, still looking at whether it can fund UNPROFOR.  The 
Rome Treaty clearly prohibits funding military operations, 
but there is a way around this.  Were Member States to 
authorize the Commission to provide \"core funding\" 
(non-earmarked funds) to the UN (or other international 
institutions, the UN would then be free to use those funds in 
any manner it wished.  At present, member states have 
explicitly refrained from giving the Commission the 
flexibility to provide core funding to international 
institutions, and insists on earmarking all EC funds to such 
organizations.  EC Relex Commissioner Chris Patten is 
reportedly sympathetic to using Commission funds to support 
UNPROFOR, but is upset with member states refusal to allow 
him the flexibility (through core funding) to do so.  On the 
one hand, Patten wants to support the UN in Iraq; on the 
other hand, he\'s inclined to say \"it\'s not legal\" out of 
frustration with the member states.  Bottom line, according 
to our source:  Don\'t hold our breath for Commission funding, 
but keep up the pressure on member states to contribute to 
UNPROFOR. 
 
Comment 
------- 
4. (C) Our impression here is that member states with troops 
in Iraq are not 
prepared to make significant contributions to UNPROFOR, but 
the other EU 
member states have not yet registered the urgency of 
providing the necessary 
funding to allow UNPROFOR to move forward.  Department may 
wish to consider 
using the upcoming ministerial meeting with the EU in New 
York to stress the 
urgency of resolving these funding issues. 
 
McKinley 
"
"20767","9/20/2004 9:38","04BRUSSELS3989","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS3556|04BRUSSELS3813","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 BRUSSELS 003989 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/RSA; PRM/AFR; DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS 
USAID FOR AFR,DCHA AND PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PREF, PGOV, EAID, PHUM, XA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: TRANSATLANTIC CONSULTATIONS ON AFRICA: EU AND U.S. 
LARGELY AGREE ON SUDAN, GREAT LAKES 
 
REF: (A) BRUSSELS 3556 (B) BRUSSELS 3813 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D). 
 
1. (U) Summary.  The September 8 transatlantic consultations 
on Africa (COAFR) addressed priorities in the Great Lakes 
(strengthening MONUC, protecting refugees, supporting 
internal and regional dialogues), Sudan (calibrating pressure 
on the government, strengthening the AU role, meeting 
humanitarian and security needs and responding to the Pronk 
Plan); Zimbabwe (preparing for elections); and other issues 
in the Horn and West Africa.  In opening the discussions Van 
de Geer noted that \"Africa has boomed on the European/EU 
agenda.\"  He emphasized EU interest in intensifying already 
good cooperation with the U.S. and said that the EU wants to 
be able to present a positive agenda on Africa to the 
European public.  The EU, he stated, has a positive view of 
U.S. policy in Africa. End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Participants 
------------------------ 
 
2. (U) EU participants included: Roeland van de Geer, 
Director for Sub-Saharan Affairs (MFA), Norbert Braakhuis, 
Deputy Director, Sub-Saharan Affairs (MFA), Hein Knegt, 
Senior Policy Advisor for Sub-Saharan Affairs (MFA), Gerda 
Vrielink, Senior Policy Advisor for Sub-Saharan Affairs 
(MFA), and Guusje Korthals Altes, Senior Policy Advisor 
(Dutch Embassy/Washington), for the Dutch Presidency; 
Ambassador Aldo Ajello, EU Special Envoy for the Great Lakes; 
Peter Clausen, Jesper Tvevad and Genoveva Hernandez, Africa 
Desk Officers for the EU Council Secretariat; Anders 
Henriksson, Director for the Horn, East and Southern Africa 
(DG DEV), Sipke Brouwer, Director for Central  and West 
Africa (DG DEV), and Marc van Bellinghen , Deputy Head of 
Unit for ACP Issues (DG RELEX) for the European Commission 
(EC); and Alain de Muyser, Director for African Affairs (MFA) 
and Nadia Ernzer, Senior Advisor for Africa and CIS Affairs 
(MFA) for the incoming Luxembourg Presidency.  USDEL 
consisted of Ambassador Michael Ranneberger (Principal Deputy 
Assistant Secretary, AF), John Nay (Director, AF/Regional and 
Security Affairs), Patricia Lerner (Development Counselor, 
USEU/USAID), and Marc Meznar (Political Officer, USEU/PRM). 
 
-------------------------------- 
Great Lakes 
-------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) In his initial overview of the Great Lakes region, 
Ajello said that he is not encouraged by recent developments. 
 The peace processes in both DRC and Burundi remain fragile, 
as does the democratization process in Rwanda.  Regarding the 
DRC, Ajello said that the existence of parallel structures in 
both the government and military -- one official and the 
other where real power rests -- is at the root of 
instability.  DRC\'s government of national unity is unable to 
withstand the \"negative forces\" emanating from the 
President\'s cabinet and the \"maison militaire\" which control 
the country.  Ajello singled out security sector reforms as 
the number one priority to stabilize DRC.  He said that the 
international community has put forth an array of plans to 
reorganize the army, but that they should work together to 
move this needed objective forward.  He expressed optimism 
that South Africa and Angola have agreed to cooperate in this 
area.  Ajello was not optimistic about the World Bank\'s 
program to disarm and demobilize soldiers; he also emphasized 
the need to disarm non-Congolese forces in the country. 
 
4. (C) Regarding MONUC, Ajello said he favored reworking its 
mandate to remove some responsibilities (such as its 
humanitarian mission).  Ranneberger said that while the U.S. 
favored reviewing MONUC\'s mission, it did not favor a large 
expansion of personnel.  The EU side called for increased 
attention to the quality of troops being brought in.  Van de 
Geer commented that while endless numbers of Bangladeshis and 
Uruguayans could swell the ranks, troops that cannot speak 
the language, don,t know the terrain, and operate in a 
\"bubble\" might only succeed in ruining the reputations of the 
UN and MONUC.  Ajello contrasted MONUC to the EU\'s (mainly 
French-speaking) Operation Artemis where the perceived and 
real readiness to respond to challenges and disturbances was 
highly effective.  Ajello conceded that although in certain 
situations size could compensate for lack of quality, MONUC 
should not become \"an aggregation of banana republics.\" He 
advocated targeting MONUC forces in Kinshasa, Ituri, and the 
Kivus, as well as having a reserve force that can quickly 
deploy to areas where a need arises, and training Congolese 
forces to deploy with MONUC.  When Lerner asked about the 
possibility of another EU peacekeeping operation in the Great 
Lakes, van de Geer denied there were plans and said it would 
not be needed if MONUC could be fixed. Ranneberger said that 
the U.S. would not support a massive expansion of MONUC.  Van 
de Geer said that the EU was preparing a paper with options 
for MONUC and would share this.  Van de Geer and Ajello said 
that one option being considered is to \"bring up to speed\" 
two Congolese brigades to help with disarmament.  The South 
Africans have indicated that they might be willing to help 
with this.  Van de Geer and Ajello raised the possibility of 
a collaborative U.S./EU/African effort. 
 
5. (C) Regarding Burundi, Ajello said that both sides were 
not only pushing for ethnic balance, but also concerned with 
the political persuasions of those representing their ethnic 
communities.  Van de Geer referred to the work of the Dutch 
government in mediating between the FNL and the government. 
He said that the FNL remains a problem because of the lack of 
political progress among the parties in the government of 
national unity.  Braakhuis noted that while the international 
community deplored the massacre of refugees by rebels, no one 
said a word when a week later the Government was complicit in 
the killing of 200 people.  He sketched out a \"worst case 
scenario\" in Burundi as follows:  general spread of chaos and 
insecurity followed by a 1993-type incident with a military 
takeover of power -- one where they would go \"all the way\" 
because power sharing had not worked -- and consequent 
destabilization of the neighboring countries. 
 
6. (C) Ajello characterized the Gatumba massacre of refugees 
from the DRC as \"one of the most horrible things I\'ve seen.\" 
He lamented the fact that, by chance, UNHCR had housed the 
Tutsis in green tents and the others in white ones (the 
Tutsis had arrived later, after the white tents were all in 
use), which made the ethnic-based slaughter easier to carry 
out.  He also noted that while the GoB had granted permission 
to move the camps away from the border, the refugees 
themselves seemed determined to return home and thus did not 
wish to move further from the border.  Van de Geer said that 
the attack on DRC refugees in Burundi threatened to undermine 
the whole region.  Meznar noted that the desire to return 
probably stemmed from the lack of security.  He noted UNHCR 
had put forth an appeal for its work in Burundi and that 
funding would help the agency further ensure the safety of 
refugees.  Meznar also referred to the successful joint 
U.S.-EC mission in April which assessed the return of 
Burundian refugees from Tanzania. 
 
7. (C) With reference to Rwanda, Ajello said he felt the EU 
needed to be more active and frank in dealing with the 
government.  Despite the historical context and the GOR,s 
concerns, \"there are limits\" beyond which the GOR should not 
go, he noted.  Ajello asked for increased coordination with 
the U.S. in this regard.  Van de Geer agreed and said that 
the GoR was too \"heavy handed.\" 
 
8. (C) Van de Geer praised the work of the USG in bringing 
together foreign ministers from the region on August 24 in 
Kampala. U.S. efforts, he said, helped prevent the crisis in 
the Congo from spilling over into the region.  He warned that 
President Kabila is trying to reopen some elements of the 
agreed Kampala text. Ranneberger briefed on U.S. plans to 
host a signing ceremony on the margins of the UNGA to 
formally constitute the Tripartite Commission.  Van de Geer 
and Ajello expressed strong support. He said that the Great 
Lakes Conference scheduled for this November would be another 
opportunity for the leaders of the region to interact. 
Ranneberger noted the U.S.,s skepticism about the 
conference; he asked what the specific agenda would be and 
what the EU hoped the conference would accomplish.  Van de 
Geer said that the EU was also was skeptical, and 
\"exceedingly frustrated\" over the lack of progress in this 
regard.  Braakhuis noted that on September 13 the \"group of 
friends\" would meet and hopefully move the agenda forward. 
He invited the U.S. to participate.  (The U.S. delegation 
alerted Embassy The Hague.)   Ajello said that he would be in 
New York on Sept 20 for the UNGA, and expressed interest in 
meeting with U.S. officials.  Ranneberger said that we would 
try to arrange that and be in touch with him directly in New 
York. 
 
------------------------ 
Sudan 
------------------------ 
 
9. (C) Ranneberger presented a sober analysis on Sudan noting 
the north/south negotiations are stalled and that the GoS is 
trying to use Darfur as leverage, arguing that it cannot 
proceed in the north/south talks while it is under so much 
pressure on Darfur.  He emphasized the U.S. view that the 
north/south talks and resolution of the crisis in Darfur must 
move forward in parallel.  The two situations are linked in 
practical terms.  Progress toward a comprehensive north/south 
agreement will increase pressure for progress on Darfur, and 
both sides know that a north/south agreement cannot be 
implemented unless violence is ended in Darfur.  Ranneberger 
noted that John Garang was currently in Washington and that 
the USG was urging him to be helpful in resolving the Darfur 
crisis; unfortunately, there are indications that he is 
urging the rebels to maintain maximalist positions.  The USG 
has also warned Garang that time is running out on the peace 
process (and its subsequent peace dividend).  Garang, 
mistakenly in the U.S. view, believes that delay works in his 
favor by building pressure on the GOS.  Van de Geer said the 
EU shares the approach of pushing resolution of both Darfur 
and the north/south negotiations in parallel.  He noted the 
same resistance from Garang to assist in Darfur, despite his 
one-day appearance at the Abuja talks.  \"We can\'t wait for 
him to become Vice President,\" was van de Geer\'s message. 
 
10. (C) Ranneberger presented the U.S. assessment of the 
situation in Darfur. While there has been significant removal 
of some obstacles to humanitarian assistance, the GoS had 
taken no credible actions to improve security. The plan of 
action developed by SRSG Pronk with the GOS is problematic in 
several respects, particularly in creating so-called \"safe 
areas.\"  The GOS is using the concept to develop \"safe areas\" 
that include rebel-held territory as a pretext to mount 
operations against rebel forces in those areas.  Recent GOS 
attacks involving the use of helicopter gunships, verified by 
the AU, highlights GOS failure to respect the ceasefire. 
Ranneberger emphasized the need to press the GOS and the 
Darfur rebels to move ahead quickly to resolve political and 
security issues. The talks thus far have made some progress 
in reaching a protocol on humanitarian access to rebel-held 
areas, but the rebels will not agree to sign the protocol 
until agreement is also reached on a protocol on security 
issues.  The AU has tabled a compromise security proposal. 
Ranneberger reported the U.S. will soon issue a report, based 
on interviews with almost 1200 refugees in camps along the 
Chad border, which will document the close links between the 
GoS and the janjaweid. Van de Geer said the EU is considering 
a second fact-finding mission.  Regarding public statements 
by the head of the first mission (reftel a), Van de Geer said 
he regretted the statements allowed the GoS to get the 
misimpression that the EU was less concerned than the U.S. 
about the situation.  He believed that misunderstanding has 
since been clarified, however. 
 
11. (C) From the Commission\'s point of view, Henriksson 
questioned whether too much external pressure could provoke 
the government to collapse and destabilize the region.  He 
also wondered whether the GoS was still in control of the 
events in Darfur and to what extent a chain of command still 
existed in the government.  Ranneberger responded that there 
is no alternative to maintaining and intensifying pressure. 
Pressure could conceivably lead to a shake-up in the 
government, but the resulting situation would be no worse 
than the current situation. While the GoS has unleashed a 
monster in the janjaweid, the GOS is still in a position to 
take the necessary political and security steps to stop the 
violence. Braakhuis expressed concern over a split within the 
government -- \"The GoS can control the monster, but can it 
control the monster within?\" 
12. (C) Regarding the Pronk plan, Ranneberger said the USG 
had not been consulted and believes that the plan is 
seriously flawed.  Rather, however, than oppose the Pronk 
plan, the U.S. has made clear that its 14-point list of 
required steps given to the GOS is still on the table.  The 
U.S. has indicated that the steps it intends to take, 
including in the UNSC, will in part be determined by the U.S. 
assessment of GOS actions with respect to the 14 points.  Van 
de Geer appealed for a united stand on the Pronk plan, noting 
he was aware the USG was unhappy that Pronk had underplayed 
the negative aspects of the current situation during his UN 
presentation.  He stated there were also parts of the plan 
the EU was unhappy with, and that the EU too would keep its 
Council Conclusions of the 12th and the 26th as road maps for 
Sudan.  \"Meeting the Pronk Plan will not get them off the 
hook, neither for the EU nor the U.S.,\" Van de Geer 
concluded.  There was a brief discussion of the new 
U.S.-drafted UNGA resolution (reftel b). 
 
13. (C) Both sides were positive about the involvement of the 
AU in Darfur.  Ranneberger noted that the AU has moved 
quickly and effectively to set up its mission in Darfur.  The 
AU realizes that its handling of Darfur could be a \"make or 
break\" test case for the organization.  Ranneberger 
emphasized that continuing EU and U.S. technical, logistical, 
and financial support for the AU to ramp up its mission is 
essential. Ranneberger reported that the U.S. is publicly 
calling for an expansion of the AU mission, and will announce 
an additional 21 million dollars for the mission; putting 
money on the table will make it harder for both the AU and 
the GoS not to move ahead quickly. 
 
14. (C) The U.S. and EU teams agreed that Egyptian 
involvement to press the GOS on Darfur is helpful.  Efforts 
should be made to persuade the Arab League to do more.  Van 
de Geer expressed concerns about Eritrea\'s involvement in the 
Sudan conflict. Ranneberger described U.S. efforts to press 
Eritrea not to exacerbate the situation in Sudan, 
particularly in the east. 
 
15. (C) Ranneberger said that, while there is some progress 
on the humanitarian front, about 50 percent of the population 
cannot be reached on a regular basis, largely due to the 
continuing environment of insecurity. Ranneberger reviewed 
U.S. efforts to provide humanitarian assistance. Lerner 
requested EU help in convincing donor countries to increase 
food assistance to Darfur. She noted the U.S. has been very 
generous, but will be unable to make further commitments 
until and unless the GoS revises its GMO restrictions.  Van 
de Geer said the Dutch Presidency would take the request to 
the Member States, noting that the combined EU total of 
assistance so far was about 285 million euros and that the EU 
was prepared to give more for the humanitarian response. 
 
------------------------ 
Horn of Africa 
------------------------ 
 
16. (C) Both sides expressed concern at the lack of tangible 
success in dealing with problems that affect Eritrea. 
Ranneberger pointed out that President Isaias has a general 
disregard for outside pressure.  Isaias still has not 
accepted the credentials of the new U.S. Ambassador in 
Asmara, nor is the U.S. able to influence him on the 
detention of two Department foreign service nationals.  Nay 
said that some tension also was caused by the most recent 
U.S. international religious freedom report on Eritrea.  The 
only glimmer of hope was a commitment to not move 
belligerently on the boundary situation \"for the time being.\" 
 Van de Geer expressed similar frustration with Isaias, but 
noted that in a recent meeting the Dutch Development Minister 
gave him \"a cookie of his own making\" (i.e., a hard time). 
Van de Geer said that the EU was supporting Axworthy and 
standing by the boundary commission, but asked what this 
would amount to in the end.  The EU is encouraging Axworthy 
to convene a meeting in Algiers to brainstorm, perhaps to 
have the IMF and World Bank work out a peace dividend plan. 
Regarding UNMEE, Nay said that the U.S. is looking at the 
numbers carefully.  Although perhaps UNMEE,s numbers should 
be reduced, rather than pushing for the pullout of a specific 
unit, it likely would be better to spread any reduction out 
over UNMEE and thus reduce the risk of sending a damaging 
signal about the commitment to peace on the border. 
 
17. (C) Due to the press of time, there was only a very short 
discussion on Ethiopia.  Lerner asked the EU views on the 
GoE\'s resettlement plans.  Braakhuis said there were Member 
State concerns, but did not elaborate.  Henriksson noted 
U.S.-EU cooperation under the G8 Famine Initiative and said 
the Commission is engaged in a policy dialogue on food 
security with Ethiopia, but that the government is not 
behaving rationally.  He said that Ethiopia is \"facing real 
choices\" regarding its resettlement and agricultural 
policies.  On another note, Henriksson said that Ethiopia\'s 
engagement with Somalia has been positive. 
 
18. (C) Regarding the peace process in Somalia, Van de Geer 
said that many Member States are hopeful about recent 
developments and that the EU maintains \"very guarded 
optimism.\"  He said most of the Member States will be 
represented at the inauguration of the transitional national 
government, although some still had legal and political 
questions (including about Somaliland) to be resolved. 
Braakhuis expressed concern that General Morgan and other 
rebels might try to challenge the new government; on a more 
optimistic note he said that for the first time neighboring 
countries did not seem to be supporting the spoilers. 
Henriksson asked whether the international community would 
respond with targeted sanctions.  The EU urged the U.S. to at 
least be perceived to engage with Somalia.  Ranneberger noted 
that the U.S. had contributed 1 million dollars to IGAD to 
support the Somalia process, and that another 900,000 dollars 
would be made available for engagement with civil society and 
efforts to promote reconciliation.  Nay said that the U.S. 
has issued a public statement welcoming developments in 
Somalia. 
 
------------------------ 
Uganda 
------------------------ 
 
19. (C) Van de Geer said that the war in the north of Uganda 
threatens to destroy the country.  Not only does it drain the 
budget, but it is destroying President Museveni\'s image.  He 
said that Museveni might win a few battles, but that he 
cannot win the war.  Van de Geer also noted that although 
this is currently a \"forgotten war,\" once the press discovers 
it Museveni\'s image will truly suffer.  (Van de Geer reported 
that Museveni has told the EU that he gets support for the 
war from the U.S. and that the U.S. will capture LRA leader 
Joseph Kony for him.)  Henriksson said that the GoU has 
proposals for a big reconstruction program for the north, 
which the Commission rejects as an extremely premature 
discussion. 
 
20. (C) Van de Geer said the EU had thought of suggesting a 
mediation effort between the LRA and GOU, but that when 
Museveni went to the International Criminal Court over Kony 
and other leaders the EU felt the need to back away from the 
proposal.  The Netherlands, however, will remain in contact 
with lower echelons in the LRA to maintain options to help 
facilitate an end to the conflict. 
 
21. (C) Ranneberger said that 52 percent of the GoU\'s budget 
comes from the international community.  He expressed concern 
that the GoU is using much of this to acquire weapons beyond 
the type and amount legitimately needed, and asked whether 
the EU conditions any of its aid, particularly in light of 
inappropriate arms purchases.  Van de Geer reported that only 
the Netherlands has suspended budget support to the GOU 
because of arms purchases.  Henriksson said that continued 
military expenses would serve to undermine public support for 
the Commission\'s assistance to the GoU.  Braakhuis noted that 
spending on social programs is down, yet overall spending is 
up because of costs associated with the Presidency and the 
war; he added that Uganda is slipping vis-a-vis IMF criteria 
across the board.  Both sides agree that the U.S. and EU 
should coordinate closely to discourage a third term by 
Museveni. 
--------------------------------- 
Zimbabwe 
--------------------------------- 
 
22. (C) Both sides indicated that they were in the midst of 
internal reviews regarding their Zimbabwe policy, and agreed 
to exchange papers (once the reviews have progressed further) 
on how to address the deteriorating political and 
socio-economic situations in Zimbabwe.  Ranneberger expressed 
concern that no concrete results have come from South 
Africa\'s engagement with President Mugabe and said that South 
Africa should be more forceful.  Van de Geer said that the EU 
raised the issue with South Africa at a troika meeting in May 
and it seemed as if South Africa had made a genuine -- albeit 
unsuccessful -- attempt to influence Mugabe.  The EU also 
made demarches in all SADC countries, but most have 
disengaged in the last few months.  Only Angola\'s response 
was surprisingly positive.  He said that the UK has a \"large, 
but guarded\" role in addressing the situation in Zimbabwe. 
Van de Geer emphasized that the EU will not reverse its tough 
approach. 
 
23. (C) Van de Geer characterized the SADC election 
principles as \"the best show in town\" and said that the 
GoZ,s reported acceptance of the principles is a potentially 
positive development that must be followed up vigorously. He 
expressed concern, however, that the opposition MDC is still 
threatening to boycott the elections and is diminishing as a 
viable alternative to the regime.  He also said that if the 
EU concluded the elections were not \"credible and democratic\" 
it would not feel compelled to rubberstamp a SADC positive 
assessment of the elections.  The EU will meet with six SADC 
members in the Netherlands on October 20 to further discuss 
the situation in Zimbabwe.  Lerner inquired whether there are 
ways the U.S. and EU can work to build capacity for the 
elections.  Henriksson indicated assent.  Nay said that the 
U.S. is contributing 400,000 dollars for electoral support 
(not channeled through the government, but for programs like 
voter education).  Van de Geer expressed concern that the new 
Zimbabwean government bill on NGOs could effectively kill 
civil society in the country.  He reported the EU will 
maintain its sanctions through the elections. 
 
------------------------ 
West Africa 
------------------------ 
 
24. (C) Due to time limitations, other issues on the agenda 
were not dealt with in as much depth. 
 
-- ECOWAS:  The EU had a \"frank exchange\" at the recent 
EU-ECOWAS summit on Charles Taylor, with a difference about 
timing.  Both the U.S. and EU have a positive assessment of 
ECOWAS as contributing to regional stability. 
 
-- Cote d\'Ivoire:  The EU has engaged in Article 96 
consultations. 
 
-- Nigeria:  The U.S. remains concerned about corruption and 
religious/regional conflict. 
 
-- Oil:  In response to an EU question, the U.S. noted that 
although a growing percentage of US petroleum imports comes 
from Nigeria and the Gulf of Guinea area, this follows the 
market and is not part of a specific strategic plan to lessen 
dependence on Middle East sources. 
 
-- Liberia:  Lerner noted concerns over donor coordination in 
Monrovia which may have led to duplication of efforts in some 
reconstruction work.  Nay said a follow-up meeting on Liberia 
reconstruction will take place on September 24. 
 
-- Guinea:  Van Bellinghen said the EU opened Article 96 
consultations in July and the GoG has agreed to have 
elections in 2007.  The EU will receive a plan of action by 
the end of this month.  Until a viable program is in place, 
the Commission will not sign the 9th European Development 
Fund agreement with Guinea.  At the EU-AU Troika meeting on 
May 18, Nigeria asked for EU help in getting through to 
President Conte, who seems to remain upset with ECOWAS for 
not helping Guinea when it was attacked by forces supported 
by Charles Taylor.  Meznar briefed on plans for a joint 
PRM-ECHO monitoring trip to Guinea in early 2005 to assess 
the humanitarian situation and GoG relations with UNHCR. 
 
 
-- Africa Peace Facility:  Responding to a U.S. inquiry, 
Henriksson explained that there is a black list of items 
which cannot be funded with this money.  However, he noted 
that the Member States have more flexibility with regard to 
items such as weapons, ammunition and salaries for soldiers. 
 
-- Other issues briefly discussed included HIV/AIDS and 
counter-terrorism. 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
25. Unlike previous troika discussions, the Presidency 
monopolized the EU side of the discussion.  Following the 
meeting, Council Secretariat staff confided that about 60 
percent of what was said by van de Geer reflected Dutch -- 
not EU -- points for view.  Luxembourg was totally silent, 
which may mark the tone for the upcoming presidency. Since 
Luxembourg has almost no presence in Africa, it is expected 
to rely heavily on the Dutch. The EU agreed to Ranneberger\'s 
suggestion that a short list of concrete measures to improve 
transatlantic efforts and coordination be drawn up and 
reviewed at the next meeting (tentatively scheduled for March 
11, 2005).  The Council Secretariat will draft the list in 
coordination with USEU. 
 
(Ambassador Ranneberger has cleared this message.) 
 
Minimize considered. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20804","9/21/2004 9:42","04BRUSSELS4009","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04LONDON6824","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004009 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/TURKEY: ACCESSION TALKS NOT A DONE DEAL 
 
REF: A. LONDON 6824 
 
     B. THE HAGUE 2190 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL: Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 B/D 
 
1. (C) Summary: The current conventional wisdom in Brussels 
is that Turkey will get \"yes-but\" recommendations to start 
accession talks with the EU from the European Commission on 
October 6 and the European Council on December 17.  We expect 
the debate in both bodies to be contentious.   It would only 
take one dissenting vote in December to derail Turkey\'s 
prospects. End Summary 
 
Time-Line: Key Dates 
-------------------- 
 
2. (C) European debate on Turkey will be driven by two key 
dates:  October 6 and December 17. On October 6, the 
Commission will provide the Council with 1) an analysis of 
Turkey\'s performance when measured against the \"Copenhagen 
Criteria,\" and 2) a recommendation on whether to offer a date 
for accession talks to Turkey. In addition, the Commission 
will also give the Council 3) an \"impact statement\" that will 
assess the impact on European institutions and budgets of 
possible Turkish membership.  On December 17, the European 
Council (heads of government from all 25 Member States) 
should take a decision on offering Turkey a date to begin 
accession negotiations based on the outcome of Commission 
discussions.  In between these two dates (on November 1), the 
current Prodi Commission will step down and be replaced with 
the new Barosso team.  Commission sources tell us that the 
current Commissioners are determined to finish their 
recommendation on Turkey on their watch, however, so it is 
unlikely the new Commission would play a major role in this 
process. 
 
October 6: Judged against what? 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) The Commission\'s recommendation should be based on 
whether Turkey has adequately met the EU Copenhagen 
\"political criteria.\"  This means an assessment of Turkey\'s 
internal/domestic human rights reforms and practices in terms 
of laws passed and implementation of laws and reforms.  By 
design, other political issues that will figure prominently 
in European political debate over Turkey (relations with 
Cyprus, religion, NATO, the costs of membership on current 
members, or the impact on ratification of a European 
Constitution) have been excluded. Also not at issue in the 
Commission report is the question of Turkey\'s \"suitability\" 
or eligibility for membership.  For the Commission, Turkey is 
eligible, and the main question is whether or not Turkey\'s 
enormous political reforms and changes over the last five 
years are enough to offer a date to begin talks. 
 
Setting the goalposts 
--------------------- 
 
4.  (C) DG-Enlargement staffers who head the working-level 
effort on Turkey see the key question as follows: when 
compared with the last round of members and other current 
candidates, has Turkey done enough? Turkey, they say, should 
first be measured against \"less than perfect\" protections in 
other recently-admitted countries -- such as  Slovakia\'s 
treatment of the Roma or Latvia\'s treatment of ethnic 
Russians.  In addition, Turkey is to be considered in light 
of the situations in Croatia, Romania, and Bulgaria, all of 
whom have been offered negotiations despite flaws in their 
records.  What the Commission has told us is that it wants to 
avoid judging Turkey by a different standard than it did for 
the new 10 members or 3 current applicants.  The Commission\'s 
bottom line is that it will not ask that Turkey demonstrate 
\"perfect\" or \"full\" completion of the Copenhagen Criteria 
when some current member-states are also not perfect. 
 
October 6: the \"yes-buts\" 
------------------------- 
 
5. (C) Current Brussels conventional wisdom is that Turkey 
will get a \"yes-but\" decision o/a October 6 (Commission 
sources tell us that the date could slip a few days), 
although no one expects debate among the Commissioners will 
not be controversial. The key internal debate in 
DG-enlargement is how to word a conditional yes to get it 
through the College of Commissioners.  The Commission usually 
decides by consensus, although a final decision can, in 
theory, be taken by simple majority vote.  Under informal 
consideration in the Commission are two conditional \"yes\" 
recommendations: 
 
-- yes, but listing certain conditions that still must be met 
before accession talks start; or 
 
-- yes, but explicitly listing conditions that will be 
expected to be met during (not before) accession talks.  This 
latter is sometimes called the \"Croatia model\" (ref A). 
Within DG-Enlargement, there is a strong belief -- almost an 
article of faith -- that accession negotiations themselves 
provide a powerful vehicle for effecting political and 
economic reforms. 
 
The Commissioners: How They Line Up 
----------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) Importantly, DG-Enlargement officials preparing the 
reports have virtually ruled out a \"flat no\" as an option. 
For many Commissioners, led by Enlargement Commissioner 
Verheugen and President Prodi, EU enlargement is a legacy 
issue.  Turkey is the last piece in the puzzle that they 
began to assemble at the Helsinki Summit of December 1999. 
Still, among the 30 Commissioners, there remains a wide range 
of views on Turkey, and no consensus on whether to offer a 
date.  Already, Commissioners Bolkestein (Netherlands) and 
Fischler (Austria) have spoken out not only against offering 
a date, but also questioning Turkey\'s suitability for 
membership at all.  The Bolkestein argument asserts that 
Islamic Turkey is not European, and therefore should not even 
be considered.  His arguments run counter to the entire 
dynamic on Turkish membership over the last few years, and 
will likely fall flat.  Fischler\'s key points are that taking 
on Turkey is too expensive for current members.  These 
arguments may carry more weight with Commissioners who must 
juggle a budget, or political leaders looking for an out if 
this issue is moved to the Council in December.  Spanish 
Commissioner De Palacios also reportedly opposes offering 
Turkey a date. 
7. (C) In favor, among others, are RELEX\' Chris Patten, 
Verheugen, and Prodi.  Not all Commissioners are equal in the 
debate, and the views of the latter three Commissioners will 
likely carry more weight than the opinions of other 
Commissioners.  There are a number of Commissioners who are 
likely to go with the consensus -- or if consensus is 
impossible then with the majority opinion. 
 
NGOs: All Over the Board 
------------------------ 
 
8. (SBU) As we entire the waning days of the debate, a number 
of NGOs have released reports designed to influence and shape 
the debate.  Some recommend kicking the issue down the road 
(again), others question Turkey\'s democratic and cultural 
credentials to join the Union, while still others strongly 
endorse membership for strategic reasons.  None are likely to 
change the outcome in the Commission. 
 
The European Council \"Wild Card\" 
-------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) The heads of state and government at the December 17 
European Council will have the final say.  They meet behind 
closed doors.  The leaders will be under enormous pressure to 
make a decision, and strange deals have been known to emerge 
as a result.  Decision-making requires consensus: it takes 
only one country ready to vote against Turkey to derail the 
process. 
 
10. (C) Political leaders will weigh their previous 
commitments to Turkey and the enlargement process against 
broad skepticism among their voting publics about Turkish 
membership and the EU in general.  Greece, Germany, the UK, 
and Poland have all pronounced in favor of a date for 
accession talks December 17.  France\'s position is more 
complex, but President Chirac has come out in support of 
giving Turkey a date.  We expect that some/all the Balts will 
swing behind membership for Turkey also, but Turkish FM Gul\'s 
recent trip to the region was aimed at shoring up Baltic 
support.  Cyprus and Austria are reportedly most skeptical 
about membership, with Denmark also said to be wavering, and 
the Hague facing strong public opposition.  Other 
member-states appear to have no strong views, and could go 
with a consensus either way. 
 
The Triumph of Inertia Over Politics? 
------------------------------------- 
 
11. (C) The arguments in favor of Turkish admission are 
strong.  Recent progress has been laudible, and the strategic 
arguments for bringing a moderate Islamic democracy into the 
European fold are compelling.  European leaders have also 
made so many promises to Turkey over the years that pulling 
back at this time would be viewed as a colossal breach of 
faith.  For much of the European voting public, however, 
these arguments have not proved convincing.  Less than one 
third of Europeans polled recently believe that Turkish 
membership in the EU is a good thing.  For many of Europe\'s 
political leaders, who were pummeled in this summer\'s 
European Parliament elections, the pressures to pander to 
voters at home by standing firm on Turkey could prove 
appealing.  The poorer new members, hoping to reap benefits 
of EU programs, will fear that Turkish membership could come 
at their expense.  Another potential dividing line could come 
over religion, especially if the Vatican weighs in more 
forcefully.  A number of Christian Democrats have already 
expressed variations of this theme, including Commissioners 
Bolkestein and Fischler.  Some leaders, worried about the 
possible impact on referenda on the European Constitution to 
be held next year, could argue for postponement.   In 
European politics, these are all powerful arguments against a 
yes vote for Turkey in December. 
 
Cyprus?? 
-------- 
12. (C) One critical difference between the Copenhagen 
decision in 2002 and the situation today is that Cyprus is 
now a member of the EU.  The conventional wisdom in Brussels 
is that Cyprus would not dare block Turkish membership, 
especially since Greece has staked a strong strategic 
position in favor.  But Brussels orthodoxy has already been 
flummoxed by Cypriot President Papadopoulos on two occasions 
-- first in opposing the April referendum, and then by 
blocking the EU\'s aid/trade package for Northern Cyprus. 
Nicosia has proven it is willing to stand firm, even in 
isolation, on matters directly related to its dispute with 
Turkey.  And if they hold firm in December on Turkish 
membership, it won\'t matter how the other 24 countries line 
up. 
 
Will they flinch in December? 
----------------------------- 
 
13. (C) EU heads will make the final determination on Turkey 
this year -- not Foreign Ministers and not the Commission. 
The Dutch Presidency will be key in shaping and guiding the 
debate, particularly as the European Council approaches. 
Nonetheless, the deciding factor will be the political 
calculations that 25 leaders make at the European Council. 
As they weigh public opinion, North Cyprus, the role and 
place of Islam in Europe, fears about job losses, the costs 
of Turkish membership, uncontrolled internal migration, and 
lower agricultural and regional subsidies that their 
countries might receive after eventual Turkish membership, 
the attraction of avoiding any decision will grow.  A 
rancorous and fear-driven public debate in Europe this fall 
could easily push the heads of states and government to 
flinch on December 17.  This is an issue the key European 
leaders will have to struggle with; we should listen to their 
concerns and continue to urge them privately to keep their 
eyes focused on the historical nature of the decision rather 
than immediate political gains. 
 
McKinley 
"
"20810","9/21/2004 11:37","04BRUSSELS4012","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BRUSSELS 004012 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/PRP - SBUSBY; EUR/ERA - KSHEARER; 
HOMELAND SECURITY FOR CIS/ASYLUM DIVISION - JLANGLOIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PREF, PHUM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU GRAPPLES WITH INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION: DUTCH 
PRESIDENCY TO PRESENT ROADMAP 
 
1. (U) Summary.  Approximately 250 experts in migration 
policy from throughout Europe and North America gathered at a 
conference hosted by the Dutch Presidency in Amsterdam, 
September 1-3, to discuss the current state of migration 
affairs in the EU and to recommend policy options in managing 
migration flows.  The Dutch Presidency will present a 
multi-year migration strategy paper at an upcoming EU Council 
meeting of Justice and Interior Ministers on November 5. 
While many speakers at the conference underscored the 
positive economic and demographic consequences of 
immigration, others focused on the political sensitivities 
which surround the social debate.  The inability of European 
countries to effectively patrol the EU\'s external borders 
fuels a popular backlash against migrants.  Asylum seekers 
are viewed with particular disdain as many are thought to be 
economic migrants making spurious (and costly) requests for 
international protection.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Around four to six million foreigners (slightly over 
one percent of the population) are estimated to be in the EU 
illegally.  Although the percentage and numbers of illegals 
are lower when compared to the U.S. (around 3 percent or 12 
million illegal aliens), concern about immigration remains 
much stronger in Europe.  Even if illegals and other migrants 
work in jobs most citizens will not fill, including the 
critically needed domestic, health and care services, 
Europeans tend to display a lack of hospitality towards them. 
 
----------------- 
Presidency Strikes Right Chord 
----------------- 
 
3. (U) In her keynote address, Dutch Minister for Immigration 
and Integration Rita Verdonk sketched out an ideal view of a 
Europe that was open to the world, yet secure.  She professed 
to be unhappy with \"Fortress Europe\" and said that there was 
no need for \"a new iron curtain between rich and poor.\"  She 
also emphasized the need for Europe to maintain a 
humanitarian system, recommending that the best way to keep 
the hearts and minds of citizens open to the needs of the 
persecuted was to ensure swift and efficient asylum 
procedures.  Verdonk also said the EU should do more to 
encourage protection mechanisms in regions of origin, citing 
the attack on a refugee camp in Burundi as an example of why 
Europe needed to do more abroad. 
 
4. (U) Even in her rallying call to tackle illegal 
immigration, Verdonk injected a humanitarian note by 
referring to the hundreds of migrants intercepted in the 
Mediterranean on small boats and the many watery graves.  She 
said the growth of illegal immigration enriched organized 
crime groups which used profits to carry out other illegal 
enterprises that can \"threaten the fabric of our society.\" 
According to Verdonk, illegal migrants living on the margins 
of society overwhelm -- or fall outside -- European social 
systems.  To secure the EU\'s borders, Verdonk said that 
travel and residency documents must be made more secure by 
incorporating biometric identifiers.  She also called for 
improved cooperation with neighbors and expressed hope that 
the new EU Border Agency would contribute to more secure 
external frontiers. 
 
5. (U) Verdonk underscored the positive aspects of legal 
immigration, including cultural ones.  She said the 
immigrants could contribute to stimulating the European 
economy and thus help the EU fulfill the Lisbon strategy. 
She also noted that immigration was part of the solution to 
reversing Europe\'s demographic decline.  Verdonk concluded 
her remarks by noting, \"Immigration is something we can no 
longer live without, even if we want to live without it.\" 
 
6. (U) Despite the well-balanced speech, Verdonk was unable 
to respond convincingly to the questions from the audience 
which followed.  When a British Home Office participant asked 
how the EU could foster a greater acceptance of immigrants 
and asylum seekers among its citizens, Verdonk urged greater 
interagency and international cooperation to address 
problems.  When an Irish Justice Department official asked 
what political strategy the Dutch Presidency had developed to 
encourage closer standardization of asylum policies at the 
European level, Verdonk noted that enlargement had made that 
task more difficult than it was before.  Nonetheless, she 
concluded that the Member States had already agreed at the 
political level to move towards a European system, and thus a 
way had to be found. 
 
----------------- 
EU: Already Home to (Productive) Immigrants 
----------------- 
 
7. (U) Policy briefs prepared for the conference illustrated 
via statistics that foreigners are currently present and 
productive throughout Europe.  States with the highest 
percentage of foreign-born residents (Luxembourg - near 40%, 
Austria - 25%, Switzerland - 23% and Germany - 13%) are among 
the wealthiest countries.  The percentages of foreign born 
(including naturalized and other citizens) in these countries 
surpass those of the U.S. (11%).  Other wealthy European 
countries like the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden and France 
come close to the U.S. composition with 8-9% foreign-born. 
Europe\'s total migrant population is estimated to be 36 - 39 
million people, the majority of which originate from outside 
Europe.  The largest blocks of foreigners living in the EU 
are Turks (2.6 million) and Moroccans (1.4 million). 
 
8. (U) Like the U.S., Europe\'s net population gain in 2003 
(1.3 million people) is attributed principally to 
immigration.  In absolute numbers, Germany, the UK and Italy 
received the largest numbers of immigrants.  However, 
relative to population size, growth was seen most in Cyprus 
( 14 per 1000 inhabitants), Ireland ( 7), and Portugal ( 6). 
Only in the Baltics and Poland did EU Member States see more 
emigration than immigration. 
 
9. (U) Unlike the U.S., most of those coming to Europe 
legally do not do so for family reasons.  Family formation 
(marriage) and reunification accounts for about 30% of 
Europe\'s legal immigrants.  Numbers in this category are 
particularly high in Sweden, Belgium and Denmark.  A related 
group includes those coming because of ethnic ties (such as 
returnees from the former Soviet Union to Germany). 
Surprisingly, the group singled out by the media for the most 
criticism -- refugees and asylees -- comprises the smallest 
number of Europe\'s legal residents, under 10% of all 
immigrants. 
 
10. (U) The majority of those immigrating legally to Europe 
come for economic reasons.  When including illegal aliens, 
labor migrants account for over half the foreign population. 
Economic streams of immigration are particularly strong in 
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Ireland and Greece.  According to a 
European Commission (EC) report dated 7-16-2004, migration 
helps the EU sustain economic growth.  Migrants from outside 
Europe contributed 22% to employment growth for the period 
from 1997-2002 even though they only comprise 3.6% of the 
total EU work force.  The report concludes that \"given the 
extremely high levels of employment already reached by 
skilled EU nationals, third countries\' labor is increasingly 
appearing as a major potential which can be tapped to respond 
to the growing demand for skilled labor while continuing to 
respond to the demand for low skilled labor.\" 
 
11. (U) When looking at the EU 15, immigrants (particularly 
from developing countries) are over-represented in the 
low-skilled end of the labor market and the high-skill end of 
the market (mainly immigrants from other developed 
countries).  The following statistics show the ratio between 
immigrants and native born citizens across the EU 15 average: 
-- Immigrants:  low skills (52%), medium skills (28%), high 
skills (20%) 
-- Natives:  low skills (46%), medium skills (38%), high 
skills (16%) 
 
12. (U) Several speakers at the Amsterdam conference 
predicted that Europe would increasingly have to compete to 
attract needed laborers to fill market gaps.  Professor 
Rainer Munz of the Hamburg Institute of International 
Economics suggested the EU might also consider ways to 
attract back the 450,000 European scientists and researchers 
currently working in the U.S. -- or copying the U.S. 
technique of smoothing transition of foreign students from 
universities into the labor market.  Other suggestions and 
challenges for policymakers outlined by Munz in his policy 
brief included: 
 
-- facilitating access to permanent residency and citizenship 
in order to attract needed high skilled immigrants; 
--adopting a \"point system\" in selecting immigrants as done 
by Canada, or experimenting with \"earned regularizations\" 
(which gives residency permanents to illegals who are 
employed); 
-- reduce the reliance of the low skills job market on 
self-selecting illegals; 
-- help the ten new EU Member States prepare for their 
transformation into countries of destination for 
international migrants; and, 
-- target measures so that certain immigrant groups which 
perform below the norm in terms of employment and 
assimilation (Turks and North Africans) acquire needed skills 
and abilities to become productive. 
 
----------- 
Politics Intrude 
---------- 
 
13. (U) Despite the strong case for immigration, the majority 
of Europeans would prefer not to open their countries to 
foreigners.  Some say there already too many unemployed 
(although studies show these will not take jobs filled by 
low-skilled migrants).  Others find the religious values, 
particularly of Muslim migrants, troubling or repulsive 
(despite European claims to toleration and 
multi-culturalism).  Finally, the perceived lack of effective 
tools to control borders leads to resentment of those who 
enter without authorization and as lawbreakers.  For these 
reasons, anti-immigrant parties have flourished and done well 
and virtually every national election in the past few years 
throughout the EU. 
 
14. (U) Rocco Buttiglione, incoming EU Commissioner for 
Justice, Freedom and Security ignited a fierce debate in 
early September after suggesting that camps for migrants 
attempting to enter the EU illegally be set up in Libya and 
Tunisia.  His comments came as German and Italian interior 
ministers were discussing a similar initiative.  The plan 
revives a proposal made last year by the UK and ultimately 
rejected by the EU because of legal, practical and 
humanitarian concerns.  Sweden and UNHCR criticized the lack 
of adequate protection mechanisms ) a problem intensified by 
Buttiglione,s identification of Libya as a possible venue. 
(Note.  In his native Italy, the government is also working 
bilaterally with Libya to stop the flow of migrants from 
North Africa, the new gateway to Italy for illegals.  End 
Note.)  Member of the European Parliament Baroness Sarah 
Ludford (UK Liberal) assailed the plan as &wacky8 and 
during a BBC interview noted that it had already been 
rejected by the Commission for good reasons.  She said the 
Buttiglione can expect a rigorous grilling during his 
confirmation hearing before the Parliament later this month. 
Nevertheless, Germany and Italy continue to support the idea 
(even though the Green party in Germany has broken with 
Interior Minister Schilly on this point). 
 
15. (U) Buttiglione,s view probably reflects that of the 
average European.  At the Amsterdam conference, other 
measures were discussed to strengthen the EU,s border 
controls and to effectively curb abuse in the asylum system. 
In a workshop on EU borders, participants discussed several 
proposals for enhancing an integrated approach to the 
European frontier, including creation of a pool of 
multinational external border inspectors, establishment of an 
EU multinational coast guards corps and development of common 
consular offices and even a single EU visa.  The workshop 
also explored ways of building  effective partnerships with 
migrant-sending and transit countries. 
 
------------------------ 
Ensuring Protection: Here and There 
------------------------ 
 
16. (U) A separate workshop on asylum and refugee protection 
focused on the development of a single procedure 
incorporating refugee and other &subsidiary8 protection 
mechanisms.  While many noted the challenges of consolidating 
all protection procedures into one, there was general 
consensus that a single \"protection8 procedure is far 
preferable to disparate ones.  Neverthelss, finding consensus 
on asylum in Europe has been one of the EC\'s biggest 
challenges (with Germany often spoiling the consensus). 
 
17. (U) The second half of the workshop focused on a recent 
EC communication on improving access to durable solutions for 
refugees, which proposes establishment of an EU-wide refugee 
resettlement program and an increase in EU resources devoted 
to enhancing protection for refugees in their regions of 
origin.  While governments spoke generally in favor of these 
ideas, many voiced skepticism about the ability of migration 
ministries to affect overseas assistance and development 
programs.  Others (e.g., France) were more blunt, stating 
that EU citizens and their governments were unlikely to 
significantly increase their support for overseas refugee 
programs unless they see clear benefits to themselves (i.e., 
a reduction in the number of spontaneous arrivals by asylum 
seekers on their territories). 
 
--------------------------- 
Provocative Conclusions 
--------------------------- 
 
18. (U) The conference concluded with several provocative 
presentations on the way-ahead for Europe on migration 
policy.  Antonis Kastrissianakis, Director of Employment 
Strategy and European Social Fund policy Development and 
Coordination, DG Employment and Social Affairs, European 
Commission, reminded the audience of the demographic 
challenges facing the EU for the next several decades and 
stressed that increased immigration, while not a cure-all to 
this problem, could help.  He encouraged member-states to 
look at more effective ways of attracting skilled labor 
(including from the U.S.) and integrating existing migrants. 
Jan Karlsson, co-chair of the Global Commission on 
International Migration, summarized the work of the 
Commission and said his chief lesson learned to date was the 
importance of taking into account the perspective of the 
migrant in seeking to develop effective migration policies. 
Migrants, he noted, do not always respond to the same 
incentives and disincentives that policymakers in the 
developed world think they do.   A representative from the 
Dutch Ministry of Justice closed the proceedings by noting 
that the Netherlands would seek to incorporate the various 
recommendations made at the conference into the formal 
conclusions to be developed at the Justice and Home Affairs 
Council session in November. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
19. (U) The Dutch Presidency, despite its excellent effort to 
ensure that a balanced view of migration was presented at the 
conference, should stress measures to beef up the union\'s 
external frontiers when it presents its multi-year strategy 
in November.  Likewise, its recommendations on international 
protection should underscore activities the EU can undertake 
in refugee producing regions.  Acknowledged, but not 
effectively addressed at the conference, were measures the EU 
must take to promote the integration of migrants into 
European societies.  That the most visible immigrants come 
from countries whose values and ways of life frequently 
collide with host societies, compounds the problem.  Whether 
it be disputes over the use of headscarves by Dutch 
waitresses or French schoolgirls, the rise in anti-Semitic 
violence linked to immigrants or the growth of Islamophobia, 
Europeans have not yet found a way to smooth away the rough 
edges associated with international migration. 
 
20. (U)  Migration management and the embracing of immigrants 
to contribute to the social and economic fabric is one area 
where Europe looks to the U.S. for a possible model. 
Although Europeans have traditionally resisted the notion 
that they are an \"area of immigration,\" the reality is 
otherwise; EC officials are now begin to perceive the need to 
highlight the benefits of controled immigration in order to 
foster greater toleration of migrants by European citizens. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20815","9/21/2004 12:02","04BRUSSELS4013","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 004013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF, PREL, BG, BM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN COMMISSION CONCERNED ABOUT ROHINGYA 
REFUGEES 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary.  The European Commission (EC) is concerned 
about the plight of Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh, 
including the lack of adequate educational opportunities for 
refugee children.  Those living outside official refugee 
camps without official status are at greater risk.  The EC 
would provide significant funding if the GoB agreed to allow 
the local integratation of the Rohingyas.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) On 9/10, PRM Assistant met with EC officers -- DG 
RELEX Administrator for Southeast Asia and Uprooted Peoples 
Thomas Gnocchi and DG RELEX Bangladesh desk officer Ana 
Beatriz Martins -- to discuss the Rohingya refugees.  Martins 
spoke at length about the living conditions in both the 
official camps and the \"unofficial\" Teknaf camp.  According 
to Martins, conditions in the official camps are relatively 
good.  However, he noted that the exceedingly low levels of 
education in the camps have become a focus of concern. 
Gnocchi said that the Bangladeshi government requires lessons 
to be taught in Burmese so as to keep the ties alive and 
encourage future return.  Since there are few teachers who 
speak the required language, many refugee children are not 
receiving satisfactory schooling and their future is in 
jeopardy. 
 
3.  (SBU) The \"unofficial\" camp in Teknaf, on the other hand, 
is facing more immediate difficulties and hardships. \"The 
living conditions in Teknaf,\" stated Martins, \"are abysmal.\" 
Unfortunately, the peculiarities surrounding their situation 
merely serve to complicate their eligibility for aid.  Many 
of its residents have unknowingly lost their status as 
refugees, often as a result of failed attempts to repatriate 
to Rakhine State.  Martins added that as a result the 
Bangladeshi government recognizes them not as refugees, or 
even as former refugees, but as illegal immigrants. 
 
4.  (SBU) With the help of the UNHCR, the EC is pushing for 
the implementation of a self-sufficiency program that aims to 
increase accessibility to educational and vocational 
training.  Thus far, the Bangladeshi government has neither 
endorsed nor denounced this program.  This is significant 
considering the continued hard-line approach by the 
government to the plight of these refugees.  Gnocchi noted 
that the Rohingyas, numbering 19,500 persons, comprise a 
small fraction of the overall migration problem.  He added 
that Bangladesh has the capacity to absorb this rather small 
group, but refuses to for fear of igniting a mass movement of 
refugees.  Martins acknowledged the legitimacy of such fears, 
but stated that they could be avoided if a low profile was 
maintained. Gnocchi added that the EC is willing to offer 
significant development projects in the region if local 
integration were accepted as an option by Bangladesh. 
 
5. (SBU) In response to the current stagnation surrounding 
the plight of these refugees, the EC is in the process of 
redefining its vision for Bangladesh, according to Martins. 
They plan to pursue deeper discussion on the issue with 
Member States under the Dutch Presidency.  Martins added that 
the current turmoil plaguing the region both heightens this 
need and frustrates any possibility of resolving the issue. 
Martins and Gnocchi inquired about future coordination with 
the U.S. on this issue. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20820","9/21/2004 13:22","04BRUSSELS4016","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04BRUSSELS3897|04BRUSSELS3989","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004016 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, PRM/AFR, EUR/ERA; DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS 
USAID FOR AFR, DCHA AND PPC; NAIROBI FOR REED 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PREF, PHUM, EAID, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: DARFUR \"TANTAMOUNT TO 
GENOCIDE\" 
 
REF: (A) BRUSSELS 3897 (B) BRUSSELS 3989 
 
1. (U) Summary.  In a resolution dated September 16, the 
European Parliament (EP) endorsed the U.S. view that events 
currently happening in Darfur are \"tantamount to genocide.\" 
A multi-party fact-finding mission undertaken September 2 - 7 
provided the impetus for the strong statement.  The Dutch 
Presidency, in addressing the EP, also had tough words for 
the Sudanese Government -- including the threat of sanctions 
-- but shied away from the genocide label.  Both Presidency 
and Parliament urged increased and expedited spending to 
alleviate human suffering in the region.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Parliament:  Clear on Genocide 
------------------------ 
 
2. (U) On September 16, the European Parliament adopted a 
strong resolution which condemns the Government of Sudan for 
its deliberate support in Darfur of the targeting of 
civilians in both villages of origin and centers for 
displaced people.  The EP urged Sudanese authorities \"to end 
impunity and to bring to justice immediately the planners and 
perpetrators of crimes against humanity, war crimes and human 
rights violations, which can be construed as tantamount to 
genocide.\"  The resolution also called for the UNSC to 
consider a global arms embargo and other targeted sanctions 
-- and possibly the use of the International Criminal Court 
-- against perpetrators. 
 
3. (U) The tone for the parliamentary debate was set by 
fifteen minutes of dramatic images, as well as personal 
accounts from several Members of the European Parliament 
(MEP) who visited Sudan and Chad at the beginning of 
September.  The group of MEPs was led by the chairwoman of 
the Development Committee, Luisa Morgantini (Italian 
Communist), who spoke with alarm about spectacle of extreme 
suffering in the camps for displaced people.  UK Socialist 
Glenys Kinnock said, \"What we saw convinced us that we were 
witnessing a genocide.\"  Czech Conservative MEP noted, \"The 
Sudanese Government is not disposed to do any more than the 
international community forces it to do.\"  The EP is the 
first Parliament in the EU to agree with the U.S. that acts 
of genocide are taking place in Darfur.  Parliamentarians 
voted overwhelmingly in favor of the resolution 566 to 6 (and 
16 abstentions). 
 
4. (U) The wording of the resolution and the MEP statements 
stand in contrast to the more cautious approach taken in the 
Council Conclusions adopted September 13 (reftel a).  The 
Council conclusions \"welcome steps by the UNSG to establish 
as soon as possible an international commission of inquiry in 
order to immediately investigate all violations of human 
rights and humanitarian law in Darfur, and to determine 
whether acts of genocide have occurred.\" 
 
5.  (U) The EP resolution (full text emailed to the 
Department) also states: 
-- Darfur has suffered from persistent underdevelopment and 
economic and political marginalization; 
-- fighting, including attacks on civilians and 
indiscriminate bombing, has resulted in at least 30,000 
killings; 
-- the Government of Eritrea is arming and training the SLA 
and JEM; 
-- after the ceasefire was signed on April 8, the GoS 
continued to support militias which kill civilians, use 
sexual violence against women, loot and harass, and that it 
has breached the ceasefire by using rocket helicopters and 
fighter jets; 
-- all the refugees the delegation met in Chad were from 
non-Arab tribes who mistrust the Sudanese authorities and are 
afraid to return as long as their security is not guaranteed; 
-- the establishment of \"safe areas\" is questionable; 
-- the substantial number of additional ceasefire observers 
(not protection forces) are needed, as well as human rights 
monitors; 
-- Article 48 of Sudan\'s criminal law should be repealed to 
ensure that women who have been raped are able to receive 
treatment before or upon reporting the incident and that 
police should be training in sexual and gender-based violence 
issues; and, 
-- the agreement between UNHCR and the Government of Chad to 
deploy policemen around the refugee camps to ensure their 
security is a positive step. 
 
------------------------ 
Dutch Presidency: International Cooperation, Assistance 
Needed 
------------------------ 
 
6. (U) In his speech to the EP on September 14, Council 
President Bernard Bot referred to the Sudanese Government\'s 
inability, or possibly unwillingness, to stop the violence in 
Darfur.  Like the EP resolution, Bot highlighted the active 
role of the African Union in the Sudan crisis while 
mentioning the need to cooperate closely with other 
international players such as the UN, the U.S. and the Arab 
League. 
 
7. (U) He outlined the following components of the Dutch 
Presidency\'s plan of action for Sudan: 
 
-- Support the mission of the UN SRSG Pronk:  The EU supports 
the Action Plan, but sees resolution 1556 as the main 
framework to maintain pressure on the GoS.  Bot said that 
there is recent evidence of continued killings of villages in 
Darfur by armed forces.  He called for a new, strong UNSC 
resolution and said that \"the threat of sanctions is the best 
means of pressure,\" noting that the U.S. and EU are in 
agreement on this issue. 
-- Pressure the GoS and SPLM to conclude the Naivasha peace 
process and to conclude the Abuja peace process with the SLM 
and JEM: Bot highlighted the benefits that peace in Sudan 
could bring not only to Sudanese, but to the region and other 
parts of Africa. 
-- Enhance Humanitarian Assistance:  While highlighting 
improvements in terms of access, Bot said that the 
humanitarian situation is still critical.  The lack of 
security is the biggest threat to the people of Darfur.  He 
said that while the EU has pledged a total of 287.8 million 
euros (of which 107 million come from the EC and the balance 
from Member States), 50 percent of the UN appeal for Darfur 
remains unmet. At the EP hearing, Development and 
Humanitarian Commissioner Poul Nielson called on Member 
States to increase their funding for humanitarian relief 
efforts; the EC has contributed 47% of the EU total (whereas 
their target for any crisis is 20% of the total).  The EP 
resolution also stressed the need for rapid disbursement of 
these funds. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
8. (SBU) As one European Commission official who participated 
in the EP fact-finding mission put it -- the value-added of 
the MEPs is that they can say what many others are thinking, 
but cannot express publicly.  From the overwhelming support 
the EP resolution received from MEPs, the Darfur issue 
reaches across the political and public spectrum in Europe as 
much as it does in the U.S.  From a transatlantic point of 
view, Darfur also provides an excellent example of 
cooperation and common thinking (reftel b). 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20833","9/21/2004 15:18","04BRUSSELS4025","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS3983","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

211518Z Sep 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR E - U/S LARSON, EB, EUR/ERA, NEA/I 
PLEASE PASS USAID FOR PPC/DCO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/21/2009 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PGOV, MOPS, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU FUNDING FOR IRAQ:  EB A/S WAYNE MEETING WITH 
COMMISSION OFFICIALS 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 3983 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (U) Action request:  See para 12 below. 
 
2.  (C)  Summary.  Commission Deputy DG Leigh told EB A/S 
Wayne on September 21 that the EC agreed that the goal for 
the upcoming Tokyo conference is to get more support from 
donors for Iraq.  To do this, Leigh said, Iraqi officials 
must present a strategy and their specific assistance needs 
rather than having the US take the lead.  France and Germany 
are considering making assistance offers in Tokyo, Leigh 
added, but it is essential that Arab countries also deliver. 
On election support, the EC is looking at how to monitor the 
election process from Amman, rather than provide direct 
observers in-country, due to the security situation.  The EC 
may also provide some additional funding out of its 
election/democracy funds.  In addition, the EC is looking to 
see if it can fund directly some components of a UN 
protection force, but the focus is on member states, who have 
so far offered 10 million euros.  Questions remain, though, 
on what the UN actually needs, whether any troops have been 
offered, and how funding will be transferred to troop 
suppliers.  A/S Wayne updated Leigh on the Forum for the 
Future meetings in New York; Leigh said the EC would 
participate and share information on its existing programs in 
the region, but he was not sure it could contribute funding 
to the initiative.  End Summary. 
 
Tokyo Donors\' Conference 
------------ 
3.  (C)  On September 21 in Brussels, EB A/S Tony Wayne met 
with European Commission Deputy Director General Michael 
Leigh to discuss Iraq.  A/S Wayne briefed Leigh on US 
planning for the Tokyo meeting, informing him that the focus 
will be on showing Iraqi leadership and plans, accelerating 
disbursements, stock-taking of where donors stand on the 
pledges made one year ago at Madrid and hopefully adding some 
new offers of aid.  Leigh said the Commission remains 
engaged, as a Core Group member, and by having recently sent 
an exploratory mission to Iraq.  All 200 million euros of 
Commission funding for Iraq pledged at Madrid has been 
committed to the UN and WB trust funds, he said, and the EC 
is preparing to make a similar commitment for 2005. 
 
Let Iraq, not US, present needs 
----------------- 
4.  (C)  Leigh agreed the goal for Tokyo should be to get 
more support for Iraq, particularly from those countries that 
did not pledge at Madrid (i.e. France and Germany) and 
suggested that Iraqi officials be present to make their case 
directly.  For example, he suggested that rather than have 
the US explain its decision to switch priorities for 
assistance, which will open up gaps in other areas, Iraq 
should explain its development strategy and the needs that 
flow from it.  Leigh also said it would be important for Iraq 
to show that it has been tracking the assistance it has 
received from donors.  For its part, the EC is working with 
all EU member states, both to take stock of the assistance 
provided by those that pledged in Madrid, but also to work 
with the French, Germans and others who Leigh said are 
considering announcing assistance at Tokyo.  In this regard, 
he said, it will be important for the UN and WB to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the trust funds, and how they will be 
handled in the future. 
 
Will Arab countries pledge at Tokyo? 
------------ 
5.  (C) Leigh asked whether Saudi Arabia and other Arab 
countries would be announcing assistance at Tokyo.  A/S Wayne 
briefed him on Iraqi-Jordanian discussions about possibly 
Jordan offering to host the next reconstruction fund meeting. 
 (On this latter point, Leigh said his understanding is that 
Japan is not seeking to transfer chairmanship to another 
donor following the Tokyo meeting, but instead was keen to 
identify a new host.)  Wayne noted that he would be meeting 
GCC officials next week in Washington and would press the 
Saudis and others on the need to announce assistance to Iraq 
in Tokyo.  Leigh reiterated the importance of having the Arab 
states deliver in Tokyo. 
 
Elections:  Remote Monitoring, not Direct Observation 
-------------------- 
6.  (C)  Leigh and his staff explained that the EU\'s recent 
exploratory mission returned from Iraq having concluded that 
the security situation precluded the EC from mounting a 
classical election observation mission.  Even the MNF had 
said it could not provide security for large numbers of EU 
observers dispersed around the country.  For its part, the UN 
reportedly told the EC in clear terms that observation would 
not be possible for the January elections; perhaps for future 
rounds, but not now.  The EC now plans to send an experts 
mission in early October to Amman to look at alternatives to 
direct election observation.  They will meet with the Iraqi 
election commission and other officials to determine how the 
EC can monitor the election process from Amman. 
 
7.  (C)  Leigh said the EC was also looking at ways to 
respond to the UN\'s election appeal, and had identified 
potential funds for both 2004 and 2005.  In addition, the EC 
was thinking about placing election experts on the UN\'s 
election team.  Leigh noted that Iraqi PM Alawi had been 
invited to the November 5 EU Summit, and this was a logical 
time to announce EU election support. 
 
UN Protection Force 
-------------- 
8.  (C)  Leigh\'s staff explained that under strong pressure 
from member states the Commission continues to explore legal 
ways to fund some part of the UN protection force directly, 
although this is problematic.  EC officials will meet in New 
York with UN officials this week to explore the possibility 
of funding the \"inner core\" security band for the UN -- if 
this involves securing buildings and providing equipment, the 
Commission may be able to fund it.  Funding direct military 
operations is not possible. 
 
9.  (C) The focus therefore remains on member state 
contributions, but even here questions remain.  On funding 
needs, although the figure of $26 million seems agreed, the 
Dutch are telling the EC that in fact there is only a $10 
million gap, but it\'s not clear what the origin of this 
figure is.  Currently, Leigh said, EU member states have 
offered about 10 million euros (reftel), but the UN\'s exact 
needs still aren\'t clear.  In addition, the EC has heard that 
there aren\'t any troops available, even if the funding is 
found.  Finally, the funding mechanism to be used is not 
clear.  A/S Wayne agreed to check on these issues and provide 
updates to the EC based on our current understanding. 
 
Forum for the Future 
----------- 
10.  (C)  A/S Wayne briefed Leigh on US plans for the 
September 23-24 Forum for the Future meetings in New York, 
noting that they were preparatory events for a full Forum 
meeting later in the year.  A/S Wayne said we are very 
pleased that nineteen ministers and a good representation of 
civil society/private sector representatives were attending. 
He also noted that Secretary Snow would be hosting another 
preparatory meeting with Finance Ministers around the October 
2-3 Bank/Fund meetings.  Leigh said the EC will participate 
actively in New York and share information on the assistance 
it provides the region through its existing Barcelona 
process, and through the proposed new European Neighborhood 
Instrument that will be set up starting in 2007 (subject to 
Council and Parliamentary agreement), but noted he was not 
sure what the EC could contribute to the Forum directly. 
 
New EC Funding Mechanisms 
------------ 
11. (SBU)  Leigh explained that, as part of the preparations 
for the Commission\'s 2007-13 budget, the EC is streamlining 
its assistance.  Current funding mechanisms such as TACIS 
(Technical Assistance to the CIS), CARDS (Community 
Assistance for Reconstruction Development and Stabilization) 
and MEDA (which funds the EU\'s Barcelona Process with Middle 
East and North Africa) will disappear.  In lieu of the 
current fifty funding instruments, the Commission is 
proposing a streamlined four new funds.  The first, for the 
European Neighborhood Initiative, will cover EC assistance 
for the current Barcelona countries, Ukraine, Moldova, 
Belarus, the three Caucasus countries, and Russia.  This fund 
will include a new, unprecedented facility for cross-border 
programs between EU and neighboring states, e.g. Poland and 
Ukraine.  The second, for Enlargement, will cover the Western 
Balkans, Romania, Bulgaria and Turkey.  The third, for 
Economic Cooperation and Development, will apply to all of 
Asia (including Central Asia) and Latin America.  The fourth, 
a Stability Fund, will in fact be a reserve to meet emerging 
crises.  (The European Development Funds (EDF) for the 77 
Africa, Caribbean and Pacific countries joined to the EU 
under the Cotonou Agreement is currently off-budget, though 
the Commission has proposed bringing it on-budget as well.) 
 
Action Request 
-------------- 
12. (SBU) That Department advise USEU of latest status of UN 
funding requirement for a UN Protection Force in Iraq, list 
of potential troop-providing countries, and possible 
mechanisms for transfer of funds. 
13. (U) A/S Wayne cleared this message. 
SCHNABEL 
"
"20890","9/23/2004 12:19","04BRUSSELS4055","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04BRUSSELS3320|04BRUSSELS4016","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004055 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/RPM, INR/B 
PASS USAID FOR PPC/DCO 
 
E.O.: 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, SOCI, EAID, SU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT:  THE DEVELOPMENT 
COMMITTEE\'S NEW LEADERSHIP 
 
REFS: A) BRUSSELS 3320; B) BRUSSELS 4016 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED-PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Development Committee in the 
European Parliament (EP) is responsible for EU 
development assistance policy (over which the EP and 
the Council share legislative power).  Its new 
chairperson is Italian Communist EP Deputy (MEP) 
Luisa Morgantini.  We do not expect its customary 
push for increased development assistance funding 
nor its traditionally left-wing orientation to 
change significantly. The committee speaks out on a 
wide range of political issues from Palestine to 
Sudan. END SUMMARY. 
 
ROLE AND COMPETENCES 
-------------------- 
 
2. (U) The Development Committee is responsible for 
the promotion, implementation and monitoring of the 
development policy of the EU, including political 
dialogue and cooperation agreements with developing 
countries; the promotion of democratic values, good 
governance and human rights; matters relating to the 
ACP-EU Partnership Agreement with former EU colonies 
in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific region; and 
the EP\'s involvement in election observation 
missions. It also speaks out on political affairs 
and following a recent visit by the development 
committee to Sudan, the EP became the first 
Parliament in the EU to support the USG finding on 
genocide in Darfur (ref B). 
 
3. (U) The Development Committee enjoys full 
legislative responsibilities together with member- 
state development ministers (meeting in the Council) 
for all European development legislation on issues 
under the control of the European Community budgets. 
The committee has paid close attention to 
reproductive health policies and combating HIV/AIDS. 
 
WHO\'S WHO IN THE NEW COMMITTEE 
------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) The principal committee officers are: 
 
-- Luisa Morgantini (Italy, GUE/NGL), Chairwoman: A 
social worker, Morgantini, 63, started her political 
career in the Italian Communist Party in the 
sixties.  She worked in trade unions in the eighties 
and nineties while starting her involvement in the 
peace movements including the founding of the 
Italian branch of the \"women in black\" anti-war 
organization.  Elected MEP in 1999, she was the 
chairwoman of the EP delegation for relations with 
Palestine until 2004.  She has been a persistent 
opponent of Israeli policy, allegedly once calling 
Ariel Sharon a war criminal.  She told us that she 
believes that U.S. policies are at the root of the 
suffering of the Palestinians.  In the Development 
Committee, she has opposed the Mexico City policy 
and other U.S. pro-life stances, such as the USG 
suspension of funds for UNFPA.  However, British 
conservative MEP Nirj Deva told us recently that it 
was proving easier to work with her than he had 
expected. 
 
-- Max van den Berg (The Netherlands, Party of 
European Socialists--PES), Vice-Chairman: A 
sociologist and faculty member at Groningen 
University, van den Berg, 58, has had a long career 
in development as the head of Novib (Oxfam 
Netherlands) from 1986 until his election to the EP 
in 1999.  A Vice President of the Development 
Committee in the last term, he was also a member of 
the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly. 
 
-- Michael Gahler (Germany, European Peoples 
Party/European Democrats-EPP/ED), Second Vice- 
Chairman: A lawyer and member of the German 
Christian Democratic Union (CDU), Michael Gahler, 
44, is new to the Development Committee.  An MEP 
since 1999, he has been a member of the Foreign 
Affairs Committee where he was responsible for the 
report on Estonia\'s EU accession. 
 
-- Danut Budreikait (Lithuania, Alliance of 
f 
Liberals and Democrats for Europe--ALDE), third 
Vice-Chairwoman: a newcomer in the EP, Budreikait, 
51, worked as an economist at the Lithuanian Central 
Bank where she specialized in Lithuania\'s economic 
integration into the EU single market.  She also was 
a member of the Lithuanian Science Academy. 
 
-- Nirj Deva (UK, EPP-ED), EPP-ED coordinator:  A UK 
citizen born in Sri Lanka, Deva, 56, after degrees 
in aeronautical and mechanical engineering, became a 
manager and businessman.  Elected MEP in 1999, he 
has been an active member of the Development 
Committee and became in 2000 the rapporteur on the 
WTO and development. He has been a close contact of 
USEU since the previous parliamentary term. Unlike 
most other MEPs, Deva has been supportive of U.S. 
population policies. 
 
-- Maria Martens (Netherlands, EPP-ED), second EPP- 
ED coordinator: with a degree in theology and 
marketing, Martens, 49, worked in the eighties and 
nineties in the Association of Catholic 
Organizations.  She was also the chairwoman of the 
Dutch Episcopal committee in 2000 and is a member of 
the board of governors of the Utrecht University of 
Catholic Theology. 
 
-- Miguel Martinez Martinez (Spain, PES), PES 
coordinator:  An MEP since 1999, Martinez, 64, was 
President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the 
Council of Europe and Vice-President of the WEU 
Assembly earlier in the nineties.  A doctor from the 
Moscow State Institute for International Relations, 
he was also the President of the North-South Center 
of the Council of Europe until 2002.  As an MEP, he 
was Vice President of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary 
Assembly in 2002-2004. 
 
-- Thierry Cornillet (France, ALDE), ALDE 
coordinator:  Cornillet, 53, was elected MEP in 
1999.  He holds a doctorate in political science and 
has done postgraduate studies in environmental law. 
He was an active member of the Citizens\' Rights 
Committee in the previous parliamentary term, 
specializing in human rights - Cornillet was 
rapporteur on human rights in the EU in 2000. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5. (SBU) The development committee in the European 
Parliament will remain a \"leftist\" committee.  The 
new committee will keep a communist chairman with 
Luisa Morgantini, whom we expect to be more vocal 
and activist than the previous, low profile 
communist chairman, Joaquim Miranda. For the rest, 
the committee has undergone a nearly complete 
renewal with many high-profile MEPs from the 
previous term not reelected or not assigned to the 
development committee.  Most of the new MEPs are not 
very high-level politicians.  In the past, the 
committee has pushed consistently for increased 
spending on development assistance and generally 
advised the EP to grant additional emergency funds 
when requested by the Commission.  We expect this to 
continue, as political groups are behind these 
decisions and the EP\'s general political balance 
has not been greatly modified by the latest 
elections. END COMMENT. 
 
 (DRAFTED:POL:MVANAVERBEKE) 
MCKINLEY 
"
"20991","9/27/2004 8:11","04BRUSSELS4107","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS2292","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004107 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2014 
TAGS: PREL, UNGA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU IN UN: IO A/S HOLMES IN BRUSSELS 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 2292 
 
     B. B) STATE 167370 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: In meetings with IO Assistant Secretary Kim 
Holmes on September 15-16, EU officials: 
 
--stressed EU commitment to \"effective multilateralism with 
the UN at its core;\" 
 
 --continued their push for enhanced status for the European 
Commission (EC) in UN bodies (EU additionality); 
 
--agreed that engaging the EU in the UN before EU positions 
had been decided was difficult but necessary; 
 
--stressed strengthening the African Union (AU) in Darfur; 
 
--were noncommittal on EU next steps in Iraq; 
 
--predicted the EU would agree to UNSC referral of Iran\'s 
nuclear program if no deal were made by November; 
 
--did not predict whether a WEOG rotation in the UN Human 
Rights Commission (UNCHR) could be worked out. 
 
The EU is determined to increase its influence in the UN -- 
one official\'s speculation about a future permanent EU UNSC 
seat, although long-range, reflects how far the ambition 
goes.  We must keep engaging the EU on these issues, 
including on additionality, to be sure U.S. interests are 
taken into account.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
The EU, the UN, and \"effective multilateralism\" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. (C) Robert Cooper, EU Council Director-General for Common 
Foreign and Security Policy, expounded on the essence of EU 
policy toward the UN: \"effective multilateralism with the 
United Nations at its core.\"  A world in which states are 
governed by law is an important EU aspiration, Cooper said, 
adding that, while law is nothing if not backed by power, 
power without law is barbaric.  Given this EU view of the 
world, Cooper said, the UN is key to providing legitimacy for 
international action, even if it is not always the best venue 
\"for getting things done.\"  Here Cooper stressed EU consensus 
on the importance of the UN, noting that it was not just 
something that \"idealists\" (like Sweden) believed in -- even 
the UK, France, and Germany supported it.  Returning to the 
subject of power, Cooper also noted the occasional necessity 
of \"multilateralism with muscle.\"  He said he expected most 
future EU military operations would be \"UN-mandated.\"  Even 
exceptions to this rule would likely occur under some sort of 
UN context. 
 
3. (C) Holmes noted that \"effective multilateralism\" had 
originated as a U.S. concept.  He added that the U.S. defined 
\"effective\" as fulfilling a purpose.  He said it was not the 
process itself that lent legitimacy, but what was being 
accomplished.  Holmes said, and Cooper agreed, that the U.S. 
had done more productive work in the UN than it was often 
given credit for, and that the multilateralist-unilateralist 
debate over Iraq had produced more fog than clarity.  Holmes 
remarked that he had seen an improvement in relations among 
UNSC members, including on Iraq.  Cooper replied that, from 
an EU perspective, the wounds had not yet healed. 
Furthermore, he said, encouraging EU member states to get 
engaged in Iraq when it looked so risky and expensive was 
difficult work.  He added that the current Dutch EU 
presidency was pushing hard to that end, perhaps \"harder than 
the market will bear,\" and that strong divisions remained 
among member states.  On a rational level, he said, everyone 
wanted Iraq to be a success--but politicians, and especially 
heads of state, were not always rational. 
 
4. (C) On the effect of Iraq on transatlantic relations, 
Cooper did not think Europe would ever take a unified stand 
against the U.S.  Cooper said the U.S. could usually find 
numerous EU allies (\"at least 10\") to support its positions. 
He dismissed the possibility of the EU\'s becoming a 
\"counterweight\" to U.S. influence. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Additionality: EC Push Continues, US Stance Clear 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
5. (C) Holmes raised EU additionality (the European 
Commission\'s push for enhanced status in international 
organizations and UN conferences) in meetings with Fernando 
Valenzuela, Deputy Director-General for External Relations in 
the European Commission (EC), and Christoph Heusgen, Director 
of the EU Council\'s Policy Planning and Early Warning Unit. 
Valenzuela, who is slated to take up his new appointment as 
EC Ambassador to the UN in New York in early 2005, said 
traditional observer status for the EC in the UN was no 
longer adequate.  While stressing several times that the EC 
did not dispute that voting rights belong only to UN member 
states, he said  \"full participant\" status (on which he did 
not elaborate) \"below the level of voting member\" would best 
fit the EC\'s international weight in areas in which the EC 
shares EU decision-making power with EU member states. 
Valenzuela said he was not pushing for any change in UN rules 
-- he wanted a \"pragmatic solution for better results in the 
UN.\"  Raising the current dispute regarding the World 
Conference on Disaster Reduction (WCDR -- see reftels), 
Valenzuela maintained that EC know-how on dealing with 
international disasters eclipsed that of the EU member 
states, thus pragmatically justifying full WCDR participation 
short of voting. 
6. (C) Holmes explained that, while the U.S. welcomes EC 
expertise and does not want to stifle EU participation in UN 
agencies and conferences, the UN Charter defines the UN as an 
organization made up of member states, with only member 
states having the right to be represented in decision-making. 
 Going beyond that for the EC would pose not only a legal 
problem but also give the EU an unjustified additional voice, 
thus putting the U.S. and other UN member states at a 
disadvantage compared to the EU.  In addition, it would set a 
precedent that would open the way for other regional 
organizations to request similarly advantageous status. 
Holmes emphasized that the issue was not whether the EC could 
contribute its input in EU deliberations but whether a non-UN 
member should have a role in UN decision-making. 
 
7. (C) Expressing a different view than that of the EC and 
Valenzuela, Heusgen said EC status was not a top concern for 
the EU Council.  Heusgen echoed Valenzuela\'s arguments about 
the EC\'s \"special competence\" in many areas, but said that 
when the EU gains a \"legal personality\" under the new EU 
constitutional treaty, the EU should be represented as one 
unit.  Therefore, he said, this issue should be put off until 
after the treaty enters into force.  (NOTE: if approved by 
voters in the EU member states that are holding referenda and 
ratified by member-state parliaments, the constitutional 
treaty would probably enter into force in early 2007.  END 
NOTE.)  Looking ahead, Heusgen predicted an eventual 
permanent EU UNSC seat, but declined to specify whether this 
would supplement or replace the British and French P-5 seats. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Coordinating with EU Before Positions are Set 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Holmes stressed to Heusgen the U.S. desire to engage 
the EU in international bodies before the EU has decided on 
positions it is unwilling or unable to change.  Heusgen 
agreed that it was difficult for the EU to take outside input 
into account, remarking that it had been hard to coordinate 
among the EU-15 and would be even harder with 25 member 
states.  However, he said, EU positions on most issues were 
now evolving earlier due to the increasing development of 
EU-wide perspectives among member states and better 
member-state coordination.  The establishment of a unified EU 
external relations service under the constitutional treaty 
would enhance this process, he predicted, and make the EU 
much easier to deal with than under the current six-month 
rotating presidencies. 
 
----------------------------- 
Sudan: EU Wants to Bolster AU 
----------------------------- 
 
9. (C) On Darfur, Holmes expressed hope for an agreement at 
the UN on an expanded monitoring force.  Cooper said the EU 
wanted to get the AU to function and to make use of the EU 
military planners waiting in Addis Ababa.  Holmes said 
continued pressure was needed on Khartoum to allow access for 
the international community -- maintaining the threat of 
sanctions was important to keeping the pressure on.  Outside 
the UNSC, the international donor community and NGOs must 
follow through on their commitments to provide needed 
logistical and financial support.  Underscoring the depth of 
U.S. concerns, Holmes summarized a recent State Department 
report in which some 1,700 interviewees painted a 
\"devastating\" picture.  Heusgen said that the EU Council had 
gotten a mandate from EU FonMins to consider sanctions; a 
working group was examining the matter.  In his view, the 
most important next step would be to increase the number of 
observers -- adding to the 150 observers could do more than 
inserting a poorly trained protection force.  Heusgen added 
that the EU would be happy to help with training, but that 
nothing had been decided. 
 
------------------------ 
EU Noncommittal on Iraq 
------------------------ 
10. (C) USEU PolMinCouns asked for Cooper\'s views on the 
timeline for elections in Iraq and whether the EU would 
provide any support for the UN protection force.  Cooper 
replied that the EU was \"scrambling around\" for funding, but 
he thought it would work out in the end.  There had been a 
discussion in the Council about EU funds to support the UN, 
but the Community budget could not legally be used for 
military operations.  External Relations Commissioner Patten 
was casting around for alternatives, but Cooper did not think 
it would be possible to get around this legal prohibition. 
The amount of money--25 million euros, or only one million 
per member state--was so small that Cooper expected the EU to 
find a way to provide the support.  He felt that police 
training would be \"on the margins\" of what may be possible 
for the EU, however.  The Council Secretariat was interested 
in police or judicial training, but this would require 
member-state backing.  There was also the additional question 
of physical security, Cooper noted.  But his organization was 
continuing to pursue these possibilities. 
 
------------------------------- 
November Turning Point on Iran? 
------------------------------- 
 
11. (C) On Iran, Cooper said that the EU-3 (France, Germany, 
UK) had each briefed him after most meetings with Iranian 
representatives.  Cooper\'s impression, based on all three 
countries\' read-outs, was that they really did want to bring 
the rest of the EU along with their efforts.  Ensuring the 
backing of all 25--which Cooper would continue to work 
toward--would be important in the run-up to what he foresaw 
as \"crunch time\" later this fall.  If a deal could not be 
worked out with Iran by November, he expected the nuclear 
issue to be referred to the UNSC.  In response to Cooper\'s 
question about the likely content of a UNSCR, Holmes said 
that an IAEA Board of Governors (BOG) report recommending 
IAEA referral to the UNSC would assume advance support or at 
least non-opposition at the UN from reluctant members (China 
and Russia)-- who would have had to have agreed to the IAEA 
referral.  Meaningful Council action would require more than 
a technical referral; the details of the IAEA referral would 
form the basis for the UNSCR and would outline the areas in 
which Iran needed to take action.  Holmes sketched likely 
next steps, and said that the threat of sanctions would 
probably be the most severe option a UNSCR would contain. 
Judging from his reading of the EU mood, Cooper said that he 
had the impression that November\'s BOG meeting would be 
different than previous ones, re-emphasizing that \"we are 
coming to a crunch.\"  \"But the Iranians are clever at evading 
at the last minute,\" he noted. 
 
-------------------------------- 
EU Noncommittal on WEOG Rotation 
-------------------------------- 
 
12. (C) Holmes also raised U.S. interest in changing the WEOG 
rotation at the Human Rights Commission.  Explaining that the 
U.S. now accepted remaining off for two years out of 21, it 
was up to other WEOG members to agree to the same 
limitations.  Heusgen did not predict how the EU would 
respond, but did say that there had been lengthy debates when 
reform had come up several years ago.  At that time, 
countries did--after tough discussions--agree to sit out 
terms. 
 
13. (C) COMMENT:  The 25-member-state EU\'s commitment to 
\"effective multilateralism\" and to increasing its influence 
in a strengthened UN have considerable implications for U.S. 
ability to pursue its interests multilaterally.  Heusgen\'s 
speculation about an eventual permanent EU UNSC seat, 
although long-range, reflects how far the EU\'s ambition may 
go.  We must keep engaging the EU, including on EU 
additionality, to be sure U.S. interests are taken into 
account.  Our persistence is paying off -- Valenzuela\'s 
approach to Holmes on additionality was more conciliatory 
than EC officials have been in previous meetings, indicating 
the Commission is realizing that U.S. red lines will have to 
be taken into account.  END COMMENT. 
 
14. (U) A/S Holmes has cleared this message. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"20995","9/27/2004 8:55","04BRUSSELS4112","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004112 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB, EUR/ERA, AND EUR/SCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/24/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, PL, ZL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: POLISH EU PERMREP AMBASSADOR GRELA MEETING WITH EB 
A/S WAYNE 
 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL: HO\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b/d 
 
 1. (C) Summary: Poland Permanent Representative to the EU, 
Ambassador Marek Grela stressed that the Polish government 
strongly endorses giving Turkey a date for accession talks to 
the EU this fall, said progress was being made on Cyprus aid 
issues among EU ambassadors, expressed concern over the 
current situation in Serbia, and commented briefly on the 
transatlantic relationship. He estimates that \"more than 20 
EU countries\" are ready to say \"yes\" to Turkey. End Summary 
 
2. (C) In a September 22 meeting with Assistant Secretary for 
Economic and Business Affairs Tony Wayne, Polish PermRep 
Ambassador Grela said that the Polish government strongly 
supports giving Turkey a date for EU accession talks. Even 
though Poland is a heavily Catholic country, the Polish 
public and many Polish clergy have a great deal of sympathy 
for Turkey. One reason is that Turkey was the only country in 
Europe that didn\'t recognize the 19th century Partition of 
Poland. In addition, there is a small Polish community, 
Polanescu (as heard), a weekend resort town about 80 km from 
Istanbul that was settled by Poles located there by Russia. 
All these factors contribute to a positive historical feeling 
about Turkey that is deep-rooted and emotional. 
 
3. (C) Grela argued that the proof of the EU\'s desire to show 
an open and outward looking face depends on the EU\'s ability 
to open itself to possible new members. Poland is interested 
in other new members besides Turkey. Within the EU, Grela 
said \"more than 20 members\" favor giving Turkey a date for 
starting accession talks.  A number of member states have 
some questions about timetables and conditions, but in the 
Polish view the offer for a date needs to be unconditional. 
Grela suggested that it would be better to offer no date or 
to delay a decision than try to impose more conditions. 
 
4. (C) On Cyprus, Grela said EU perm reps had earlier 
debated, in a restricted session, proposals for EU aid to 
Northern Cyrpus as well as proposals to allow trade.  He said 
the Cypriot Ambassador had shown more flexibility and that he 
(Grela) believed an agreement in principle has been reached 
on EU assistance.  Grela said some progress had been achieved 
also on trade but this was more difficult.  Nevertheless, 
Greala said he was optimistic that bit by bit an agreement 
could be hammered out to help Northern Cyprus. 
 
5. (C) Grela briefly commented on the Balkans and accession 
talks with Romania and Bulgaria. He said that it is crucial 
that the EU work to integrate the Balkans in the next five 
years. Serbia is key but it is drifting. The EU needs to be 
more engaged there and to show more political will in dealing 
with the question of Montenegro. On Romania and Bulgaria, the 
European Commission has concerns about its progress on 
closing three acquis chapters particularly in the justice and 
home affairs area. The Commission needs to do more to keep 
both Bulgaria and Romania moving towards their 2007 target 
date (a date that could slip). 
 
6. (C) Grela said that it is essential that the US and the EU 
work together to revive the transatlantic relations 
particularly in the areas of the EU\'s common foreign and 
security policy (CFSP) and European security and defense 
policies (ESDP). Poland wants EU efforts in ESDP to also 
complement those of NATO. Grela said that US/EU cooperation 
in foreign policy should focus on the Middle-East P 
"
"21004","9/27/2004 13:02","04BRUSSELS4119","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04BRUSSELS4016","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PREF, IZ, SU, CD, BO, CY, TU, EUN, AID, ICTY, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: European Parliament (EP) Plenary September 
13-16: Iraq, Darfur, Belarus and ICTY 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 4016 
 
1. SUMMARY:  The September 13-16 EP plenary included 
debate on Iraq and Darfur.  External Relations 
Commissioner Chris Patten criticized U.S. policy on 
terrorism and Iraq.  MEPs qualified the Darfur 
situation as \"tantamount to genocide.\"  Also, the EP 
passed a resolution criticizing human rights abuses 
in Belarus and supported the freezing of assets of 
people indicted by the International Criminal 
Tribunal for former Yugoslavia (ICTY).  In contrast 
to Patten, the plenary\'s resolution on Iraq avoids 
direct criticism of the U.S.  END SUMMARY. 
 
PATTEN: U.S.TESTOSTERONE, EU SUPERCILIOUSNESS 
--------------------------------------------- 
2. In his last speech before the EP as Commissioner 
for External Relations, Chris Patten sniped at the 
U.S. on Iraq, the fight against terrorism and the 
future of transatlantic relations.  After noting 
that the world was not safer after the overthrow of 
the \"appalling Saddam,\" with \"violence raging across 
much of the liberated land,\" he called for Europe to 
be involved in trying to hold the democratic project 
together, for \"if Iraq goes badly, we all suffer.\" 
He stressed that the Commission had already pledged 
200 Million Euros for 2004 and was hoping to secure 
an agreement for an additional 200 Million Euros for 
next year. On transatlantic relations, Patten 
worried that \"America\'s unwillingness to discuss 
with foreigners would lead to Europeans mixing up 
sniping at America and building up their common 
foreign and security policy,\" and that \"on either 
side of the Atlantic, we will bring out the worst in 
our traditional partners.\"  He added that \"the world 
deserves better than testosterone on one side and 
superciliousness on the other.\" 
 
MEPS ON IRAQ: EUROPE SHOULD ASSIST 
----------------------------------- 
 
3. On September 16 MEPs adopted a resolution (533 
votes in favor; 43 against; 26 abstentions) 
reaffirming \"the EU\'s determination to assist the 
transformation of Iraq and its reintegration into 
the international community as a sovereign, 
independent and democratic partner country\" and 
supporting the Commission proposal to allocate a 
further 200 million euros of EU contribution for 
Iraq\'s reconstruction in 2005. MEPs did not include 
any request for election monitoring, and they 
avoided criticism of U.S. policy. 
 
DARFUR \"TANTAMOUNT TO GENOCIDE\" 
------------------------------- 
 
4. On September 16, the European Parliament adopted 
(566 for; 6 against; 16 abstentions) a resolution 
condemning Sudan for its support in Darfur of the 
targeting of civilians in both villages of origin 
and centers for displaced people (reftel).  The EP 
urged Sudanese authorities \"to end impunity and to 
bring to justice immediately the planners and 
perpetrators of crimes against humanity, war crimes 
and human rights violations, which can be construed 
as tantamount to genocide.\" 
 
MEPS CRITICIZE LUKASHENKO 
------------------------- 
 
5. In a resolution adopted by 499 votes in favor to 
20 against with 26 abstentions, MEPs lambasted the 
Belarus regime\'s \"indiscriminate attacks on the 
media, journalists, members of the opposition, and 
human rights activists.\"   MEPs call for free 
parliamentary elections on October 17 and ask the EU 
Council presidency to allow an EP delegation to 
monitor these elections.  The resolution also 
criticizes President Lukashenko\'s attempts to seek 
an extension of his presidential term by referendum, 
against the provisions of the Belarus constitution. 
 
 GREEN LIGHT TO COMMISSION ON ICTY 
---------------------------------- 
 
6. In support of the International Criminal Tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), MEPs passed a 
resolution giving the Commission a green light to 
allow the freezing of assets of people indicted by 
ICTY. 
 
(Drafted by POL: MVANAVERBEKE) 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"21030","9/28/2004 9:15","04BRUSSELS4129","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/24/2014 
TAGS: PREL, IZ, TU. CY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EB A/S WAYNE\'S MEETING WITH GERMAN EU PERM REP 
SCHOENFELDER 
 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) In a September 21 meeting with Assistant Secretary for 
Economic and Business Affairs Tony Wayne, German EU Permanent 
Representative Wilhelm Schoenfelder observed that Iraq 
continues to dominate US-EU relations.  While clearly in 
Europe\'s interest to contribute to stabilization, 
domestically in Germany it would cause \"major problems\" to 
get involved in-country.  On Cyprus, Schoenfelder said it has 
been \"extremely difficult to get any signs of flexibility\" 
from the Greek Cypriots.  He was optimistic an aid package 
could be approved, if no money is spent on \"contested 
territory\" or infrastructure on such land; but was less 
confident a trade package could be agreed.  On Turkey, unless 
penal code reform is completed, the Commission could only 
issue a \"yes, if...\" recommendation on opening accession 
negotiations.  Despite European public opposition, 
Schoenfelder argued the EU had already gone too far to say 
\"no\" -- the choices should only be between \"yes\" or \"yes, 
if...\"  Schoenfelder also shared his views on the EU\'s top 
priorities over the next year.  END SUMMARY. 
 
IRAQ 
---- 
 
2. (SBU) Schoenfelder opened the meeting by saying that the 
Iraq was still the dominant issue in transatlantic relations, 
especially with European public opinion. It was important to 
figure out how to change that.  He acknowledged that the 
transfer of sovereignty to the interim government was 
important in addressing this, but that there remained serious 
questions about when the Iraqis themselves could assume 
responsibility for security and US troops could start pulling 
out.  It was in everyone\'s interest to contribute to 
stabilizing Iraq, and Schoenfelder pointed to the EU 
financial contribution and German efforts on training Iraqis 
outside of Iraq.  But he added that it would cause \"major 
problems\" for the German government domestically to try and 
do any such activities within Iraq. 
 
CYPRUS 
------ 
 
3. (C) Schoenfelder recalled that he had been visited by a 
Turkish Cypriot delegation (including the agriculture 
minister and mayor of Nicosia) two weeks ago, and they had 
made a good impression.  He contrasted that with his 
experience in the EU Perm Reps\' Committee (COREPER), where 
his Greek Cypriot colleague was being \"extremely inflexible\", 
clearly on instructions from Nicosia.  Schoenfelder 
reaffirmed the rest of the EU\'s desire to end the isolation 
of northern Cyprus, but admitted is was proving extremely 
difficult, since financial assistance must be unanimously 
agreed and legal arguments continued over whether trade 
measures would also require consensus.  The trade package 
remains the more difficult one.  Schoenfelder was optimistic 
that, if the two pieces were decoupled the aid package could 
be approved.  But he underlined that even these measures 
would be heavily constrained, as there was already agreement 
within the EU that this aid would not be spent on 
infrastructure projects in \"contested territory\"; and his 
understanding was that as much as 85 percent of northern 
Cyprus could fit in that category.  He also acknowledged that 
the Turkish Cypriots put more importance on the trade package 
than on the financial assistance. 
TURKEY 
------ 
 
4. (C) Schoenfelder said he understood the Commission\'s 
position was clear, if Turkey did not complete the reform of 
the penal code, then the best the Commission could do was to 
issue a \"yes, if...\" recommendation, which could well mean 
that the Commission would have to prepare a subsequent report 
assessing any such reforms before the Council could take a 
final decision on opening accession negotiations.  This would 
risk a delay in such a decision.  Schoenfelder also gave a 
rather negative assessment on the value of Turkish accession, 
arguing that from the EU point of view it would only cause 
great strains institutionally and on such policies as the 
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and regional funds, and from 
the German point of view it would only help stir up extreme 
right-wing politics.  Nonetheless, he said that the EU had 
\"passed the point of no return\" in 1999 in Helsinki when EU 
leaders declared Turkey a candidate country.  Turkey would 
not be satisfied with an offer of a \"special relationship\" 
with the EU.  So EU leaders could not simply say \"no,\" the EU 
had already gone too far for that, and Turkey was much too 
important to treat that way.  While it would be a difficult 
decision, Schoenfelder felt the EU would have little choice 
but to say either \"yes\" or \"yes, but...\" on opening 
negotiations. (In subsequent discussions, Dutch and Polish 
officials reaffirmed their commitment to push ahead for a 
\"yes\" decision in December.) 
 
EU PRIORITIES FOR THE COMING YEAR 
--------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Asked by A/S Wayne about key issues facing the new 
Commission, Schoenfelder replied that the most important 
issues facing the EU right now were not directly within the 
Commission\'s competence.  First was ratification of the EU 
Constitutional Treaty; \"in two years we\'ll know if we can do 
it.\"  Second was agreement on the EU\'s Financial Perspective 
for 2007-2013.  He forecast very difficult negotiations. 
When A/S Wayne commented that this might present an 
opportunity for significant revision of the CAP, 
Schoenfelder\'s response was firm:  \"nobody will touch\" the 
agreement of October 2002 made by French President Chirac and 
German Chancellor Schroeder setting the terms of CAP spending 
for this period.  In areas more within the Commission\'s 
realm, Schoenfelder highlighted the Services Directive, 
financial markets liberalization, and conclusion of the Doha 
Round as top priorities. 
 
6. (U) A/S Wayne has cleared this cable. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"21053","9/28/2004 14:02","04BRUSSELS4144","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE195305","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004144 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR FOR PDAS BRADTKE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2014 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PREL, BK, NATO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUMS THOUGHTS ON REMAINING SFOR HANDOVER ISSUES 
 
REF: STATE 195305 
 
Classified By: Political-Military Officer Jeremy Brenner for reasons 1. 
5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C)  Summary: Some issues related to the end of SFOR and 
the beginning of Operation Althea remain to be resolved, but 
planners in HR Solana\'s secretariat are confident that the 
transfer will go smoothly. The transfer date has been largely 
resolved among commanders on the ground, but the EU political 
decision-making apparatus must still agree to a December 1 
date. The designation of DSACEUR as the successor to 
COMIFOR\'s final authority under Dayton is a more significant 
sticking point. EUR PDAS Bradtke raised many of these issues 
with the PSC Troika September 27. (See Septel.) End summary. 
 
2. (C) Mission polmiloff recently spoke with Didier Lenoir, a 
defense policy planner on the Military Staff within CFSP High 
Representative Solana\'s Secretariat General.  We raised the 
outstanding SFOR handover issues contained in reftel in order 
to gauge the latest thinking on the Military Staff.  We found 
areas of agreement in principle, and subjects that may 
require further discussion. 
 
Date of Handover 
---------------- 
3. (C) Lenoir reiterated what he has told us previously 
concerning the date of the Transfer of Authority. The PSC, in 
its early political discussions of the mission, has been 
using December 16 as the target date for the TOA.  This is an 
unofficial date, since Operation Althea will only take place 
following a high-level decision to launch the mission. The 
date will be set at that time.  As a practical matter, the EU 
planners understand the U.S. requirements regarding the 
scheduling of withdrawal of its forces, and on the ground, 
there is a recognition that the U.S. withdrawal will be 
phased.  Lenoir said there are a number of ways to resolve 
the discrepancy in working dates, but that the resolution 
must be arrived at in discussions between NATO and the EU, 
not on a bilateral basis.  He said the PSC could opt to adopt 
an earlier date, the EU and NATO could agree that there would 
be a two week lapse in coverage in Task Force North, or the 
Finns could agree to operate under NATO for those two weeks 
until the TOA. In any event, he did not anticipate any 
problem in reaching an understanding and observed that on the 
military side, things will be largely in place by December 1. 
 
SOFA 
---- 
4. (C) Lenoir had just received a paper from his legal 
services on the issue of whether or not a new SOFA would be 
needed for the new mission.  The paper was inconclusive, and 
Lenoir said there remained two schools of thought on the 
subject within the EU. The first school, headed up by the UK, 
holds that there is no need -- or desire -- for a new SOFA. 
The second school argues that under the rubric of increasing 
Bosnian \"ownership\" of its own affairs, discussion, and 
perhaps renegotiation of a SOFA is desirable.  Lenoir\'s 
conclusion was that the SOFA would be the product of 
consultations rather than imposition even if its terms 
remained unchanged. 
 
COMIFOR 
------- 
5. (C)  Lenoir agreed completely on the need for a 
coordination mechanism to manage potential areas of 
overlapping or unclear responsibilities between the NATO HQ 
and EUFOR. He said he has been making precisely such an 
argument since planning began for the Althea mission.  He 
declined to endorse DSACEUR as the appropriate mechanism, 
arguing that such an arrangement created the impression that 
EU forces were somehow being \"chopped to NATO.\"  Still, he 
insisted that there is a need to find a way for NATO to call 
upon EUFOR for assistance or support if needed.  The issue of 
who will exercise the overarching authority ascribed to 
COMIFOR is one of the difficult questions that Lenoir said 
have been \"kicked down the road\" by EU political 
decisionmakers. 
 
Reserves 
-------- 
6. (C)  The EU planner was adamant that ambiguity in the 
decision chain for deploying reserves was \"no way to plan a 
military operation.\" He agreed with the U.S. call for 
agreement on the procedures between NATO and the EU, even 
though difficult discussions might ensue.  (Note: Other more 
senior officials, such as DG Robert Cooper, express comfort 
with the ambiguity and \"parallel decision-making.\"  End Note) 
 
POLAD and UNSCR 
--------------- 
7. (C) After conferring with colleagues, Lenoir assured us 
that Bruce Maclean\'s nomination as POLAD to NATO HQ in 
Sarajevo would be welcome. High Representative Ashdown looks 
forward to working with Maclean again we were told. On the 
issue of an exchange of letters between NATO and the EU to 
codify arrangements established by a new UNSCR, Lenoir 
expressed his personal view that such an exchange would be 
unnecessary, but if it were needed for political reasons, he 
saw no disadvantage. 
 
McKinley 
"
"21059","9/28/2004 16:00","04BRUSSELS4151","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04BRUSSELS4012|04MADRID3701","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004151 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM - KRYAN; EUR/ERA - KSHEARER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PREF, PHUM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: MIGRANT CAMPS IN LIBYA/UKRAINE: EU DEBATES 
MEASURES TO CONTROL INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION 
 
REF: (A) BRUSSELS 4012 (B) MADRID 3701 
 
1.  (SBU)  Summary.  The EU faces a delicate balancing act 
between controlling the illegal follow of migrants crossing 
its external frontiers while maintaining the asylum channel 
open for those in need of international protection (reftel 
a).  Increasingly, EU Member States are willing to consider 
extra-territorial measures which might satisfy both of these 
objectives.  A warming of relations with Libya has galvanized 
Italy to support a plan for migrant processing camps which 
would help seal off the North African gateway used by 
illegals.  With an Italian soon to be in charge of the EU\'s 
border management policy, the plan has also gained new 
strength in Brussels.  Meanwhile, similar measures have been 
proposed to stem the flow of asylum seekers from the east, 
particularly Chechens.  A composite list of \"safe\" countries 
is another measure being considered by the EU to preserve the 
asylum channel for those with credible claims.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
The Eastern Front:  Migrant Camps in Ukraine 
------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) Austria has joined the bandwagon of Member States 
supporting a plan to screen would-be asylum seekers outside 
the boundaries of the EU, an idea which is expected to come 
up at an EU Council meeting on September 30. The Baltic 
states support Austria in suggesting that migrant processing 
camps be set up in Ukraine to interview Chechens and others 
from the east seeking protection (a plan rejected by 
Ukrainians).  Chechens have supplanted Iraqis as the number 
one group of asylum seekers in the EU.  Over half of the 
Chechen applications are filed in Austria, Poland and the 
Czech Republic.  Sizeable numbers of applications are also 
made in Germany, Slovakia and Belgium. 
 
------------------------ 
The Southern Front:  Migrant Camps in Libya 
------------------------ 
 
3. (SBU) Although Germany was vocally opposed to the idea a 
year ago when the UK presented a plan for migrant processing 
centers outside the EU, Interior Minister Schily is now 
leading the charge for a reconsideration of the British 
proposal.  Italy, which has been faced with waves of migrants 
arriving in precarious crafts on the island of Lampedusa, 
argues the camps are needed for humanitarian reasons to stop 
the perilous sea crossings.  Italian authorities estimate 
that close to 10,000 migrants have crossed the Mediterranean 
illegally this year to reach Italy\'s shores.  Following its 
reported success in working with Albanian authorities to stem 
the tide of migrants across the Adriatic, Italy is now 
focusing its attention on North Africa and has called for 
migrant processing camps in Libya.  Those in need of 
international protection would be resettled within the EU 
(dividing the burden equally among Member States).  Economic 
migrants would be returned directly to their countries of 
origin from Libya. 
 
4. (SBU) On a related track, Libya\'s promise to help prevent 
clandestine migration was the dominant factor in the EU\'s 
preliminary decision on September 22 to lift economic 
sanctions on the former pariah.  The decision came after 
Italy requested permission to provide equipment (such as 
binoculars and boats) to Libya for the fight against illegal 
immigration.  Libya had reportedly signaled its willingness 
to cooperate in controlling migration, but argued it did not 
have the resources to prevent the flow of migrants from 
Sudan, Chad and other parts of Africa through its territory. 
Malta strongly endorsed the Italian request; a Maltese 
diplomat told reporters that lifting economic sanctions was 
good news because it will \"help Libya purchase the equipment 
it so badly needs to monitor its borders more effectively.\" 
 
5. (SBU) Spain\'s new Socialist government, which faces 
similar influxes both in the Mediterranean and Atlantic (to 
the Canary Islands), is ambivalent about the proposal for 
migrant camps abroad.  This year Spain has interdicted 412 
illegal immigrant boats leading to the arrest of more than 
10,042 illegal immigrants.  Officials rescued 171 illegal 
immigrants, while fifty-three persons drowned and 35 
\"disappeared\" in Mediterranean waters (reftel b).  About one 
million illegal migrants are thought to be living in Spain. 
Nevertheless, the new government has sought to take a softer 
line on undocumented migrants. 
 
------------------------ 
The View From Brussels: Pre-confirmation Support 
------------------------ 
 
6. (SBU) Whereas outgoing EU Commissioner for Justice, 
Freedom and Security (JFS) Antonio Vitorino has maintained a 
discreet silence over the renewed calls for extra-territorial 
measures, his re-emplacement has jumped into the fray and 
supported the Italo-German plan for camps in Libya.  Because 
of repeated press pronouncements favoring the idea, the 
European Parliament asked incoming JFS Commissioner Rocco 
Buttiglione to put his views on the migrant processing camps 
into writing.  Citing a recent maritime tragedy involving 
migrants, he reasoned, \"We have to find a viable alternative 
to the clandestine and dangerous practices of smugglers which 
threaten both people with a legitimate need for international 
protection and migrants trying to enter the Member States in 
search of a better life.\"  He stated, \"Our first aim should 
be to address humanitarian needs and prevent the 
Mediterranean from becoming a \'graveyard\'.\"  Buttiglione also 
mentioned the objective of working with Libya and other 
neighbors in the framework of the European Neighborhood 
Policy for solving regional problems and engaging in concrete 
cooperation and reinforced assistance. 
 
7. (SBU) Buttiglione can expect a rigorous grilling during 
his confirmation hearing before the Parliament on October 5, 
particularly from leftist parties.  Not only are they leery 
of the migrant camp schemes, they are put-off by 
Buttiglione\'s staunchly Catholic views on homosexuality and 
abortion, as well as his close ties to Pope John Paul II. 
 
8. (SBU) As with the UK plan, UNHCR has again criticized the 
proposal for migrant processing camps.  A UNHCR spokesman 
argued, \"Libya does not have the necessary asylum laws or 
structures to deal with this....Libya has not even signed the 
1951 Convention.\"  Sweden and France also have criticized the 
proposals for lack of adequate protection mechanisms.  Even 
officials in Buttiglione\'s own office have expressed 
criticism of the plan.  \"Libya has been criticized by Human 
Rights Watch for refouling refugees to neighboring 
countries,\" said one. 
 
------------------------ 
Safe Countries of Origin in Granting Asylum 
------------------------ 
 
9. (SBU) Also expected to be on the agenda of the upcoming EU 
Council meeting of September 30 is a discussion over a 
unified list of \"safe countries of origin.\"  Requests for 
asylum from any citizen of these countries would be 
pre-judged as \"manifestly unfounded\".  The initiative for a 
\"safe\" list began during the Italian Presidency and was 
continued by the Irish.  Legal and human rights standards 
agreed to as a pre-requisite for the list are so high that 
only seven African and three Latin American countries are 
currently under consideration for a \"safe\" designation. 
(Note.  Only countries with significant numbers of asylum 
seekers were reportedly considered for inclusion on the 
list.)  Views among Member State vary widely, with some 
countries and many advocacy groups objecting to the concept 
of the list itself. 
 
10. (SBU) Momentum is gaining to strike all Latin American 
countries off the list for political reasons.  Countries not 
given the \"seal of approval\" of being selected for the list 
might complain about the omission, so it might be best to 
ignore the whole region.  As to the African candidates, the 
two EU heavyweights -- France and Germany -- are taking 
opposing sides.  France is pushing hard for all seven to be 
included on the list because France receives the bulk of the 
claims from these countries.  (For instance, over 90% of all 
asylum claims made by Malians in the EU are filed in France.) 
 Germany, because of domestic politics, is questioning the 
African countries identified for inclusion on the list over 
the issue of female genital mutilation.  Since the Green 
party campaigned hard for Germany to consider gender and 
other related claims in deciding asylum requests, it does not 
want to include African countries on the list where FGM is 
practiced for cultural reasons. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
11. (SBU) The resurgent call for migrant processing camps 
outside the EU will likely fade once it comes under scrutiny. 
 Legal experts predict European courts would not support the 
practice of intercepting migrants on the high seas and 
transferring them to third countries.  Furthermore, no EU 
Member State possesses a territory in the vicinity which is 
outside its immigration laws (similar to those used by the 
U.S. and Australia in deterring dangerous, unauthorized 
maritime crossings).  Questions about protection mechanisms 
in proposed extra-territorial venues -- Ukraine and Libya -- 
will be tough to answer.  Last year\'s proposals by the UK 
were quickly rejected:  Croatia (by the government, insulted 
at the suggestion) and Albania (for the lack of an effective 
asylum system).  In this year\'s debate, the UK has remained 
strangely silent.  Either it is happy with its success in 
cutting its number of asylum seekers in half through a 
variety of policy changes, or it is letting other EU Member 
States make the case this time around.  What the revived idea 
does underscore is the EU\'s never-ending quest to find ways 
to stop the flow of unauthorized migrants to its shores. 
 
McKINLEY 
"
"21081","9/29/2004 10:16","04BRUSSELS4161","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BRUSSELS 004161 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, PARM, PREL, UNGA, CDG, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 3 U.S.-EU TROIKA CONSULTATIONS ON ARMS 
CONTROL AND GLOBAL DISARMAMENT (CODUN) 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please Protect Accordingly. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The U.S. and the Dutch EU presidency on 
September 3 conducted semi-annual CODUN consultations in 
Brussels on UN disarmament issues.  Subjects covered included 
U.S./EU priorities, UNFC, UNDC, CD, FMCT, landmines, CWB, 
BWC, CCW, CTBT, Libya, Luxembourg,s upcoming EU presidency, 
and potential changes in Dutch representation at the CD. 
Participants are listed in para 23 below. 
 
Action items: 
 
-- Para 13:  The Dutch asked whether it would be useful for 
the EU to mediate U.S.-Russian differences over Aberdeen and 
other CW facilities.  The EU was serious about wanting to be 
of assistance in breaking the deadlock.  The U.S. side 
undertook to report the EU,s offer to Washington and 
communicate any U.S. reaction through USEU. 
 
-- Para 20:  On the U.S.-EU Summit declaration, the U.S. 
promised fuller comment during September 28 CONOP 
consultations. 
 
End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
U.S. and EU Priorities 
---------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) U.S. and EU delegations met in Brussels on September 
3 for semi-annual consultations on UN disarmament issues. 
Reviewing EU priorities, which focused on advancing the EU\'s 
WMD strategy paper, the EU side highlighted revitalization of 
the UNGA First Committee (UNFC); promotion of multilateral 
agreements, including the Comprehensive-Test-Ban Treaty 
(CTBT); adoption of a work program for the Conference on 
Disarmament (CD); improving control of man-portable air 
defense systems (MANPADS), which was more important than 
ever, due to potential use by terrorists; and encouragement 
of universal acceptance of the Ottawa Convention on 
anti-personnel mines.  The U.S. side remarked on the improved 
political atmosphere in arms control discussions in New York 
and Geneva, which it hoped would prove sustainable. 
Delegation members pointed to reform of the UNFC as an issue 
that remained a U.S. priority, and expressed optimism about 
continued cooperation to this end with the EU. 
 
-------------------- 
UNGA First Committee 
-------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) The U.S. welcomed the EU\'s response to last year\'s 
First Committee resolution on improvement, noting that we 
plan to follow up this year with a draft resolution 
recommending specific measures to enhance the Committee\'s 
working methods.  The U.S. hoped to be able to share this 
with the EU soon.  The U.S. also is exploring with Russia the 
possibility of introducing a joint draft resolution on 
bilateral nuclear arms reductions; the Russians seem 
interested, but we are still considering specific resolution 
language.  Elaborating on reform, the U.S. noted that changes 
can take place only gradually, with leadership from key 
countries on measures such as reducing the number of agenda 
items.  It was for this reason that the U.S. response to the 
UN had cited the work of specific governments as proof that 
other countries had provided contributions of merit. 
 
4. (SBU) The EU side replied that the EU would look at the 
U.S. draft resolution with great interest, and predicted that 
it would be in line with EU thinking.  The willingness of 
national governments to merge resolutions was not something 
that the EU Presidency could prescribe -- the Presidency 
could encourage them to do so, but could not actually make 
them.  The EU presidency noted its strong interest in 
coordinating in New York \"at 25, \" which it was finding 
\"quite a challenge.\"  On some topics, EU member states would 
have to work things out on their own rather than through the 
EU.  The EU was working toward common positions on 
resolutions where there used to be split votes, although only 
it was likely that the EU would only be able to agree on one 
common position.  The bad news was that a new resolution on 
The Hague Code of Conduct (HCOC) was in the work; this would 
be another draft resolution to add to the UNFC,s agenda, 
despite our common efforts at reduction. 
 
5. (SBU) The EU then sought U.S. views on the Argentine draft 
resolution on Confidence and Security Building Measures 
(CSBMs) and on the draft MANPADS resolution.  Regarding the 
Argentine CSBM draft, the U.S. side explained that the U.S. 
had encouraged Argentina to table its resolution to preserve 
the work on conventional CBMs that the UNDC had conducted 
during 2001-03.  The U.S. might co-sponsor that resolution 
and the draft MANPADS resolution. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
United Nations Disarmament Commission (UNDC) 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) The U.S. side was not optimistic about the prospects 
for the UNDC.  U.S. representatives expressed their 
disappointment that the EU -- despite productive discussions 
with the Irish EU Presidency in January -- did not consult 
with the U.S. before tabling a draft agenda last April.  The 
U.S. side recalled that the Non-Aligned refused to consider 
the EU proposals, preferring to negotiate on the basis of the 
U.S. proposals for the UNDC agenda, and that the EU had to 
seek U.S. support to participate in those negotiations.  The 
Dutch EU presidency seemed uninformed about those events, but 
accepted that U.S.-EU communications on the UNDC had broken 
down at some point.  The EU sought clarification of the U.S. 
assertion that the future of the UNDC needed to be 
reconsidered.  The U.S. replied that the U.S. will propose to 
the UNDC chair (Georgia) devoting one year to examining UNDC 
institutional reform.  If the impasse over the UNDC agenda is 
not resolved during the first week of the First Committee, 
the U.S. might table an alternate draft resolution.  The EU 
side reiterated that it continued to view the UNDC as an 
important forum for allowing non-CD countries to express 
their opinions, but that EU member states agreed that the 
UNDC could be improved. 
 
------------------------------ 
Conference on Disarmament (CD) 
------------------------------ 
 
7. (SBU) The EU underscored concerns about the lack of a CD 
work program for the eighth straight year.  How long can a 
body that does not do anything be kept alive?  The U.S. 
commented that the history of the \"Five Ambassadors\" (A-5) 
proposal for a CD work program has led the U.S. to conclude 
that it is unlikely to command consensus in the future. 
Realistically, it also is highly unlikely that a 
long-inactive CD currently could take on more than one or two 
negotiations at the same time; as a result, the U.S. has been 
urging the CD to agree to begin work on the U.S. proposals on 
FMCT and persistent landmines -- it is an opportunity for a 
fresh start.  Though this year,s CD session would end on 
September 10, the debate generated by the two U.S. proposals 
has served as a useful platform from which the U.S. and the 
EU should work in tandem to develop a consensus on a program 
of work early next year.  The U.S. hoped that EU governments 
will instruct their delegations in Geneva to support the U.S. 
proposals without linkage to other issues or within a 
balancing formula. 
 
8. (SBU) The Dutch EU Presidency noted an evolution in EU 
thinking, and suggested that \"packaging\" might be the only 
way toward establishing a program of work.  Delinking, from 
the EU,s perspective, would unravel the possibility of 
getting anything done.  The U.S. side reiterated that each 
prospective CD agenda item should be considered on its own 
merits, and that efforts to link them constitute a formula 
for continued stalemate at the CD. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) 
------------------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) The EU side welcomed the conclusion of the U.S. 
review on the FMCT, and asked for a brief readout of U.S. 
briefings in Geneva earlier that week, which had focused on 
verification.  The U.S. side reported that consultations had 
gone well and had included contacts with a broad range of 
delegations, but were only the start of a long process.  The 
U.S. would seek early action in January at the CD for a 
negotiating mandate, but would maintain that the FMCT, unlike 
the NPT or other agreements, was not verifiable.  If Canada 
reintroduced its traditional verification resolution in the 
UNFC, the U.S. would not be able to support it if its text 
were similar to that of past years.  The Dutch EU Presidency 
then asked how the GON and/or the EU could pose FMCT 
questions to the USG.  The U.S. side invited the EU 
Presidency to forward any questions regarding an FMCT through 
either USEU or State/AC/ISN. 
 
-------------------- 
Persistent Landmines 
-------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) The EU side stated that the EU was studying the 
U.S. proposal at the CD for an international agreement to ban 
the sale or export of all persistent landmines, but cautioned 
that most EU countries give priority to existing instruments, 
especially the Ottawa Convention.  The U.S. side reiterated 
its hope that EU governments at the CD will be able to 
support negotiations on this subject early next year, 
pointing out that the U.S. had chosen the CD as the venue in 
order to avoid confusion with the Ottawa Convention or other 
demining issues. 
--------------------------------- 
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) 
--------------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) The U.S. side stated that this fall\'s Conference of 
CWC States Parties would mark the mid-point of the Article II 
Action Plan on national implementation of the Convention.  It 
is an ideal opportunity to assess progress to date and to set 
the agenda for the coming year, and the U.S. sees meaningful 
progress in a number of capitals on implementing measures. 
The past year also has been an exercise in gathering data 
about the status of implementation in various countries and 
the obstacles that they face.  One frequent problem is that 
many countries indicate that they are having difficulty and 
would welcome assistance, but appear to have only vague ideas 
concerning the sort of assistance needed.  Giving this issue 
a high profile at the Conference will maintain pressure; it 
also will let us \"fine tune\" the second year of the Action 
Plan. 
 
12. (SBU) The EU side replied that CWC was a successful 
treaty and a successful organization; under its new 
leadership, it was well under way to fulfilling its mandate. 
EU policies dovetailed with U.S. remarks about some countries 
not having implemented all the provisions, and the EU hoped 
that financial contributions would help those countries along 
the way.  The European Commission (EC) representative noted 
that this was part of the EU\'s WMD strategy, and that the EU 
representative for WMD nonproliferation efforts, Annalisa 
Giannella, has discussed this issue with the OPCW.  They were 
considering three areas of effort:  supporting OPCW action on 
CWC universalization (conferences, etc); supporting national 
implementation with technical or other assistance; and 
chemical sector cooperation programs.  The EC rep noted other 
EC programs:  with the Russians on the construction of CW 
destruction facilities at Gorny; with the U.S. and the UK on 
CW facilities at Shchuch,ye and Kambarka; and with the 
Germans, as well as preliminary talks with Sweden.  The EU\'s 
proposed budget for 2007-2013 dedicated additional funding to 
disarmament and non-proliferation, and could support chemical 
weapons destruction, especially in Russia. 
 
13. (SBU) Looking at the OPCW,s draft budget for 2005, the 
U.S. side pointed to the proposed 4.8 percent increase, 
remarking that, although the U.S. has not finalized its 
position on this proposal, it is inconsistent with overall 
U.S. budget policy in favor of zero-nominal-growth budgets in 
international organizations.  The U.S. and EU members should 
work hard for a budget agreement at the October Executive 
Council session; budget negotiations at the Conference 
usually are an opportunity for Non-Aligned \"crisis\" tactics 
to increase funding.  The EU side replied that the EU had 
discussed the 4.8 percent funding increase the previous day. 
Some member states felt that the increase would be hard to 
agree to, but saw value in extra funding for OPCW for 
additional inspections.  The EU would review this again in 
The Hague on September 9.  On challenge inspections, the EU 
now was developing a draft OPCW action plan that it hoped to 
discuss with key WEOG partners, including the U.S.  The EU 
side also asked about Aberdeen, inquiring whether it would be 
useful for U.S.-Russian discussions to be opened to others. 
The U.S. side undertook to report the EU interest to 
Washington. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) 
----------------------------------- 
 
14. (SBU) Reviewing the July experts\' meeting on disease 
surveillance, suspicious outbreaks, and alleged use of BW, 
the U.S. side described the gathering as very successful, 
providing a useful opportunity to exchange information and 
enhance international contacts.  The U.S. believed that this 
and other meetings encourage BWC States Parties to implement 
the BWC, and hoped that all States Parties would be able to 
report by 2006 that they have fully implemented the 
Convention -- an imperative reinforced by UN Security Council 
Resolution 1540.  This year\'s meetings already have made 
progress, but an Annual Meeting document drafted by Chairman 
Goosen would need to highlight strengthening public health 
networks and mechanisms for disease surveillance; increasing 
support for the World Health Organization and other 
international bodies; agreement for prompt notification of an 
outbreak; and improved coordination and assistance among 
States Parties on public health and disease surveillance. 
The EU side agreed with the overall positive assessment of 
the experts\' meeting in Geneva, particularly the constructive 
participation, including by NAM countries, and little 
politicization, other than Iranian efforts.  The EU side 
added that both sides needed to collaborate on keeping 
politicization out and enforcing discipline on the NAM in 
steering the agenda for the Meeting of States Parties in 
December.  The EU will coordinate with the U.S. on this in 
Geneva. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
15. (SBU) The EU side affirmed that, regarding mines other 
than anti-personnel mines (MOTAPM), it was too early to find 
a common denominator between a total ban and unconstrained 
use.  The EU wished to integrate the Irish proposal with 
other parameters for mine use.  On Explosive Remnants of War 
(ERW), the EU highlighted the successful adoption of Protocol 
V and said that it would push for rapid entry into force. 
The EU envisioned a two-stage approach to compliance, 
beginning with a consultation process, followed by the 
subscription by States Parties to more stringent regulations. 
 These would include the referral of violations to a 
committee of experts, followed by a fact-finding mission. 
(COMMENT:  The latter stage is one that the EU would like to 
add to current procedure.  END COMMENT)  This would require 
either creating a new protocol, or amending/adding on a less 
formal agreement that would be faster, yet politically (vice 
legally) binding.  The EU may call for consultations on this 
subject under Article 13. 
 
16. (SBU) The U.S. side stated that Washington was prepared 
to continue the discussions of measures to prevent munitions 
from becoming ERW.  The U.S. supported calls by several 
states, including The Netherlands, to focus on implementation 
of existing best practices and safeguards, including the 
implementation of the new ERW protocol by states in a 
position to do so.  The international community should 
evaluate the implementation of the ERW protocol that was just 
negotiated before any consideration is given to starting a 
new negotiation on this subject.  The U.S. Administration 
currently is reviewing the protocol to determine whether to 
submit it to the Senate to seek its advice and consent to 
ratification.  In any case, the U.S. could not support a 
moratorium or ban on the use of cluster munitions, as some 
NGOs are advocating.  Such munitions have a legitimate role 
in military operations, and do not necessarily create greater 
humanitarian problems than other munitions. 
 
17. (SBU) The U.S. side observed that the U.S. and the EU are 
generally on the same track regarding MOTAPM.  The U.S, which 
plans to get rid of all its persistent landmines, could 
support the Irish proposal.  We are urging fellow co-sponsors 
of the 30-nation proposal to take it on board, and have found 
encouraging the apparent movement of India towards the 
approach set forth in this proposal.  However, China, Russia, 
and Pakistan still reject the need for a MOTAPM protocol, 
arguing that the detectability and 
self-destruct/self-deactivate requirements could create 
military problems or be too expensive to implement.  The U.S. 
intended to approach those governments bilaterally during the 
intersessional period to demonstrate that reasonable 
restraints on MOTAPM can be agreed without prejudicing 
legitimate security concerns, and encouraged similar efforts 
by EU countries.  The U.S. also is urging NGOs to make clear 
that anti-vehicle mines are indeed a humanitarian problem, 
and plans to work with Germany to fund a study on this issue 
through the Geneva International Center for Humanitarian 
Demining (GICHD).  The U.S. plans to meet with the Russians 
in early October to review their technical concerns; their 
willingness to engage in this way gives us some hope that we 
can bring them around.  The U.S. does not believe that 
another mandate for the Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) 
is necessary for the group to negotiate on a MOTAPM protocol. 
 The current mandate provides sufficient authority, and those 
who want to obstruct progress will use a debate on revising 
the GGE mandate to prevent action. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
18. (SBU) The EU noted the great importance that it attaches 
to the treaty\'s entry into force, which is one of the 13 
Steps agreed to at the 2000 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
Review Conference and slated to be reviewed at next year,s 
RevCon.  The U.S. reaffirmed its opposition to the CTBT and 
its intention not to ratify the CTBT.  That said, the U.S. 
funds and participate in 95 percent of Preparatory Commission 
activities, and continues to observe a nuclear testing 
moratorium.  The two sides then discussed potential 
leadership changes at the IAEA and the Provisional Technical 
Secretariat (PTS).  The U.S. asserted that succession in 
 
SIPDIS 
these organizations should be considered in the context of 
turnover in other UN agencies over the next year, but hoped 
that the process for seeking a new PTS Executive-Secretary 
would move ahead in order to ensure a smooth transition next 
year.  Asked for EU views on succession issues, EU 
participants offered little on the PTS, but said that IAEA 
Director-General el-Baradei could, under the two-term/12-year 
rule, have a third term, as he has been in office for less 
than twelve years.  The U.S. side also mentioned that the 
unfavorable exchange rate between the dollar and the euro, 
among other issues, have placed serious constraints on the 
availability of funds for the U.S. assessment for 2005, and 
could shape our response to possible G-77 calls for budget 
cuts at the November meeting. 
 
19. (SBU) FYI:  AC/ISN Director Robert Luaces was laying out 
the U.S. case against the CTBT when his wristwatch alarm 
unexpectedly went off.  After a momentary silence captured 
the meeting room, Luaces quipped, &Sorry:  that was 
Washington alerting me that I,m saying too many positive 
things about the CTBT.  I,d better stop now, before my watch 
explodes and takes my wrist with it!8  A brief bout of 
laughter ensued.  END FYI 
 
------------------------ 
US-EU Summit Declaration 
------------------------ 
 
20. (SBU) The EU side reviewed the statement, noting that the 
EU continues to promote the universalization of disarmament 
and non-proliferation treaties.  Many of the follow-up issues 
were more appropriate for CONOP.  The EU supported UNSCR 
1540, which lists steps that states should take to counter 
proliferation of WMD and its delivery systems, and planned to 
report as early as possible ) hopefully, by the October 28 
deadline -- on the status of European efforts.  As the 
relevant competences within the EU usually were national, 
rather than European, there would be separate EU and national 
reporting to reflect these differences.  Regarding the IAEA 
Additional Protocol, the EU had undertaken a round of 
demarches, and found that non-adherence in most countries was 
a matter of institutional delays, rather than of policy.  On 
the Global Threat Reduction Initiative, the EU Presidency had 
done a quick survey and determined that member states planned 
to attend at the senior policymaking (vice political) level. 
On the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Materials, there were some difficulties within the EU, 
including admittedly tepid support from The Netherlands. 
Regarding the Hague Code of Conduct (HCOC) against ballistic 
missile proliferation, the EU supported universal adherence, 
and had sent out a round of demarches aimed at increasing 
support for the Chilean resolution in the First Committee and 
asking non-adherents to become parties.  The U.S. side 
thanked the EU side for this review, and promised to provide 
responses on these issues during the September 28 U.S.-EU 
CONOP meeting. 
 
----- 
Libya 
----- 
 
21. (SBU) The EU side asked for an update on WMD 
dismantlement efforts in Iraq and Libya, and was particularly 
interested in what the U.S. was doing to assist unemployed 
WMD scientists.  The U.S. side explained that Washington was 
looking at expanding our current program with the Russians 
and trying similar work with Libya, which was made various 
proposals regarding conversion of its CW production facility 
at Rabta.  The EU Presidency described a \"complete meeting of 
minds\" within the EU on conversion, although the details 
still needed to be worked out.  Both sides agreed on the 
importance of ensuring that Libya not see its WMD 
renunciation as an opportunity to seek \"rewards\" for good 
behavior. 
 
---------------------- 
Luxembourg/Netherlands 
---------------------- 
 
22. (SBU) The Luxembourgeois informed the U.S. side on the 
margins of the meeting that the GOL has asked The Netherlands 
to continue to represent the EU presidency on CODUN and CONOP 
issues during Luxembourg,s EU presidency during the first 
half of 2005.  The Dutch confirmed this arrangement.  The 
Dutch also stated privately that, if the CD failed to adopt a 
program of work by the end of the extended Dutch EU 
presidency in June 2005, The Hague would &have8 to consider 
closing its separate diplomatic representation at the CD. 
Were this to happen, The Netherlands UN Mission in Geneva 
would represent the GON at the CD.  (COMMENT:  Of 65 CD 
member states, only twelve (including the U.S.) have separate 
delegations in Geneva accredited to the CD.  END COMMENT) 
 
------------ 
Participants 
------------ 
 
23. (U) AC/ISN Director Robert Luaces led the U.S. 
delegation, which included U.S. CD Deputy Representative 
Thomas Cynkin and USEU PolOff Maren Smith (notetaker).  The 
Dutch EU Presidency was represented by MFA Nonproliferation 
and Nuclear Affairs Director Paul Wilke, Deputy Director of 
the Arms Control and Arms Export Policy Division Freek 
Keppels, Policy Officer Elke Merks-Schaapveld, and CD Deputy 
Representative Daniel Prins.  Robert Lauer and Tim Kesseler 
attended for the upcoming Luxembourgeois EU Presidency. 
Council Secretariat participants were Andreas Strub, Tomas 
Reyes-Ortega, and Jean-Claude Brunet from the Office of the 
Personal Representative of the High Representative for 
Non-Proliferation of WMD.  Commission attendees were Marc 
Deffrennes, Head of the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament 
Unit; Laura Ligouri, from the Non-Proliferation and 
Disarmament Unit; and U.S. Desk Officer Andrew Denison.  This 
meeting marked the broadest EU representation at U.S.-EU 
CODUN consultations in recent memory. 
 
24. (U) AC/ISN Director Luaces has cleared this cable. 
 
McKinley 
"
"21121","9/30/2004 8:50","04BRUSSELS4181","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Belgrade8","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004181 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR/DAS Kathleen Stephens, EUR/SCE Chuck English, 
EUR/ACE Tom Adams, Pat Nelson-Douvelis and Monica O\'Keefe 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, ZL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: THE STABILITY PACT: PRESSING REFORM THROUGH 
REGIONAL COOPERATION 
 
REF: (A) Belgrade 008 (B) Sarajevo 2208; (C) Zate-Holtzapple 
 
9/15/04 email 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) With South Eastern Europe facing a decisive year in 
2005, the Stability Pact (SP) continues to generate pressure 
for further political and economic reforms in the region and 
to draw the region closer to European and Euro-Atlantic 
integration.  The Pact is complementing its ongoing efforts 
in the areas of democratization, economic reform and in the 
security field with a strong push for implementation and 
regional ownership of programs and commitments undertaken by 
SEE governments.  There has been particular success on the 
economic front -- promoting regional free trade agreements 
and restoration of the regional power grid, improving the 
investment climate -- and in fostering regional cooperation 
on migration and refugee returns as well as law enforcement. 
The Pact and Senior Coordinator (SC) Erhard Busek have 
helped restore an atmosphere of cooperation among SEE 
governments and political leaders.  As intended at its 
creation in 1999, the Pact plays an important supporting 
role, as individual SEE governments, the Contact Group and 
other members of the international community work toward for 
lasting political solutions in the areas of greatest 
challenge: Serbia and Montenegro, Kosovo and Bosnia- 
Herzegovina (refs A and B).  END SUMMARY. 
 
Five Years of the Pact: Creating \"Critical Mass\" of Regional 
Communication 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
2. (U) Launched under Presidential auspices in the aftermath 
of the spring 1999 Kosovo air campaign with the goal of 
helping restore peace and stability to the Balkans, the 
Stability Pact initially captured some 200 so-called \"quick 
start\" assistance programs under its umbrella.  The Pact\'s 
early years under the leadership of Bodo Hombach were marked 
by feverish activity and a fair measure of coordination 
challenge as it sought to bring coherence to international 
donor efforts in the war-torn Balkans.  Since 2001, with 
former Austrian Vice Chancellor Erhard Busek as Senior 
Coordinator, the Pact\'s activities have become much more 
streamlined and clearly focused on six core objectives (see 
para five below).  The Pact is also placing strong emphasis 
on implementation of existing agreements and commitments 
undertaken by regional governments and is pressing hard for 
further regional ownership of a range of important 
initiatives.  With evident progress in the region toward EU 
integration on the part of EU candidates Bulgaria and 
Romania as well as Croatia and most recently Macedonia, the 
Pact has contributed to achieving the twin goals of bringing 
peace and stability to the Balkans as well as further 
European integration in the long-challenged South East 
European region. The Pact also represents a useful channel 
to draw Moldova closer to the European mainstream, although 
with evident limitations on near-term prospects for 
significant progress. 
 
3. (SBU) Conversations with government officials and 
politicians confirm the sense of achievement by the Pact as 
a concerted undertaking by international donors and regional 
assistance recipients.  Both in public statements and in 
September 27 comments to Deputy Special Coordinator (DSC) 
Mozur, EU Commission Director for the Western Balkans 
Reinhard Priebe strongly praised the accomplishments and 
positive impact of the Stability Pact and stressed its role 
as a key partner for the EU in the region.  Typical comments 
from the region stress, as a leading Bulgarian 
parliamentarian recently noted to DSC, the clear benefit of 
the \"critical mass of communication\" created by the Pact in 
the region.  A senior Hungarian Interior Ministry official 
highlighted the Pact\'s success in providing a venue for 
close collaboration among regional Ministers of Interior, 
citing the stark contrast between the cordial and productive 
September 14 meeting of regional Ministers in Brdo, Slovenia 
with the icy, distrustful encounters of just a few years 
ago.  Other examples abound. 
 
4. (U) Some skeptics remain, however.  Regional and donor 
critics hit the Pact for its inability to deliver fully on 
promised infrastructure and other economic improvements and 
perceived shortcomings in assistance coordination.  On the 
former, such criticism often draws on long existing 
skepticism and opposition dating from the Pact\'s early days, 
when it was finding its place in the overall international 
community effort in the Balkans.  Criticism from the region 
often implies the expectation that the Pact was to serve as 
a Marshall Plan in the Balkans, rebuilding and restoring the 
region to some version of perceived pre-1990 halcyon days. 
Critics of lapses of coordination do not see the Pact\'s 
efforts to streamline and focus on core objectives and fail 
to recognize the extent to which assistance levels have 
decreased as peace and stability have settled into the 
region.  And there have been some bumps in the road on some 
initiatives, where results have been less than expected or 
where poor performance by  individuals has undercut 
achievement. 
 
SP Initiatives have Impact, Economic Objectives to the Fore 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
5. (SBU) A brief overview of key Stability Pact activities 
confirms success in its role of supporting a return to 
diplomatic normalcy and regional cooperation in South 
Eastern Europe.  These activities have to be viewed in 
context, against the backdrop of substantial but declining 
bilateral assistance from the US and other donors and a 
build-up of EU pre-accession assistance - focused on acquis 
requirements -- to candidates Bulgaria, Romania, as well as 
Croatia and prospectively Macedonia. 
 
-- Democratization and Human Rights (Working Table I) with 
core objectives of Media and Local Democracy/Cross Border 
Cooperation: Among key priorities, the Pact is joining 
forces with donor governments and leading NGOs to promote 
active inter-parliamentary cooperation.  The goal: to ensure 
that regional parliamentarians and staffers have the 
information, understanding and political will they need to 
ratify and implement the web of already-concluded regional 
economic agreements in trade and energy as well in other 
policy areas.  Among other SP initiatives is a media task 
force with the goal promoting responsible standards for the 
regional media and tempering corrosive and irresponsible 
journalism in tense areas.  The Pact is seeking to deepen 
regional commitment to reconciliation by proposing 
government-supported youth exchanges between Serbia and 
Montenegro, Kosovo, and Bosnia-Herzegovina (and perhaps 
others) along the lines of successful past Franco-German 
programs. 
 
-- Economic Reconstruction, Cooperation and Development 
(Working Table II) with core objectives of Interregional 
Trade/Investment Compact and Regional Infrastructure/ 
Energy: The Pact has worked extremely hard in tandem with 
the OECD, EBRD, other IFIs and such bilateral donors as the 
U.S. to win regional governments\' commitment to an 
interlocking system of free trade agreements (creating a 
common market of some 60 million people), economic reform 
measures under the \"SEE Investment Compact\", and the so- 
called Athens Process to restore the regional power grid. 
As a supporting measure, SPSC Busek is devoting considerable 
time and effort to heighten the role and influence of the 
regional Business Advisory Council (BAC), with the US Deputy 
Senior Coordinator exploring further ways to strengthen the 
role of US business in the BAC.  All are mature and highly 
applauded initiatives.  They now demand a concerted effort 
and political push by all concerned -- most significantly by 
regional governments and parliaments -- for final 
ratification and implementation.  This task is perhaps the 
Pact\'s key priority for the year immediately ahead. 
 
-- Security Issues (Working Table III) with core objectives 
of Anti-Organized Crime and Migration/Asylum/Refugees:  The 
Pact has worked successfully on initiatives involving 
regional cooperation on migration and refugees, border 
cooperation, against trafficking in persons (graduating the 
initiative to the broader mandate of a special OSCE 
representative), against organized crime and corruption and 
on such military issues as arms reduction and small arms 
control.  The SP Disaster Preparedness and Prevention 
Initiative has set the stage for meaningful regional 
cooperation should a cross-border natural disaster occur in 
the seismologically unstable and infrastructure-poor region. 
An initiative addressing military \"conversion\" is evolving 
in tandem with NATO, the World Bank and other donors 
(possibly Nordic).  The concept posits limited regional 
cooperation in dealing with military down-sizing, base 
closing, defense plant conversion, and environmental issues, 
with Serbia-Montenegro the primary country of concern.  NATO 
SG de Hoop Scheffer agreed to explore possibilities with the 
SP and other donors during his September 15 meeting with SC 
Busek, expressing support for the undertaking while 
cautioning on NATO\'s clear resource constraints. 
 
Progress toward Meaningful Regional Ownership 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Achieving regional ownership of reforms and of SP 
initiatives is a leading priority of the Pact.  Here, there 
is evidence of success.  Regional governments are assuming 
costs and responsibility by seconding personnel and 
providing facilities to a number of regional initiatives. 
For example, the Sava River Commission -- involving four 
regional governments along with several donors in Sava River 
environmental management -- is opening (in October) a 
regional office in Zagreb.  Similarly, the Croatian 
government is strengthening the regional center for arms 
control and verification (RACVIAC) in Zagreb and promoting 
it as a regional center for defense conversion issues, doing 
so with support from donors and expertise from various 
quarters, including NATO.  There are other examples.  The 
regional anti-corruption initiative (SPAI) based in Sarajevo 
and the newly established regional center in Skopje to 
address migration and related issues which were formerly the 
focus of the Pact\'s MARRI initiative, led most recently by 
new UNMIK head Soren Jessup Petersen.  By year\'s end, the SP 
education reform initiative plans to move the secretariat of 
the Austrian-led \"Graz process\", incorporating South Eastern 
Europe into a European area of education, to Zagreb with its 
Vienna activities winding down as a result.  The SECI anti- 
organized crime center in Bucharest, now loosely associated 
with the Stability Pact due to SC Busek\'s lead role in both, 
is a success story, highlighted by a forthcoming positive EU 
assessment that lays out a vision of SECI cooperation and 
possible incorporation into EUROPOL over the coming decade. 
 
7. (SBU) One particular challenge: reinforcing the move to 
regional ownership by re-energizing the South East European 
Cooperation Process (SEECP).  Present chair Romania, 
distracted by its upcoming elections, could be doing more, 
although Romanian officials are hosting Foreign Ministers in 
October and are planning a regional Defense Ministerial to 
discuss issues related to defense conversion.  With an eye 
to the Greek SEECP chairmanship beginning in April 2005, SC 
Busek has already started to bolster Greek interest and 
leadership in ensuring that SEECP plays a more significant - 
- and positive -- role in the future. 
 
The Coming Two Years: Stability Pact will be a Useful Tool 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
8. (SBU) The SP can further contribute regional stability 
and progress over the crucial next years.  The context 
through 2007 is gaining clarity.  Bulgaria and Romania, 
together with the EU, are working toward the January 1, 2007 
target date for their accession to the EU.  Croatia is 
progressing along a similar path and initial discussions 
with Macedonia have started.  With such accession prospects, 
the Pact\'s target area will necessarily shrink.  But 
regional leverage, spearheaded by the SP, international 
partners and EU candidates in the region, will generate 
additional pressure on the remaining countries of the 
Western Balkans whose reform efforts and commitment to 
European integration are lagging.  We should use this 
evolving leverage, now and in the future, to strengthen the 
position of reformers and to press governments and political 
oppositions in Serbia and Montenegro, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
and Albania to embrace the realistic vision of full 
integration into Europe and the EU over the coming decade. 
 
9. (SBU) With this in mind, the next two years will be 
critical for the region, particularly in Serbia/Montenegro 
(Ref A) and certainly for Kosovo, where pressure for a 
change in the status quo is building.  Ref B lays out some 
elements of the 2005-2006 picture in Bosnia-Herzegovina with 
the suggestion that a change in the IC posture in that 
country will be a significant discussion issue in this 
period.  Albania is moving ahead at times, while stepping 
back at others.  On September 14, the EU delivered a tough, 
critical message to Tirana (backed by Embassy Tirana - Ref 
C) on its mixed record and uncertain commitment on reform, 
making clear the need for Albania\'s 2005 elections to 
demonstrate the country\'s readiness to progress toward 
European integration.  With the clear challenges facing 
these countries, the Stability Pact\'s consistent role of 
facilitating regional cooperation and of providing steady 
regional pressure for continued reform -- linked to the EU 
and Euro-Atlantic integration and the holy grail of eventual 
EU accession -- remains essential to the international 
community\'s set of diplomatic tools and pressure points. 
 
10. (SBU) Like other international players and donors active 
in South Eastern Europe, the Stability Pact is assessing 
next steps and medium-term objectives.  Discussion with the 
EU on CY 2006 funding is ongoing, with initial soundings are 
upbeat.  EU officials are positive on the Pact, supportive 
of its continued work, but clear to ensure that it plays a 
supporting and complementary to the EU\'s main thrust of 
promoting accession for candidate countries and progress 
toward candidacy status by the others. 
SC Busek: On the Road, On Message in Advancing the Reform 
Agenda 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
11. (SBU) Through his seemingly indefatigable travels and 
his straight talk and problem solving, and a senior EU 
political figure concentrating exclusively on the Balkans, 
SC Busek has won great respect and considerable credibility 
with senior government officials and politicians throughout 
the region.  He sees Prime Ministers and senior cabinet 
ministers regularly and constantly presses hard on the 
reform agenda and on cooperation with Stability Pact 
initiatives.  His efforts underpin the Stability Pact\'s 
success to date and will likely ensure further positive 
regional government cooperation and action.  He and the Pact 
are working toward a successful meeting of the Pact\'s 
Regional Table November 18-19 in Skopje, where regional 
leaders and donors will meet to assess progress, set 
priorities, and establish the Pact\'s work plan for the 
turning point period 2005-06. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"21127","9/30/2004 9:30","04BRUSSELS4183","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004183 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/RPM, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/30/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, OSCE, EUN, RU, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU OSCE CONSULTS FOCUS ON RUSSIA 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: The September 21 U.S.-EU OSCE consultations 
focused largely on Russian intransigence toward outside 
influence in its \"near abroad.\"  Both sides agreed that the 
CIS Astana Declaration is an attempt to undercut the OSCE 
role in human rights and democratization.  Similarly, the EU 
reported a \"growing gap\" between it and Russia on the 
\"European neighborhood\" countries (Moldova, Belarus, Ukraine, 
Georgia), with Russia openly declaring that region to be of 
\"more interest to Russia than to the EU.\"  On Kazakhstan, the 
Kazakh desire to hold the 2009 OSCE Chairmanship should be 
leveraged to promote progress on democratization.  On 
appointing OSCE Special Representatives for anti-Semitism and 
discrimination, the EU bottom line was that all forms of 
racism be equally acknowledged.  U.S.-EU agreement on Russia 
opens the way for cooperating with the EU on initiatives to 
oppose Russian attempts to marginalize the OSCE.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------ 
Participants 
------------ 
 
2. (U) 
 
EU Delegation 
------------- 
 
Netherlands (current EU Presidency): 
 
Frank van Beuningen, Head of Delegation, Security Policy 
Department/OSCE Desk, MFA Hague 
Mark Versteden, Senior Policy Office OSCE, MFA Hague 
 
Luxembourg (successor to Netherlands in EU Presidency): 
 
Ronald Mayer, Ambassador to the Council of Europe 
Beatrice Kirsch, Deputy Permanent Representative to the OSCE 
Fabienne Rossler, Attache, MFA 
 
European Commission 
Gilbert Dubois, Head of Unit for OSCE and Council of Europe, 
DG for External Relations 
Mario Mariani, OSCE Desk, DG for External Relations 
Louise Head, Adviser, DG for External Relations 
Nicole Taillefer, EC Delegation to the internal organizations 
in Vienna 
Raul de Luzenberger, Moldova Desk, DG for External Relations 
Konstandinos Vardakis, Kazakhstan Desk, DG External Relations 
Robert Liddell, Caucasus and Central Asia Unit, DG for 
External Relations 
 
EU Council Secretariat 
Alison Weston, Administrator, OSCE & CoE Desk Officer, (DG E 
IX) 
Carl Hartzell, Moldova/Belarus Desk Officer, Policy Unit 
 
U.S. Delegation 
--------------------- 
Stephan M. Minikes, Ambassador to the OSCE 
Bruce Connuck, Political Counselor, USOSCE Vienna 
Steven Steger, Political Officer, USOSCE Vienna 
Todd Huizinga, Political Officer, USEU Brussels 
Sean Kimball, Intern, USEU Brussels 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
ASTANA DECLARATION: A RUSSIAN TRIAL BALLOON? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) USOSCE Ambassador Minikes characterized the CIS 
Astana Declaration of September 15 as a Russian \"trial 
balloon\" to see how far Russia could go in perverting OSCE 
priorities and principles in its own interests.  He warned 
that not responding would encourage Russia to go farther in 
weakening OSCE commitment to promoting human rights and 
democratization in the former Soviet space.  Dutch OSCE 
Office Director Frank van Beuningen agreed, observing that 
Russian frustration with the OSCE had been building for a 
long time.  He said Astana did not bode well for achieving 
consensus with Russia and other CIS states on important 
issues at the upcoming OSCE Ministerial in Sofia.  European 
Commission Head of Unit for OSCE Affairs Gilbert Dubois 
pointed out that the Astana Declaration explicitly 
characterized itself as having been built upon the July 
Moscow Statement, which forcefully called on the OSCE to 
observe \"(the fundamental Helsinki principle of) 
non-interference in internal affairs...of States.\" 
 
4. (C) USOSCE PolCouns Connuck said that the Moscow and 
Astana declarations substantively contained nothing new -- 
the documents\' themes pulled together what Russia had pushing 
for day-in, day-out in Vienna for a long time.  Connuck also 
pointed out that the Astana Declaration\'s language on 
reinforcing OSCE efforts against terrorism by \"reducing OSCE 
expenditures in the highest-cost-prone sectors\" was a thinly 
veiled attempt to undercut OSCE field missions. 
 
5. (C) Minikes said that the Russians had traction on their 
attempts to marginalize the OSCE because not all OSCE members 
bought into OSCE principles on human rights and democracy. 
Minikes said, and the EU agreed, that the U.S. and EU needed 
to decide when to say \"enough.\"  One way to do so might be 
some sort of explicit recommitment to OSCE principles at 
head-of-state level. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
RUSSIA AND SOUTH OSSETIA, GEORGIA/CHECHNYA BMO 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
6.  (C) Van Beuningen reported that the EU was looking for 
ways to \"internationalize\" negotiations on South Ossetia, but 
that Astana was yet another sign that Russia was unlikely to 
agree to such internationalization (neither in South Ossetia, 
nor in Moldova).  Minikes reported that, in South Ossetia, 
the Russian flag was now flying alongside the South Ossetian 
flag.  Van Beuningen remarked on a recent radio interview in 
which South Ossetian leader Eduard Kokoity said South Ossetia 
would never be a part of Georgia.  The atmosphere, he said, 
was worsening, and Russia was probably playing a role in 
those developments. 
 
7. (C) According to van Beuningen, if the mandate for the 
Georgia/Chechnya Border Monitoring Operation (BMO) is not 
extended beyond December 31, the EU will consider, with 
partners such as the U.S., another type of international 
presence.  Minikes said, with instability in the region even 
worse after Beslan, the BMO must continue; the U.S., EU, and 
OSCE must engage Moscow to that end. 
 
----------------------------------- 
MOLDOVA: A RUSSIAN \'NYET\' TO THE EU 
----------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Ronald Mayer, the Ambassador of Luxembourg to the 
Council of Europe, reported that Moldova discussions at a 
September 20 EU Political and Security Committee Meeting with 
Russia had been \"strikingly negative.\"  Russia rejected any 
EU role in five-sided talks on Transnistria; a proposed 
resolution to the schools crisis; and the withdrawal of 
ammunition from Moldova in line with the Istanbul 
commitments.  (According to Mayer, the Russians said they 
\"need the ammunition\" in the area.)  Carl Hartzell, 
Moldova/Belarus Desk Officer in the Policy Unit of the EU 
Council Secretariat, confirmed that Russian resistance to EU 
influence in the region through tools such as the European 
Neighborhood Policy was \"becoming greater every day.\" 
Hartzell said the EU was facing \"a tremendous challenge\" -- a 
\"growing gap\" between the EU and Russia on dealing with an 
area that for both of them was the near abroad.  Hartzell 
said the EU would continue to work with the U.S. to create a 
\"broader international platform\" to deal with 
Moldova/Transniestria.  He said the EU was deliberating 
whether the Security and Stability Pact for Moldova proposal 
might be a basis for progress. 
 
9. (C) European Commission Moldova Desk Officer Raul de 
Luzenberger said the \"double-checking\" proposal for Moldovan 
steel was in the final stages of preparation.  He said the EU 
should have a common proposal by the end of September, after 
which there would be an exchange of letters with Moldova and 
the system would be put in place.  On border monitoring, de 
Luzenberger said the European Commission was ready to 
participate, but that the border first had to be demarcated. 
Hartzell said the EU would like to compare notes with the 
U.S. on possible further measures, such as freezing assets, 
to \"make the status quo uncomfortable\" for Transnistrian 
leaders.  Van Beuningen said the EU wanted the schools crisis 
solved before resumption of the five-sided talks.   Hartzell 
asked rhetorically whether it would be wise to invite Russia 
to such talks, given the risk that Russia would reject the 
offer. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
BELARUS: EU UNDECIDED ON ODIHR REFERENDUM OBSERVATION 
----------------------------------------- 
 
10. (C) Mayer said the EU was divided on whether the OSCE 
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) 
should accept Belarus\' invitation to observe the October 17 
referendum on eliminating presidential term limits, because 
of concern about possibly \"legitimizing\" the referendum.  It 
would therefore be unlikely that there could be an EU 
decision to push ODIHR to observe the referendum.  Minikes 
responded that the OSCE would not be able to comment 
authoritatively on the referendum if ODIHR did not accept the 
invitation. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
KAZAKHSTAN 2009 CHAIRMAN-IN-OFFICE CANDIDACY 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
11. (C) Robert Liddell of the Caucasus and Central Asia Unit 
of the European Commission expressed concern over the 
fairness of the September 19 elections in Kazakhstan, but 
said that the EU nevertheless saw Kazakhstan as the most 
viable leader in Central Asia, a region that needed 
leadership.  Konstandinos Vardakis, European Commission 
Kazakhstan Desk Officer, said the EU expected Kazakhstan to 
be exporting as much oil in 2012 as Russia does today. 
Therefore, it was in the EU\'s vital interest to promote 
democracy and stability there.  Minikes proposed that the 
U.S. and EU look at ways to cooperate in leveraging the 
Kazakh candidacy for OSCE CiO in 2009 to push for substantial 
progress on human rights and democracy.  Minikes suggested 
meeting with the Kazakhs regularly, not to single them out, 
but to help them.  Connuck reported that the Kazakhs at the 
working level in Vienna believe they have enough momentum for 
2009 as to make their candidacy unstoppable, partially 
because there has not been a concerted effort to leverage the 
Kazakh CiO candidacy.  The Kazakhs and some other CIS states, 
he said, are convinced that they hold the U.S. and EU hostage 
on this issue, not the other way around.  Van Beuningen 
agreed that action on leveraging the Kazakh candidacy had to 
come soon, or it would be too late. 
 
------------------------------------- 
CHOOSING A NEW OSCE SECRETARY GENERAL 
------------------------------------- 
 
12. (C) Van Beuningen said that there was no EU candidate to 
succeed OSCE Secretary General Jan Kubis as of yet.  Van 
Beuningen expressed annoyance at Bulgarian FM and OSCE CiO 
Passy\'s letter in which he created a \"fait accompli\" by 
stating that the SecGen candidate should have a \"political 
profile.\"  Minikes stressed that the candidate for OSCE 
SecGen should be equal in stature to the NATO SecGen.  Van 
Beuningen agreed that a high profile figure would bring in a 
large network with access to other key leaders, but cautioned 
that the issue for the EU was not just the SecGen, but the 
leadership of the OSCE and the role of the CiO in providing 
political direction. 
 
------------------------------------- 
OSCE REFORM AND SCALES OF ASSESSMENT 
------------------------------------- 
 
13. (C) Both sides agreed that reform could not be 
accomplished through the creation of more rules and that, 
while they were open to discussion, they thought reform 
should be done carefully, not with undue urgency. 
Underlining U.S.-EU concerns that some OSCE members wanted to 
use OSCE reform to undercut field missions, Connuck reported 
that CIS countries might be considering letting the mandates 
of OSCE field missions in the CIS expire as of January 1 
(which they can do by withholding consensus on mandate 
renewals at the end of the year).  On scales of assessment, 
Van Beuningen said the OSCE should consider the possibility 
of how to prevent the organization from coming to a 
standstill in the event of failure to come to a timely 
agreement.  He said CiO Passy\'s presentation to Dutch FM 
Bernard Bot of the \"Chair\'s Guess\" paper so irritated Bot 
that it had become more difficult to find a solution to the 
scales of assessment issue at a political level.  Van 
Beuningen affirmed that the EU supported the U.S. position on 
having two scales, and Nicole Van Taillefer from the 
Commission Delegation to the OSCE reported that the Russians 
had again insisted on one scale in a September 20 meeting in 
Vienna. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
SPECIAL REPS ON ANTI-SEMITISM, RACISM, XENOPHOBIA 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
14. (C) Van Beuningen said the EU\'s bottom line was that all 
forms of discrimination needed to be combated.  Whether there 
should be one, two or three envoys was undecided, he said. 
The EU agreed with the U.S. that the special 
representative(s) position(s) should be temporary 
appointments and modeled on the Maarti Ahtisaari position of 
OSCE Special Rep for Central Asia -- no bureaucracy and no 
additional OSCE staff. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
KOSOVO FOLLOW-UP: EUROPEAN CONVENTION ON TORTURE 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
15. (U) Mayer asked whether the U.S. could hasten resolution, 
via NATO, of the Council of Europe (CoE) and Kosovo 
Stabilization Force (KFOR) negotiations on implementation in 
Kosovo of the European Convention for the Prevention of 
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. 
Serbia and Montenegro committed itself to implementing the 
Convention when it joined the CoE in April 2003, but 
implementation in Kosovo is subject to negotiations with 
KFOR.  The U.S. side promised to pass the request on. 
 
------------------------------------ 
COMMENT: U.S.-EU CONSENSUS ON RUSSIA 
------------------------------------ 
 
16. (C) These consultations affirmed a U.S.-EU convergence of 
views on the gravity of Russia\'s campaign to marginalize the 
OSCE and reassert Russian dominance in the CIS region.  Both 
sides agreed also that U.S. and EU inaction would encourage 
Russia to push even further.  The EU agreed in principle to 
explore the proposal of publicly recommitting the OSCE to its 
founding principles (see para 5) -- opening the way for 
U.S.-EU common action in making clear our commitment to 
promoting human rights and democracy throughout the OSCE 
region.  END COMMENT. 
 
17. (U) USOSCE has cleared this message. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"21147","9/30/2004 14:31","04BRUSSELS4201","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004201 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPT FOR NEA - DAS PHILO DIBBLE, NP/RA - FITZPATRICK, S/CT- 
MILLER, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/30/2009 
TAGS: PREL, KNNP, ETTC, EAID, IR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU WANTS G8 TALKS ON IRAN BEFORE NEXT IAEA BOARD 
 
REF: A. SECTO 0019 
     B. 09/24/2004 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASON 1.4 (B,D) 
 
 
1.  (C/NF)  According to UK Mission official Karen Betts 
(strictly protect), the EU-3 are working to coordinate with 
the EU ideas for a G-8 strategy to \"handle Iran between now 
and the November IAEA Board meeting.\" On September 29, EU 
High Rep Solana presented a draft paper to the EU-3 outlining 
specific, technical steps Iran must take regarding the 
suspension of uranium enrichment.  In parallel, the EU-3 are 
looking at possible incentives the EU could offer Iran, 
should it comply. G8 engagement, she said, is designed to 
bring Moscow on board and allow for the possibility that the 
U.S. could offer some improvement in relations with Iran.  As 
for the EU, Solana is proposing to re-start the stalled 
negotiations on a Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) with 
Iran, should it suspend uranium enrichment.  Betts said the 
thinking is that, even restarted, negotiations would likely 
founder, but it is the only carrot the EU can offer at this 
time. 
 
2.  (C/NF)  The UK, Betts shared, is not completely 
comfortable with the EU-3 paper, but feels compelled to 
proceed in an effort to make clear to Iran it has one last 
chance to keep the issue from going to the UNSC.  \"The 
message to Iran would be:  we need to see 100% compliance or 
it goes to the UNSC in November,\" said Betts.  However, the 
EU-3 are approaching the whole issue of Iran asking, \"What 
price do we need to pay to get Iran to give up its nuclear 
program?\"  We responded that another way to view the 
situation is that Iran\'s international obligations are clear, 
and Tehran should not expect to be rewarded simply for 
meeting them.  Rather than looking for carrots to offer Iran, 
we asked, has the EU considered putting Tehran on notice that 
it might impose economic sanctions -- given that the EU is 
Iran\'s largest trading partner -- should Iran not suspend 
enrichment?  Betts answered that while the EU has discussed 
this option, serious consideration of sanctions could only 
come under an authorizing UNSCR. 
 
3.  (C/NF) Betts said the sequencing of upcoming meetings is 
a complicating factor in managing this issue.  The EU-3 are 
hoping to convene G8 Political Directors (or, perhaps even a 
ministerial-level meeting) in the period October 11-13 to 
discuss an Iran strategy (reftel).  Unfortunately, EU 
ministers meet in a GAERC on the 11th, before the G8 will 
have held its discussion.  The EU would like to present the 
proposals to the G8 before EU ministers reach any 
conclusions.  She said the UK feels very much squeezed in the 
middle between the U.S., which wants to take a tougher line 
on Iraq, and the EU, which wants to be a bit softer. 
\"Handling\" Iran as an issue has become a delicate matter for 
the UK, she said.  She welcomed next week\'s US-EU-Canada 
trilateral discussions on Iran, and encouraged the US 
delegation to engage the Dutch on all these issues. 
 
McKinley 
"
"21182","10/1/2004 15:11","04BRUSSELS4235","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 BRUSSELS 004235 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/RPM AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/30/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUR PDAS BRADTKE\'S SEPTEMBER 27 DISCUSSIONS WITH 
THE EU 
 
 
Classified By: USEU Political Military Officer Jeremy Brenner for reaso 
ns 1,5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: Visiting EUR PDAS Robert Bradtke covered a 
wide range of topics in meetings with the EU Political and 
Security Committee Troika and Director General Robert Cooper 
on September 27.  The US and the EU voiced support for UNSCR 
1564 regarding Darfur, and the EU sought consultations with 
the US on a \"division of labor\" in Sudan.  On 
Russia/Moldova/Georgia, neither the US nor the EU found 
grounds for optimism regarding December OSCE Ministerials, 
but both insisted that Istanbul Commitments must come before 
ratification of the Adapted CFE Treaty.  The EU shares the US 
view on MONUC and the Great Lakes, that there is a need for a 
stronger mandate and higher force levels. In Afghanistan, the 
US is looking for a way to merge ISAF with OEF, while the EU 
expands its efforts at Democracy support.  On Operation 
Althea in Bosnia, the US desire to vest final Dayton 
authority in DSACEUR met considerable resistance from the EU 
side.  EU battlegroups are moving ahead, with EU assurances 
that they and the NATO Response Force (NRF) will be mutually 
reinforcing.  US underscored concern about lifting of EU arms 
embargoes on Libya and China.  End summary. 
 
Sudan/Darfur 
------------ 
2. (C) PDAS Bradtke pointed out the high level of interest 
within the USG over developments in Darfur. He noted that the 
Secretary had characterized the situation as \"genocide,\" 
 
SIPDIS 
giving high profile impetus to our desire to speed the 
deployment of African Union monitors.  Bradtke took note of 
the significant EU contribution, and reiterated the US pledge 
of an additional 20 million dollars. Bradtke lamented the 
apparent hesitance by the AU to accept assistance with their 
military mission on offer, but pointed to hopeful signs of a 
greater willingness to work with experts after meetings last 
week in New York. 
 
3. (C) The EU Presidency underlined the EU\'s full support for 
UNSCR 1564, and called for intensified pressure on the 
parties. The EU continues to look at options, including the 
imposition of sanctions. Dutch Presidency representative 
Ambassador Alphons Hamer noted the urgent need to get peace 
talks back on track in October when discussions resume. The 
EU Commission is looking at ways to mobilize funds for the 
Peace Facility.  Hamer referred to AU requests for planning 
assistance, and said that there was a need for realistic 
cooperation based on the AU\'s capacities.  He noted a 
North/South linkage to the situation in Darfur, and said it 
was vital that all sides understand that no one can expect to 
gain from the stalemate. 
 
4. (C) Deputy Director General for European Defense and 
Security Policy, Peter Feith  -- recently returned from a 
fact-finding mission to the region -- said the AU needs 
assistance in planning, logistics, and funding.  In planning, 
Feith emphasized the need to get the right mix. He urged that 
donors focus on building AU capacity, such as headquarters 
operations in Addis and Khartoum. He argued against a focus 
on protection forces, but called for monitors to reach out to 
remote areas. He said that the UN has shown some flexibility, 
and he urged that we build on -- and phase in -- the Caemmert 
plan. Feith supports a significant police component as part 
of the overall mission in Darfur, believing that a police 
presence might alleviate the need for military protectors. 
 
5. (C) With regard to logistics, Feith cited a need for lift 
and transport assets as well as covering accommodation costs 
for the deployed units in Darfur. He suggested continued 
close coordination with a view to arriving at a division of 
labor between the EU and the US. Feith asked for US views on 
where this coordination could best take place.  On funding 
issues, the EU Commission observed that the EU cannot simply 
become the \"paymaster\" of the African Union. Funding, 
including a tranche of funds for the Peace Facility, must be 
undertaken with reasonable and efficient planning in place, 
and it must contribute to capacity building within the AU. 
There can be no question of releasing additional funds if the 
EU is \"uncomfortable\" with the AU\'s strategic approach. In an 
earlier meeting, Director General for Common Foreign and 
Security Policy, Robert Cooper, told Bradtke that the EU 
envisions a larger role in Addis, but he did not expect 
Europeans to play a major role on the ground in Darfur -- 
other than the small group of observers already there. 
 
6. (C) USEU Charge called for realistic engagement, noting 
that there are three provincial capitals within Darfur, and 
that the AU has been unable to develop acceptable accounting 
mechanisms.  He also said there was a need for planning cells 
in Addis Ababa and Khartoum. 
 
7. (C) Observers, and Police training. PDAS Bradtke outlined 
the US hope to see a force of 1500 observers deployed by the 
end of October as part of an eventual total of 3500. He said 
that meetings in New York had been used to accelerate the 
deployment process. Bradtke noted that the AU has no policing 
capability and asked who the EU would plan to work with if it 
undertook a police training mission, given that the Sudanese 
security forces are part of the problem. 
 
8. (C) Feith outlined three options for a police mission to 
Darfur. The first would be an EU-only operation, which he 
said was unlikely to find consensus among EU member states. 
The second option would be an ESDP mission with 50 senior 
police advisors in an EU chain of Command to mentor, monitor, 
advise, and train local police under an AU or UN umbrella. 
The third option would be an AU Police Mission with EU 
trainers within a Sudanese chain of command. The trainers 
would serve to steer the Sudanese command away from embarking 
on harmful or undesirable missions. 
 
9. (C) USEU PolMinCouns asked whether the deployment of 
unarmed monitors did not risk creating a situation where 
international observers might witness atrocities taking 
place, but could do nothing to stop them.  Feith responded by 
saying that this would not be the case if the mandate and key 
supporting tasks for the protectors called for protection of 
civilian populations.  He also said that the presence of 
unarmed observers had been shown to have a deterrent effect 
against attacks against civilians. 
 
10. (C) NAC-PSC Consultations.  Bradtke pointed out that 
UNSYG Annan had approached both the EU and NATO seeking 
support in Darfur. Under these circumstances, it was a 
particular disadvantage that the issue could not be raised in 
NAC-PSC sessions because of the ongoing political question 
over participation by Cyprus and Malta in NATO-EU 
discussions.  This made consultations difficult in an area 
that could be appropriately covered under the provisions of 
the Berlin Plus Agreements.  The EU Presidency replied by 
acknowledging that this was a strange situation, but that the 
issue could only be dealt with by all 25 EU member states. He 
urged greater contacts between the NATO International Staff 
and the EUMS as one way around the blockage. Bradtke said 
that NATO could become involved under the right 
circumstances, but it would depend upon a specific requestfor assistance. EU 
representatives observed that there is a 
\"siege mentality\" within the AU, and that additional 
\"non-african faces\" as part of the mission would be a 
sensitive matter. In the earlier meeting, Robert Cooper, 
suggested that coordination could best be carried out via 
talks between Peter Feith and NATO Deputy Assistant Secretary 
General for Crisis Management and Operations, Robert Serry. 
Cooper recommended against holding the discussions at the 
senior political level (Solana- De Hoop Scheffer) and the 
NAC-PSC is not feasible because of the Cyprus-Malta problem. 
Cooper also suggested that it would be difficult for the AU 
to accept a NATO role. He pointed out that even with all the 
EU\'s money, they have found it difficult to gain entrance to 
the AU HQ in Addis. \"Everything is political with the AU,\" 
Cooper concluded. 
 
Georgia/Moldova: Istanbul Commitments 
-------------------------------------- 
11. (C) Ambassador Hamer opened the discussion by observing 
that the EU continued to insist upon fulfillment of Russia\'s 
Instanbul commitments.However, Hamer warned against holding 
any high expectations for the December OSCE Ministerials. On 
Moldova, Hamer noted that only a single ammunition 
repatriation train has left Moldova this year.  He said that 
the EU tries to work with Moscow within the OSCE, but there 
is a need for the US to push the Russians in the right 
direction. The prospect is not promising for regional 
declarations at Sofia, since they are not likely to find 
agreement in Moscow. 
 
12. (C) PDAS Bradtke expressed US appreciation for the close 
cooperation of the EU on this issue. Although we did not 
succeed in Maastricht on obtaining a ministerial declaration 
on regional issues, the Russians did not divide us. The joint 
US-EU visa ban on members of the Transnistrian regime was an 
example of our positive cooperation.  While the US shares the 
EU\'s pessimism concerning the OSCE Ministerial, we must stick 
to our bedrock principle that the Istanbul commitments must 
come before ratification of the amended CFE.  Bradtke 
wondered if there were other possibilities to make progress 
on OSCE issues at the December Ministerial, noting that 
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov had recently taken a less 
threatening posture toward the OSCE. He warned, however, that 
the Russians hold an extremely negative view of Georgian 
President Saakashvili. In his earlier meeting with Robert 
Cooper, Bradtke said that Russian FM Lavrov had expressed 
critical views of the Georgian PM in meetings with the 
Secretary.  The PSC Troika participants agreed that the US 
 
SIPDIS 
and the EU must stay in close touch in the run-up to the OSCE 
Ministerials in Sofia. 
 
13. (C) Ambassador Hamer suggested that Moscow has shown more 
openness to an EU role in the Caucasus.  He said that EU 
envoy Talvitie believed it would be possible to bring about 
the withdrawal of 3000 Russian military personnel by 
negotiation. Both the EU and the US expressed concern over 
recent moves by Russian President Putin that bring into 
question the direction of democratic development in Russia. 
PDAS Bradtke cited a need to stay engaged with Moscow on 
Counter-Terrorism, but said the US is keeping a close eye on 
internal developments. 
 
14. (C) Robert Cooper told Bradtke that the EU had noted a 
change in atmosphere recently, with some \"real Soviet stuff\" 
coming from FM Lavrov. He cited continuing Russian 
assertiveness vis-a-vis the Baltics, which has now become 
more pronounced also with regard to Lithuania (regarding 
Kaliningrad transit).  Cooper also reported that the Russians 
have told the EU that they are not ready to discuss Moldova 
since it is \"a former part of the USSR.\" According to Cooper, 
the Russians are relatively pleased with the functioning of 
the NATO-Russia Council and point to it as the \"gold 
standard\" they would like to emulate in their contacts with 
the EU. Cooper said that this kind of 25 plus 1 mechanism 
would not work with the EU, and they were not prepared to 
pursue it. 
 
MONUC/Great Lakes 
---------------- 
15. (C) The Presidency said the EU is supportive of a more 
robust and focused MONUC. They call for strong international 
monitoring, with a strengthened mandate and access to 
information -- including satellite imagery. There is also a 
need for better coordination in Kinshasa.  The EU has taken 
concrete steps toward a December launch of a civilian ESDP 
mission to conduct fact-finding and to help reinforce 
internal security within the DRC. This would be the first 
civilian ESDP mission outside Europe. Per Bradtke, the US 
shares the EU\'s support for stronger MONUC mandate and force 
levels.  USEU Charge pointed out the need to consider the 
Rules of Engagement for an expanded MONUC. 
 
Afghanistan 
----------- 
16. (C) PDAS Bradtke noted the very high US priority attached 
to elections in Afghanistan. On the positive side, there have 
been 10 million people registered to vote, of whom 40 percent 
are women. Three million refugees returned to the country. 
Bradtke credited Eurocorps with a smooth takeover of command 
of ISAF and commended the stage one expansion of ISAF. He 
said that challenges remain, including finding the 
appropriate relationship between ISAF and Operation Enduring 
Freedom. Problems with warlords and narcotics traffic must be 
resolved. Bradtke said that the end-state should be a merger 
of ISAF and OEF. It remains to identify the right timeline. 
 
17. (C) For the EU, narcotics remain a significant threat, 
and there is still great concern over the security situation. 
Democracy, development, and reconstruction remain at the 
heart of EU policy in Afghanistan. The EU Election Monitoring 
Mission in Afghanistan will mobilize teams to visit Islamabad 
and Teheran to examine registration programs for 
out-of-country refugees.  Bradtke commended the OSCE 
monitoring mission under Ambassador Barry. 
 
Operation Althea 
---------------- 
18. (C)  Ambassador Hamer referred to what he characterized 
as an \"unhelpful\" interpretation of a NAC decision sheet that 
prevented discussions of non-Berlin Plus issues such as Sudan 
and Afghanistan in broader NATO-EU fora. On the transfer of 
SFOR to Operation Althea, Hamer cited the need for intel 
sharing, since EUFOR would be intelligence driven, based on a 
robust situational awareness.  He said there would be three 
EUFOR sectors as currently exist under SFOR: Tuzla, Mostar 
and Banja Luka. He recognized that the US wants a December 2 
Transfer of Authority in Tuzla, but said that NATO must so 
advise the EU.  While the issue of reserves was dealt with at 
the earlier NAC-PSC (see septel), Hamer confirmed that all 
nations currently in SFOR would be invited to participate in 
the force generation process for EUFOR. 
 
19. (C) Bradtke pointed out that a number of allies find the 
costs being allocated by the EU to be exorbitant and 
disproportionate.  He reaffirmed the US commitment to Bosnia 
stability, pointing out that the US will fill 44 of 150 
billets in the NATO HQ and provide a number of support 
personnel to General Schook. 
 
20. (C) Bradtke concluded that the smooth transition process 
has shown that Berlin Plus can work, proving the naysayers 
wrong.  Cooper agreed, telling Bradtke that Berlin Plus 
mechanisms were functioning, but it would be up to the new 
DASCEUR to make it work smoothly. Cooper noted that Turkey 
was not helping the process with its restricted 
interpretation of strategic cooperation. (The Greek Cypriots, 
Cooper acknowledged, have also behaved \"unspeakably.\") 
 
21. (C)  Dayton Final Authority.  Bradtke identified one 
remaining point that should be resolved before debate begins 
on a new UNSCR in October.  Bradtke said that the US had 
concluded there was a need to further clarify the issue of 
the successor to COMIFOR/SFOR as the final authority on 
military matters under the Dayton GFAP. Once SFOR ceased to 
exist, there is a need to vest that final authority in 
someone. The US position is that this authority should be 
vested in DSACEUR as the operational commander in both the 
NATO and EUFOR chains of command. DSACEUR could then delegate 
that authority to the EUFOR commander and the NATO HQ 
commander as necessary in conjunction with delineated tasks. 
The US would not accept that the final authority be vested in 
COMEUFOR. 
 
22. (C)  Peter Feith expressed concern about designating 
DSACEUR as the final authority. He wondered whether the US 
was trying to move the goalposts at this late date, or if the 
issue were even necessary.  Feith said it was important -- 
both politically and psychologically -- that COMEUFOR not be 
seen as having any less authority than was held by COMSFOR. 
All parties have agreed that COMEUFOR will have full 
authority in addressing and assessing issues of 
non-compliance under Dayton, and that authority cannot be 
qualified or delegated as suggested by the US position. 
Bradtke assured Feith that there is no ambiguity concerningCOMEUFOR\'s \"full 
Dayton authority\" in his areas of 
responsibility, but that we did not accept that COMEUFOR 
would be vested with the \"final\" authority.  Ambassador Hamer 
argued that this issue must be raised within NATO, where \"we 
will deal with it. Bradtke reiterated that this was not a 
question of moving the goalposts, but a legal issue raised by 
lawyers. The US would prefer to resolve the issue before it 
becomes an issue for negotiation within the UNSC, where we 
want to avoid non-participating UNSC members causing 
mischief.  He argued that DSACEUR could delegate final 
authority to the commanders, leaving COMEUFOR\'s credibility 
unchallenged.  It was agreed that further discussions of this 
issue are needed. 
 
23. (C) Exchange of letters on Reserves. PDAS Bradtke 
responded to a question from Feith about an exchange of 
letters on reserves by saying that the US has not proposed 
such an exchange but supports the idea within NATO that such 
an exchange could specify how the parallel decisionmaking 
processes in NATO and the EU would work. Robert Cooper noted 
the importance of arriving at an agreement that avoided 
language on \"joint decisions\" but allows for parallel 
decision-making\" in both NATO and the EU. 
 
24. (C) Kosovo. In earlier discussions, Robert Cooper voiced 
the EU\'s support for the ideas contained in the Eide Report 
and noted that doing nothing was clearly not an option. 
Bradtke said the US generally agrees with the EU\'s assessment 
of the report, and that we are committed to staying in KFOR. 
 
 
EU Battlegroups 
--------------- 
25, (C)  Ambassador Hamer told the US delegation that the EU 
plans for Initial Operational Capability of high-readiness 
battlegroups by 2005, with Full Operational Capability by 
2007.  The EU ambition is to be able to launch a mission 
within 5 days in response to a request from the UNSYG. The 
most probable mission would be to act as a bridging operation 
by intervening quickly in a crisis situation, thereby giving 
time to the UN to organize its own intervention force. Hammer 
assured Bradtke that the EU battlegroups and the NATO 
Response Force (NRF) would be mutually reinforcing, both in 
terms of capabilities and timelines for deployment. 
 
26. (C) Bradtke welcomed EU initiatives to improve 
capabilities, and cited the positive discussions within the 
EU-NATO capabilities working group to ensure common 
standards.  He reiterated the need to harmonize the 
battlegroups and the NRF, asking about the creation of the 
NATO liaison cell within the EU. He urged further discussions 
within the Capabilities Working Group on standards and 
certification processes. 
 
27. (C) Hamer said that the EU envisioned a \"large number\" -- 
from 8 to 9 -- battlegroups to be eventually available to 
meet the EU ambition. He argued that the battlegroup concept 
had to be dealt with by all 25 member states under the 
principle of inclusiveness.  He said that excluding Cyprus 
and Malta from discussions or participation was neither 
acceptable nor desirable.  Battlegroups are seen as a 
\"welcome lever\" on capabilities development. 
 
Iraq 
---- 
28. (C)  Per Bradtke, the US priorities in Iraq revolve 
around supporting the electoral process, including support 
for a UN protection force. The assessed requirement is for 
three 600-man battalions at an estimated cost of USD 24 
million for six months.  Potential troop contributors include 
Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Romania and Georgia, though there are 
unresolved problems.  Such a force is critical to the UN 
presence.  EU funds are needed to support these deployments. 
Bradtke asked that any planned EU police mission be closely 
coordinated with existing programs underway in Jordan. 
 
29. (C) Peter Feith explained that he will lead an EU 
civilian crisis management fact-finding mission to Iraq in 
mid-October to assess the possibilities for an EU police 
training mission. He foresaw a positive EU role in the areas 
of Rule of Law, Police Training, and Civil administration. 
The fact-finding mission was tasked by the Council and will 
travel to Basra and Baghdad, where he asked US assistance in 
making broad contacts. One part of the mission will visit 
Amman.  Ambassador Hamer said that the EU will be as generous 
as possible on election support via the UN Iraq Stabilization 
Fund.  He wondered about the cost of the protection force -- 
projected by the UN at usd 26 million -- asking what the 
funds would be for and how they would be dispersed. 
 
30. (C) Bradtke offered that the bulk of the cost would be 
for salaries, and said he would check to see if there would 
be costs for insurance associated with the force.  The US 
will provide lift and sustainment resources, but cannot pay 
salaries. He asked if there were legal restrictions on the 
Commission\'s ability to provide funds for such a protection 
force.  Michel Caillouet, Deputy Political Director, replied 
that he \"could not say it was impossible\" for the Commission 
to provide funding for the inner protective circle.  Both the 
US and the EU were in agreement that the 13 percent overhead 
charges proposed by the UN to act as 
administrator/disbursement agent was too high. Bradtke 
wondered whether one of the contributing nations might be 
able to perform the function by distributing money from a 
fund into which other contributors could pay. 
 
China/Libya Arms Embargoes 
-------------------------- 
31. (C)  In an addition to the agreed agenda, PDAS Bradtke 
raised the issue of existing arms embargoes on China and 
Libya.  He urged that the EU not lift these embargoes.  On 
Libya, although Qaddaffi has come a long way, he still had 
not received a \"clean bill of health.\"  There are questions 
related to an attempt on Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah\'s life, 
and lingering human rights concerns. The treatment of the 
Bulgarian medics held in Libya is especially troubling. 
Ambassador Hamer agreed that the treatment of the medics is 
disgraceful. He took note of the US views, stating only that 
the issue of the Libyan embargo will come before the Council 
at the October 12-13 General Affairs and External Relations 
Council (GAERC). 
 
32. (C) Bradtke also expressed strong concern that weapons 
sold to China might be used against US forces, especially in 
the Taiwan Straits. He also said that lifting the embargo 
would send the wrong message on human rights. Hamer said the 
US views were well known, and being taken into consideration 
by the EU as it weighs its decision.  He replied that even if 
the embargo were lifted, no one anticipates a flood of 
weapons sales to China. He posited that, while there may 
remain some human rights concerns, China does not belong in 
the same category as Zimbabwe or Sudan. 
 
33. (U) PDAS Bradtke has cleared this message. 
 
McKinley 
"
"21223","10/4/2004 10:50","04BRUSSELS4253","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE195305","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004253 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/FO PDAS BRADTKE, EUR/RPM, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/03/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MOPS, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: NAC-PSC DISCUSSION OF BOSNIA AND \"OTHER BUSINESS\" 
 
REF: STATE 195305 
 
Classified By: USEU Political Military Officer Jeremy Brenner for reaso 
ns 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  In the September 27 meeting of the NAC with 
the EU\'s Political and Security Committee (NAC-PSC), nations 
focused on the constructive NATO-EU cooperation in planning 
for the EU operation in Bosnia, and were confident the few 
remaining issues would soon be resolved.  Ambassador Burns 
called for a NATO-EU joint Public Diplomacy concept for 
Bosnia.  He also welcomed the constructive progress on the EU 
Battlegroups issue, while urging concrete next steps.  SecGen 
de Hoop Scheffer recalled the NATO and EU plan to exchange 
permanent liaison staffs.  The meeting was brief and narrow 
in scope, the agenda being constrained by the Cyprus-Turkey 
issue.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) EU Council Secretary General Javier Solana and NATO 
Secretary General de Hoop Scheffer briefed on planning for EU 
 
SIPDIS 
Operation Althea in Bosnia and the NATO HQ Sarajevo.  Notable 
points of discussion included: 
 
- Norway, Turkey and Bulgaria, supported by the U.S. and 
several others, appealed for quick resolution on their status 
in the operation\'s Committee of Contributors.  The EU chair 
assured them that the PSC would resolve the issue shortly. 
The Dutch NATO PermRep, speaking on behalf of the Presidency, 
said in the NAC on September 29 that the PSC meeting 
confirmed that all SFOR TNCs would be members of the 
Committee of Contributors for EUFOR. 
 
- The UK noted that work was underway to ensure a UN Security 
Council Resolution was adopted in October, during the UK\'s 
UNSC Presidency; 
 
- Finland noted its progress toward assuming the Framework 
nation role for Task Force North (from the U.S.), including 
access to Eagle Base in Tuzla, where an initial Finnish 
contingent had already arrived; 
 
- Solana noted that the EU approach on operational and 
strategic reserves was reflected in its draft Operational 
Plan, and de Hoop Scheffer noted that NATO and EU staffs were 
working to finalize NATO-EU understandings on the subject; 
 
- de Hoop Scheffer said another NATO-EU staff mission would 
visit Bosnia in early October to meet with Bosnian 
authorities (as the two Secretaries General had recently 
done); 
 
- de Hoop Scheffer noted that NATO and EU staffs had 
discussed the NATO-EU \"Specific Agreement\" on EU use of NATO 
assets and capabilities, which is called for under 
Berlin-Plus, and indicated that once the EU formally requests 
assets/capabilities, NATO\'s reply would be in the form of the 
initial draft of the Agreement. 
 
3. (C) Ambassador Burns affirmed U.S. expectations and 
support for a successful operation in Bosnia with the EU 
clearly and visibly in the lead.  He stressed the importance 
of public diplomacy to ensure that success, and proposed that 
NATO and EU staffs present to the next NAC-PSC a joint 
NATO-EU public diplomacy concept.  The UK, Turkey and Italy 
supported this idea, and Solana noted that he and De Hoop 
Scheffer were indeed addressing this subject. 
 
4. (C) De Hoop Scheffer also recalled that NATO and the EU 
had affirmed in principle the proposal for EU and NATO 
liaison presences at, respectively, SHAPE and the EU Military 
Staff, and cited Bosnia as evidence of the need to speed up 
these permanent arrangements.  (Comment: the EU Summit in 
June approved proposed terms of reference for these liaisons, 
subject within the EU to agreement on a package of papers 
including the EU internal \"civ-mil cell\" and \"operations 
center.\") 
 
5. (C) Under any other business, Ambassador Burns welcomed 
the constructive, single-issue discussion of coherence and 
complementarity between the EU Battlegroups and NATO Response 
Force in the September 20 NATO-EU Capabilities Group, 
including the UK\'s non-paper for that meeting.  He affirmed 
U.S. support for respective capabilities initiatives so long 
as they upheld interoperability, non-duplication and the 
other principles provided for in Berlin-Plus.  Accordingly, 
he called for a subgroup of the Capabilities Group to 
continue addressing the subject, and urged (supported by 
Turkey) that a NATO and an EU representative each brief the 
next NAC-PSC on the issue. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"21241","10/4/2004 15:06","04BRUSSELS4265","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, ETRD, SR, MW, ICTY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: THE COMMISSION\'S EXPLANATION OF EU\'S \"TWIN TRACK\" 
APPROACH TO SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reason 1.4 B/D 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  The Commission reports that its new \"twin track\" approach 
to Serbia and Montenegro (SaM) met with an enthusiastic 
response in both Belgrade and Podgorica.  Further details 
still need to be hashed out, however, on when, whether and 
how a feasibility study on negotiations for a Stabilization 
and Association Agreement could begin.  A visit by Patten and 
Solana on October 5 is supposed to firm up at least some of 
these details.  On one point the Commission remains firm: 
SaM\'s cooperation with ICTY must improve if SAA negotiations 
are to begin in 2005.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Therese Sobieski, Head of Unit for Serbia and 
Montenegro at the European Commission (EC), tried to explain 
the EU\'s \"twin track\" to negotiations on a Stabilization and 
Association Agreement with Serbia and Montenegro in a recent 
meeting with USEU\'s PolOff and USAID Advisor. 
 
A \"TWIN TRACK\" TOWARD A SINGLE AGREEMENT 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) According to Sobieski, the impetus for the \"twin 
track\" came from growing frustration in the Commission that 
the EU\'s preferred strategy of dealing with Serbia and 
Montenegro as a single economic unit was making no progress. 
Meetings this past July had been \"a moment of truth\" that the 
EU must recognize the reality of the two republics\' growing 
authorities.  Therefore, the EC had proposed the EU drop its 
insistence on economic harmonization and elaboration of an 
Internal Market Action Plan (IMAP) as a precondition for 
SaM\'s next step on the path of European integration: a 
Feasibility Study on whether SaM is ready to begin 
negotiations for a Stabilization and Association Agreement 
(SAA) with the EU.  Previously, the EC had insisted an IMAP 
was needed before it could evaluate SaM\'s economy in a 
feasibility study.  Now, the EC was reconciled to the need to 
prepare separate sections on the economies of Montenegro and 
Serbia.  Sobieski insisted, however, that the EU Foreign 
Ministers, in endorsing the EC\'s proposal were still keen to 
continue the EU\'s policy in support of keeping the State 
Union together.  The EC would prepare only one feasibility 
study, and eventually, negotiate a single SAA, with separate 
sections, protocols or annexes as necessary for the two 
republics. 
 
NEXT STEPS 
---------- 
 
4. (SBU) Sobieski said that the EU\'s first trip in 
mid-September to explain the \"twin track\" approach to 
Belgrade and Podgorica had been met with enthusiasm in both 
cities, although she acknowledged that this was \"maybe not 
for the same reasons\" in each government (i.e., Belgrade sees 
progress toward an SAA, Podgorica sees progress toward 
independence).  The Serbs and Montenegrins were also asked to 
make two commitments:  that they will agree between 
themselves on which areas should be negotiated by the EU with 
the State Union, and which with the respective republic 
governments; and that they will not take any steps to 
undermine the State Union government.  In particular, the EU 
stressed that this \"twin-track\" approach should not be 
extrapolated to any other issues, such as WTO membership. 
Commissioner Patten and High Rep Solana will visit Belgrade 
on October 5 to hear their response, and the EU will then 
decide if work on a feasibility study can begin.  The 
Commission also hopes the Patten/Solana visit with help 
clarify what the EU is and is not putting on the table, 
although Sobieski noted they fully expect that \"everyone will 
hear what they want to hear.\" 
 
POSSIBLE CALENDAR 
----------------- 
 
5. (C) Assuming that all went smoothly, which Sobieski 
thought unlikely, the shortest conceivable calendar for SaM\'s 
progress would be that drafting of a feasibility study would 
begin this month, and the study might be finished in February 
2005.  If the study\'s conclusion was positive that SaM was 
ready to begin SAA negotiations (an unlikely prospect unless 
the GoSaM improves cooperation with ICTY -- see next para), 
then the Commission would need to seek a negotiating mandate 
from the EU Member States in the Council.  Actual 
negotiations of an SAA were unlikely to start before late 
2005.  And, as the contrasting examples of Macedonia (six 
months) and Albania (going on two years and counting) show, 
it is impossible to predict how long such negotiations might 
last. 
 
ICTY CONDITIONALITY 
------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) One message that Sobieski (and several other EU 
interlocutors) was keen to stress with us was that the EU\'s 
\"twin track\" approach in no way implies a relaxing of the 
EU\'s ICTY conditionality.  Sobieski said any feasibility 
study will include discussion of the \"political 
conditionality\" for SAA negotiations, and key among these was 
that the GoSaM is meeting its international obligations 
toward ICTY.  The Commission hopes that by removing economic 
harmonization as a stumbling block for SaM progress toward an 
SAA, the \"twin track\" will actually help focus Belgrade and 
Podgorica on the need for improved cooperation.  This is a 
message Patten and Solana will again deliver clearly on 
October 5. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7. (C) We are unconvinced the EU has fully thought through 
the political ramifications of the \"twin track.\"  Despite the 
EU\'s insistence it still supports a united SaM, even some EU 
officials have told us this change in policy is a weakening 
the EU\'s pressure to keep Montenegro from declaring 
independence.  But for us, the key issue is that negotiation 
of an SAA with SaM remain firmly conditioned on better 
cooperation with ICTY.  And the Commission appears to be 
solid on this point.  It is, nonetheless, a point we will 
want reconfirm as the Balkans portfolio passes from External 
Relations Commissioner Patten to Enlargement Commissioner 
Olli Rehn of Finland in the next Commission beginning on 
November 1. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"21266","10/5/2004 10:02","04BRUSSELS4274","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 BRUSSELS 004274 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, IZ, IR, CH, IS, PTER, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: US/EU POLICY PLANNING TALKS 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL: Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b/d 
 
 1.  (C) Summary: US and EU policy planners met September 20 
to discuss the transatlantic relationship, the Middle East 
Peace Process (MEPP), Iraq, Iran, and the Broader Middle East 
and North Africa and the EU\'s Barcelona Process.  Discussions 
were frank about the challenges in the main message from 
discussions on Iraq was that European nerves were still raw: 
time and again EU representatives dwelled more on what had 
happened over Iraq, then on what should happen to help 
stabilize Iraq.  When pressed by Reiss, a broad range of EU 
diplomats, think tankers and journalists admitted that their 
publics do not see Iraq as critical to their security (and, 
by extension, this sentiment will continue to limit what the 
EU collectively and its members individually can offer the 
Iraqi Interim Government). In contrast, Europeans placed 
greater emphasis on the MEPP and the Quartet. EU officials ) 
facing a dead-end of the EU-3 diplomacy over Iran -- 
demonstrated little appetite for tougher measures, and hoped 
that somehow the US could rescue the day by launching a 
&grand bargain8 with the Iranian government.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) S/P Director Dr. Mitchell B. Reiss and S/P Principal 
Deputy Director Barry Lowenkron met September 20-23 with a 
broad range of European Council and Commission officials, 25 
member state Political and Security Ambassadors, as well as 
NGOs, European Parliament members, academics and journalists 
to take the temperature of the transatlantic relationship and 
to explore ways to revitalize the relationship. Key EU 
officials that Reiss and Lowenkron met with include EU 
Council Policy Unit Head Christoph Heusgen; Council Director 
Jim Cloos; the 25 EU Ambassadors assigned to the EU Political 
and Security Committee; Solana Personal WMD Representative 
Annalisa Giannella; and also from the Council policy unit: 
Gyorgy Tatt, Rein Tamsaar, Andreas Papaconstantinou, Bjorn 
Larsson, Antonio Alvarez Barthe and Petr Hladik. 
 
The transatlantic relationship: a warm-up round 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
3.  (C) EU and US participants reviewed key findings of the 
recent German Marshall Fund (GMF) report on transatlantic 
relations. Discussed were the common transatlantic public 
recognition of the need for the US and Europe to work 
together, US/European support for the UN, US public support 
for a stronger EU, and differences over the use of force. 
Reiss stressed that the results could boost efforts to renew 
the relationship:  both sides of the Atlantic wanted close 
cooperation, and the American public supported a strong EU. 
The key was how both sides could build on the findings to 
tackle key problems, above all the Middle East agenda:  Iraq, 
Iran, BMENA, and the MEPP. 
 
EU not opposed to the use of force 
---------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Cloos said that Iraq posed many questions for the EU 
including under what circumstances could force legitimately 
be used.  He warned against drawing a conclusion that just 
because the EU disapproved the use of force in Iraq, that 
therefore, Europe opposes the use of force per se.  He said 
that Kosovo, Sierra Leone and Afghanistan showed that Europe 
could accept the use of force; furthermore, Kosovo showed 
that Europe could support the use of military force without 
UN blessing.  Heusgen added that now Russia is seeking to 
justify its right to take unilateral action against 
terrorists anywhere on the basis of the rationale used by the 
US to justify its use of force in Iraq.  He also claimed that 
the Sudanese government has borrowed the US concept of 
\"illegal combatants,\" as developed and applied to Guantanamo, 
to justify some of its current actions. 
 
 
Afghanistan 
----------- 
 
5. (C) Reiss noted that Afghanistan was one area everyone is 
touting as a model of multilateral cooperation.  That being 
the case, he asked what more the EU could do there. Setting 
aside what some member states and NATO are doing, Cloos 
replied that the EU is working on developing capabilities to 
support its missions abroad, including in Afghanistan, and 
will get there eventually.  He admitted that there is a gap 
between EU will and EU capabilities and that the EU can\'t do 
all that it would like to do.  Heusgen noted that European 
publics understand that Afghanistan is a security problem 
both for being a source of drugs and base for various 
terrorist camps. 
 
Iraq 
---- 
 
6. (C) Reiss asked the central question as whether both sides 
could cooperate on Iraq today.  He asked if European publics 
see what is happening in Iraq as important to their security 
and their futures and, if so, what are they prepared to do 
about it. Heusgen noted strong European public feelings that 
Iraq is not an European mess, that the US-led coalition had 
made this mess, and that Iraq and Afghanistan were different. 
 Lowenkron noted that the US had been working to 
internationalize the post-war effort, represented by two UN 
Security Council resolutions.  It was perfectly reasonable to 
ask the EU ) especially given its strong support for the UN 
-- to help in any way, including offering protection to the 
UN officials working to prepare the January elections.  Cloos 
responded that US actions in the UN were &too late.8  He 
argued that had the US approached the UN right after the end 
of hostilities with the ideas it has presented since, then 
the mood in Europe might have been different.  Cloos 
suggested that more \"fundamental\" to him than these recent US 
internationalization efforts was a US concept that the 
\"mission defines the coalition.\"  He said that this concept 
undermines 40 years of transatlantic relations - not just 
with the EU but also with NATO.  We need to work together as 
a coalition to define the mission, he said.  On Iraq, Cloos 
said that Europe found a way to say \"no\" to the US.  Heusgen 
added that he was pessimistic that the EU, particularly 
France and Germany, will want to do anything new on Iraq -- 
not just before, but even after, November 2. 
 
The \"war\" on terrorism 
---------------------- 
 
7.  (C) Heusgen suggested that the US reconsider its effort 
to link Iraq to the war on terrorism, as this linkage does 
not work among European publics.  He suggested that European 
audiences would more sympathetic to language on the plight of 
\"failed,\" \"fragile\" or \"failing\" states.  On Iraq, the US 
would have a better chance if it depicted the challenge as 
reconstructing a failed state or preventing a failed state. 
Heusgen emphasized that the very notion of a \"war\" on 
terrorism does not sound good in Europe, Madrid 
notwithstanding.  Cloos rejected an idea that Europe somehow 
needs another terrorist attack to become sympathetic to the 
US views on terrorism. Europe fears terrorism but doesn,t 
see this as a war. Lowenkron suggested that in the fight/war 
on terrorism, the difference seems to be that Europe is 
concerned about it while the US is committed to fight it. 
 
EU as \"partner\" or \"leader\" 
--------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Heusgen said that the GMF study showed that US and 
European publics wanted the EU to be a leader. He doubted, 
however, that the US is ready to accept the EU -- with all 
its weaknesses -- as a partner. On the MEPP, he argued that 
the EU needs to believe that the US is willing to share 
leadership with the EU -- something that currently is not the 
case. On Iraq, the current situation is so \"out-of-hand\" that 
he has trouble seeing how individual member states might want 
to move in at all. At an EU-wide level, there is no support 
for doing more in Iraq, he said. Perhaps if European public 
understood that there would an end-point or departure state, 
that would help but he wondered if anyone realistically could 
see an end-point in Iraq.  Reiss replied that the challenge 
is to stabilize the situation in the cities so our troops can 
leave them and no longer be a lightening rod. Police can do a 
better job and we currently are in a race between the 
insurgents and the government until January 2005 elections. 
Heusgen said that regardless, European public opinionremained \"very difficult\" 
on Iraq. 
 
Problems with US leadership: Style or Issues? 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) Heusgen said that the European don\'t oppose US 
leadership per se, just the current style of leadership. 
Cloos demurred and questioned whether focusing on style leads 
to a constructive debate.  He said that one way to turn 
around negative European perceptions is to \"get rid\" of 
Guantanamo, an issue that undercuts the US claim to offer 
\"moral leadership.\"  The recent controversy of various USG 
memos on the use of torture had revealed an America that 
Europeans did not know. He blamed these memos for 
contributing to growing cynicism on international human 
rights.  He added that the prison incidents in Abu Ghraib had 
done \"horrible damage\" to the US.  For a number of reasons, 
including embarrassment, many in the EU didn\'t even want to 
talk about or raise Abu Ghraib with the US.  Cloos suggested 
that differences over issues, not style, were at the heart of 
the current condition of the relationship. Beside Guantanamo, 
Iraq and Abu Ghraib, the EU was still upset about the 
International Criminal Court and Kyoto.  Reiss explained the 
domestic history of these two issues -- including the role 
and attitude of the Congress -- and added that not a single 
major European country is meeting its Kyoto targets.  Reiss 
asked if the damage was so great that the US has lost a 
generation in Europe. Cloos answered with \"no-but\" while 
Heusgen said the transatlantic relation was in a \"deep hole.\" 
 
MEPP 
---- 
 
10. (C) Cloos said that the MEPP is central, not just for the 
EU, but also for the transatlantic relationship.  He said 
that the US has a number of fundamental misconceptions ) 
including its belief that the EU is somehow biased against 
Israel.  He argued that the EU does try to engage Israel 
positively and does condemn Palestinian terrorism. He said 
that even though many depict the EU and the US as having huge 
difference on the MEPP and the roadmap, this is false. The 
one big difference is that the EU believes that Arafat, as 
bad as he is, can\'t be ignored.  Cloos also expressed 
frustration that Israel is able to bypass the Quartet and 
make direct deals with the US on Roadmap issues that should 
be dealt with in the Quartet. 
 
BMENA 
----- 
 
11.  (C) Reiss briefed EU officials on the state of play on 
BMENA, reinforcing the President,s message that the G-8 Sea 
island initiative is multi-decade, multilateral, diplomatic 
in focus and not designed to substitute for the MEPP -- all 
things that the European have told us they want.  Reiss said 
that the US is interested in working with Europe and is 
disappointed with the EU\'s lack of enthusiasm.  Heusgen said 
that the EU agreed on the objectives of BMENA and is already 
spending one billion euros/year on its own Barcelona Process. 
 The Barcelona Process, 10 years old and an object of pride 
for Solana when it was created when he was the Spanish 
Foreign Minister, is in need of revitalization, he admitted. 
Heusgen said that it was good that the US, through BMENA, 
sought engagement in the region -- though EU had had some 
concerns that US had been interested in imposing it on the 
region.  Lowenkron reminded Cloos that the leaked document 
that touched off the original criticism in the Arab World had 
been a G-8 document ) and that none of the language that had 
been shared among the G-8 members claimed that the West was 
intent on imposing change in the region.  Cloos asked if we 
could find a work-around regarding EU\'s fears that BMENA 
would be used to distract from the MEPP. 
 
Possible BMENA/Barcelona Process Cooperation 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
12. (C) Heusgen suggested that with all this behind us, 
perhaps we could then explore some concrete areas of 
cooperation in education, private investment and local 
administration.  The EU is working on action plans, which 
would contain a broad range of regional assistance packages, 
for internal EU discussion next month.  There had been some 
internal EU hesitation about moving ahead with these action 
plans but these have been overcome.  Perhaps the US and the 
EU, or EC, might explore how their projects might be fitted 
together; for example, in education, where the EU tends to 
emphasize higher education while US assistance is focused on 
secondary and elementary education.  Reiss and Heusgen agreed 
that Egypt is a key country.  Reiss noted that promoting 
democracy there would be complex and various structures 
needed to be in place beforehand and that a premature push 
for elections could create instability. 
 
Political teeth for the Barcelona Process? 
------------------------------------------ 
 
13. (C) Heusgen noted that the Barcelona Process had been 
helpful in Tunisia on the business side but had not worked 
well in promoting human rights.  From a policy planning 
perspective, Heusgen said that it was not great for the EU to 
providing economic support that also strengthens an 
undemocratic government.  Reiss suggested that we could draw 
from the old Helsinki Process Basket III approach of 
reviewing and monitoring progress on human rights. Hladik 
noted that precisely the Helsinki model frightens some 
Arabian countries.  Lowenkron stressed that it is important 
that, whatever the EU or the US does, these efforts do not 
degenerate into economics-only assistance.  Heusgen suggested 
that the EU might use the forthcoming 10th anniversary of the 
Barcelona Process to make it better and also to make it more 
visible to the people that it is helping. 
 
14. (C) EU policy unit member Vassalo noted that the BMENA 
project is developing in a positive direction and said that 
there is wider acceptance of it in the region. Nonetheless, 
Heusgen said that the EU will stick to the Barcelona Process. 
USEU Min-Couns Scott noted that in many countries, where the 
US and the EU wanted to help, we had only a limited universe 
of participants/partners to work with.  Perhaps US and EU 
reps in the field could consider closer coordination under 
these circumstances.  Already we are doing this in a number 
of Gulf States, he noted. 
 
Iran: fork in the road 
---------------------- 
 
15. (C) Heusgen noted that while the EU-3 process had made 
some progress in the last year, the Iranians have not stopped 
enrichment.  We can expect to enter into a difficult time 
between now and the November IAEA Board of Governors Meeting. 
 EU policy planner Bjorn Larsson said that Iran will decide 
whether we go to a good or a bad scenario.  He asked if some 
kind of grand deal is possible among the EU, the US, Russia 
and Iran to put it on the good road.  Reiss replied that Iran 
already is in non-compliance on its safeguard agreement and 
that we should act on that first.  In addition, Reiss noted 
that he had seen nothing from the Iranians indicating 
interest in working with the US on a grand deal. He said if 
the EU-3 argues against toughness on Iran, then we will have 
a highly divisive issue in the transatlantic relationship. 
As policy makers, he asked if there is a way that we can 
imagine a combination of joint US/EU carrots and sticks to 
get the Iranians to do the right thing.  But this would not 
be US sticks and EU carrots, rather the EU would have to show 
sticks and be tough on Iran.  Reiss cautioned that some in 
the US see the current situation as one of now that the EU-3 
has \"failed\" in Iran, they are now in a \"cul-du-sac;\" and 
therefore the EU should now ask the US to step in and fix it. 
 Heusgen noted that he sees some possibility that the US and 
the EU could cooperate on Iran, after November 2. 
 
Cloos on Iraq: Round II 
----------------------- 
 
16. (C) Key Solana advisor on transatlantic affairs, Jim 
Cloos, was even blunter in his September 21 conversation than 
he had been the previous day. He said that the EU is not 
willing to play in Iraq.  While he agreed that could be a 
window of opportunity to discuss this after November 2 -- 
regardless of who wins -- he questioned what help the EU 
could provide that would make a difference to the situation 
in Iraq.  Reiss asked if European publics and leaders would 
resonate with an appeal for help to Iraq based US help to 
Europe in WWII -- something that could be explored in various 
ceremonies from WWII that would take place this year.  Cloos 
said that using these models would be \"over the top.\"  If the 
US wants to work on Iraq with the EU, we would need to start 
some private talks with Solana but currently, Cloos said, the 
EU is not prepared to deal with us on Iraq in a serious 
fashion.  Cloos also said that \"nice words\" from the US would 
not be enough to get a serious commitment from the EU on 
Iran.  The MEPP would be a different matter -- this is for 
the EU and for Solana, the number one foreign policy problem 
for the EU and an area where US leadership is essential and 
desirable. 
 
Cloos on MEPP: Round II 
17. (C) Cloos said that \"emotions in the EU on the Quartet 
are boiling\" with him and others increasingly seeing this as 
something to keep the Europeans happy.  He sees Israel as not 
respecting the Quartet and the US tacitly permitting this. 
Cloos said that despite this, no one in the EU opposes US 
leadership in the MEPP. 
 
What the EU can do for the US? 
------------------------------ 
 
18.  (C) When asked by Reiss what the EU offers the US if we 
would work together more in foreign policy, Cloos listed 
greater legitimacy in the international arena for our 
actions, political links that the US does not have, some 
independent EU capabilities from its nascent battle groups to 
election observers, financial assistance to key countries 
through the Barcelona Process, and trade and cooperation 
agreements -- a powerful carrot for countries like Iran. 
 
PSC Ambassadors lunch 
--------------------- 
 
19.  (C) Director Reiss addressed the ambassadors of the EU 
Political and Security Committee (PSC) over lunch, focusing 
on the critical challenges facing the US and EU in the 
greater Middle East: Iraq, Iran, BMENA, and the MEPP.   Most 
of the discussion following Reiss,s presentation covered the 
MEPP with Reiss fielding questions about settlements, Gaza, 
Israel, and US views on a nuclear free zone in the mid-east 
(as a way to get a handle on Iran,s nuclear program).  While 
most participants preferred to talk about the MEPP and the 
failure of the US and the EU to work well together there, the 
Dutch PSC Ambassador tried to shift the discussion to Iraq. 
In the short discussion on Iraq, Ambassador Hamer, the Dutch 
Presidency Ambassador who chaired the lunch for the EU, said 
that the EU was not disengaged from Iraq and that the EU 
supported the Iraqi President, that discussions on debt 
relief were \"ongoing\", that the EU is considering election 
support and support for UN and other protection forces. 
 
Other topics 
------------ 
 
20. (C) On China, one PSC Ambassador said that the current EU 
arms embargo was only about Tianmanen and not the current 
human rights situation in China.  The French Ambassador 
highlighted the EU Code of Conduct, while arguing that it was 
unnatural for the EU to lump China in with a handful of 
states where the EU still retained sanctions.  Another PSC 
Ambassador suggested that US/EU differences over China arms 
will lead to another transatlantic disagreement.  On 
terrorism, a number of PSC Ambassadors said that the US is 
too focused on military responses.  On a more positive note, 
one PSC Ambassador praised US/EU cooperation in the Balkans 
as good for the Balkans and good for transatlantic relations. 
 
NGO/think tank/journalist discussion 
------------------------------------ 
 
21. (SBU) Reiss met with a broad range of journalists, think 
tankers, EU officials, European Parliamentarians at two 
off-the-record conversations, one sponsored by the German 
Marshal Fund on September 20 and the second by the Bertelsman 
Foundation on September 21. Participants echoed many of the 
comments and concerns expressed in the policy planning talks. 
However, the tone was often sharper. 
 
Iraq 
---- 
 
22. (SBU) Numerous Europeans described the damage done by 
Iraq to the US image in Europe as significant. Others 
admitted that the European reaction had a strong emotional 
content that made this difficult to repair. There was strong 
consensus that \"things were far from normal\" in the 
transatlantic relationship, despite recent efforts at Summits 
to \"paper things over.\" Others wondered whether the European 
could \"trust\" what the US says in light of the lack of WMD in 
Iraq. 
 
23. (SBU) There was widespread feeling that the Mid-East 
Peace Process is much more important than Iraq for Europeans. 
One participant argued that Iraq was not the cause of the 
current transatlantic crisis, rather Europe felt slighted by 
the lack of a US effort to work with Europe in the immediate 
aftermath to 9/11.  Another participant wondered if US 
foreign policy was being driven by conflict between a &good 
side8 and a &bad side.8 The problem for the US, from a 
European perspective, is that the bad side is winning.  This 
\"bad side\" wins when the US commits a fundamental breach of 
values through its use of torture and when US leaders 
allegedly do not accept the consequences of their actions. 
If the US continues in this way, there will be a major 
transatlantic break with foreign policy coordination 
occurring on a case-by-case basis and not on the basis on 
common beliefs or values. 
 
Iran 
---- 
 
24. (SBU) On Iran, a journalist suggested that if Europe is 
given the choice between an Iran with nukes or a decision to 
bomb Iran, Europe will choose an Iran with nukes.  If the US 
does bomb Iran, this will be the nail in the coffin of the 
transatlantic relationship.  Another journalist said that 
Iran should be seen less dramatically and as a test of US 
commitment to multilateralism -- especially when 
multilateralism is \"hard.\" 
 
US Response: questions are two-way 
---------------------------------- 
 
25. (SBU) Both Reiss and Lowenkron noted that a clear message 
coming through from many of their European interlocutors is 
that, despite the difficult state of transatlantic relations, 
Europeans expected the US to help them out whether it be the 
MEPP or Iran.  What this misses is that US also has questions 
about the transatlantic relationship, Europe\'s commitment to 
helping Iraq, and fighting terrorism and nuclear 
proliferation.  Lowenkron told the Bertelsman Foundation 
participants that a message to Washington comprising of 
\"press the Israelis and don,t ask us for any help on Iraq8 
was hardly fruitful for building a solid trans-atlantic 
relationship.  Several participants took exception to the 
stark way the view was presented ) but not to the view 
itself. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
26. (C) At every event, Director Reiss and Dep. Dir. 
Lowenkron asked their European hosts to imagine a blank sheet 
onto which they were free to write down as many policy 
recommendations as they would like as to what the U.S. should 
do in Iraq.  Most left their pages blank.  Two (Heusgen and 
Cloos) argued that the sheet should have one point:  move out 
on the Israeli-Palestinian front.  The failure of Europe to 
see that what happens in Iraq is important for European 
security, and not just the security of the United States, was 
sobering.  If this is indeed the case, then the EU is in 
danger of missing an opportunity post-November 2 to try to 
fix the relationship.  The bottom line message to Dir. Reiss 
was the EU seems willing to run the risk that it can &sit 
out8 Iraq (while demanding greater action on MEPP and US 
carrots on Iran) without further damaging the trans-atlantic 
relationship. 
 
27. (U) S/P cleared this message. 
 
28. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"21322","10/6/2004 8:48","04BRUSSELS4294","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS4082","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/ FO PDAS BRADTKE, EUR/RPM, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, CY, MT, TU, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: CYPRIOTS FLOAT A BALLOON ON NATO SECURITY 
AGREEMENT AND PFP 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 4082 
 
Classified By: USEU Political-Military Officer Jeremy Brenner for reaso 
ns 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: The Cypriot military representative to the EU 
suggests that Nicosia is giving serious consideration to 
negotiating a security agreement with NATO as part of an 
effort to resolve the blockage in EU-NATO strategic 
cooperation. Nicosia is also eager to participate in the EU 
Battlegroup program. End summary. 
 
NATO Security Agreement 
----------------------- 
2. (C)  Cypriot Military Representative to the European 
Union, Lt. Colonel Pantelis Christophorou (strictly protect) 
told USEU polmiloffs that Nicosia was giving very serious 
consideration to negotiating a security agreement with NATO 
as part of a strategy to resolve the problem of participation 
by Cyprus and Malta in discussions of EU-NATO strategic 
cooperation.  Christophorou said that he had discussed the 
issue with the Cypriot Permanent Representative to the EU, 
and that the mission was prepared to send the proposal 
directly to President Papadopoulos, on the condition that 
they were given a \"green light\" signaling Turkey\'s acceptance 
of the plan. 
 
PfP Membership 
-------------- 
3. (C) Christophorou lamented his exclusion from meetings 
where NATO classified information (NCI) is discussed, and 
said that Nicosia wanted to be a full participant in EU 
defense matters.  Adherence to a security agreement with NATO 
would remove one of the obstacles cited by Turkey preventing 
Cyprus and Malta from participating in discussions involving 
NCI.  Access to NCI would also require subscription to the 
PfP framework document, under the provisions of the EU-NATO 
Security Agreement.  Christophorou said that PfP membership 
or even accession to NATO are under consideration in Nicosia, 
although he acknowledged that there would be some domestic 
political opposition in Parliament.  He argued that political 
circumstances in Nicosia have evolved to the point where 
these subjects can be raised for serious consideration.  He 
told us that the major impediment was concern over a negative 
response from Turkey. 
 
Rejecting the Plan, Not Reunification 
------------------------------------- 
4. (C) Christophorou contended that the \"no\" vote by Greek 
Cypriots on the Annan plan for reunification was a vote 
against the plan, not against reunification.  He said that 
reunification is working in practice, with residents of 
Northern Cyprus free to travel in the south.  He cited 
security concerns as the major reason for the rejection of 
the Annan plan, but said that Cyprus as a whole should not be 
made to suffer because Turkey seeks to punish the Greek 
Cypriots for rejecting the reunification plan. 
 
Aiming for December 
------------------- 
5. (C) He suggested that the security agreement could be 
pushed ahead quickly, perhaps even by December in order to be 
part of a package that would coincide with a positive message 
to Turkey on EU accession. 
 
Battlegroup Participation 
------------------------- 
6. (C) Christophorou was enthusiastic about the possibility 
of Cypriot participation in an EU battlegroup. He said that 
Cyprus had no preconceived ideas about potential partners in 
such a unit, saying that Nicosia was open to any possibility. 
Christophorou suggested that Cyprus had a number of 
facilities and other assets to offer to an EU battlegroup, 
although they could not offer more than a platoon or two of 
troops.  He said that he was unaware of any national caveats 
that would prevent Cypriots troops from being deployed 
outside their national territory or restrict the kinds of 
duties they could perform. He mused that it would be an odd 
circumstance for Cypriot forces to be deployed on 
peacekeeping missions outside the country while the Island 
itself was still divided. 
7. (C) Comment: Christophorou would not be likely to trot out 
the prospect of a security agreement without instructions 
from Nicosia.  As a practical matter, Cyprus already adheres 
to the EU security arrangement, which was itself designed to 
meet NATO standards.  Acquiescence by Ankara at the NAC would 
remove one obstacle to broader EU-NATO cooperation at a time 
when the pace of military/ESDP activity is increasing within 
the EU. We defer to Embassy Nicosia to evaluate Lt. Col. 
Christophorou\'s assertion that the political climate has 
evolved sufficiently to allow for discussion of PfP 
membership. What is clear, is that this blockage is shutting 
off significant avenues of new cooperation between NATO and 
the EU, and Ankara is not winning any friends within the EU 
by its stance. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"21329","10/6/2004 10:07","04BRUSSELS4299","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS4029","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EC/TURKEY: A \"CLEAR RECOMMENDATION\" TO START 
ACCESSION TALKS 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 4029 
 
     B. PARIS 7178 
 
Classified By: USEU poloff Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b/d 
 
1. (C) Summary: An upbeat Commissioner for Enlargement, 
Gunther Verheugen, told Ambassador Schnabel that the European 
Commission would make a \"clear recommendation\" October 6 that 
the EU start accession talks with Turkey. Verheugen expressed 
appreciation for the US\'s low-key support for Turkey, concern 
over possible French referendum plans on Turkey, and 
described a proposed braking mechanism on future enlargement 
talks as \"window-dressing.\" The next decision point is the 
December 17 European Council, where EU heads of 
state/government will decide whether to authorize accession 
talks.  This decision will be accompanied by a heated, 
emotional and highly public debate in EU capitals as well as 
Ankara. End Summary 
 
A clear recommendation to start 
------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) Late October 5, Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen 
told Ambassador Schnabel that he plans to publicly recommend 
October 6 that Turkey has made sufficient progress on a broad 
range of political reforms since 1996 so that the Commission 
can recommend that accession negotiations begin.  Verheugen 
said that he would offer Turkey \"a clear decision\" with \"soft 
conditions.\" Ambassador Schnabel congratulated Verheugen on 
this decision, as well as his historic achievements on EU 
enlargement in the last five years. 
 
US approach appreciated 
----------------------- 
 
3.  (C) Verheugen expressed appreciation for the US\'s 
\"low-key\" approach to Turkey\'s desire for starting accession 
talks with the EU. He said that this had been helpful.  Other 
Commission officials have also expressed appreciation for the 
US diplomatic efforts with Turkey to keep them on track in 
the last few weeks as well as keeping US support for Turkey 
out of the bilateral US/EU political relationship. 
Commission officials describe the last months as a 
\"rollercoaster\" experience (ref a), particularly over recent 
flaps over adultery and penal code reforms. Verheugen 
characterized this recent period as \"difficult.\" 
 
Concern over France 
------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Verheugen said that after October 6, Turkey goes to 
the member states. He said that a \"comfortable majority\" at 
the Council level favor starting accession talks with Turkey. 
However, Verheugen expressed particular concern with France 
-- particularly if the center-right seeks to amend the French 
constitution to require that all future EU enlargements be 
subject to a referendum (ref b).  (Other Commission officials 
have voiced concerns about Austria and Slovakia.) 
 
Good for Europe 
--------------- 
 
5.  (C) Nonetheless, Verheugen was in a very positive mood. 
He said that Turkey has made \"revolutionary changes\" and the 
process of accession talks with the EU will only accelerate 
this. He stressed that not only is this positive for Turkey, 
but it is also good for Europe. 
 
\"Window-dressing\" 
----------------- 
 
6.  (C) Verheugen acknowledge concerns from other 
Commissioners and member-states. For that reason, the 
Commission has recommended that they be allowed to adopt a 
new \"braking mechanism\" for all new accession negotiations -- 
not just for Turkey -- but also for Croatia and any future 
invitees.  This mechanism would allow the Commission to halt 
accession negotiations in the case of back-sliding on human 
rights or other commitments.  Verheugen described this as a 
bit of \"window-dressing,\" because the use of such a brake 
would require a majority of member-states to authorize its 
use. Another Commission official noted to us that the current 
EU Nice Treaty already contains similar mechanisms for 
existing EU member states, whose rights can be suspended in 
the case of a serious breech of democratic standards. 
 
Looking ahead 
------------- 
 
7. (C) The Commission will not include a proposal for the 
date to begin negotiations; that will be left to the December 
17 European Council.  Assuming a positive vote, Verheugen 
anticipates a ceremony sometime in January 2005 where a time 
for talks will be announced, and that accession talks would 
also start in 2005 (preferably after France sorts out its 
referendum concerns). 
Schnabel 
"
"21380","10/7/2004 9:11","04BRUSSELS4317","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS903","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/06/2009 
TAGS: PREL, EFIN, ZL, ICTY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ASSET FREEZE ON FUGITIVE ICTY INDICTEES 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 903 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
1. (C) The Dutch Presidency has told us that an EU Regulation 
enacting an asset freeze against the three most prominent 
ICTY fugitive indictees, Mladic, Karadzic and Gotovina, will 
be adopted at the October 11 General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC) meeting.  As reported reftel, this 
measure has been under development by the EU since early in 
2004, in response to a USG request. 
 
2. (C) The Dutch Presidency is also investigating whether, 
once the Regulation is adopted, the EU can ask the countries 
of the Western Balkans (Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia 
and Montenegro, Macedonia and Albania) to \"align\" themselves 
with the EU\'s decision, as they do with many of the EU\'s 
Common Foreign and Security Policy instruments.  The Dutch 
hope this would help increase pressure on these states to 
take measures against the indictees. 
 
3. (C) At the October 4 EU Balkans Working Group (COWEB) 
meeting, the Dutch also secured political agreement from all 
EU Member States to extend the asset freeze to cover the 
other fifteen fugitives under public ICTY indictments.  The 
legal procedure to do that should begin a few days after 
GAERC adoption of the original Regulation.  If Balkan states 
have aligned themselves with the original Regulation, they 
would then be asked to adapt to the expanded list, which 
would include several individuals living openly in Serbia. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"21409","10/7/2004 15:37","04BRUSSELS4332","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004332 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA, EB/TRA, AND INL 
STATE PLEASE PASS DHS FOR U/S HUTCHINSON, A/S VERDERY, AND 
CLAYTON 
DOJ FOR SWARTZ AND BURROWS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, EAIR, EWWT, PHSA, PTER, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DHS U/S HUTCHINSON\'S OCT 1 MEETING WITH EXTERNAL 
RELATIONS DG LANDABURU 
 
Sensitive but unclassified, entire text. 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (SBU) DHS Undersecretary for Border and Transportation 
Security Asa Hutchinson met External Relations Director 
General Eneko Landaburu October 1 in Brussels.  Hutchinson 
told Landaburu that the EU and U.S. need to stand shoulder to 
shoulder even when we do not agree to show we are working 
together to overcome differences. Landaburu agreed with 
Hutchinson that more communication with European and U.S. 
publics on Homeland Security was important but warned that 
the two sides should not paper over real disagreements in 
joint appearances. Hutchinson noted that DHS was working on 
longer term projects like an international trusted traveler 
program. Landaburu expressed his appreciation for U.S. 
efforts to raise awareness of the US-VISIT program with 
Europeans but noted skepticism over the US VISIT system and 
welcomed the roll out of \"Secure Flight\" before cautioning 
that the Commission would have to review the program. 
Landaburu noted that the Commission proposed a paper in ICAO 
on PNR and Hutchinson agreed that ICAO should be considered 
as a place to discuss global standards for transfer of PNR. 
Hutchinson noted DHS\'s satisfaction with the current U.S.-EU 
agreement. The EU side welcomed the postponement of the 
October 2004 deadline for including biometric data in 
passports but asked for additional time.  Hutchinson agreed 
to look into the appointment of a \"trusted third party\" to 
review international PNR transfers currently under discussion 
between the U.S. and European Commission.   Landaburu thanked 
the U.S. for arranging an informational meeting with EU 
countries not participating in the Visa Waiver Program. 
 
Action items coming out of the meeting included: 
 
---  U/S Hutchinson committed that the U.S would discuss the 
results of the November test of \"Secure Flight\" with EU 
officials. 
 
---  U/S Hutchinson agreed to look into the appointment of a 
\"trusted third party\" to review international PNR transfers 
under discussion between the U.S. and European Commission and 
to review what other loose ends remain before full compliance 
with the U.S.-EU PNR agreements is possible, including the 
finalization of a sensitive data list that the Commission 
owes the U.S.  End Summary. 
 
Joint Communications Strategy 
----------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Hutchinson told Landaburu he appreciated 
participating in the Hague Justice Ministerial and he had 
added Brussels to his trip to strengthen coordination with 
the EU.  He hoped that the U.S. and EU could begin to develop 
initiatives together as well as communicate jointly to 
publics as a part of this initiative.  The U.S. and EU 
together would be more effective addressing security 
concerns.   Landaburu said he appreciated Hutchinson\'s 
efforts at building ties with his European counterparts.  The 
EU was currently stressing a member state driven security 
policy, and the Commission was involved in this process. 
Still Landaburu believed that Hutchinson would find strong 
partners with JHA DG Faull and TREN DG Lamoureux, as well as 
the member states.  A frank U.S.-EU Policy Dialogue on Border 
and Transport Security (PDBTS) would be necessary on the many 
security initiatives DHS was contemplating.  Landaburu added 
that the EU needed to balance the need for increased security 
with citizens\' rights to privacy.  European public opinion as 
part of a global trend had not been keen on the security 
changes developing in the United States.  Landaburu added 
that he did not want to use a joint press conference with 
language constructed to paper over U.S.-EU differences to 
give arguments to those that do not support needed security 
enhancements.  Hutchinson agreed that both sides needed to be 
realistic.  The U.S. and EU could work together in some areas 
and be honest about those areas where they disagreed. 
 
US VISIT 
-------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Hutchinson noted that post-Madrid the pressure for 
strengthened immigration controls in Europe seemed to be 
growing.  The U.S. had adopted the US VISIT system to collect 
biometric data on visitors more quickly than had the EU, but 
he believed that the EU would adopt a similar system.  The 
U.S. would serve as a lightening rod for criticism, until 
such systems came to be commonplace.   Hutchinson understood 
this role.  He said DHS was working to ensure the US VISIT 
system ran well.  An important next step would be development 
of an internationally recognized trusted traveler system that 
would allow publics to see that the technology also 
facilitated travel. 
 
4.  (SBU) Landaburu said he was grateful for Hutchinson\'s 
efforts to raise awareness of the US VISIT program in Europe, 
thereby \"answering\" Commissioner Patten and Vitorino\'s 
September 8 letter to Secretaries Powell and Ridge on the 
subject.  While, in principle, the Commission had no 
objection to the enrolling of Visa Waiver travelers in US 
VISIT, whether the policy will create a backlash among EU 
travelers depends in large part on how DHS implements the 
system.  Landaburu added that having to submit to a finger 
scan would be a shock to some.  The Commission had already 
received complaints from European travelers over treatment at 
U.S borders.  Landaburu said he had to wait about an hour at 
immigration at Dulles earlier in the week.  EU Consumer 
groups remain skeptical of how DHS safeguards the data it 
collects. 
 
5.  (SBU) Hutchinson said he was concerned about European 
skepticism, and bad stories about inspector performance would 
make implementation more difficult.  DHS wanted to be 
responsive.  It had already made changes by training 
inspectors and giving them more discretion.  While a 
zero-tolerance policy for minor infractions had been 
implemented at the border following the 9/11 attacks, DHS 
realized that this had gone too far and reversed the decision. 
 
\"Secure Flight\" 
--------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Hutchinson noted the recent roll out of the privacy 
impact assessment on the \"Secure Flight\" program.  The 
Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening Program (CAPPS II) 
had created significant controversy in Europe.  DHS had been 
responsive to those concerns with \"Secure Flight\".  The 
prescreening function had been adjusted dramatically in the 
modification of the CAPPS II system to create \"secure 
flight\".  The key was to create a better mechanism to compare 
passenger names against a terrorist watch list.  In \"Secure 
Flight\" a commercial database would not necessarily be used. 
 
7.  (SBU) Landaburu noted that the EU had concerns with the 
design of CAPPS II and appreciated the information the 
Commission had received from the U.S. on \"Secure Flight\". 
The modifications were positive, but the Commission will 
likely need additional information.  Landaburu asked whether 
the system would definitely use European sourced PNR for 
domestic flights and how exactly data collected for \"Secure 
Flight\" would be used.  Hutchison told Landaburu that the 
\"Secure Flight\" test would take place in November, European 
sourced historical PNR data from June 2004 would be used as 
it would be impossible to determine which data was not 
\'domestic\', and that DHS would discuss the results of the 
test with the Commission.  All interested parties would have 
an opportunity to comment following the test.  (Comment: USEU 
previously passed the DHS Privacy Notices on the \"Secure 
Flight \" test to the Commission 9/30) 
 
PNR in ICAO 
----------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Landaburu asked Hutchinson his views on developing 
a global standard on international transfer of PNR, noting 
that European travel agents were asking for a standard out of 
fear that proliferation of PNR requests from governments will 
raise the cost of traveling.  The EU would seek a better 
definition of PNR within an ICAO framework.  Hutchinson noted 
that he saw ICAO examination of PNR as a benefit to aviation 
security but stated that the U.S. is satisfied with the 
current US-EU agreement on PNR.  (Comment: USEU passed the 
Commission Paper on developing a PNR standard in ICAO to 
Washington Agencies 9/23). 
 
 
APIS 
---- 
 
9.  (SBU) Landaburu added that DHS Assistant Secretary 
Verdery spoke at the September SLCG on the development of a 
regulation requiring airlines to transfer APIS data to 
DHS/CBP before a flight departs.  The EU wanted to look at 
the implications of this information.  The Commission\'s 
initial reaction was that such a requirement would complicate 
preparations and timing for U.S.-bound flights.  Hutchinson 
confirmed that the U.S. was considering the change.  He noted 
that currently, CBP received flight manifest data 15 minutes 
after a U.S.-bound flight departed.  Some passenger data was 
available earlier, but a terrorist could escape a pre-takeoff 
check by arriving at the last minute.  Some way was needed to 
correct the last-minute problem.  It could be a matter of 
educating passengers to provide their data earlier without 
necessarily a longer wait at the airport.  DHS is looking at 
requiring manifest data 60 minutes prior to takeoff to enable 
a check to be done before departure, but airlines have 
already told DHS that a 60-minute rule would require that a 
plane\'s door be shut 75 minutes prior to departure. 
Landaburu noted that such a change would cause disruptions to 
passengers arriving at an airport from connecting flights. 
Hutchinson noted the problem and added that DHS is looking at 
implications and gathering more information. 
 
Biometric Passport Deadline 
--------------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) RELEX Director Richard Wright said the EU was 
happy about the one-year extension until October 26, 2005 of 
the law mandating inclusion of biometric data in passports, 
but that a year would not be sufficient.  Hutchison noted 
that the Congressional deadline was firm, calling it 
\"political gamesmanship.\"  As the deadline grew nearer, 
U.S.-EU discussions would continue.  Hutchinson hoped that 
both sides could work hard to meet the deadline.  Wright 
suggested that the EU and U.S. could work jointly on the 
matter adding that the Community had 25 administrations to 
manage in this regard.  Hutchinson added that the U.S. was 
testing biometric passport readers with European 
participation.  Working together, this effort sends a good 
message. 
 
Trusted Third Party 
------------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) Wright added that DHS A/S Verdery had also 
mentioned onward transfers of PNR data and the need to come 
up with a \"trusted third party\" to oversee those transfers. 
Wright noted that with the court case undecided, the U.S. and 
Commission remained under the spotlight.  DHS Advisor Maria 
Clayton noted the U.S. was still discussing the issue 
internally.  The DHS Privacy office would conduct the joint 
review.   Hutchinson added that he would look into the issue 
and asked whether the delay in appointing the trusted third 
party would have any affect on the Parliament ECJ case 
against the PNR agreements.  U.S. Unit Head Gunnar Weigand 
said he could not assess the affect the delay would have, but 
any irregularity in implementation would add to the 
Commission\'s vulnerability before its opponents.  Clayton 
noted that to date, there have been no foreign transfers of 
PNR data.  She added that the U.S. was also seeking the list 
of sensitive data to be filtered from PNR records from the 
Commission. 
 
Visa Waiver 
----------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Landaburu closed by welcoming the U.S. initiative 
setting up an October 18 meeting of EU countries not 
participating in the visa waiver program.  Hutchinson replied 
that he hoped the meeting would help the non-VWP countries\' 
to understand the requirements they must meet to join the 
program.  He told Landaburu that he understood the non-VWP 
countries\' requests created a problem for the EU, and that he 
hoped the countries fully understood the criteria for 
membership and could develop a plan for how our requirements 
could be met. 
 
Scott 
"
"21435","10/8/2004 8:47","04BRUSSELS4334","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA, EB/TRA, AND INL 
STATE PLEASE PASS DHS/BTS FOR U/S HUTCHINSON, A/S VERDERY, 
AND CLAYTON 
JUSTICE FOR SWARTZ AND BURROWS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, EAIR, EWWT, PHSA, PTER, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DHS U/S HUTCHINSON\'S OCT 1 MEETING WITH TRANSPORT 
DG LAMOUREUX 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified, entire text 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (SBU) DHS Undersecretary for Border and Transportation 
Security Asa Hutchinson met with Director General for 
Transport and Energy Francois Lamoureux October 1.  Lamoureux 
briefed Hutchinson on the growing Commission program of 
airport inspection.  Hutchinson committed to Lamoureux that 
DHS would brief the Commission on U.S. implementation of the 
ISPS (International Ship and Port Security) code and discuss 
with the Commission new U.S. requirements for container 
seals.  Lamoureux briefed Hutchinson on European Parliament 
concerns over the allocation of costs of new security 
measures.  Hutchinson suggested to Lamoureux the U.S. and EU 
exchange experiences in rail and mass transit security. 
Hutchinson also told Lamoureux that, while he was interested 
in further cooperation on air marshals, and the U.S. and EU 
might find a mechanism outside the U.S.-EU bilateral aviation 
services negotiations for that discussion. 
 
Action items for follow-up include: 
 
--- Hutchinson requested greater exchange between the U.S. 
and EU on leading airport security technologies. 
 
--- Hutchinson committed to further coordination with the EU 
on implementation of ISPS rules and on container seals. 
 
--- The U.S. and EU should consult further on rail/mass 
transit security measures. 
 
End summary. 
 
Airport Inspection 
------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) Lamoureux told Hutchinson that after the 
Commission\'s initial year of experience conducting security 
inspections of community airports, DG TREN would publish a 
report on its findings.  Lamoureux added that he found 
Community airports\' level of compliance with EU rules \"not 
satisfactory\", though he had noticed some improvement.  He 
wanted to address improvement of controls and training of 
inspectors in future meetings with the U.S.  Hutchinson told 
Lamoureux he hoped for greater exchanges with European 
institutions on leading technologies in airport security. 
 
U.S.-EU Maritime Cooperation 
----------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Lamoureux told Hutchinson that the Commission would 
begin inspecting maritime facilities in January 2005, and 
this would be the first implementation of the maritime 
security code.  As such, the EU wanted to avoid differences 
in implementation.  Currently differences in U.S. ISPS code 
implementation were creating practical problems.  Acting 
Director for Transport and Energy Security, Jean Trestour 
claimed that through its legislation, the EU was abiding 
strictly by the ISPS code, while the U.S. was not.  Trestour 
asked for a common identification of suspect port facilities. 
 
 
4.  (SBU) Lamoureux asked Hutchinson to explain DHS views on 
container seals.  Hutchinson noted that the shipping industry 
was working to develop secure containers and locks.  DHS is 
in the process of considering requirements for seals and 
locks on U.S. bound containers.  As this process goes 
forward, it would not be helpful for countries to develop 
differing standards.  Hutchinson pledged to share ideas on 
container seals with the EU.  Lamoureux felt seals integral 
with the container would be most effective.  He asked whether 
the U.S. believed that seals were essential.  Hutchinson said 
they were important, but seals alone would not eliminate the 
threat to the supply chain, which had to be considered in 
total.  Lamoureux noted that international views on seals 
will affect EU decision-making, but he asked Hutchinson to 
work multilaterally on a container seals measure. 
 
5.  (SBU) Hutchinson committed to respond to Lamoureux on 
both the ISPS and container seals questions and to work with 
the EU.  He added that the effectiveness of measures taken 
should also be part of any U.S.-EU discussion and that the 
DHS industry advisory group COAC (Customs Operations Advisory 
Committee) had been asked to make recommendations on 
regulations governing container trade.  He promised to share 
the group\'s recommendation with the Commission. Trestour 
suggested that given the security risks raised by 
transshipment of containers, the U.S. and EU should also work 
together on capacity building in third countries. 
 
 
Parliament\'s Concern Over Costs 
------------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Hutchinson asked whether the new Parliament were 
more or less sensitive towards security questions.  Lamoureux 
said EU institutions, and particularly the Parliament were 
becoming concerned with the costs of additional security, and 
the Commission was preparing a communication on the subject 
to answer the questions: Who should pay? users or the member 
states.  Lamoureux believed the overall conclusion would be 
that public authorities, not the users, should pay, noting 
that the Parliament frequently pointed to the U.S. 
Government\'s willingness to pay for aviation security 
upgrades as potentially distorting competition.  Lamoureux 
said the issue had become so contentious that new Community 
security initiatives could be scuttled.  Hutchinson told 
Lamoureux that the question of who pays also came up in U.S. 
discussions on containers where it was decided that shippers 
would bear the costs for regulations due to be promulgated 6 
months to a year from now.  The U.S. Government had invested 
heavily in aviation security, but in addressing container and 
rail shipments, though DHS may make some grant money 
available, shippers would likely bear most of the cost. 
 
7.  (SBU) Lamoureux also noted that the Parliament continued 
to press on the PNR case and asked whether, given this 
pressure, the U.S. might be amenable to negotiating with the 
new Commission officials parts of the PNR agreement including 
reducing the list of data elements it collected.  Hutchinson 
said the U.S. is content with the current agreement and his 
objective would be to let experience demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the privacy protection DHS has put into 
place. 
 
Rail/Mass Transit Security 
-------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Lamoureux said that the Commission was concerned 
over rail security, and had some competence to address the 
issue, but not enough experience.  Nonetheless, the 
Commission would have to issue a regulation harmonizing 
security practices in the area.  Hutchinson said that while 
the USG did not take over rail and mass transit security 
following the Madrid bombings, he wanted to show leadership 
in securing the U.S. rail network.  DHS established \"federal 
leadership\" for security.  DHS had looked regionally at 
individual networks to find the best practices in place and 
used the best standards to create a benchmark to build from 
in the case of an elevated threat.  DHS was also developing a 
federal response capability.  The U.S. Congress is sensitive 
to transit authorities\' requests for additional funds, and it 
has made some limited grants in this area. 
 
9.  (SBU) Lamoureux emphasized the importance of looking at 
rail station security.  It had become clear that the Madrid 
bombers had intended their bombs to detonate inside stations 
to maximize destruction.  He believed the best example in 
Europe of effective station security were the Eurostar 
stations in London, Paris, and Brussels.  Hutchinson noted 
that such measures were expensive, but DHS wanted to do more 
in this area.  Some U.S operators had piloted checking 
passengers, which they appreciated, but such measures had 
been tried only at small stations.  The U.S. had neither the 
equipment nor the personnel to do more.  Programs moved 
slowly.  Lamoureux noted that after Madrid, European national 
railways established a clear separation between passengers 
and luggage, with luggage loaded into a separate car. 
Hutchinson suggested that there would be benefits in working 
together on rail security. 
 
U.S.-EU Bilateral Agreement/Air Marshals 
---------------------------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) Lamoureux suggested that the bilateral aviation 
agreement currently under negotiation between the U.S. and EU 
could provide a better framework for discussions on some 
security issues now underway in ICAO.  One example would be 
to use the aviation bilateral to find a more rapid solution 
for a standard set of rules for the training and equipping of 
air marshals.  Lamoureux asked whether it would be 
appropriate to discuss \'ICAO type\' standards under the 
auspices of the bilateral.  Hutchinson said the U.S believed 
that air marshals added security value, and he agreed that an 
international standard on training and equipping marshals was 
necessary.  He suggested that the U.S. and EU might wish to 
look for alternate venues to discuss the air marshal 
question, but that as an economic agreement, the U.S.-EU 
bilateral agreement may not be the best venue. 
 
Scott 
"
"21444","10/8/2004 10:32","04BRUSSELS4335","Embassy Brussels","SECRET","04BRUSSELS4201","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004335 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/FO-DIBBLE, NP/FO:FITZPATRICK, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/08/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, KNNP, IR, EUN, IAEA, UNSC, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: WISHFUL THINKING? EU HOPES G8 CAN KEEP IRAN OUT OF 
UNSC 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 4201 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASON 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  In meetings with NEA DAS Dibble and NP 
A/DAS Fitzpatrick on October 4-5, EU officials from the Dutch 
Presidency, Council Secretariat and Commission expressed 
concerns that IAEA referral of Iran to the UNSC in November 
would cross a major, negative threshold they want to avoid. 
The EU fears Iran would respond by withdrawing from the NPT 
and accelerating uranium enrichment, and that moving the 
issue to the UNSC would lead to confrontation.  The EU is 
still deliberating possible European components for a 
G8-endorsed \"package\" of significant incentives to offer Iran 
in return for cessation of enrichment, but wants to assemble 
as many carrots as possible -- including from the U.S.-- in 
one more effort to resolve the matter without recourse to the 
UNSC.  Should Iran respond in any meaningful way to an 
incentives package, even on the eve of the IAEA Board 
meeting, EU member states will likely oppose referral to the 
UNSC.  EU officials are aware this could lead to an 
undesirable transatlantic rift, but are unsure at this point 
how to reduce this risk.  Pushback from the U.S. side focused 
on the strategic and legal advantages of involving the UNSC, 
Iran\'s tactic of offering -- and breaking -- pledges to 
comply in order to keep the issue out of the UNSC, and the 
lack to date of any indication that Iran will consider making 
a strategic decision to suspend enrichment and forego a 
nuclear weapons program. End Summary. 
 
Points of Agreement... 
---------------- 
2.  (S)  On October 4-5, NEA DAS Dibble and NP A/DAS 
Fitzpatrick, accompanied by NEA/ARPI Waller and S/CT Miller, 
met with a wide range of EU and Canadian officials during and 
on the margins of the U.S.-EU-Canada Trilateral discussions 
on Iran.  Canada and the EU agree with the U.S.\'s pessimistic 
assessment of internal developments in Iran, and shared their 
own downbeat assessment of trends in human rights, support 
for terrorism, and opposition to a negotiated Middle East 
peace settlement.  Although EU officials readily acknowledged 
that their policy of engagement on Iran has failed, their 
only prescription was  \"more engagement.\"  On WMD, the EU was 
interested in Fitzpatrick\'s briefing on the status of Iran\'s 
work in converting its 37 tons of yellowcake into uranium 
hexafluoride, and its efforts to master the complex 
centrifuge technology related to uranium enrichment -- two 
chokepoints that, once passed, would give Iran a dangerous 
breakout capability.  Fitzpatrick underscored USG concern 
that Iran would agree to suspension on the eve of the 
November 25-26 Board meeting, only after it had passed these 
chokepoints.  A suspension pledge in that case would mean 
little, unless Iran turned over the UF6 and centrifuges. 
 
But Divergence over a G8 Initiative 
------------------- 
3.  (C) Nearly all EU interlocutors, however, expressed the 
hope that a G8-endorsed initiative could entice Iran to 
suspend enrichment, and avoid sending the issue to the UNSC 
at the November IAEA Board meeting.  The EU is still working 
on what the possible components of such an initiative could 
be.  Given the importance of \"saving face\" for Iran, most EU 
officials are convinced that \"significant\" carrots -- 
including especially from the U.S. -- are needed to bring 
Iran around.  The EU favors a G8 approach because, by 
including the US, Japan, and Russia, it broadens the appeal 
of any initiative for Iran.  Also, should a G8 initiative 
ultimately fail, moving the issue to the UNSC would then in 
theory have the support of Russia. 
 
Referral to UNSC Crosses Major Threshold 
--------------------- 
4.  (C)  Most EU officials shared the conviction that 
reporting the issue to the UNSC would shift the issue to an 
almost inevitable path toward conflict.  Iran, they argued, 
would likely withdraw from the NPT, accelerate its 
enrichment, or both.  One official asked rhetorically, \"What 
is the advantage in having Iran outside the NPT and pursuing 
nuclear weapons?\"  DAS Dibble and A/DAS Fitzpatrick 
questioned this assumption, noting that having Iran pursue 
nuclear weapons within the NPT is even worse.  They added 
that reporting to the UNSC is a necessary step to begin to 
ramp up pressure, but would not lead immediately or 
inevitably to sanctions or confrontation.  The UNSC could, 
however, provide a legal basis for \"requiring\" Iran to 
suspend enrichment, and also put Iran\'s program in a broader 
context than its narrower NPT obligations.  Most Board 
members believe the IAEA can only \"call on\" Iran to suspend; 
the UNSC has clear legal authority to compel Iran to do so. 
DAS Dibble observed that Iran will not abandon the NPT 
lightly; to do so would would imply that the purpose of its 
program is not peaceful, undercut support for Iran among the 
NAM and G-77 countries, and further isolate Iran in 
international eyes.  Unlike the cases of India and Pakistan, 
who never signed the NPT, Iran would have to abrogate an 
international treaty it has signed. 
 
Once in the UNSC, what then? 
----------------- 
5.  (C)  EU officials were skeptical that moving the issue to 
the UNSC would necessarily be effective.  Several questioned 
whether the U.S. could obtain nine votes and no veto on a 
Chapter VII resolution.  Referring the issue only to face 
vetoes would undermine the UNSC in dealing with Iran and 
future proliferants. Others were concerned that moving to the 
Council meant immediately seeking to impose economic 
sanctions.  Fitzpatrick laid out the several graduated steps 
that the UNSC could take that would raise the pressure on 
Iran to comply, but were short of the admittedly difficult 
step of imposing economic sanctions.  Council DG Robert 
Cooper stated flat-out that with oil at $50/barrel, the cost 
to Europe\'s economy would be such that the EU would be very 
reluctant to move to an oil embargo no matter what happened. 
Fitzpatrick also noted that Russian actions at the last IAEA 
indicated they might be cooperative; the key was to go into 
the UNSC with the support of the EU-3 and European members of 
the UNSC; we could then build on this core.  Fitzpatrick also 
stressed that reporting to the UNSC would not mean taking the 
issue away from Vienna.  We would expet the UNSC to give its 
support to the IAEA inspection process, which in any case 
will have to continue. 
 
Could UNSC Referral accompany a Parallel G8 offer? 
------------------- 
6.  (C) All EU officials expressed concern that there remains 
very little time to develop a G8 package, or give Iran much 
time to respond to one, before the November IAEA Board 
meeting.  Dibble and Fitzpatrick agreed, especially given 
that the objective was not to elicit yet another Iranian 
tactical ploy to delay referral to the UNSC, but rather for 
Iran to make the strategic decision that a network of 
relationships with the West would provide greater security 
than would nuclear weapons.  Dibble and Fitzpatrick pointed 
out that there was no reason referral to the UNSC could not 
occur in parallel with a G8 initiative.  Should Iran respond 
to a G8-endorsed initiative with concrete steps to halt 
enrichment and, as was the case with Libya, agree to 
dismantle its nuclear fuel cycle infrastructure, the UNSC 
could refrain from taking punitive action.  Ultimately, how 
Iran\'s nuclear program is viewed depends on how Iran responds 
to the concerns of the international community.  EU officials 
were skeptical that Iran would respond to any G8 initiative 
following a referral to the UNSC. 
 
Possible EU components of a G8 package 
---------------------- 
7.  (C)  EU officials are still brainstorming possible 
elements of a package that they can propose at next week\'s G8 
Political Directors meeting.  Annalisa Gianneli, Solana\'s 
Non-Proliferation advisor, avoided details on how such a 
package might be structured, but envisaged a combination of 
carrots and sticks that should be clearly spelled out. 
Elements of the offer could correspond to levels of 
compliance, with nothing given to Iran in advance.  One idea 
might be to propose holding a regional security conference to 
address the concerns driving Iran\'s perception of a strategic 
threat.  She agreed that \"sticks\" could include, for example, 
a visa ban on Iranian officials as well as the threat of 
referral to the UNSC.  However, EU officials did not 
articulate at what point they would consider Iran to have 
rejected a G-8 proposal (i.e., no deadlines or triggers) - 
presumably because their thinking has not progressed very far 
in that direction. 
 
A U.S. security guarantee as a carrot? 
-------------- 
8.  (C)  EU officials in all the meetings made references to 
the critical importance of some U.S. incentive on Iran to the 
success of a G8 package.  Bjorn Larsson on the Council\'s 
Policy Planning staff suggested the most compelling offer 
would be some kind of security guarantee -- along the lines 
of Secretary Powell\'s public statement that the U.S. respects 
the results of the Iranian revolution.  DAS Dibble responded 
that the Secretary\'s statement stands, but moving beyond it 
would be difficult politically, given Iran\'s defiance of its 
IAEA obligations and the many other outstanding issues where 
Iran undermines regional stability (Iraq, terrorism, and 
potentially Afghanistan).  The U.S. will not give Iran a 
\"pass\" on all these other issues in return for movement on 
the nuclear issue alone. 
 
Insight into EU thinking:  Some Sound bytes 
----------------------- 
9.(C)  What follows are some quotes by various EU officials 
from the discussions on Iran that illustrate EU thinking. 
 
Council Secretariat 
 
-- Robert Cooper, Solana\'s Foreign Policy Advisor:  \"The U.S. 
seems concerned that Iran would respond to a G8 proposal (and 
thus postpone referral to the UNSC).  I\'m concerned they 
won\'t respond at all.  If Iran does respond to a G8 
initiative, even on the eve of the November Board meeting, EU 
member states are not likely to support referral to the UNSC.\" 
 
-- Annalisa Giannelli, Solana\'s Non-Proliferation Advisor: 
\"A G8 deal is preferable to referral to the UNSC.  We should 
construct a G8 package that includes carrots and sticks.  I 
think we should be hard on Iran in terms of what it must do, 
but generous in the carrots we offer.\" 
 
Commission 
 
-- Michael Leigh, Deputy DG for Middle East and CIS:  \"The EU 
is not at the point where it could support moving the Iran 
issue to the UNSC if Iran responds to a G8 package.  We need 
to stay in touch, as this could become a transatlantic issue, 
and discuss it after the IAEA Board meeting, when new 
Commissioners are in place and the U.S. elections are over.\" 
(Fitzpatrick replied that the September IAEA Board resolution 
said decisions would be taken at the November Board meeting, 
not after.) 
 
-- Christian Leffler, Head of Middle East Department: \"There 
are two unacceptable outcomes:  a nuclear Iran, and resort to 
force... The EU insists on engagement and dialogue with Iran, 
in part because we have no alternative.... Ultimate recourse 
to action on Iran would mean a complete policy failure. 
Backlash in the region would be enormous.\" 
 
Canada and some Dutch are the exception 
------------------------ 
10.  (C)  The exception to the sentiments expressed above 
came from the Canadian delegation, and from Dutch IAEA 
Mission Counselor Dirk Jan Kop, who said he expected Iran do 
\"just enough\" before the November IAEA board meeting to keep 
the board from referring the issue to the UNSC.  That said, 
he thought there would be enough votes on the Board to refer 
in November, if Iran does not agree to full suspension.  He 
reported that the Canadian Ambassador to the IAEA, who is now 
chairman of the Board, is planning a series of dinners in 
Vienna between now and the November board meeting in an 
effort to persuade NAM members that Iran is a sui generis 
case, and its referral to the UNSC would not in any way 
diminish other states\' rights to pursue peaceful nuclear 
energy.  Kop and the Canadians were comfortable with a 
three-pronged approach: 
 
-- Develop a strategy for explaining the logic for referral 
to the UNSC (e.g. enhanced legal authority); 
-- Explore a G8 package, including possible incentives from 
the U.S.; 
-- Outreach to the NAM to address concerns that referral 
would undermine their access to peaceful nuclear technology. 
 
Next Steps/Timeline 
---------------- 
11.  (SBU)  Upcoming meetings offer the EU several 
opportunities to discuss and fine-tune their approach to Iran 
prior to the November IAEA Board meeting.  These include: 
 
Oct 7 restricted PSC discussion of Iran 
Oct 11 GAERC -- EU FM\'s (over lunch) 
Oct 13 G8 PolDirs meeting 
Nov 5 COUNCIL summit 
Nov 11 EU-Russia summit 
Nov 22-23 GAERC 
 
Comment:  Another Transatlantic Trainwreck? 
------------------ 
12.  (C)  EU thinking on Iran is beginning to crystallize 
around a G8 initiative that would be attractive enough to 
elicit Iranian cooperation -- in explicit exchange for not 
referring the issue to the UNSC in November.  From the EU\'s 
perspective, the onus will be on the G8 to include sufficient 
carrots to bring Iran around, and they will want to err on 
the side of offering too much rather than too little.  The 
key, in EU eyes, will be having a substantial U.S. carrot in 
the mix, preferably in the form of some kind of security 
guarantee.  The EU would probably support including some 
sticks in the package, too, e.g. if Iran does not cooperate, 
it will be referred to the UNSC, visa/travel bans will be 
considered, etc.  But their clear concern is not to \"miss\" 
the opportunity to avoid referral by being too stingy in the 
offer made to Iran. 
 
13.  (C) Comment continued.  There are several implications 
for transatlantic relations in the EU\'s approach.  First, the 
EU is not at present prepared to support pursuing a G8 
package in parallel with referral to the UNSC.  In their 
eyes, these are mutually exclusive approaches, and U.S. 
insistence on referral in November will be viewed as 
explicitly undermining chances for successful G8 initiative. 
Failure of a G8 initiative -- either due to the G8\'s 
inability to agree on a package, or due to Iran\'s rejection 
of an agreed package -- could also be laid at the U.S.\'s door 
if the U.S. is viewed as having prevented agreement on a 
package, or is viewed as being unwilling to offer a carrot 
sufficiently enticing to bring Iran around.  The last place 
the EU will look to place blame will be Tehran, absent an 
outright Iranian rejection of a G8 package the EU judges to 
be \"sufficient.\"  We thus risk a break with the EU over (a) 
the composition of a G8 package -- specifically, what U.S. 
incentives are included, and (b) how the G8 initiative is 
linked to referral to the UNSC -- specifically, whether the 
U.S. would agree not to seek referral if Iran responds 
positively to a G8 initiative.  A break with the EU over 
either issue could complicate our efforts in the IAEA Board 
to refer Iran to the UNSC or, once in the UNSC, our ability 
to secure the votes needed to take any action. 
 
14.  (U) This cable was cleared by NEA DAS Dibble and NP 
A/DAS Fitzpatrick. 
 
SCOTT 
"
"21457","10/8/2004 13:04","04BRUSSELS4346","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004346 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU: PARTING THOUGHTS FROM RELEX COMMISSIONER CHRIS 
PATTEN 
 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.4 (B)(D) 
 
1. (C) Summary. Ambassador held a reflective October 6 
farewell meeting with RELEX Commissioner Patten, whose term 
expires at the end of the month.  Patten called the 
Commission\'s decision earlier that day to recommend in favor 
of starting accession negotiations with Turkey \"the most 
important decision I\'ve been a part of\" at the Commission. 
Patten suggested that Atlantic powers \"have two decades to 
shape the world\" -- after that, economic and demographic 
trends argue in favor of India and China.  Patten doubted 
whether the EU Constitution will ever be ratified, and 
worried about growing French disaffection with the EU that 
could lead Paris to \"bring the temple down.\"   He believes 
incoming Commission President Barosso has several advantages 
over his two immediate predecessors, but said Barosso is 
mistaken in trying run the Commission in presidential style. 
Patten suggested Commissioners Verheugen, Wallstrom, and 
Mandelson bear watching as future Commission heavyweights. 
He worried that the US and EU may split on Iran, and urged 
more visible US activity on the Middle East peace process. 
End summary. 
 
Turkey 
------- 
 
2. (C) Over drinks at the end of a long day, Patten was 
clearly pleased with the decision announced earlier in the 
day to recommend in favor of launching accession negotiations 
with Turkey.  He called it \"the most important decision I 
have taken part in during my entire tenure on the 
Commission.\"  Patten noted that at the beginning of the Prodi 
Commission, only he and Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen 
were in favor of Turkish enlargement.  He stressed that the 
EU has proven very successful at reform, and that Europeans 
will increasingly come to realize the advantages of having 
Turkey inside the EU. 
 
3. (C) In particular, Patten said that Turkish membership 
would make the EU a more serious player in defense, and also 
give it strategic weight in the Caucasus and Central Asia. 
He also pointed to the disturbing demographic trends in 
Europe, and the contribution that Turkey\'s large population 
could make in this regard.   He predicted that smart 
investors will begin to pour money into Turkey (at times at 
the expense of other newer EU members in Central and Eastern 
Europe).  Patten also expressed the view that the Erdogan/Gul 
duo was the \"most impressive\" leadership team in all of 
Europe today. 
 
4. (C) Patten thanked the U.S. for its low-key approach to 
Turkish accession over the last few months, and encouraged US 
leaders to keep \"piano\" as well through the crucial Council 
decision in December. 
 
EU - Amazing, But It Actually Works 
-------------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) Patten expressed his own amazement that EU 
institutions, \"pieced together with rubber bands, chewing gum 
and blue tack\" actually perform.  He refuted arguments that 
Europe has become sclerotic and unable to compete, but said 
he does have long-term concerns about basic demographic 
factors, and Europe\'s long-term competitiveness vis-a-vis 
rising powers in China and India.  He suggested the Atlantic 
countries have two decades to shape the world.  Beyond that, 
and he predicted economic and demographic trends favor a rise 
in power for India and China.  He was particularly 
enthusiastic about India\'s future, noting that -- in contrast 
to China -- India\'s democratic system means it will not have 
to cope with new political structures as its economy rapidly 
expands. 
 
6. (C) In the meantime, the EU will \"continue to lumber along 
-- against all odds.\"   The EU of today is neither the one 
envisioned by Monet and Schumann, nor the Europe managed by 
Adenauer and De Gaulle in years gone by.   With the most 
recent enlargement, the Franco-German engine can no longer 
drive the Union, Patten said, and he was especially concerned 
that France was getting nervous about its waning influence. 
The lingua franca of the EU is now english, and countries 
appear increasingly willing to stand up to France and tell 
them \"no.\"  Barosso\'s decision to give France the minor 
Transport portfolio was a major blow, and Patten worried that 
there is a growing feeling in Paris that it might be better 
to \"bring the temple down.\" 
 
7. (C) Patten also predicted that the EU Constitution would 
not be ratified, suggesting that it may fail to gain 
ratification in three or more countries. 
 
The Barosso Commission 
-------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Patten judged the incoming Commission President to be 
a \"smart, cautious politician.\"  He starts his tenure with 
several advantages over his two most recent predecessors, 
Patten suggested.  First, he is extremely articulate in 
several languages.  Secondly, he has been selected without 
any political obligations.  This offered him additional room 
for maneuver, which he had used decisively in forming his 
Commission.  Third, Barosso does not face any European 
leaders who are serious competitors in putting forward a 
vision for the future of Europe.  (On the flip-side, Patten 
noted that there are also no political leaders in Europe who 
are prepared to make difficult decisions to pursue a 
visionary policy.) 
 
9. (C) Still, Patten suggested Barosso was mistaken if he 
believed he could manage the Commission in presidential 
style.  He said Barosso \"should have begged\" to keep either 
(outgoing Italian Commissioners) Monti or Vitorino, and then 
established a structure with three senior Vice Presidents: 
Monti/Vitorino, Verheugen, and Wallstrom.   As it now stands, 
Patten predicted that Verheugen, Wallstrom, and incoming UK 
Commissioner Mandelson will be the centers of gravity in the 
Commission below Barosso.  He suggested, however, that 
Wallstrom might in fact leave in the near future to pursue 
politics back in her home country. 
 
On US-EU Relations 
--------------------- 
 
10. (C) Patten said managing transatlantic relations will 
remain a challenge no matter who wins in the US elections in 
November.  Patten said many Europeans disagree with US 
policies, but not American values -- but posited that even 
this could not be guaranteed in the long run.  In the post 
9/11 world, every European now has a horror story about US 
visa/border entry hassles -- either personally or someone 
they know.  The world\'s best and brightest, who traditionally 
went to the US to study and then stayed, are increasingly 
reluctant to do so -- a fact Patten said he hopes to 
capitalize on in his next job at Oxford University.   Besides 
border policies, Europeans simply don\'t understand American 
attitudes about guns.  For many of his countrymen in England, 
Patten suggested, Athens, Ohio is now more foreign than 
Athens, Greece.  And yes, Patten admitted, there are many 
European elites who resent the United States precisely 
because America did Europe so many favors over the preceding 
decades. 
 
11. (C) Still, Patten remains convinced that the EU will need 
to devote increased attention to transatlantic relations. 
That is why he pushed so hard to have a political appointee 
Ambassador selected for Washington (vice a Commission 
functionary).  Patten noted that it took 15 months to get 
John Bruton\'s nomination through the bureaucracy -- and 
suggested in the end it only happened because Bruton is a 
close personal friend of Manuel Barosso. 
 
12. (C) He advised the US to also re-think its relations with 
Europe.  In so doing, Patten suggested the US should tell the 
EU that America will only listen to European views if Europe 
is also ready to play a serious role in implementing the 
policies adopted.  He suggested the next US Administration 
approach Europe openly and say: we need this relationship, 
but what are you (Europe) going to contribute?  If the US 
goes down the multilateral road Europe wants, will there be 
any Europeans at the end of the path if the bullets begin to 
fly?  In a nutshell, he suggested the US should ask Europe 
(\"courteously, of course\") to ante up.  Iran, he suggested, 
will be the next major test for the relationship.  The West 
needed carrots to offer the Iranians, but also needed sticks. 
 The Middle East is another area for more work, and Patten 
suggested the next US President needs to \"look a little moreenergetic\" in 
working the peace process. 
 
Scott 
"
"21458","10/8/2004 13:11","04BRUSSELS4347","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE215870","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004347 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CCA, IO/UNP, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, ETRD, CU, UNGA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU VOTE FOR CUBAN ANTI-EMBARGO RESOLUTION EXPECTED 
 
REF: STATE 215870 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 (C) Poloff delivered reftel demarche to Paulo Oliveira, UN 
desk officer in the EU Council Secretariat.  He said EU 
representatives at the UN in New York had not yet discussed 
the resolution, but that he expected EU member states, as 
last year, to vote unanimously in favor of the Cuban 
anti-embargo resolution.  He did say that he expected an 
explanation of vote to include \"tough criticism of Cuba\'s 
human right record,\" based both on current EU-Cuba tensions 
and the EU\'s experience at this year\'s UNGA ministerial. 
(Cuban FM Perez Roque was a no-show at a scheduled meeting 
with Dutch EU presidency FM Bernard Bot.) 
 
SCOTT 
"
"21461","10/8/2004 13:30","04BRUSSELS4352","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS4265","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004352 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, ZL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU-US BALKANS TROIKA: GROWING IMPATIENCE ON ICTY 
COMPLIANCE, LOOKING AHEAD ON KOSOVO 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 4265 
 
     B. SKOPJE 1684 
     C. TIRANA 1625 
     D. USEU BRUSSELS 4317 
 
Classified By: RICK HOLTZAPPLE, POLOFF, REASONS 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) On September 30, EUR/SCE Director Chuck English and 
EUR/ACE Deputy Director Pat Nelson-Douvelis met with the EU 
Troika (Dutch and Luxembourg Presidencies, Commission, 
Council Secretariat) to discuss Balkan affairs.  The EU 
stressed the \"twin track\" approach for Serbia and Montenegro 
implied no weakening of ICTY conditionality.  On Kosovo, the 
Commission is looking for money to help with post-riot 
reconstruction, but have not responded to the Eide report\'s 
recommendation for an economic development strategy.  High 
Rep Solana\'s Balkans advisors see tough times ahead on 
getting to status discussions.  The EU is toughening its 
message on ICTY compliance with all the relevant countries, 
but remains somewhat nervous about potential variance between 
US and EU approaches.  Policy coordination between the US and 
EU on Macedonia and Albania is excellent.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Serbia and Montenegro: How the \"Twin Track\" Will Work 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
2. (C) Genoveva Ruiz Calavera, Deputy Head of the 
Commission\'s Serbia and Montenegro Unit, described the EU\'s 
new \"twin track\" approach in the same terms as reported Ref 
A.  She added that the Commission still believes it would 
have been better if SAM had been able to complete internal 
market harmonization, but the process had become caught in 
\"endless disputes.\"  The key now was to ensure that any 
Stabilization and Association Agreement is negotiated in a 
way that \"would preserve the essentials of the State Union\" 
such as its responsibility for foreign and defense policy, 
including political dialogue with the EU, and implementation 
of ICTY obligations.  Ruiz Calavera also underlined that the 
EU expects that Montenegro must also continue to \"bear the 
burden\" of compliance with ICTY as well as Serbia.  In 
particular, the EU would be pressuring Montenegro to rejoin 
the State Commission for ICTY cooperation.  Ruiz Calavera 
also asked for US assistance \"to calm down\" the Montenegrins, 
who had overreacted to the EU\'s shift; \"we told them not to 
think of applying this approach at the WTO or UN; and the 
next day they went to talk to the WTO.\" 
 
3. (C) English noted that we had also seen the Montenegrins 
misinterpreting the EU\'s new policy as an encouragement to 
the government\'s aspirations for independence.  He also noted 
U.S. appreciation of and support for the EU\'s continued 
insistence on ICTY cooperation as a precondition for progress 
in the SAA process. 
 
4. (SBU) In a meeting on Oct 1 with EUR/ACE\'s 
Nelson-Douvelis, Commission SAM Unit Head Therese Sobieski 
explained that the \"twin track\" approach would not apply to 
the EU\'s CARDS program assistance to SAM, despite Montenegrin 
appeals.  The CARDS program in SAM is budgeted at around 190m 
euros annually in 2005 and 2006, but the Commission has not 
yet wrestled with the question of what it will do with 
programs in municipalities that end up with Radical party 
governments after the recent elections.  Hungary was putting 
lots of pressure on the Commission to take a tough line. 
Sobieski also said the Commission was looking at resuming 
macro-financial assistance to Belgrade, but that the GoSAM 
had not yet met the necessary IMF conditions. 
 
KOSOVO 
------ 
 
5. (SBU) In a very brief discussion on Kosovo, both sides 
agreed that the next several months were critical, leading up 
to the standards review in 2005.  Ruiz Calavera said the 
Commission is currently looking for additional funds for 
Kosovo this year.  If such funds could be identified, the EU 
would use them to support reconstruction efforts for cultural 
and religious sites damaged in the March rioting, 
supplementing the PISG\'s efforts to rebuild housing.  English 
said such a move by the EU would be very welcome. 
 
6. (SBU) In her October 1 meeting, Sobieski indicated the EU 
had not yet responded explicitly to the recommendation in the 
recent Eide report calling for a comprehensive economic 
development strategy.  A major difficulty was that most 
economic competencies in Kosovo were among the powers already 
transferred from UNMIK to the PISG, but the Kosovar Ministry 
of Economy had been totally ineffective.  Sobieski also noted 
that Pillar IV of UNMIK had recently issued a new report (a 
copy was provided to EUR/ACE) on promoting economic 
development. 
 
7. (C) In a subsequent meeting, High Rep Solana\'s Balkan 
advisor Stefan Lehne noted the difficulties of getting a good 
result from the upcoming Kosovo elections.  Lehne said that 
some of his Serbian contacts (Samardizic and Ratkovic) had 
hinted that Kostunica\'s initial negative response might not 
be the last word.  But even more fundamental is the need to 
move from the standards process to the status issue; and 
Lehne thought it was \"almost impossible\" to see how Belgrade 
could go along with this transition in a constructive way. 
When English raised the decentralization project as a way of 
assuaging Serb concerns, Lehne commented that this would be 
hard for the Kosovar Albanians to give away before status, 
and that in any case, he thought security issues were more 
important to the Serbs than legal ones.  English responded 
that decentralization was a critical part of the most 
important issue: majority-minority relations. 
 
ICTY COOPERATION LACKING EVERYWHERE 
----------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) The EU shared the U.S. assessment that ICTY compliance 
remains a widespread problem in the region.  Jan Lucas van 
Hoorn and Tony Agotha of the Dutch Presidency said that ICTY 
Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte had recently told the EU she had 
clear indications that fugitive indictee Ante Gotovina was in 
Croatia this summer.  In late September, Commission President 
Romano Prodi called Croatian PM Sanader to complain about 
poor Croatian performance, and the next day the GoC produced 
a \"hastily assembled\" report on ICTY compliance, and 
organized a couple of ineffectual raids on the houses of 
suspected Gotovina supporters.  Del Ponte has been invited to 
the October 11 EU FMs\' meeting (GAERC), to provide a tough 
message on Serbia and send \"a shot across the bow of 
Croatia.\" 
 
9. (C) In Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Republika Srpska remained 
the key roadblock on better ICTY cooperation.  If, as 
anticipated, the GoBH had met all the other conditions of the 
EU\'s feasibility study, the EU would be confronted with 
whether it would have to postpone SAA negotiations with the 
whole country because of the behavior of the RS.  English 
noted that the U.S. continued to support High Representative 
Ashdown\'s efforts to prompt greater cooperation with ICTY, 
and that Ashdown would continue to get support if he decided 
to take further punitive measures.  The Dutch Presidency\'s 
Agotha reported the EU was getting close to final approval of 
an asset freeze against fugitive ICTY indictees (details REF 
D), although for legal reasons it could not be applied 
against support networks. 
 
10. (C) In his separate meeting, Stefan Lehne told English 
and Nelson-Douvelis that the EU remains concerned about a 
\"disjuncture\" between the messages being sent to the Serbs by 
ICTY (\"give us everything\") and the U.S. (\"only Mladic 
matters\").  Lehne said he always thought the Croatian model 
provided a better approach.  English said that would depend 
entirely on what one thought the \"Croatian model\" was.  If it 
was improve your cooperation with ICTY, and then look for 
some flexibility, then OK; but if it was cooperate on the 
little things, but refuse to deliver the big fish, then we 
could not accept it.  Lehne did not respond directly, but 
said Solana remained frustrated that ICTY conditionality was 
blocking Serbia\'s progress toward an SAA with the EU and PfP 
with NATO.  And without Serbia on a positive track toward 
Europe, then the Kosovo status problem was much more 
difficult. 
 
BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA 
------------------ 
 
11. (C) John Dunne, of the Commission\'s Bosnia unit, reported 
that the GoBH was making progress on meeting the EU\'s 
conditions for starting of SAA negotiations, although 
Commissioner Patten was insisting on the need for more 
implementation of laws passed.  Helene Holm-Pederson of the 
Council Secretariat commented that the EU-Bosnia ministerial 
troika during the UNGA had demonstrated yet again FM Ivanic\'s 
eloquent optimism and his lack of substance.  Ivanic\'s one 
substantive point had been to repeat his call for a 
re-examination of the OHR mandate prior to elections in 2006. 
 
 
12. (SBU) Holm-Pedersen also noted that neither the HDZ nor 
SDA had been helpful during parliamentary debate on 
legislation for a War Crimes Chamber in Bosnia.  She observed 
that the fact that \"feelings are running high\" on the issue 
might be a \"good sign it will have some bite.\"  English 
responded that the U.S. sees the War Crimes Chamber as an 
important part of ICTY\'s completion strategy, and we remained 
disappointed at the EU\'s meager contribution.  Dunne said the 
Commission had funded 1.5 million euro, and would \"keep under 
review\" the possibility of further funding, but made no 
promises. 
 
13. (C) Lehne, in his meeting, said that the OHR transition 
remained a \"touchy question\", particularly what should be 
done with OHR\'s \"Bonn Powers.\"  But there seemed to be a 
growing appetite for moving ahead with a change, perhaps by 
\"parking\" the Bonn Powers with the PIC.  Lehne cautioned, 
however, that he was concerned about ideas floating that the 
EU could somehow take over full responsibility on behalf of 
the international community in Bosnia, or even in Kosovo. 
\"The EU is ready to engage more,\" he said, \"but we can\'t do 
too much too quickly.\" 
 
MACEDONIA 
--------- 
 
14. (C) Ambassador Jean Louis Wolzfeld, representing the 
upcoming Luxembourg Presidency, said the November 7 
referendum on the decentralization was a discouraging 
development, whatever the result.  In the best of 
circumstances it has slowed implementation of the law, and it 
will likely undermine the confidence of ethnic Albanians in 
the Ohrid Framework Agreement.  Nonetheless, the EU would 
continue to speak out in favor of the decentralization law as 
a necessary element of the Framework Agreement, which is, in 
turn, a necessary step on Macedonia\'s path toward the EU. 
Wolzfeld also recalled that the European Commission was due 
to issue its opinion (\"avis\") on Macedonia\'s EU membership 
application by mid-2005. 
 
15. (C) Lehne, for his part, saw the US and EU messages to 
Macedonia (REF B) as well coordinated.  He argued the EU 
line, as elaborated by Wolzfeld, was \"clear to anyone who can 
read.\"  There was no need for the EU or US to suggest a 
boycott strategy.  He predicted the GoM would probably appeal 
for voters to abstain, and at that point the EU and US could 
make supportive statements.  (The Dutch Presidency had 
earlier half-jokingly suggested the campaign slogan, \"If you 
want to travel (i.e., get a looser EU visa regime), then stay 
home.\") 
 
ALBANIA 
------- 
 
16. (C) The Dutch Presidency expressed its appreciation for 
U.S. support in its recent demarche to Albania on the need 
for accelerated reforms (REF C).  But the EU was concerned by 
PM Nano\'s reaction.  It appears Nano has not gotten the 
message about how serious the problems are.  (NOTE: At a 
Sept. 30 dinner for English and Nelson-Douvelis, Albanian 
Ambassador to the EU Artur Kuko (protect) said he shared the 
EU\'s concern that the PM did not understand the seriousness 
of the situation. END NOTE.)  Nano\'s response has been to 
cite the GoA\'s responsible behavior on Kosovo and the 
\"Greater Albania\" question, and assume that trumps 
everything.  The European Commission, meanwhile, has 
cancelled, for technical reasons, the next round of SAA 
negotiations planned for early October. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"21476","10/8/2004 15:52","04BRUSSELS4361","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE213215","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 004361 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PINS, ECON, BG, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU PLANNING EXPERTS MEETING ON THE SITUATION IN 
BANGLADESH 
 
REF: STATE 213215 
 
(U) We raised reftel message concerning the deteriorating 
situation in Bangladesh with Bruno Hanses, South Asia Officer 
in the External and Politico-Military Affairs Directorate of 
the European Council.  Hanses told us that there will be a 
meeting of EU Bangladesh experts on October 21 to consider 
the issues raised in reftel.  He suggested that the October 
18 US-EU Troika meeting on Asia in Washington would be a good 
occasion for an exchange of views on the subject. 
 
Scott 
"
"21477","10/8/2004 15:54","04BRUSSELS4362","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE213824","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/07/2014 
TAGS: PTER, KTFN, NP, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU CLOSE TO A DECISION TO FREEZE MAOIST ASSETS 
 
REF: STATE 213824 
 
Classified By: USEU Political Military Officer Jeremy Brenner for reaso 
ns 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 1. (C)  Summary.  The EU is \"close\" to taking a decision to 
freeze Maoist assets.  While there is some discussion of 
tactics, there is an increasing awareness within the EU of 
the need to act. End summary. 
 
2. (C) USEU Poloff raised reftel points on freezing Maoist 
assets with Bruno Hanses, South Asia officer within the 
External and Politico-Military Affairs Directorate of the 
European Council.  Hanses told us that the thinking within 
the EU has evolved considerably since the U.S. last raised 
the issue.  He said that the question of an assets freeze has 
been discussed at length within the anti-terrorism 
clearinghouse, and that the EU is \"close to doing it.\" 
 
3. (C) Hanses characterized the action as symbolic in nature 
and said that there was some tactical consideration being 
given to \"keeping the issue in the fire\" for a bit in order 
to extract the maximum pressure from the threat before 
actually implementing it.  There was, he assured us, an 
increasing awareness within the EU on the need for the action. 
 
Scott 
"
"21534","10/13/2004 6:49","04BRUSSELS4376","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004376 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MASS, ETTC, PHUM, CH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/CHINA ARMS: DAS SUCHAN VISIT LAUNCHES PUBLIC 
DEBATE 
 
REF: SUCHAN E-MAIL 10/7/04 
 
Classified By: POL/MC Kyle Scott.  Reasons: 1.4 (B)(D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: PM DAS Greg Suchan\'s October 7 visit to 
discuss US opposition to lifting the EU arms embargo on China 
included meetings with select PSC Ambassadors, as well as a 
public briefing and press conference/backgrounder which 
resulted in widespread and generally positive coverage in 
European media outlets.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
Meeting Select EU Member States 
------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) PM DAS Greg Suchan discussed US concerns over lifting 
the EU arms embargo on China with a select group EU Political 
and Security Committee (PSC) ambassadors from smaller 
countries that had not been on his recent travels to European 
capitals.  In attendance were PSC Ambassadors from 
Luxembourg, Denmark, Poland and Lithuania, plus the chief 
Asia advisor in HiRep Solana\'s Policy Unit.  Suchan stressed 
the political, military and human rights aspects of our 
opposition to lifting the arms ban, and said that EU efforts 
to assuage our concerns had been far from sufficient.  EU 
assurances that lifting the ban would have no material 
consequence were hard to believe, he said, because market 
pressures and lobbying by Beijing would make it very hard for 
member state regulators to deny sales to China without the 
political cover of an arms embargo.  Citing the high rate of 
reported military sales to China in recent years under both 
the embargo and/and Code of Conduct (almost 210 million Euros 
in 2002, amounting to 17 license issuances for every one 
denial), Suchan stressed that even a strengthened Code could 
be no substitute for the embargo.  European governments 
should not deceive themselves into thinking they can convince 
the US that it would be okay to lift the embargo, he 
cautioned.  And if a decision to lift is taken, the EU should 
expect a strong reaction from Washington. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Luxembourg: We Need Mutual Trust 
-------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Ambassador Paul Duhr of Luxembourg said his government 
hoped the matter would be resolved before the start of its 
Presidency on January 1.  Speaking for the group (and as de 
facto EU lead since the Dutch Ambassador was not present), 
Duhr said there was no intention of selling more arms or 
military technology to China after the embargo is lifted.  US 
concerns are being taken \"very seriously,\" he said, although 
it was also important to recognize China\'s positive changes 
in recent years.  He said that \"a majority of member states 
favor a lift,\" but that serious arguments against it remain; 
it would take time to iron them out.  He understood that we 
were still not satisfied with EU assurances that lifting the 
ban would have no material impact, but said that we needed to 
proceed \"on the basis of mutual trust if transatlantic 
relations are to be respectful.\"  The US and EU needed to 
\"respect each others\' autonomy in foreign policy, while 
trusting each other not to endanger their critical 
interests,\" he said.  He added that the (not yet agreed) 
\"Toolbox\" addendum to the Code of Conduct was designed to 
reassure the US that no increase in sales to China would 
result from lifting the embargo.  On Suchan\'s description of 
possible US reactions to lifting the embargo, Duhr cautioned 
that we would lose sympathy in the EU if we are perceived as 
threatening Congressional retaliation.  \"They will drop their 
doubts and join the pro-lift camp,\" he said. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Denmark and Policy Unit: Human Rights 
------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Ambassador Reimer Nielsen of Denmark acknowledged that 
his country was still uneasy about the human rights 
implications of ending the embargo.  China \"hasn\'t delivered 
what we want yet,\" he said, which makes it difficult to make 
a decision on lifting the embargo.  Council Policy Advisor 
Tomaz Koslowski (himself a former Polish Ambassador to China) 
argued that China\'s human rights record had improved 
significantly since 1989 and that Beijing\'s progress should 
be recognized.  China\'s openness to dialogue is a good sign 
and a major accomplishment, he said.  Kozlowski said it was 
\"extremely important to note\" that in EU discussions there 
has been \"no mention\" of increasing arms sales to China.  He 
also underscored that the embargo is vague and not legally 
binding, while the Code of Conduct calls for EU Member States 
not to endanger the interests of friends and allies. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Poland and Lithuania: Feeling Stuck 
----------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) Polish Ambassador Maciej Popowski added only that the 
EU is a \"community of rules\" and that Member States generally 
respect those rules and are working to tighten them (a 
reference to the effort to strengthen the Code of Conduct). 
Lithuanian Ambassador Arnoldas Milukas said that Vilnius 
favored revising the Code of Conduct to be as legally binding 
as possible.  He expressed serious concern about the 
political implications of lifting the embargo, and said that 
Lithuania was \"very concerned for transatlantic relations.\" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
PD Events Result in Widespread Coverage 
--------------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) The main purpose of Suchan\'s visit was an 
on-the-record briefing on October 7 at the Center for 
European Policy Studies (CEPS) in Brussels.  Sharing the dais 
were Amnesty International\'s EU Director Dick Oosting and 
USEU Defense Policy Advisor Col. Mike Ryan.  The briefing was 
followed by a press conference at CEPS and follow-on 
exclusives for Reuters and Wall Street Journal Europe. 
During the press events, DAS Suchan outlined points similar 
to those in para 2.  The two CEPS events were attended by 
most major wire services and several dailies -- including two 
Chinese newspapers -- and resulted in positive and 
widespread, often front page, coverage during the October 8-9 
news cycle.  USEU Political Minister-Counselor followed up 
with an interview for BBC World Service on October 8. 
 
7. (U) DAS Suchan has cleared this message. 
 
McKinley 
"
"21603","10/14/2004 13:03","04BRUSSELS4410","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS4016","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004410 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/13/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PREF, PHUM, SU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU CONTINUES TO EXERT PRESSURE ON SUDAN: SNYDER 
CONSULTATIONS 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 4016 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  During October 11 consultations with 
Department\'s Senior Representative on Sudan Charles Snyder, 
the EU shared Snyder\'s assessment that concluding a 
comprehensive peace settlement between the North and the 
South was essential to stabilize the country.  Snyder said 
the EU\'s generous assistance package was an important 
\"carrot\" in this process.  The two sides discussed ways to 
cooperate in expediting the deployment of an expanded AU 
protection force to Darfur.  Javier Solana\'s Personal 
Representative for Sudan Pieter Feith said he would encourage 
EU Member States to provide in-kind logistical support.  EU 
military planners, however, cautioned that too much pressure 
to \"fast forward\" the deployment might provoke a failed 
mission.  Nonetheless, EU advisors in Addis are helping the 
AU reformulate its request for EU funding that would allow 
1000 military personnel to be on the ground in Darfur by 
October 30.  The Commission is prepared to fund up to 50 
percent of this entire operation.  The EU informed Snyder 
that a high level EU delegation led by Dutch Foreign Minister 
Ben Bot would leave for Sudan on October 12.  The EU will 
pressure the Sudanese government to finish the Naivasha peace 
talks and to end the violence in Darfur.   Following a 
meeting of EU Foreign Ministers in Luxembourg on October 11, 
the EU again called on the Government of Sudan to disarm the 
janjaweed militias and to facilitate humanitarian access. 
They also said the threat of sanctions against Sudan must be 
maintained.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
North-South Peace Agreement 
------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU)  In separate meetings with the European Commission 
and the European Council on October 11, Snyder gave readouts 
of his recent meetings with Sudanese Vice President Taha and 
other officials in the region.  The EU shared his assessment 
that concluding a comprehensive peace settlement between the 
North and the South was essential to stabilize the country. 
Anders Henriksson, Director for Horn, East and Southern 
Africa (DG Development), said that EU Foreign Ministers would 
stress this point in their conclusions on Sudan later in the 
day.  Snyder characterized the large EU assistance packages 
as an important \"carrot\" in encourage the opposing factions 
to work towards a comprehensive peace settlement.  Henriksson 
said that the longer the two sides took to finalize the peace 
accords, the less money would be available.  Already, 10 
percent of the total package for Sudan has been re-programmed 
to other parts of Africa (including the EU\'s number one 
priority on the continent, the Great Lakes).  The EC also 
noted that increasing revenue from oil makes the Sudanese 
less dependent on development assistance. 
 
3.  (U) The EU informed Snyder that a high level EU 
delegation led by Dutch Foreign Minister Ben Bot would leave 
for Sudan on October 12.  The EU will pressure the Sudanese 
government to finish the Naivasha peace talks and to end the 
violence in Darfur. 
 
4. (U) Note. The EU Council conclusion Henriksson referred to 
\"notes with appreciation the resumption of the negotiations 
between the GoS and the SPLM/A under the auspices of IGAD and 
urges both parties to conclude the discussions on the 
outstanding issues as soon as possible, to sign a 
comprehensive peace agreement and to implement it without 
delay.  The Council is of the view that a speedy conclusion 
of the \'Naivasha process\' could provide a political platform 
to address the underlying causes of the ongoing conflicts in 
Sudan, including Darfur; to accelerate the pace of reforms; 
to promote human rights; and to establish a genuine and 
constrictive dialogue with the political forces that are not 
present in Naivasha.\" End note. 
 
------------------------ 
Expanded AU Mission in Darfur 
------------------------ 
 
5.  (C) The two sides also discussed at length the role of 
the AU in stabilizing the situation in Darfur.  Fernando 
Valenzuela, Deputy Director General of DG RELEX, spoke of the 
delicate balancing act between allowing the AU to take 
ownership of the process while providing enough support to 
ensure a successful outcome.  He said that the UN was well 
placed to convey to the AU the importance of the donor 
community\'s involvement with the logistical planning and 
deployment of the expanded monitoring and protection force. 
Valenzuela also opined that the AU should see the logic in 
acknowledging they are not ready to go at it alone.  Both 
sides agreed that the African Mission in Sudan (AMIS) might 
mirror the role played by AMIB in Burundi -- a bridge to a 
full-fledged UN peacekeeping operation. 
 
6. (C) The EU asked about the \"BBQ approach\" (broad, big and 
quick) to deployment in Darfur, recently espoused by the U.S. 
 Council Secretariat Coordinator of Political-Military and 
Defense Policy Relations Matthew Reece expressed doubt 
whether \"fast forwarding\" the mission was logistically 
possible.  He said that since there was virtually nothing on 
the ground to support a large deployment, equipment and 
supplies would have to be procured and then flown in.  Snyder 
said that because helicopter gunship attacks on civilian 
populations were continuing (he reported an additional 10,000 
people had been displaced over the past few days), the U.S. 
was committed to support an expanded deployment as soon as 
possible.  He explained that the U.S. goal is for 10,000 
military personnel to be on the ground in Darfur by October 
30; Snyder indicated the Pentagon would make two C-130\'s 
available to ferry in troops. 
 
7.  (C)  Reece said he understood the purpose, and noted that 
Peter Stamps, an EU advisor in Addis, was helping the AU 
reformulate its request for financial support from the EU\'s 
Africa Peace Facility to meet this goal.  Feith said he would 
encourage EU Member States to provide in-kind logistical 
support.  He also stated that Solana was planning to travel 
to Addis on or about October 21, right after the AU\'s Peace 
and Security Council is expected to approve the expansion of 
the AU ceasefire commission in Darfur.  The EU hopes to 
receive a list of requirements at the earliest opportunity. 
According to DG Development Sudan Desk officer, Joaquim 
Salgueiro, the Commission is prepared to fund up to 50 
percent of the expanded deployment (estimated total is 180 
million euros for 12 months). 
 
8. (U) Note.  EU Council conclusions on the AU mission in 
Darfur state:  \"The Council reaffirms its commitment to 
assist the AU in the planning and implementation of a 
significantly expanded pro-active monitoring mission with a 
sufficiently broad mandate, in order to improve the security 
in Darfur.\"  It also takes note of the GoS\'s commitment to 
\"cooperate with an enlarged AU monitoring mission with an 
expanded mandate and a possible police component, as decided 
by the AU.\"  End Note. 
 
------------------------ 
Genocide Designation 
------------------------ 
 
9. (C)  Regarding genocide, Valenzuela noted that the EU had 
not been as forward-leaning as the U.S. because the 
implications of making such a designation were enormous.  He 
welcomed the formation of a UN committee to investigate and 
noted that an Italian national was invited to participate. 
Regarding the European Parliament\'s resolution that events in 
Darfur were \"paramount to genocide\" (reftel), Valenzuela said 
that there was no legal consequence within the EU system or 
any obligation to act as a result of the finding.  Valenzuela 
agreed with Snyder\'s assessment that the Sudanese were well 
able to withstand a sanctions regime.  He added that the main 
EU sanction -- a freeze in assistance -- was already in 
place. 
 
10.  (U)  Note.  EU Council conclusions relating to genocide 
state:  \"The Council welcomes the recent mission and the 
recommendations of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights 
and of the UN Special Advisor on the Prevention of Genocide 
in Darfur.  The Council further welcomes the decision of the 
UNHCHR to increase the number of human rights monitors in 
Darfur.  The Council welcomes the UNSC Resolution 1564 and 
the establishment of a Commission of Inquiry into violations 
of international humanitarian law and human rights in Darfur 
by all parties, with a mandate that includes investigating 
whether acts of genocide have occurred in Darfur.  The 
Council calls upon all parties to extend their full 
cooperation to this Commission of Inquiry.\"  End Note. 
 
------------------------ 
Other issues 
------------------------ 
 
11. (C) The two sides touched briefly on other issues. 
Regarding the political situation in Khartoum, the EU 
expressed its continuing fears of a total collapse of the 
government and  disintegration of the country.  Both sides 
agreed on the positive contributions Egypt has made and 
expressed disappointment for the lack of progress made in 
Abuja. Regarding the humanitarian situation, they noted 
improvements including a huge expansion of national and 
international NGOs operating in the region.  However, they 
agreed that these gains were offset by new displacements of 
civilians. 
 
12. (U)  Note.  The EU Council conclusion of October 11 
requests that \"the GoS provide information on actions taken 
thus far to neutralize and disarm the Janjaweed militias and 
to bring to justice perpetrators of human rights violations 
and crimes against civilians.\"  In also \"notes with urgency 
the need for additional humanitarian assistance and 
coordination.  The EU has already committed well over 300 
million euros.  The Council also emphasizes that humanitarian 
assistance and measures to enhance security are mutually 
supportive, and deserve equal attention by the international 
community.\"  End Note. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
13. (C) All EU interlocutors were extremely thankful for 
Snyder\'s report fresh from the field, particularly as 
Henriksson was leaving within hours for Sudan as part of the 
Dutch Presidency\'s delegation.  Although Sudan plays second 
fiddle to the primacy of the Great Lakes with regard to EU 
interest in Africa, it still is considered an important, 
developing situation.  Furthermore, the EU is well aware of 
the importance the U.S. attaches to Sudan.  It\'s willingness 
to financially support a stepped-up expansion of the AU 
protection force in Darfur -- despite advice from its own 
technical experts to go slowly -- reflects this 
understanding. 
 
(Ambassador Snyder has cleared this message.) 
 
Minimize considered. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"21614","10/14/2004 15:19","04BRUSSELS4418","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004418 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA - P. DIBBLE AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/14/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, PGOV, XF, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU VIEWS ON NORTH AFRICA AND THE GULF:  NEA DAS 
DIBBLE VISIT 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
 1.  (C)  Summary.  In US-EU discussions on the Maghreb and 
Gulf on October 5-6, EU officials said that in lifting the 
arms embargo on Libya they would urge Tripoli to resolve the 
Bulgarian medics issue.  Discussion of the Western Sahara 
focused on the hardening of Moroccan and, to a lesser extent, 
Algerian positions.  On promoting reform in the Arab world, 
the EU noted that Egypt was critical of the recent Forum for 
the Future meeting in New York, and wants a G8-Arab forum. 
The EU is trying to deepen its engagement in the Gulf through 
a regional Free Trade Agreement with the GCC, and hopes to 
promote reform by working with enlightened leaders in Kuwait 
and Qatar. Strong Hamas ties to the UAE worry the EU, which 
has learned that Hamas chief Khalid Mishal plans to relocate 
in Dubai from Damascus. The EU sees Saudi Arabia as a \"drag\" 
on reform in the peninsula, but is pleased with cooperation 
to halt Saudi government funding of radical mosques in 
Europe.  End Summary. 
 
Libya 
----- 
2.  (C) At October 6 U.S.-EU Troika discussions on Maghreb 
and Gulf issues, NEA DAS Philo Dibble outlined current status 
of U.S.-Libyan relations, noting outstanding concerns that 
must be resolved prior to removal of Libya from the list of 
state sponsors of terrorism.  Dutch Presidency Middle East 
Director Micheil den Hond noted the overlap between EU and US 
approaches to Libya, but added that the issue of illegal 
emigration was an immediate concern for Italy and Malta.  The 
EU planned to lift its arms embargo on October 11 in 
recognition of Libya\'s strategic choice to dismantle its 
nuclear weapons infrastructure but, in doing so, would note 
continued EU concern about the Bulgarian medics held in 
Libya.  (Note:  As forecast, EU Ministers approved the lift 
and issued a statement mentioning ongoing concerns on October 
11.)  Den Hond said the EU hoped to bring Libya into its 
Barcelona process -- dependent on Libyan acceptance of 
attending meetings with Israel -- where the EU thought it 
could best manage relations with Tripoli. 
 
Western Sahara 
-------------- 
3.  (C)  The EU side detailed ongoing efforts to encourage 
Morocco and Algeria to resolve this issue.  The EU is 
currently using ongoing negotiations for Neighborhood \"Action 
Plans\" with Rabat and Algiers as the vehicle.  Both sides 
agreed to include general references to the conflict in their 
Action Plans, but both -- in particular Morocco -- have 
resisted making any specific political commitments.  The EU 
continues to provide humanitarian assistance to refugees and 
POWs, but sees the Western Sahara as primarily a bilateral 
issue between Morocco and Algeria.  Den Hoon said he thought 
a major effort was needed in the UN on this.  In a separate 
meeting, Council Secretariat Policy Planning chief for the 
Middle East Pascal Charlat said that peace in the Western 
Sahara was a prerequisite for stability in Algerian-Moroccan 
affairs.  Charlat said the EU was also concerned by the 
presence of up to 800 \"Afghans\" in Morocco. 
 
Engaging the Arab World on Reform 
-------------------- 
4.  (C)  Den Hoon said the greatest challenge in the region 
for the US and the EU was to find a way to engage the Arab 
World in a way that can bring development and prosperity to 
people.  The EU has ten years experience with the Barcelona 
process, an integrated approach to regional development. 
Yet, den Hoon said, earlier this year when senior U.S. 
policymakers were proposing the Broader Middle East reform 
agenda, they asked, \"What is Barcelona?\"  Since the Sea 
Island G8 summit, den Hoon said, there has been more 
convergence of US and EU approaches.  US and EU coordination 
to promote reform in the region was key, den Hoon said.  NEA 
DAS Dibble agreed, noting that our efforts must respond to 
local initiatives and not be seen as imposing an a priori 
plan from outside. 
 
Forum for the Future 
------------ 
5.  (C)  Den Hoon added that he attended the recent Forum for 
the Future meeting in New York, where he noted there remained 
some \"suspicion\" among Arab countries\' statements regarding 
the initiative but was pleased to see these remarks were not 
shared with the press.  He said that Egypt had been 
particularly difficult regarding the presence of Afghanistan 
and Pakistan at the meeting and want to hold a G8-Arab Group 
forum.  Den Hoon said the geographic scope of the U.S. 
approach -- going beyond the Arab world to include other 
Muslim countries -- is an issue in the region.  It makes it 
appear that religion is the defining element, and an obstacle 
to reform.  Den Hoon said that Egypt had also raised the 
concern that the Middle East Peace Process, which it sees as 
related to the issue of regional reform, was not on the Forum 
agenda. 
 
EU Engagement in the Gulf 
--------------------- 
6.  (C)  As part of a regional strategy, Den Hoon said the EU 
seeks to deepen its superficial relations with the Gulf.  The 
EU hopes to finalize a Free Trade Agreement with the GCC 
countries this year, despite Saudi foot-dragging.  The 
Commission noted that the EU and US have different approaches 
on FTAs. The EU has promoted a GCC customs union as a first 
step to a regional FTA; there is concern that the U.S. focus 
on bilateral FTA\'s could undermine the GCC customs union. 
 
7.  (C)  The EU has also been pursuing a parallel political 
dialogue with GCC countries, raising issues such as human 
rights, but discussion has usually been stilted.  The EU also 
plans to pursue bilateral relations with GCC members, with a 
focus on reform.  Money was not the issue; the key is to 
build on the desire for change in the Gulf, den Hoond said, 
which he found to be greater than one might expect.  He cited 
the Sultan of Oman and the Emir of Kuwait as examples of 
leaders pushing reform on their conservative societies -- 
\"the reverse of what we see in the Mediterranean.\" 
 
Gulf links to Hamas 
--------------- 
8.  (C)  Council Secretariat official Charlat said the EU was 
concerned about the strong Hamas links to the UAE, and said 
the EU is urging Dubai to cut these ties.  Charlat said the 
EU understood that Hamas leader Khalid Mishal planned to 
relocate from Damascus to Dubai.  (Note:  According to 
Embassy Abu Dhabi, there is no sign on Mishal in the UAE. 
End note.) 
 
Saudi Arabia 
------------ 
9.  (C)  Den Hoon said Saudi Arabia was a concern to the EU; 
it was reluctant to engage and has dragged down EU efforts 
with the GCC.  On the positive side, the Saudi government has 
ended funding of radical mosques in Europe, and the Dutch 
have intensified bilateral cooperation with the Saudis on 
this issue.  DAS Dibble remarked that the Saudi government 
has been very cooperative, but concerns remain about private 
funding to charities that support radical and terrorist 
groups. 
 
10.  (U)  NEA DAS Dibble has cleared this telegram. 
 
McKinley 
"
"21616","10/14/2004 15:34","04BRUSSELS4419","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004419 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/IPA, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/14/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, IS, UNSC, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU\'S SOLANA:  1967 BORDERS ARE STARTING POINT FOR 
MID-EAST PEACE 
 
 
Classified By: USEU/POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  In an October 13 speech before the 
European Parliament, EU High Rep Solana harshly criticized 
recent remarks by Israeli PM Sharon\'s cabinet chief, Dov 
Weisglass, that the Gaza disengagement plan was designed to 
freeze negotiations leading to a Palestinian state.  Solana 
also called for a Quartet effort to begin discussion of the 
borders of a Palestinian state, and challenged Israel to 
agree that the 1967 borders should be the basis for that 
negotiation.  End Summary. 
 
Solana to European Parliament:  Roadmap is stalled 
---------------------- 
2.  (SBU) In an October 13 address to the European 
Parliament, EU High Rep Javier Solana said events in the 
Middle East since the last Quartet meeting have stalled 
progress on the Roadmap.  In Gaza, the situation has 
deteriorated.  Rocket launches from the Palestinian side had 
triggered a disproportionate Israeli response.  The EU and 
others worked hard, but in vain, for a ceasefire.  Then came 
the attacks in Taba, which have generated a sense of 
\"revulsion\" among all.  The PA, Solana said, \"needs a 
government;\" much needs to be done on security. Arafat needs 
to delegate power to the Prime Minister.  Israel complains 
about not having a negotiating partner; this issue needs to 
be resolved so Israel does not have an \"alibi\" for not 
\"trying\" to move negotiations forward. 
 
Taking a Swipe at Weisglass 
-------------- 
3.  (SBU)  Israel, Solana said, is also politically unstable. 
 The recent Knesset vote against Sharon\'s Gaza plan and the 
issue of financing disengagement are causing problems in 
Israel.  Solana said there could be further political 
realignment, perhaps a coalition government, and elections 
could be moved up from 2006 to 2005.  With the Roadmap 
stalled, Solana said, \"recent Israeli political declarations\" 
(a reference to Weisglass) were \"disgraceful\" and \"totally 
unacceptable.\"  The EU cannot accept Israel saying \"no\" to 
the Roadmap.  \"Dishonesty doesn\'t help,\" Solana concluded, 
noting that the remarks in question were made by \"someone 
close to the Prime Minister.\" 
 
What the EU can do 
------------ 
4.  (SBU)  Solana outlined four areas for EU action, all 
guided by the direction given by the Roadmap. 
 
--  Security:  The EU stands ready to help the PA improve its 
police structure to enhance law and order and combat 
terrorism. 
 
-- Reform:  The EU will support PA reform efforts.  But the 
PA needs to carry out reform. 
 
-- Economic:  The EU will do all it can to support Gaza 
disengagement.  But, if Israel intends to disengage only from 
Gaza, it can\'t count on continued EU support.  Gaza must be 
part of a broader plan leading to a negotiated resolution of 
all issues. 
 
-- Electoral Process:  The PA needs credible elections in the 
territories, and a credible Electoral Commission.  The EU 
will support this so Palestinians can elect the leaders they 
want. 
 
Focus on 1967 borders 
------------ 
5.  (SBU)  Saying it was time to \"take a leap,\" Solana said 
the \"step-by-step\" approach to Roadmap implementation had 
reached its logical end.  Once the US elections are over, he 
continued, the EU wanted the Quartet to speed up 
implementation.  For example, no one has defined the borders 
of a Palestinian state yet, but their basic outline was 
\"quite clear-- the 1967 borders.\"  The two parties can 
negotiate exchanges of territory as they see fit, but this 
must be on the basis of the 1967 borders as the starting 
point.  Solana concluded that it was imperative to \"move 
forward speedily\" to final settlement talks, and \"get beyond 
the irresponsible statements of Israeli leaders.\" 
 
Comment 
------ 
6.  (C) Council Secretariat sources indicated to us in 
advance of Solana\'s speech that, despite press reporting that 
Solana would announce a major initiative, in fact there would 
be little that was really new.  They described this as the 
result of an effort by the Dutch presidency and Solana to 
pre-empt individual member states from launching trial 
balloons of their own, either out of anger over Weisglass\'s 
remarks or out of frustration over lack of progress on the 
Roadmap.  The Israeli mission in Brussels told us today that 
PM Sharon\'s office was upset with Solana\'s remarks but, in 
the words of the Embassy officer with whom we spoke, \"There\'s 
nothing much in what Solana said to get upset about -- what 
Weisglass said was inexcusable.\" 
 
7.  (C) Comment continued.  We interpret Solana\'s remarks as 
an attempt to pin Sharon down on whether Gaza disengagement 
is in lieu of disengagement in the West Bank, or is part of a 
process that could ultimately include the West Bank and lead 
to a negotiated settlement of all final status questions. 
The 1967 borders is simply the vehicle Solana chose to 
achieve this.  We expect the EU will press this issue in any 
future Quartet meetings. 
 
McKinley 
"
"21648","10/15/2004 10:20","04BRUSSELS4438","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04LONDON7312","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004438 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/15/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EAID, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU DISCUSSIONS ON CRISES, FAILING STATES 
 
REF: A. LONDON 7312 
 
     B. BRUSSELS 4107 
     C. BRUSSELS 3497 
     D. BRUSSELS 0014 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) On October 5 Ambassador Carlos Pascual, Coordinator 
for Reconstruction and Stabilization (S/CRS), met with EU 
officials and laid the ground work for closer cooperation 
with the EU in dealing with crises and failing states. 
Agreeing that U.S. and EU priorities fit well in this area, 
EU contacts expressed a desire to work together but cautioned 
that the EU faced institutional and resource constraints. 
Commission interlocutors pointed to a recently proposed 
streamlining of EC foreign assistance, which, if approved for 
2007, would include a \"stability instrument\" of 500-600 
million Euros to tackle crises in third countries.  EU 
Council officials summarized EU crisis-management operations 
and aspirations, and said a civilian/military planning cell 
-- which might be a good partner for S/CRS -- would be set up 
by end of year.  EU Council Director for Policy and Planning 
Christoph Heusgen suggested that S/CRS work together with his 
office to develop a U.S.-EU dialogue on &early warning8 
assessments of countries at risk.  END SUMMARY. 
 
U.S., EU ON SIMILAR TRACKS BUT EU HAMPERED 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) EU Council Secretariat Director-General Robert Cooper 
(see ref C) said U.S. plans were \"highly relevant to what the 
EU wants to do but now does rather badly;\" if the 
constitutional treaty is ratified, he said, an EU Foreign 
Minister and EU Diplomatic Service could help bring together 
\"significant political, military and foreign-aid clout\" )- 
coordination that the EU currently lacks.  Cooper said that, 
at present, the Council Secretariat was working on crisis 
management, with a military staff of about 150 and a police 
unit of about a dozen police officers, but without an 
institutional framework that encompassed both the political 
authority of the member states and the Commission\'s funds. 
Until these elements existed under a single framework, the EU 
would continue to \"learn crisis management by doing,\" but 
would not be able to develop an S/CRS equivalent. 
 
3. (C) Other interlocutors commented on the EU institutional 
framework as well.  Marc van Bellinghen, Deputy Director of 
the European Commission Office of Conflict Prevention and 
Crisis Management (Directorate-General for External 
Relations), specified the constraints the EU Council 
Secretariat was subject to when trying to act in a crisis 
 
SIPDIS 
situation:  Council action requires unanimous agreement of 
the 25 member states, thus delaying the EU response to crisis 
situations; also, the Council Secretariat has virtually no 
budget (CFSP budget is 50 million Euro/year) and very little 
manpower for taking action outside of Brussels.  Council 
interlocutors, on the other hand, outlined for us the 
constraints under which the Commission must work:  while the 
Commission has money for crisis management, it does not have 
the political backing; whereas Council crisis-management 
operations are usually carried out by people seconded from 
the member states under the political control of the 
member-state officials on the EU Political and Security 
Committee (PSC), the Commission often outsources its 
on-the-ground work to experts without an official connection 
to -- and without the political backing of -- member-state 
governments. 
 
COMMISSION MAY INAUGURATE \"STABILITY INSTRUMENT\" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
4. (C) Van Bellinghen acknowledged the Commission\'s need to 
\"adapt its foreign-aid instruments\" so that the EC could 
\"respond to crises in real time.\"  He said that that was a 
principal purpose of the proposed streamlining of the EC 
foreign-aid system that the Commission had proposed in a 
White Paper published on September 29 (\"On the Instruments 
for External Assistance under the Future Financial 
Perspective 2007-2013\").  The proposal includes a \"stability 
instrument\" of about 500-600 million euros per year to tackle 
crises and instability in third countries.  Commission Deputy 
Director-General for External Relations Michael Leigh 
affirmed that such a stability mechanism would give the EC 
more resources and greater flexibility in dealing with crises 
quickly.  For the present, until Council and Commission 
authorities would be brought together under the new 
constitution in 2007, Leigh noted that RELEX focuses more on 
medium-term issues, while crises are more likely to be 
managed by the Council.  He said he expected the Commission 
proposal to get the necessary approval of the European 
Parliament and member states, and to be up and running by 
2007.  Leigh added, though, that the amount of money that 
would actually be made available for a stability mechanism 
could not yet be predicted.  (NOTE: Van Bellinghen named the 
500-600m euro figure, but that does not appear in the 
Commission White Paper.  END NOTE.) 
CRISIS MANAGEMENT MOVING UP EU AGENDA 
------------------------------------- 
5. (C) Michael Matthiessen, EU Council Secretariat Director 
of Civilian Crisis Management, said S/CRS activities and 
plans were strikingly similar to that of his Directorate.  He 
said EU priorities for crisis management were expanding 
capabilities for missions in four priority areas: police, 
rule-of-law assistance, civil administration and civil 
protection.  He noted that the EU had succeeded in meeting 
its headline goal targets for building rapid reaction 
capacities in the four priority areas.  Given expanded EU 
membership, the Council was revising targets upward regarding 
the available on-call pool for the four civilian headline 
goal elements and two new areas: monitoring capacity and 
staff for EUSRs. 
 
6.  (C) Matthiesen stressed that the Council was responsible 
for not only strategic level planning, but also for the 
operational conduct of EU crisis-response missions.  He 
described the EU\'s three current civilian crisis-management 
missions:  the EU Police Mission (EUPM) in Bosnia, the 
PROXIMA police mission in FYROM, and the ESDP rule-of-law 
mission in Georgia.  Matthiessen added that EU was 
considering or planning several future missions:  (1) a 
police mission in Kinshasa to train DRC police; (2) the 
sending of police planners to Addis Ababa to help the African 
Union in Darfur; (3) an as-yet undefined civilian crisis 
management mission in Iraq (Matthiessen will go on a 
fact-finding trip to Iraq in October to assess needs for 
civilian crisis management in time for the November 5 visit 
of Iraqi Prime Minister Allawi to Brussels); (4) a possible 
police-assistance mission to the Palestinian Territories; and 
(5) a possible replacement of UNMIK police with EU police in 
Kosovo.  (NOTE: deliberations on 3-5 above are in the 
beginning stages.  END NOTE.) 
 
7. (C) Most interlocutors pointed out that crisis management 
and dealing with failed and failing states is central to the 
European Security Strategy (ESS), which is the strategic 
foundation of the European Security and Defense Policy 
(ESDP).  An important component of the ESS is \"effective 
multilateralism with the UN at its core\" (refs B, D). 
Against that background, our EU contacts said the EU would 
enthusiastically welcome an S/CRS approach, as described by 
Pascual, that included close cooperation with the UN.  EU 
Council Secretariat Policy Unit Director Christoph Heusgen 
proposed that a first step on enhancing U.S.-EU coordination 
on crisis issues could be to begin a regular dialogue on 
&early warning8 assessments, given that the U.S. and the EU 
had undertaken similar, regular exercises to identify 
countries at-risk.  He also referred us to the EU-UN Joint 
Declaration on Crisis Management.  Jim Cloos, Council 
Secretariat Director for UN Affairs, Human Rights and 
 
SIPDIS 
Transatlantic Relations, is in charge of implementation of 
the agreement.  In response to Ambassador Pascual,s appeal 
for EU support to encourage concrete efforts by the UN to 
improve coordination among UN agencies involved in 
post-conflict operations, Heusgen said Cloos should be 
brought into the loop in developing thoughts on how EU-UNcooperation might be 
relevant to the S/CRS approach. 
 
CIV/MIL PLANNING CELL: USEFUL S/CRS PARTNER 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Both Cooper and Matthiessen suggested that the 
Council\'s incipient Civilian/Military Planning Cell (CMPC) 
could be a natural partner for S/CRS.  According to our 
interlocutors, the CMPC should be set up by the end of this 
year, with about 60 staff preparing action plans for crisis 
management -- including both military and civilian components 
as needed -- based on an EU watch list of potential crisis 
countries.  Cooper said he foresaw the CMPC as first 
developing the capability to manage a crisis monitoring 
operation; later, he hoped, it could manage Disarmament, 
Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) programs; finally, 
even further in the future, Cooper envisaged the CMPC 
managing post-conflict reconstruction programs.  Ambassador 
Pascual noted that the EU was aware of the U.S. position on 
EU planning capability.  He welcomed, however, the cell,s 
stated role to act as a coordinator of EU civilian 
stabilization and reconstruction activities. 
 
COMMENT: SEEDS PLANTED, CONTINUE CONSULTS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) Since the December 2003 approval of the ESS and the 
related advent of the concept of effective multilateralism, 
crisis management and dealing with failing states have been 
moving toward the center of EU foreign and security policy 
thinking.  Thus, this visit to introduce S/CRS struck a 
chord.  EU capabilities and resources in these areas are not 
commensurate with the EU\'s economic clout or the political 
weight of the member states, but the EU is working hard to 
make progress -- the proposed Commission \"stability 
instrument\" and the planned Council civ/mil planning cell are 
two examples of this.  Continued consultation with the EU on 
these issues could help us not only to reach our objectives 
for S/CRS, but also encourage a pragmatic and positive 
approach to \"effective multilateralism,\" as opposed to the 
ideological multilateralism of many in the EU with its 
intense suspicion of American \"hegemony.\"  END COMMENT. 
 
10. (U) This message has been cleared by Ambassador Pascual. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"21717","10/18/2004 12:01","04BRUSSELS4474","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BERLIN3497","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004474 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/13/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, MASS, ETTC, PHUM, CH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/CHINA ARMS: SLOWING THE RUSH TO THE SUMMIT 
 
REF: A. BERLIN 3497 
 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 4376 
     C. THE HAGUE 2605 
     D. LONDON 7653 
     E. PARIS 7470 
     F. USEU BRUSSELS 2896 
     G. USEU BRUSSELS 3435 
     H. USEU BRUSSELS 3421 
     I. STATE 222102 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b)(d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: US approaches to EU member states have slowed 
the rush to end the arms embargo before the December 8 summit 
with China.  Nevertheless, following the October 11 GAERC 
discussion of China, EU Member States appear to be gearing up 
to signal to China at the summit that they have agreed in 
principle to lift the EU arms embargo, but will need more 
time to iron out the details.  Negotiations on changes to the 
EU\'s Code of Conduct appear stalled, and could delay EU 
readiness to move ahead.  We have slowed this train, but not 
derailed it.  To do so will require a more vibrant public 
debate, building on coverage inaugurated by PM P/DAS Greg 
Suchan in his visit to Brussels October 7.  A public 
diplomacy campaign that energizes natural allies in European 
parliaments, NGOs and among commentators could create enough 
bottom-up political pressure to prevent the EU from making 
any hasty commitments at the EU-China summit.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) Thanks in large part to the approaches made by US 
embassies in member state capitals, the October 11 GAERC held 
inconclusive discussions on ending the China arms embargo. 
According to our discussions here, the EU is not yet prepared 
to lift its arms embargo on China, but the trend among Member 
States continues to move in that direction.  Brussels-based 
EU diplomats understood that the mandate that emerged from 
the GAERC is to re-double their efforts to reform the Code of 
Conduct and finalize discussions on a \"Toolbox\" of measures 
for post-embargo states.  But as ref (C) makes clear and 
other reporting suggests, there is no committed opposition 
within the EU to lifting the embargo.  It appears less likely 
than ever that individual Member States will stand up and 
challenge the widespread assumption that the embargo should, 
at least in principle, be lifted.  FM Straw\'s post-GAERC 
statement to the press -- \"We are not in any sense against 
lifting the embargo, but it has got to be done in a proper 
and sensible manner...\" -- should serve as notice that the EU 
is moving beyond \"if\" and is now discussing the when and how 
of lifting the embargo. 
 
3. (C) While EU governments may have agreed tacitly that the 
embargo should in principle be lifted, time will still be 
needed to work out a formula that keeps all Member States on 
board.  The outlines of that formula have been clear since 
July: strengthening the Code of Conduct on arms sales (ref. 
G); creating a \"Toolbox\" to monitor transfers to post-embargo 
countries (ref. H); issuing a political declaration stating 
the EU\'s intent to remain vigilant on arms sales to China; 
and perhaps getting token progress from China on human 
rights. 
 
4. (C) Differing Member State views on each of these elements 
are serious, but not insurmountable.  We were told by an 
informed Council contact, for example, that the Code of 
Conduct and Toolbox \"could be agreed tomorrow\" if the French 
removed their objections to draft provisions calling for a 
higher degree of transparency and regularity in Member State 
arms licensing consultations. Discussions on strengthening 
the Code of Conduct are also currently stalemated over 
whether to make it legally binding; Dutch Presidency contacts 
suggest the final decision on this will be political, not 
technical.  It is possible, but not likely, that the EU will 
be able to iron out all these differences in time for a full 
lifting of the embargo prior to the December 8 EU-China 
summit.  The most likely scenario, however, would be for the 
EU to achieve sufficient consensus over the next two months 
to go to the summit and confidently signal to China that the 
end of the embargo is near; that it will be lifted as soon as 
Member States finish ironing out the \"modalities.\"  Beijing 
might even help the process along by sending some positive 
signals, whether genuine or not, on human rights, or by 
intimating that the summit itself could be endangered by a 
lack of EU progress.  In other words, even though the EU does 
not appear likely to lift the embargo by December 8, it might 
still be able to make a commitment to China that we and other 
concerned parties would be unable to walk back later. 
 
5. (C) The EU still has several opportunities to make 
progress on the issue before the EU-China summit.  Foreign 
Ministers will meet again at the November 2 and November 22 
GAERCs (joined by Defense Ministers at the latter), and Heads 
of Government will gather for a summit on November 5.  At 
each of these meetings, we should expect those pushing for a 
rapid lifting of the embargo to aggressively pursue their 
agenda, especially after Chirac\'s performance in China last 
week.  Whether a formal agenda item or just the topic of 
debate on the margins, the China embargo will be a theme in 
each of these meetings.  The goal of the pro-lift camp will 
be to achieve sufficient consensus to go to the EU-China 
summit with a solid pledge to lift the embargo in the very 
near future.  Under these circumstances, our goal should be 
to make that a politically unpalatable thing to do. 
 
6. (C) Changing the political calculus of EU governments that 
have so far acquiesced to pro-lift arguments will require 
continuing our diplomatic efforts while raising the level of 
our public outreach (ref. F).  PM P/DAS Greg Suchan\'s 
on-the-record public appearances in Brussels on October 7 
(ref. B) were an excellent start.  His remarks helped launch 
a public debate in Europe that until now had been 
conspicuously absent.  Numerous commentators, NGOs and 
Parliamentarians from across Europe have begun weighing in 
with compelling arguments that lifting the embargo would be 
foolish on both strategic and human rights grounds.  In an 
editorial following Suchan\'s visit, the influential Financial 
Times even acknowledged, \"Washington is on solid ground on 
this matter of international security.\"  We have only seen 
one commentary in the last week defending the pro-lift 
argument, and that was in a low circulation weekly that 
caters almost exclusively to EU bureaucrats. 
 
7. (C) On-the-record public outreach by US officials helps 
get out our key message concerning the embargo.  Far more 
effective, however, is public political debate in EU member 
states.  To the extent possible, our public diplomacy efforts 
should aim to encourage influential NGOs such as Human Rights 
Watch and Amnesty International to speak out.  (For a 
European audience, the presence of Amnesty International\'s EU 
director alongside P/DAS Suchan at a press event on October 7 
added tremendous credibility to our message.)  Likewise, 
European parliaments should be encouraged to take a stand, 
holding hearings on the issue and clarifying their concerns. 
Liberal MEP Graham Watson is initiating a debate in the 
European parliament in mid-November (date tbd).  Similar 
efforts in member state capitals can help raise the ante as 
foreign ministers and heads of government face this issue, 
and should be encouraged. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"21719","10/18/2004 12:02","04BRUSSELS4475","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE221188","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004475 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, PGOV, LY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COTER TROIKA ON LIFTING LIBYA ARMS EMBARGO 
 
REF: STATE 221188 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) S/CT European Regional Director Brent Hartley 
delivered reftel points to the EU Counter-terrorism troika 
(COTER) during consultations in Brussels October 14. 
Reponding for for the EU Presidency, Dutch MFA officer Wouter 
Jurgens underscored that the US and EU were \"on the same 
page\" regarding the positive direction in which Libya is now 
moving.  He said that since the outstanding issues 
surrounding the Labelle Disco bombing (the reason for the EU 
embargo) had been solved, and since Libya was making good 
progress on WMD and terrorism, there was no longer any reason 
to maintain the embargo.  He emphasized that the EU\'s Code of 
Conduct for arms exports would still apply, as would the 
\"Toolbox\" measures for post-embargo countries, once 
finalized.  Jurgens said that until the US removed Libya from 
its State Sponsors of Terrorism list, he hoped we would use 
our waiver authority to prevent any retaliation against EU 
countries doing business with Libya.  Other troika 
participants from The Hague, Luxembourg, Commission and 
Council Secretariat did not comment. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"21795","10/19/2004 15:49","04BRUSSELS4503","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS2114","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004503 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR P - JDEHART; EUR/ERA - PCHASE AND KSHEARER; 
CA - JJACOBS AND SJACOBS; DHS FOR BTS - DSULLIVAN AND 
MCLAYTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2014 
TAGS: SMIG, PREL, CMGT, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: VISA WAIVER MEETING: U.S. WELCOMED -- AND WARNED 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 2114 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  While privately praising USG efforts to 
adopt a more positive approach to EU Member States not in the 
visa waiver program (VWP), the European Commission (EC) 
struck a combative tone in public during consultations on 
October 18.  DG JHA Head of Unit for Visas and Borders Jan de 
Ceuster contrasted the U.S. response to enlargement with more 
welcomed initiatives from New Zealand (extending visa waiver 
status to all 25), Australia (processing visa applications 
online for newcomers), and Canada (proactively re-evaluating 
status of new states).  He also warned the ten EU Member 
States not in VWP against using the \"solidarity mechanism\" to 
force reciprocity, calling it a \"draconian\" measure.  De 
Ceuster stated the EU Council has begun discussing 
\"retaliatory\" options other than visa reciprocity to pressure 
the USG (he did not clarify further).  Senior USG policy 
makers from DHS and DoS reviewed the technical qualifications 
for VWP status.  The reaction from the ten EU \"have nots\" was 
low-key.  Suggestions included:  reducing the subjectivity of 
visa decisions, lowering the visa application fees, making 
the visa refusal rates public, and taking into consideration 
EU Membership when deciding on VWP status.  In a subsequent 
media roundtable, questions focused on USG reaction to the 
\"solidarity mechanism\" and the effect it would have on 
transatlantic travel, if invoked.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Commission urges U.S. to expand VWP 
------------------------ 
 
2. (U) Following up on an offer made by DHS Secretary Ridge 
during a a recent meeting in The Hague, senior policy 
advisors from the Departments of Homeland Security and State 
met in Brussels on October 18 with the ten EU Member States 
not in the VWP to review the parameters of the program.  The 
meeting was co-hosted by the EC and the Dutch Presidency. 
The ten interested Member States were represented by 
Brussels-based diplomats (with the Czech Republic, Cyprus, 
Latvia, Lithuania and Poland also sending senior personnel 
from capitals). 
 
3. (C) During a pre-meeting briefing, DG JHA Head of Unit for 
External Relations Lotte Knudsen thanked the U.S. for being 
responsive to the internal dynamics on VWP by agreeing to 
meet with the ten \"aggrieved\" members as a group.  DG JHA 
Head of Unit for Visas and Borders Jan de Ceuster opened the 
meeting by declaring it to be a historic gathering. 
 
4. (C) De Ceuster quickly shifted gears, however, and adopted 
a combative tone on visa reciprocity.  He reviewed the 
context of the meeting, noting that the ten new EU states 
fulfilled their Schengen obligations of adopting the EU\'s 
common visa waiver list without benefiting fully in return. 
He contrasted the U.S. defense of its \"status quo\" after 
enlargement with more positive initiatives from other 
countries regarding visas.  De Ceuster said that New Zealand 
will extend visa waiver status to all 25; Australia will 
initiate online applications with visas being issued \"quite 
automatically\"; and, Canada will proactively re-evaluate the 
status of new states with regard to visa waiver. 
 
5. (C) Characterizing the ten as \"victims of non-reciprocity\" 
vis-a-vis the U.S., de Ceuster explained that any of these 
countries could invoke the \"solidarity mechanism\" which would 
result in an automatic visa requirement for U.S. citizens in 
thirty days (reftel).  Only a qualified majority vote in the 
Council could suspend this action.  De Ceuster then turned 
his fire on the ten, warning that use of the solidarity 
mechanism would be counterproductive.  He characterized it as 
a \"draconian\" instrument. 
 
6. (C) De Ceuster said the EC has put forward a proposal to 
\"do away with the dangerous automatic nature\" of the 
mechanism.  He also stated the Council has begun discussing 
\"retaliatory\" options other than visa reciprocity to pressure 
the USG (without clarifying further). 
 
7. (C) (Note: PRMOff was told by Norwegian permrep staff, who 
qualify for insider status on Schengen issues, that the 
discussion last week in COREPER was an initiative of the 
Dutch Presidency.  The retaliatory measures could come from a 
full range of sectors -- trade, education, science -- 
although no specifics were discussed in COREPER.  This line 
of thinking was developed after it became evident that the 
ten \"aggrieved\" members responded unenthusiastically to the 
Commission\'s proposal to take the teeth out of the solidarity 
mechanism.  End Note.) 
 
------------------------ 
U.S. reviews parameters 
------------------------ 
 
8. (SBU) DHS Director for International Enforcement Daniel E. 
Sullivan said the U.S. was looking for positive approaches in 
its dialogue with the EU.  He reviewed the history of the VWP 
and described current travel flows at U.S. ports of entry. 
Of the estimated 330 million foreigners who enter the U.S. 
annually each year, 13.5 million benefit from VWP (11.6 
million for pleasure and 1.97 for work).  He said that 
legislation enacted since 9/11 provided for a tightening of 
the criteria for VWP (including requirements for machine 
readable and biometric passports).  Sullivan also highlighted 
the increasing focus on national security related provision 
of VWP status, once the 3% visa refusal threshold is met. 
 
------------------------ 
Member States offer suggestions 
------------------------ 
 
9. (C) The response from the Member States was surprisingly 
mild.  Specific comments and questions were as follows: 
 
-- Malta:  Asked for clarification about the procedure to 
follow if the government felt like it qualified for VWP 
status.  (Sullivan recommended the Maltese government contact 
the U.S. Embassy to formally initiate a request for 
consideration and described the subsequent steps.) 
-- Hungary:  Complained about the subjective nature of visa 
decisions.  (Senior Advisor for Consular Affairs Susan Jacobs 
noted that over time issuance rates have remained relatively 
stable, despite the frequent turn-over in consular staff.) 
-- Estonia:  Wondered whether having been part of the Soviet 
Union counted against it and noted it could not enter into a 
bilateral agreement with the U.S. on visas because EU 
membership prohibited this.  (Jacobs stressed that membership 
in regional groupings did not affect VWP status.  She used 
APEC as an example of a regional association where several 
members enjoy VWP status while others do not.) 
-- The Czech Republic:  Suggested the visa refusal rate be 
made public and that EU Membership be considered when 
deciding on VWP status.  Also stated that visa fees were too 
high.  (Jacobs noted that consular operations were conducted 
on the basis of \"fee for service.\") 
-- Poland:  Asked for a clarification of what was more 
important, combating illegal immigration or enhancing 
national security.  (Sullivan responded that the former was a 
primary consideration when the program was first established 
in 1986, but that current concerns stress the importance of 
national security.) 
 
10. (SBU) Poland thanked the U.S. for its willingness to meet 
to discuss visa policy and recommended that periodic 
discussions on VWP and other issues of mutual interest take 
place.  All the participants seemed to appreciate the U.S. 
initiative, even if the basic message regarding parameters of 
VWP was similar to what they have heard on a bilateral basis. 
 Jacobs said that the U.S. had engaged in bilateral 
discussions with Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia and 
welcomed others to initiate similar dialogues.  PRMOff also 
noted the on-going migration dialogues -- such as CIREFI and 
SCIFA -- where a full range of border management issues arediscussed with the 
Member States. 
 
11. (SBU) De Ceuster said that a readout of the meeting would 
be presented to the Policy Dialogue on Borders, 
Transportation and Security at its next meeting in Washington 
on November 22.  PRMOff recommended that the EC also provide 
a readout on where its proposal to modify the \"solidarity 
mechanism\" stands, as well as additional information on the 
new initiative to identify other \"retaliatory\" measures 
should the U.S. not expand VWP. 
 
------------------------ 
Media roundtable focuses on \"solidarity mechanism\" 
------------------------ 
 
12. (SBU) In a subsequent media roundtable, questions from 
the international wire services focused on the U.S. reaction 
to the \"solidarity mechanism\" and the effect it would have on 
transatlantic travel, if invoked.  Radio and print media from 
the new member states were more interested in efforts their 
own countries might make to attain VWP status. 
 
13. (U) The following communique, drafted by the Department, 
was distributed to the press regarding the meeting: 
 
Begin Text 
 
United States officials met with members of the European 
Union in Brussels on October 18 to discuss participation in 
the Visa Waiver Program (VWP). They noted that U.S. visa 
policies and procedures are established in accordance with 
specific laws and legislatively mandated requirements. 
Legislation for the VWP requires the U.S. to review each 
country individually for purposes of determining compliance 
with requirements of the VWP.  This should not be viewed as a 
reflection of the overall bilateral relationship with the 
U.S.; many countries not in the program are among the closest 
friends and partners of the United States. 
 
The statutory requirements to qualify for the VWP are set 
forth in Section 217 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, 
and cannot be waived. Countries must first meet a threshold 
requirement of an average non-immigrant visitor refusal rate 
of less than 3%.  Once that threshold is met, the following 
criteria come into play: 
 
     Issue a machine-readable passport that, after October 
26, 2005, is biometrically enhanced according to ICAO 
standards; 
     Offer visa free travel to American citizens; 
     Certify that they report the loss or theft of blank 
passports to the U.S. Government; 
     Have a low rate of immigration violations and refused 
admissions. 
 
The Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, in 
consultation with the Secretary of State, must make a 
positive determination regarding the impact the country,s 
potential VWP participation would have on U.S. national 
security and law enforcement interests. In the ongoing review 
of current VWP participants the factors considered include: 
 
     Terrorist and criminal threats in the country and 
efforts to address them; 
     Existence of formal and informal cooperation, including 
extradition; treaties, with the U.S. and international 
partners, such as Interpol; and 
     Effective border security controls, including 
citizenship and passport issuance procedures. 
 
 
The Secretary of Homeland Security is required to submit to 
Congress a report on a country,s qualification for 
designation as a VWP country, including an explanation of a 
favorable determination. 
 
While Greece and none of the new EU member nations meet all 
the criteria at this time (with the exception of Slovenia, 
who joined the VWP prior to EU accession), U.S. officials 
said that they would continue to review the situation in each 
country and make nominations for participation in the VWP if 
and when a country becomes eligible. This is similar to the 
approach used by most EU member states in defining which 
third countries qualify for \"visa waiver\" status according to 
the Schengen Agreement. U.S. officials reiterated the 
commitment of the U.S. Government to facilitate legitimate 
travel and trade between EU members and the United States, 
and look forward to the day when all EU member states meet 
the criteria to enter the VWP, and enjoy visa-free travel. 
 
End Text 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
14. (C) The hard line taken by the EC in public was obviously 
for \"domestic politics\" -- to convince the ten members not on 
VWP that Brussels is going to bat for them.  The EC\'s 
over-arching goal is to keep any of the \"aggrieved\" members 
from invoking the solidarity mechanism.  In this sense, the 
October 18 meeting was instrumental in demonstrating USG 
willingness to engage in a dialogue and to leave the door to 
VWP cracked open.  The worrisome new development of possible 
\"retaliatory\" measures in unrelated sectors also demonstrates 
the EC\'s political desire to attain uniform treatment from 
the U.S. for all 25 Member States.  The EU certainly does not 
want to bring transatlantic travel to a grinding halt.  At 
the same time, the EC and Member States are searching for 
appropriate ways to demonstrate the importance they attach to 
visa waiver. 
 
(USDEL did not have a chance to clear on this message.) 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"21827","10/20/2004 11:47","04BRUSSELS4516","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE223273","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004516 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/20/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KDEM, EAID, VE, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU NONCOMMITTAL ON SPEAKING OUT RE VENEZUELA 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 223273 
 
     B. B) THE HAGUE 2704 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (U) This is an action recommendation -- see para 3. 
 
2. (C) Poloff delivered reftel A points on October 19 to 
David Bruck, Venezuela Desk Officer in the External Relations 
Directorate-General of the European Commission.  He said the 
Commission is monitoring developments in Venezuela very 
carefully, and shares U.S. concerns about the three steps the 
GOV is poised to take.  Later, Bruck called to report that 
the Dutch EU Presidency, at the October 19 meeting of the EU 
Working Group on Latin America (COLAT), had told of having 
received reftel demarche (ref B).  The Dutch drew the 
attention of the COLAT to the issues of concern, and decided 
to task EU Heads of Mission (HOMs) in Caracas to \"investigate 
further\" and report back to capitals before the next COLAT on 
November 16.  Bruck said there was no discussion of the 
urgency of issuing a joint EU statement in time to have a 
positive impact, and he opined that it would be difficult for 
the EU to decide on a course of action before November 16. 
 
3. (C) ACTION RECOMMENDATION:  EU HOMs in Caracas could help, 
if they share our sense of urgency.  Department may want to 
consider approaching them directly to urge them to 
communicate to their capitals the need for quick action.  END 
ACTION RECOMMENDATION. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"21868","10/21/2004 8:59","04BRUSSELS4536","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004536 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS INL/PC AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EU, KCRM, KJUS, PREL, SNAR, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPOL - FEELING ITS WAY FORWARD 
 
REF: 03 BRUSSELS 02375 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  During their recent visits to The Hague, 
DHS Secretary Ridge and AG Ashcroft announced the assignment 
of an FBI agent to Europol\'s reconstituted task force on 
counter terrorism and a Secret Service agent for 
counterfeiting.  This strengthened U.S. law enforcement 
liaison suggests the need for  further consideration of 
Europol\'s role and the complexities of dealing with this 
institution.  Europol is not a law enforcement agency in the 
classical sense, although it has become increasingly 
operational with each new enforcement decree adopted by the 
Council of Justice Ministers.  Europol personnel, while 
trained police officers, have  limited operational authority 
at the present.  They do not have arrest power or search and 
seizure authority, cannot initiate criminal investigations, 
and cannot interview witnesses.  They can, however, 
participate in a support capacity in multinational task 
forces and perform analytical assessments, and often do.  The 
United States was able to successfully negotiate two landmark 
agreements with Europol permitting the full exchange of 
analytical (December 2001) and personal data (December 2002) 
between Europol and U.S. law enforcement agencies at the 
federal, state and local levels.  However, Europol does not 
collect data on its own; it only receives data from Member 
States, who remain in ultimate control of the information, 
including with whom it is shared.  As a practical matter, 
Europol is not in a position to give us much data.  Still, 
Europol provides a unique, member-wide criminal justice 
analytical capability that is increasingly looked upon at the 
Ministerial level as an expression of an EU police body.  At 
the political level, it enjoys widespread support and is 
often cited as being a critical aspect of EU integration. 
Nonetheless, support for Europol is not uniform among Member 
State enforcement agencies.  Many remain highly skeptical 
about the value Europol provides.  Some Member States, led by 
Germany, envision Europol evolving into a EU Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, while others are reluctant to allow it to 
become a fully operational police organization.   End Summary. 
 
Background 
-------------- 
 
2.  (U) Europol was established by the Treaty of the European 
Union in 1992 and has its headquarters in The Hague, The 
Netherlands.  In 1994, it began limited operations as the 
Europol Drugs Unit focusing exclusively on illicit drugs 
within the Member States.  Following ratification of the 
Europol Convention (1998), Europol began its expanded 
activities in July 1999.  In January 2002, Europol,s 
jurisdiction was extended to include all forms of serious 
crime.  Europol,s main priorities are directed by the 
Justice and Home Affairs Council,  They are: counter 
terrorism, trafficking in drugs and other contraband, illegal 
immigration, trafficking in persons, and counterfeiting of 
the Euro. There are almost 400 staff members at Europol 
including officers, analysts and other experts. 
 
3.  (U) The strategic premise behind the creation of Europol 
was that by pooling its intelligence and information 
concerning crime within the EU, and facilitating channels for 
exchanging operational matters, Member States would gain a 
better insight into, and could achieve a more effective 
response to, crime within the EU.  Each EU Member State is 
obliged to assign one or more senior officials to Europol in 
The Hague along with computer linkage to its national law 
enforcement databases.  By placing these officers in close 
proximity to each other, a country needing police data from a 
sister member state has only to go across the hall to make 
the request rather than follow a tedious and time consuming 
route at the bilateral level.   Such officers must have 
direct computer access at Europol headquarters to the 
criminal justice computer databases employed by their 
respective national law enforcement agencies, although it is 
still prohibited to integrate all databases into a single 
EU-wide system.  On the contrary, Member States &own8 their 
information and can refuse to share it if doing so would, in 
its judgment, be prejudicial. 
 
4.  (U) Thus, Europol is not an EU-wide law enforcement 
agency, although it is progressively becoming more and more 
operational.  It has been at the center of new enforcement 
initiatives following each new enforcement decree adopted by 
the Council of Ministers.  Europol personnel, while trained 
police officers, have limited operational authority.  They do 
not have arrest power or search and seizure authority, cannot 
initiate criminal investigations, and cannot interview 
witnesses.  They can, however, participate in a support 
capacity in multinational task forces and perform analytical 
assessments, and often do, especially in the field of child 
pornography.  In effect, Europol provides a unique, 
member-wide criminal justice analytical capability that is 
increasingly looked upon at the Ministerial level as an 
expression of an EU police body. 
 
5. (U) Three protocols to the 1998 Europol Convention are now 
awaiting ratification by the Member States.  These protocols 
give an expanded role to Europol, such as providing support 
for joint investigative teams.  Similarly, the EU Mutual 
Legal Assistance Treaty provides for greater Europol 
involvement in law enforcement cooperation among the Member 
States.  The latter instrument was supposed to be implemented 
by January 2005, but this is an unlikely target. 
 
6.  (SBU)  Europol\'s initial mandate was in many respects 
similar to that of Interpol, an international law enforcement 
communication network based in Lyon, France.  The EU Member 
States are the major contributors to Interpol\'s budget as 
well as the major users of Interpol\'s network.  As Europol 
takes on more and more tasks, the Member States might come to 
question their financial support for Interpol.  Already, 
questions such as whether Europol will have access to 
Interpol\'s developing databases on child pornography and lost 
and stolen passports are emerging. 
 
Data Protection within Europol 
------------------------------------ 
 
7.  (U) Background:  The handling and sharing of data, 
including personal data, is one of the more difficult issues 
affecting our ability to establish a comprehensive law 
enforcement relationship with the EU and its Member States. 
The difficulties are compounded by the different and shifting 
competencies in the field among EU institutions and the 
Member States. Further compounding the problem is that Member 
States have wide latitude in interpreting operative EU data 
privacy instruments, as well as being able to derogate from 
these mandates at the national level on the basis of public 
security.  Thus, in many respects, while operating in the 
context of umbrella EU instruments, we are confronted with 
not just a single privacy system, but many different systems. 
 
8.  (U) Nevertheless, there is basic similarity in Member 
State organizational structures to deal with data protection. 
 As data privacy issues are covered by the EU &acquis8, all 
current and future members of the EU must adhere to these EU 
data protection instruments or face suit instituted by the 
Commission.  The challenge for the U.S. is to craft a 
relationship that lets us join forces with EU members in 
combating crime and terrorism through expansive exchanges and 
sharing all forms of data, including personal data. 
 
U.S. Agreements with Europol -- Data Protection 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
9.  (U) The Europol Convention is the controlling legal 
instrument governing Europol.  It is a complex document. 
Over half of its operative articles are detailed provisions 
as to how, and under what circumstances, Europol can obtain, 
retain, and disseminate information, especially personal 
data.  Notwithstanding the complexity of these provisions, 
the United States was able to successfully negotiate two 
landmark agreements with Europol permitting the full exchange 
of analytical (December 2001) and personal data (December 
2002) between Europol and U.S. law enforcement agencies at 
the federal, state and local levels.   The agreements oblige 
us to engage in a joint consultation on the implementation of 
the agreements in 2005. 
 
10.  (U)  Europol does not collect data on its own and only 
receives it from Member States who remain in ultimate control 
of the data, including with whom it is shared. As a practical 
matter Europol is therefore not in a position to give us much 
data.  In essence, the flow of information is mainly 
one-sided with US law enforcement providing information to 
Europol but receiving little in return.   This is due to the 
reluctance of Member States to share critical data with 
Europol or to release this data to us through Europol 
channels.  The 2002 Europol Agreement on personal data was 
significant in terms of ensuring that police cooperation 
between the U.S. and EU police authorities is not disrupted 
due to differences in the respective systems of privacy 
protection.  Moreover, the relationship has been structured 
so as to provide maximum flexibility for each U.S. law 
enforcement agency to structure its relationship with Europol 
in accordance with its own needs. 
 
11.  (U) In the Europol-U.S. Agreement (December 2002) and in 
the U.S.-EU Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance (June 2003), 
the Europeans agreed that personal data obtained by the U.S. 
under those agreements did not have to be deleted once it was 
used.  Instead, the information could be used to prevent, 
investigate or prosecute any specific criminal offense. 
Thus, the information is protected by limitations on its use 
rather than by retention limits.  These agreements, together 
with the data protection provisions contained in the Council 
of Europe Cyber-crime Convention signed by the U.S. and all 
EU Member States, demonstrate that data sharing arrangements 
can be devised which are consistent with the needs of 
operative EU privacy instruments and those of the U.S. 
 
U.S.-Europol Cooperation - Liaison Officers 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
12.  (SBU) In August 2002, Europol stationed two liaison 
officers to Washington to facilitate Europol coordination 
with U.S. law enforcement agencies.  The EU Member States 
shortly thereafter agreed to have Europol represent their 
interests in Washington through these officers where they 
deem it appropriate and to serve as a communication conduit 
between them and U.S. enforcement authorities.  The EU would 
like to have these officers represent, if necessary, the law 
enforcement interests of Member States who have not stationed 
national law enforcement representatives in Washington. 
Concerns have been expressed by several of our U.S. 
enforcement agencies that in this capacity the EU liaison 
officers could undercut the work and role of our attaches 
stationed in Europe. This issue we believe has recently been 
resolved, at least for the moment.   We have agreed with 
Europol that it might be useful to exchange letters dealing 
with the operation of the liaison officers in Washington, 
especially with respect to their handling of requests for 
assistance to the U.S. from Member States. 
 
13. (U) Many federal agencies, consistent with the 
agreements, have established direct channels of communication 
with Europol.  In the absence of such arrangements, the U.S. 
law enforcement point of contact for Europol is the National 
Central Bureau, whose primary mission otherwise is to 
facilitate law enforcement cooperation with Interpol.  The 
Department of Justice attorney stationed at the Mission to 
the EU in Brussels currently oversees liaison with Europol. 
U.S. law enforcement continues to rely on its bilateral law 
enforcement relationships with EU Member States for 
exchanging information and is generally not inclined to 
handle bilateral issues through Europol channels. 
 
14.  (SBU) Europol is anxious to expand its exchanges of 
information with the U.S. concerning terrorism.  Europol has 
complained within EU circles about our alleged failure to 
cooperate with them in sharing terrorist-related information. 
 The FBI has been reluctant to provide Europol with sensitive 
data in this field, especially where member states themselves 
don,t readily share such data with Europol, preferring to 
share through bilateral channels, if at all.  Moreover, much 
of the data sought has been acquired by the FBI via 
intelligence channels and cannot be shared absent the 
concurrence of the intelligence community.  Shortly after 
9/11, the FBI assigned a liaison agent to work with the EU,s 
Counter terrorism Task Force in Europol, but the officer was 
withdrawn when it became clear that Member States did not 
want to use Europol as the means of sharing terrorism 
information among themselves or with us.  Following the 
Madrid bombings, Europol was directed by the Ministers to 
&reconstitute8 its largely moribund terrorist task force. 
Attorney General Ashcroft recently announced that we will 
station an FBI agent at Europol to work cooperatively with 
the new task force.   Europol is still designing the unit 
which is not expected to be operational until 2005. 
 
15.  (U) In the June US-EU Summit Declaration of Combating 
Terrorism, the U.S. and EU agreed to explore a heightened 
cooperative historical analysis of frozen bank accounts. 
Europol was tasked by the Ministers to take the lead in this 
effort on behalf of the EU but initially communicated their 
&inability8 to do it, at least until the adoption of 
pending protocols to their convention which will allow them 
to engage in joint analytical projects.  This matter is still 
under discussion with the Dutch Presidency and Europol. 
 
16.  (U) Europol,s greatest operational role relates to 
counterfeiting of the Euro, much of which occurs outside of 
the territory of the EU.  Here Europol, operating off of the 
authority of the two U.S. agreements already negotiated on 
sharing of information, has been working very well with the 
U.S. Secret Service which has authority for the U.S. over 
such offenses.  In his recent visit to The Hague, DHS 
Secretary Ridge announced he was posting a Secret Service 
 
SIPDIS 
agent to Europol to facilitate further cooperation. 
 
The Europeans and Europol 
-------------------------------- 
 
17.  (U) Participation in Europol is part of the EU \"acquis\" 
to which all member states must adhere.  However, membership 
in Europol does not automatically follow from EU membership, 
but rather requires adoption of the Europol Convention.  On 
September 1, seven of the ten new EU accession states became 
members of Europol: Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, 
Slovenia, Lithuania, Latvia and Cyprus.  Poland, Estonia and 
Malta are expected to join by the end of the year. 
 
18.  (SBU) Support for Europol is not uniform among EU law 
enforcement agencies.  Many are highly skeptical about the 
value Europol provides.  However, at the Ministerial level 
Europol has widespread support and is often cited as being a 
critical aspect of EU integration.  Some Member States, led 
by Germany, envision Europol evolving into a EU Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, while others are reluctant to allow 
it to become fully operational.  The agency\'s annual report 
says that 4,700 cases were processed by Europol in 2003, 
compared to 3,400 cases the year before.  \"The report shows a 
growing awareness for our services, and that our colleagues 
in the Member States appreciate the added value given from 
our analysts in the fight against organized crime and 
terrorism,\" according to the acting Director of Europol 
Mariano Simancas.  The European Parliament is considering 
changes to Europol\'s status.  The chairman of the Citizens\' 
Freedoms and Rights Committee, responsible for drafting the 
European Parliament\'s Opinion on the \"Tampere II\" Program on 
Justice and Home Affairs, wants Europol to be made an EU body 
rather than an inter-governmental organization and to make it 
subject to the control of the European Court of Justice. 
 
Search for a new Director 
----------------------------- 
 
19. (SBU) Jurgen Storbeck\'s five-year contract as Europol 
Director expired June 30.  The organization is being run in 
the interim by Spanish Deputy Director Mariano Simancas. 
The appointment requires a consensus decision.  Within the 
next two weeks the Europol Governing Board is expected to 
develop a short list from the nominations submitted by member 
governments.  This list will then go to the JHA Council for 
its consideration.  The deputy director of Europol thinks it 
is unlikely a director will be appointed for another 
four-to-five months.  The major players in the appointment 
are France and Germany.  Failure to decide on the Europol 
Directorship before the expiration of Storbeck\'s term was 
seen as most unfortunate, given the enhanced role of Europol 
envisioned in the EU\'s counter terrorism efforts. 
 
Comment 
------------- 
 
20.  (U) The U.S. believes that Europol has the potential for 
evolving into a major organizational law enforcement 
institution both within the EU as well as in international 
law enforcement fora.  As such, we have attempted to forge 
the legal basis for exchanging all forms of law enforcement 
data, while recognizing that at the moment Europol may not 
have much with which to reciprocate.   End comment. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"21903","10/21/2004 16:05","04BRUSSELS4550","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004550 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, KNNP, UN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU NONPROLIFERATION TROIKA: EU LOOKS FOR U.S. 
COOPERATION AND FLEXIBILITY 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b)(d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: On September 28, the U.S. and the EU held 
their semi-annual exchange on nonproliferation issues.  This 
discussion followed the release of the second U.S.-EU Summit 
declaration on nonproliferation.  The two sides touched on a 
wide range of nonproliferation issues and explored possible 
steps that could be taken to implement the two Summit 
declarations.  On the May Review Conference of the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), the EU emphasized the 
importance of Article VI and previous Review Conference 
results.  The EU remains seized with the prospect of 
resolving the Iran situation with a &grand bargain8 rather 
than a referral from the IAEA Board of Governors to the 
United Nations Security Council.  The EU is also close to 
finalizing the association agreement with Syria including a 
clause on nonproliferation. Privately, the EU Council 
Secretariat representative told the U.S. delegation 
 
SIPDIS 
(Rangaswamy) that the EU Council, in particular Annalisa 
Giannella,s office, is seeking to expand and enhance its 
profile and expertise in nonproliferation, and would be 
interested in attending G-8 meetings either in place of or in 
addition to the European Commission representative. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
2004 US-EU Statement on Nonproliferation 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Wilke observed that the 2004 statement demonstrates 
the EU,s growing political interest in non-proliferation. 
Rangaswamy noted the U.S. interest in developing the three 
priorities outlined in the statement: implementation of the 
UNSCR 1540, coordination leading the NPT Review Conference, 
and radioactive source security.  She stressed the importance 
of making tangible progress on these issues.  On radioactive 
source security, she mentioned the September 27 meeting 
between U.S. and EU radioactive source experts and the IAEA 
General Conference endorsement of export and import control 
guidance for sources.  The EU agreed to provide feedback on 
the U.S. suggested steps for implementing the 2004 U.S.-EU 
Summit statement on nonproliferation. 
 
3. (C) Wilke was skeptical that an initiative to restrict 
transfers of enrichment and reprocessing to additional states 
could succeed this year and observed that the atmosphere is 
too negatively charged to move forward without alienating the 
states that need to be persuaded to accept changes in the NSG 
guidelines.  The EU was sympathetic to making progress on the 
Additional Protocol as a condition of supply given the 
reference to this issue in the EU nonproliferation strategy. 
Rangaswamy asked whether a change in the French position was 
forthcoming, noting that the main opposition to the 
Additional Protocol as a condition of supply comes from 
France, Russia Brazil, and Argentina.  Wilke had \"no news on 
evolution on the French position.\"  Kayser said that the 
Additional Protocol would be incentivized if it included 
condition of supply. 
 
4. (C) The EU reported on its September 27 troika 
consultations with Brazil.  Wilke explained that Brazil sees 
itself as championing a leadership role in the Non-Aligned 
Movement.  In the EU view, Brazil,s posturing is related to 
U.S. positions on disarmament and enrichment and 
reprocessing.  The EU does not anticipate a change in the 
Brazilian position prior to the NPT Review Conference.  The 
EU emphasized that it would continue to underscore the 
importance of Brazil,s signature to the Additional Protocol. 
 The EU also observed that U.S. influence is limited, and can 
even be counterproductive at times. 
 
5. (C) On PSI, Wilke stressed that the EU has contributions 
to make, in addition to the contributions made by individual 
EU member states.  Rangaswamy acknowledged receipt of the 
EU,s paper on competencies related to PSI and said that the 
U.S. is reviewing the document.  On universalizing the 
Additional Protocol, the EU noted that its effort to expand 
adherence has met with mixed results.  Some governments 
consider the Additional Protocol irrelevant because they do 
not possess nuclear materials.  Other governments associate 
the Additional Protocol to clandestine activity or 
noncompliance and have said that their government,s 
signature is unnecessary because it is not under suspicion. 
Wilke conceded that there is challenge in convincing states 
about the benefits and relevance of the Additional Protocol. 
Rangaswamy reported on the G-8 effort to expand adherence to 
the Additional Protocol, which are being pursued during the 
U.S. G-8 presidency.  Kayser observed that in some cases, it 
could be counterproductive for the U.S. to press for 
adherence.  Kayser argued that this message is better 
received from non-nuclear weapons states.  The U.S. and EU 
agreed to continue to exchange information on these efforts. 
 
---------- 
UNSCR 1540 
---------- 
 
6. (C) On the UNSCR 1540, Rangaswamy requested that the U.S. 
and the EU consult on next steps after reports are submitted 
to the 1540 Committee.  Wilke said that the EU was aiming to 
meet the deadline.  He emphasized that implementation of the 
resolution is among the EU,s competencies.  The EU sees its 
role as filling the gaps where national reporting is 
incomplete or insufficient.  There is confusion in the EU 
about the resolution,s references to national control lists. 
 The EU is concerned that this language could result in the 
creation of national control lists and undermine the 
application of the regime control lists.  Further, the EU 
expressed concern about vague language in the resolution 
which, in the EU,s view, could result in different 
interpretations and differing standards in reporting national 
implementation measures. 
 
7. (C) Rangaswamy responded that the EU had made this 
observation previously, during G-8 meetings.  The U.S. does 
not believe that the resolution encourages the proliferation 
of control lists, the resolution was intended to reinforce 
the existing regime control lists.  Given the EU,s concerns, 
Rangaswamy suggested this issue be discussed further by 
experts along with consideration of possible next steps. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference (NPT RevCon) 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
8. (C) The EU welcomed the U.S. suggestion to consult prior 
to and during the NPT Review Conference.  Wilke observed that 
weak WEOG coordination during the April Preparatory Committee 
lead to disappointing consequences.  Wilke and Kayser 
repeatedly sought a firm U.S. commitment to Article VI and 
pressed hard for confirmation of the U.S. commitment to 
previous RevCon outcomes, referring in particular to the 2000 
RevCon,s 13 steps.  Kayser complained that the U.S. position 
on Article VI sends a bad message, especially considering the 
willingness of non-nuclear weapons states to undertake 
additional obligations by signing on to the Additional 
Protocol.  This willingness had to be matched with a 
willingness on the part of nuclear weapons states to fulfill 
their end of the bargain.  Kayser was skeptical that the 
RevCon could succeed without flexibility on the part of the 
U.S.  Rangaswamy replied that the U.S. could not support a 
2005 RevCon agenda that recognized only the 2000 outcome and 
not subsequent developments.  The U.S. has emphasized 
compliance because we are concerned that noncompliance 
threatens the Treaty and all of its benefits.  Wilke 
criticized the U.S. emphasis on compliance, observing that 
the NPT is a balance, and that actions such as the 
development of \'new nukes\' undermine the basic pillars of the 
Treaty.  He cautioned about negative atmospherics at the 
RevCon.  He added that a U.S.-EU \"alignment of views 
presupposes flexibility\", and that U.S. flexibility is 
necessary on issues such as disarmament.  Wilke expressed the 
hope that the disappointing results coming from the most 
recent PrepCom would not be repeated. 
 
9. (C) Kayser began by reaffirming the that the EU is \"not 
engaged in the context of negative assurances\".  He said that 
only once there is universal compliance with NPT and the AP 
can there be a discussion about the assurances. 
 
------------- 
DG Succession 
------------- 
 
10. (C) In response to the EU,s inquiry about the U.S. 
position on Dr. ElBaradei seeking a third term as Director 
General of the IAEA, Rangaswamy referred to the effort to 
establish term limits in the UN system.  She explained that 
the U.S. believes that a two term limit is a sound policy. 
The EU warned that if the U.S. eventually opposes ElBaradei, 
it could have a detrimental effect on relations with the 
Agency.  It will set a negative tone and could be damaging on 
efforts related to Iran and other issues.  Wilke said that 
while the DG is fair, he believes that a battle over 
succession could lead to hard feelings which would be 
difficult to overcome. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) 
---------------------------------------- 
 
11. (C) Wilke informed the group that China had submitted its 
application for membership to the MTCR.  He added that the EU 
position is still under consideration and hoped that a fully 
coordinated position would emerge by the time of the Seoul 
plenary.  EU priorities for Seoul include admission of new 
countries; discussion of the relevance of UNSCR 1540; and 
consideration tabled proposals.  Rangaswamy said that the 
U.S. hopes that MTCR Partners will give regional 
nonproliferation priority attention at the plenary and 
referred to the U.S. proposal on Syria.  Wilke replied that 
the EU is still reviewing the U.S. proposal. 
 
12. (C) Given the operation of the EU,s common market, Wilke 
believes that not having all EU member states in the MTCR 
could undermine the Regime.  The EU informed Rangaswamy of 
its impending demarche on this issue and provided an advance 
copy of the letter that would be presented to the U.S. in 
Washington.  A similar demarche will also be undertaken in 
Moscow.  Rangaswamy recalled that the U.S. supported the 
membership of the new EU member states and confirmed that the 
U.S. position has not changed.  She inquired whether the EU 
had previously contacted Russia or Turkey about their 
positions.  Wilke affirmed that the EU had weighed in with 
Ankara, and asked the U.S. to use any opportunity to do the 
same. 
 
13. (C) Wilke regretted that membership of the new EU member 
states was being linked to other issues, including the 
admission of other states.  On this point, the EU mentioned 
the possibility that Russia would offer a trade, Russian 
support for admission of the new EU member states in exchange 
for Kazakhstan,s membership.  Rangaswamy responded that, on 
Kazakhstan, the U.S. position is unchanged.  We would not 
endorse membership for Kazakhstan since it is not a 
significant potential supplier of missile-related technology. 
 
14. (C) Wilke said that Russia was already providing 
pre-launch notifications, and asked whether the U.S. would do 
the same.  Rangaswamy replied that the issue is still under 
U.S. inter-agency review.  She suggested that he discuss the 
issue on the margins of Seoul plenary with the U.S. head of 
delegation, Vann Van Diepen. 
 
15. (C) The EU intends to move forward with a UN resolution 
endorsing the Hague Code of Conduct against ballistic missile 
proliferation.  The EU reported on their outreach efforts and 
are optimistic that a majority of UN members will cosponsor 
the resolution. 
 
----- 
Libya 
----- 
 
16. (C) Rangaswamy provided the EU with information on the 
U.S.-UK effort to redirect Libyan WMD scientists.  The EU 
expressed an interest in participating in this initiative. 
Pointing out that the U.S. had not lifted all sanctions, 
Kayser said that the U.S. should give greater recognition to 
what Libya has done.  Van Reidhead, poloff at USEU, delivered 
a demarche on COREPER\'s decision to lift the arms embargo on 
Libya.  Wilke responded to U.S. concerns that \"Libya will not 
get the same treatment as some other countries do\", but he 
did not respond to Reidhead\'s question on which member states 
agree with the COREPER decision. 
 
----- 
Syria 
----- 
 
17. (C) Rangaswamy inquired about the status of the WMD 
clause in the EU,s association agreement with Syria.  Wilke 
confirmed that agreement at the COREPER level is close.  The 
clause has been agreed ad ref by the two sides but some EU 
members states have not seen the new language.  According to 
Wilke, the new language is similar to an earlier draft.  He 
seemed confident that this language would be acceptable to 
the member states and said it \"will go through the 
institutions without much problems.\"  He emphasized that the 
association agreement is a key part of the EU,s approach to 
foreign policy -- engagement.  Wilke said that the agreement 
itself will drive \"a wedge in the system that upholds power 
in Syria\" by opening the economy.  The EU views engagement 
(with Syria, and Iran) as an instigator for progress along 
the lines of Western efforts to push economic and political 
liberalization in the USSR, and Eastern Europe. 
 
---- 
Iran 
---- 
 
18. (C) The EU presented conflicting views.  On the one hand, 
Wilke and Kaysar complained that Iran had not cooperated 
fully, that Iran had cleverly manipulated the system to 
include language in the IAEA reports that supported their 
case.   Wilke complimented the U.S.-drafted list of questions 
related to the latest report.   On the other hand, Wilke 
suggested that efforts to push Iran to the UNSC would force 
Iran to take a decision to withdraw from the NPT.  They view 
the Iranian announcement on uranium conversion as a \"we\'re 
not bluffing\" move.   Reflecting on this, he said that we 
need to figure out a way to ensure that that Iran does not 
withdraw.  Wilke recommended further consideration of a 
\"grand bargain\" as a way out.  Kaysar expressed frustration 
with Iran,s delays and commented that if Iran withdraws, it 
would undermine its own position, if you don\'t have anything 
to hide, then why withdraw? 
 
19. (C) The EU asked for clarification on the next steps 
after a possible UNSC referral.  What would the UNSC be able 
to do and how would that help?  EU members remain reluctant 
for a UNSC referral without having a plan for succeeding. 
The EU is concerned that the language from the various 
reports is not robust enough to enable the UNSC to act. He 
said that using making a case for non-compliance based on 
national intelligence services would be risky and risk a 
repeat of UNSC debates on Iraq. He added that it would be 
preferable to have an international case advanced at the 
UNSC, not a national one.  He stated his preference for 
improving IAEA reports and making them more relevant to UNSC 
discussions. 
 
------------------------------- 
EU Funding for Nonproliferation 
------------------------------- 
 
20. (C) The EU reported on their efforts to establish a line 
item for nonproliferation.   The EC would like to separate 
their nonproliferation and nuclear safety assistance.  It is 
not clear whether this line item would result in additional 
funds for nonproliferation, and the Global Partnership.   The 
issue still needs to be approved by member states and the 
European Parliament. Both Wilke and Defrennes suggested that 
the slow budgetary cycle means that we will have to wait 
until 2007 \"to get serious money\", and current efforts to 
secure funding are \"like a hunting expedition\".  Defrennes 
said that he was hopeful that non-proliferation will be 
included in the proposal for a new \"Instrument for 
Stability\", which would also allow the EU to fulfill its 
commitments.  Defrennes said that the EU, working with a 
local think tank, had launched an extensive review of EU and 
member state programs on non-proliferation, border security, 
and export 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
21. (C) This routine exchange produced a surprising outcome: 
a clear sense of disappointment from the EU side that 
well-known U.S. positions remained unchanged.  The EU 
repeatedly urged the U.S. delegation to consider flexibility, 
and underscored their interest in working closely with the 
U.S.  The message was unambiguous )- rigid U.S. positions 
prevented closer collaboration with the EU and these 
divisions, in the EU view, are not constructive in advancing 
nonproliferation. 
 
------------ 
Participants 
------------ 
 
22. (U) EU Delegation: 
 
Netherlands (current EU Presidency): 
 
Paul Wilke, Head of Nuclear Affairs and Non-Proliferation 
Division, MFA Hague 
Elke Merks-Schaapveld, Policy Officer, Nuclear Affairs and 
Non-Proliferation Division, MFA Hague 
 
Luxembourg (successor to Netherlands in EU Presidency): 
 
Paul Kayser, Ambassador on special mission 
Tim Kesseler, Charge de mission, Security Department 
 
European Commission 
Marc Deffrennes, Head of Non-proliferation Team 
Andrew Denison, Desk Officer for USA and Canada, DG-RELEX 
 
EU Council Secretariat 
Stephan Klement, Administrator 
 
U.S. Delegation: 
 
Michael McKinley, Charg, U.S. Mission to the EU 
Roopa Rangaswamy, Senior Adviser for G-8 and U.S.-EU 
nonproliferation issues, Bureau of Nonproliferation, 
Department of State 
Van Reidhead, Political Officer, U.S. Mission to the EU 
Sean Kimball, Assistant, U.S. Mission to the EU 
 
 
Schnabel 
"
"22014","10/26/2004 5:41","04BRUSSELS4602","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04BRUSSELS4410","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004602 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2014 
TAGS: EAID, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, PREF, PREL, SU, SO, XA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU INCREASES FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR AU MISSION IN 
DARFUR 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 4410 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  The European Commission is set to approve 
80 million euros from its Africa Peace Facility (APF) to 
support an expanded deployment of the African Union (AU) 
mission in Darfur, Sudan.  EU financial support for the 
mission will exceed fifty percent of the total.  Although the 
decision will become final on October 25, administrative 
procedures will delay disbursement for several weeks.  Most 
EU Member States have given strong support for using the APF 
to fund the AU expansion in Darfur.  Only France has been 
reluctant to endorse the decision.  Solana is concerned that 
increasing the AU protection force without also enlarging the 
number of observers may be a mistaken approach, and also 
expressed concern that the APF funds may be tapped out soon. 
End Summary. 
 
----------------- 
Commission to approve over $100 million for peacekeeping 
----------------- 
 
2. (SBU) EU Member States have until 5:00 p.m., October 25, 
to object to Commission plans to disburse 80 million euros 
from its Africa Peace Facility (AFP) to support the expansion 
of the AU force in Darfur.  Given the near unanimity among 
the EU States to fund the full amount requested by the AU, 
the Commission and EU Council both expect this decision to go 
forward.  EU Council Sudan policy officer Christian Manahl 
calculates the value of this decision in dollars to be 
100,604,795. 
3. (C) Ever since the international community began 
discussing the expansion of the AU force in Darfur, the EU 
has expressed a willingness to fund up to one half of the 
operation.  Most recently, the Commission communicated 
support for this level of funding to the Department,s senior 
Sudan advisor Charles Snyder (reftel).   HiRep Javier Solana 
told visiting NEA A/S Burns that he was concerned that by 
deploying additional military forces without a corresponding 
increase in ceasefire observers, the international community 
may have adopted a mistaken approach.  Still, he said he was 
committed to supporting the AU\'s efforts, and would commit to 
helping fund it. 
4. (C) According to DG DEV Pan-African Affairs officer 
Ranieri Sabatucci, only France signaled reservations about 
this funding decision.  Sabatucci told PRMOff that France had 
never been an enthusiastic supporter of the APF; France also 
indicated it might not be able to pay its third assessed 
tranche to the European Development Fund (EDF), which is used 
to finance the APF.  EuropeAid APF Desk Officer Theodorus 
Kaspers told PRMOff that a failure by France to contribute 
its assessed contribution to the EDF could precipitate a cash 
flow problem that would delay disbursement of funds for the 
AU force in Darfur.  Kaspers said that the paperwork would 
require several weeks before money could actually start 
flowing to the AU.  He mentioned that internal political 
pressure to get the money moving would make this project his 
highest priority.  USEU Development Counselor spoke with 
Dutch Development Counselor Paul Ymkers who indicated France 
and Germany have both informed the EC they will not be able 
to pay into the third tranche of EDF due to cash problems. 
5. (C) Both Sabatucci and Kaspers are of the opinion that the 
political imperative of this decision could force France to 
cede to the pressure of the other Member States and deposit 
its third tranche into the EDF.  In fact, EU High 
Representative Javier Solana has already announced the 80 
million euro contribution while on an official visit to Addis 
Ababa over the weekend.  France would need additional support 
from other EU government to override the qualifying majority 
vote (the basis for decisions within the EDF group) to block 
APF funds for the AU.   According to Ymkers, France\'s 
opposition to the use of EDF for APF is quite worrisome for 
the Council, which seeks maximum consensus as much as 
possible.   While it is true that qualified majority voting 
is the basis for decision making on this instrument when 
using this \"silent procedure\" they normally make sure the 
large member states are on board. 
 
----------------- 
Council to provide technical support 
----------------- 
 
6. (C/NF) Manahl told PRMOff that although the PSC had given 
its basic agreement to the decision at a political level, it 
stated its desire to &follow closely8 the implementation of 
the plan by the AU.  This line reflects the Council,s desire 
to be actively engaged in helping the AU plan the deployment 
and providing logistical support for the operation.  Solana 
has nominated Brigadier General Brauss, the ACOS OPS of the 
EU Military Staff, as the Brussels-based point of contact for 
Darfur.  The EU will replace British Colonel Peter Stamps 
with Colonel Linz of the German army as the EU senior 
military planner on the ground in Darfur.  Polmiloffs were 
told by EUMS staffers closely involved with the Darfur 
planning that Linz was not an especially capable military 
planner, and that the short tdy rotations of officers were 
hampering effectiveness of the Partners\' Technical Support 
Group just as a spike in accelerated deployment activity was 
beginning.  The AU task force expected to plan and control 
the deployments is not yet functional, and could require from 
3 months to a year to establish the necessary infrastructure 
-- human and technical -- to operate effectively.  The EU 
planners urged the creation of a coherent joint 
EU-US-Canadian \"bank\" of highly-qualified planners within the 
Partners\' Technical Support Group, to provide discrete 
assistance to the AU from a politically palatable distance. 
7. (C) The Commission, which does not have military 
expertise, has never shown enthusiasm to connect its use of 
the APF with influence in directing the deployment of the 
mission.  An overriding purpose of the Commission-funded APF 
is to help the AU build capacity to handle peacekeeping 
operations.  Many in the Commission feel capacity building of 
AU institutions like the Peace and Security Council is more 
important than the AU peacekeeping deployments themselves. 
 
----------------- 
Comment 
----------------- 
 
8. (C) With this latest disbursement, the EU has spent a 
total of 92 million euros on Darfur.  The Commission is now 
considering another AU proposal for a peacekeeping operation 
in Somalia and expects to respond favorably.  At this rate of 
disbursement, the 250 million euro total allocated to the APF 
in 2004 will run out long before 2007 (its expected 
duration).  Solana told us he was concerned the fund will be 
\"tapped out\" soon, and the EU would have no other options 
once this current expanded AU mission is deployed.  Some 
Member States are already calling for additional development 
funds to be poured into the APF.  This may revive the 
internal EU debate over the use of development funds for 
peacekeeping, as well as the internal EU debate on 
budgetizing EDF, which is based on voluntary national 
contributions.  The strongest opposition to the Commission\'s 
proposal to budgetize EDF comes from UK\'s DFID, which would 
have to significantly increase its contributions for an 
instrument they view as inconsistent with a poverty reduction 
focus.  The UK FCO is reportedly less concerned about the use 
of EDF than DFID.  Spain has been vocal in its opposition in 
hopes of extracting something else as part of the 
negotiations.  Incoming DG Development Commissioner Louis 
Michel has stated the need to find more appropriate funding 
lines to meet this important need in the new budget, come 
2007.  Reinforcement of DG RELEX,s &rapid reaction 
mechanism8 and an expansion of the scope of this budget line 
is one alternative being considered.  This would expand the 
EU,s ability to fund peacekeeping operations worldwide, not 
just in Africa. 
 
Minimize considered. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"22035","10/26/2004 13:30","04BRUSSELS4617","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS3821","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004617 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR DAS KENNEDY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/26/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ZS, CY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU NORTH CYPRUS TRADE/AID: UPDATE 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 3821 
 
Classified By: USEU POL Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b and d. 
 
 1. (C) Summary: The EU has separated its trade and financial 
package for North Cyprus in order to get the aid package 
approved on November 22. One Council source told us that this 
is a \"split in timing -- not in substance\" because member 
states have informally committed themselves to get a trade 
package together for North Cyprus sometime in 2005.  The 
procedural torpor is a result of Cyprus\'s hard line and EU 
unwillingness to isolate or punish a member state. End 
Summary 
 
Financial Package: The Way Ahead 
-------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Council Secretariat and Commission officials tell us 
that once the Foreign Affairs Committee of the European 
Parliament approves the Commission proposal of 259 million 
Euros of financial assistance for North Cyprus (positive vote 
expected late October 26), it will be submitted to the next 
Plenary Session of the European Parliament (o/a November 18), 
where approval is expected. From there, the Commission 
financial package will be submitted to the November 22 EU 
General Affairs and External Relations Council (GAERC) for 
final approval. 
 
Trade Package: A Commitment to Act in Good Faith 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
3.  (C) A Council official involved in navigating the 
assistance package to the GAERC told us that the financial 
package is pre-cooked and that the Cypriots and the Greeks 
are comfortable with it. However, to free up the financial 
package, EU member states, under the Dutch Presidency, had to 
agree to split the assistance package from the trade package. 
 The UK was unhappy with this split but accepted a 
\"gentlemen\'s agreement\" that a final EU trade package would 
not be forgotten or diluted and that member states would 
commit themselves to getting an agreement within a fixed time 
frame (notionally some time in early 2005). 
 
Consensus vice QMV 
------------------ 
 
4.  (C) Previously we reported on a split between the legal 
services of the Council and Commission over whether qualified 
majority voting (QMV) or consensus would be needed for a 
decision on the trade package. Typically, trade matters with 
third parties are decided by QMV.  The Commission argued that 
this was no exception. Others in Council and the Dutch 
Presidency argued that, politically, it was not acceptable 
for the EU to approve a trade measure to North Cyprus against 
the wishes of Cyprus.  A Council source told us that there 
remains considerable concern among member states over the 
perception of forcing something on Cyprus, a small and new EU 
member, without its approval. Our Commission interlocutors 
were not happy with this outcome, and worry about how little 
the EU has been able to do in North Cyprus. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5. (C) Even through Cyprus has played this very tough, many 
EU member states do not want to be seen as punishing or 
\"bullying\" a member state.  The Dutch Presidency, in 
particular, has demonstrated flexibility and patience with 
Cyprus by first getting them to let the assistance package 
get out of COREPER and on its way to the GAERC, and then 
ruling against the Commission on the trade package. 
Unfortunately, this cautious approach has slowed down 
movement on both aid and trade for North Cyprus.  As a 
result, six months after the referendum, North Cyprus has 
nothing to show from the EU for its support for the UN 
reunification plan. 
 
McKinley 
"
"22037","10/26/2004 14:01","04BRUSSELS4619","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04USEUBRUSSELS3101","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, SMIG, PREF, CMGT, CVIS, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  NEW EU PROGRAM FOR FREEDOM, SECURITY AND 
JUSTICE TO BE ENDORSED BY LEADERS ON NOV 5 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 3101 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  EU Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) 
on October 25 reached broad agreement on a new multi- 
annual program for strengthening freedom, security 
and justice in the EU for the next five years.  The 
prevention and repression of terrorism will be a key 
element of the plan, which provides for an 
\"innovative approach\" to the cross-border exchange 
of law-enforcement information, to be governed, 
under certain conditions, by the \"principle of 
availability.\"  The plan will be endorsed at the 
November 4-5 European Council, when EU leaders will 
be called to decide whether the Council should move 
to qualified-majority voting and co-decision with 
the European Parliament for all asylum and migration 
decisions by April 1, 2005.  The Dutch Presidency 
draft provides for the establishment of a Common 
European Asylum System by 2010.  A rapid reaction 
force of national experts to assist with the control 
and surveillance of the EU external borders could 
\"ultimately be converted into a European corps of 
border guards.\"  The draft also provides for minimum 
standards for national identity cards and for 
further development of judicial cooperation in 
criminal and civil law matters.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  The October 25 JHA Council completed its 
preparations for a new multi-annual program of EU 
measures to strengthen \"justice, security and 
freedom\" in the Union.  The plan, based on 
discussions at the September 30 - October 1 informal 
JHA in The Hague/Scheveningen, will be endorsed as 
the so-called \"The Hague program\" at the European 
Council meeting on November 4-5.  Dutch officials 
said EU leaders would have to solve persisting 
differences on further moves from unanimity for 
Council decisions in JHA matters.  The Dutch draft 
contains language requiring a switch to qualified- 
majority voting (QMV) and co-decision with the 
European Parliament for allasylum and migration 
policy measures by April 2005.  The UK, Ireland and 
Denmark invoke a \"legal exemption\" (opt-out) to 
resist the proposal but other countries, including 
Germany, are said to be hesitant. 
 
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND COUNTER-TERRORISM 
 
3.  Speaking to the press, Dutch Justice Minister 
Donner and other Dutch officials described the new 
plan, which is building on the 1999 \"Tampere 
program\" of EU JHA activities, as both ambitious and 
practical.  Donner highlighted the plan\'s provisions 
on the cross-border exchange of law-enforcement 
information as an \"important step forward.\"  The 
draft\'s section on \"strengthening security\" calls 
for an \"innovative approach,\" saying cross-border 
exchange of law-enforcement information should be 
governed, under certain conditions, by the 
\"principle of availability.\"  The implication is 
that, effective January 2008, \"a law enforcement 
officer in one Member State who needs information\" 
to perform his duties \"can obtain this from another 
Member State\" and that the law enforcement agency in 
the other Member State that holds that information 
\"will make it available for the stated purpose.\" 
Without prejudice to work in progress -- a reference 
to the draft Framework Decision on simplifying 
information and intelligence between law enforcement 
authorities of the EU Member States, the draft tasks 
the Commission to submit proposals by the end of 
2005 for the implementation of the principle of 
availability.  Spanish Interior Minister Alonso was 
particularly pleased, saying information would \"flow 
directly, immediately and without obstacles when one 
country requests it from another.\"  EU officials 
made it clear that other ministers failed to display 
the same enthusiasm. 
 
4.  Noting the \"new urgency\" arising of 9/11 and the 
03/11/04 attacks in Madrid, the Dutch draft 
recognizes that EU citizens expect \"a more 
effective, joint approach to cross-border problems\" 
such as terrorism, organized crime, illegal 
migration and the smuggling of human beings.  The 
prevention and repression of terrorism will be a key 
element of the new program and the common approach 
\"should be based on the principle that preserving 
national security requires that full account is 
taken of the security of the Union as a whole.\"  In 
Donner\'s words, \"the security of one Member State 
contains the security of the other Member States\" 
and \"rules to protect public security in one country 
can also be used to protect public security in other 
countries.\" 
 
5.  The program calls for full implementation of the 
March 2004 EU Declaration and Action Plan on 
combating terrorism.  Effective January 1, 2005, the 
SitCen located within the EU Council should provide 
\"strategic analysis of the terrorist threat based on 
intelligence from Member States\' intelligence and 
security services and, where appropriate, on 
information provided by EUROPOL.\"  The Council and 
the EU CT Coordinator are tasked to develop, by the 
end of 2005, \"a long-term strategy to address the 
factors which contribute to the radicalization and 
recruitment for terrorist activities.\" 
 
TOWARD A COMMON EUROPEAN ASYLUM SYSTEM 
 
6.  The draft calls on the EU and its Member States 
to develop a \"comprehensive approach\" covering all 
stages of migration, from its root causes to entry, 
integration and return policies.  The new phase in 
the establishment of a common EU policy in the field 
of asylum, migration and borders \"should be based on 
solidarity and fair sharing of responsibility,\" 
including in \"its financial implications.\"  The aims 
of the Common European Asylum System will be the 
establishment of a common asylum procedure and a 
uniform status for those who are granted asylum or 
subsidiary protection.  The Council and Commission 
should establish in 2005 \"appropriate structures 
involving the national asylum services of the Member 
States with a view to facilitating practical 
cooperation.\"  Following the establishment of a 
common asylum procedure by the end of 2010, these 
structures would be transformed into a European 
office \"to assist all forms of cooperation between 
Member States relating to the Common European Asylum 
System.\"  The draft further tasks the Commission to 
\"look into the merits\" and \"feasibility of the joint 
processing of asylum applications outside EU 
territory.\"  The EU will provide support for 
capacity building, border control and wider 
cooperation on migration issues to \"those countries 
that demonstrate a genuine commitment to fulfill the 
obligations under the Geneva Convention on Refugees\" 
(watered down from an earlier version that required 
countries to \"keep their obligations\" under the 
Convention). 
 
7.  The plan tasks the Council to establish teams of 
national experts to \"provide rapid technical and 
operational assistance\" to Member States for the 
control and surveillance of the EU external borders. 
The question of whether such teams of national 
experts can \"ultimately be converted into a European 
corps of border guards\" would be part of a 2007 
review of the tasks of the European Agency for the 
management of cooperation at the EU external borders 
to be established on May 1, 2005.  The leaders will 
also task the Council and Commission to draw up a 
plan in 2005 to develop \"common standards, best 
practices and mechanisms to prevent and combat 
trafficking in human beings.\" 
 
BIOMETRICS AND VISA POLICY 
 
8.  The draft calls on the Council, Commission and 
Member States to pursue their efforts to integrate 
biometric identifiers in travel documents, visas, 
residence permits, EU citizen\'s passports and 
information systems, and to prepare for the 
development of minimum standards for national 
identity cards.  A common visa policy will be 
developed through further harmonization of national 
legislation and handling practices at local consular 
missions.  Common visa offices would be established 
in the long term, taking account of discussions on 
the establishment of an EU external action service 
as envisaged under the EU Constitution.   The draft 
tasks the Commission to submit in 2005 a proposal on 
the establishment of common application centers and 
calls for the swift implementation of the Visa 
Information System (VIS) \"starting with the 
incorporation of among others alphanumeric data and 
photographs by the end of 2006 and biometrics by the 
end of 2007 at the latest.\" 
 
POLICE AND JUDICIAL COOPERATION 
 
9.  The program calls on the EU Member States to 
enable EUROPOL in cooperation with EUROJUST (EU 
Prosecutors\' Office) to \"play a key role in the 
fight against serious cross-border (organized) crime 
and terrorism by providing all necessary information 
to EUROPOL in good time.\"  Member States are pressed 
to set up joint investigative teams.  The Council 
and Commission will set up \"within the existing 
structures an integrated EU crisis management 
arrangement for cross-border crises\" to be 
implemented by July 1, 2006. 
 
10.  The program also calls for EU judicial 
cooperation in criminal and civil matters to be 
enhanced by \"strengthening mutual trust\" and the 
\"progressive development of a European judicial 
culture.\"  This should be achieved through exchange 
programs and the creation of a European training 
network for judicial authorities.  The program calls 
for full completion of the program of EU measures to 
implement the principle of mutual recognition of 
judicial decisions in both criminal and civilian 
matters.  The draft will refer to preparations for 
the establishment of a European Public Prosecutors\' 
Office at EUROJUST, as provided under the EU 
Constitutional Treaty, but Donner said the exact 
wording on this controversial point remained subject 
to amendments.  The Commission will be tasked to 
table legal instruments regarding family and 
succession law for completion by 2011. 
 
EXTERNAL ASPECTS AND NEXT STEPS 
 
11.  The leaders will task the Council SG/HighRep to 
present to the Council, by the end of 2005, a 
strategy encompassing all external aspects of EU 
policy on freedom, security and justice.  The 
strategy should reflect the EU\'s \"special relations 
with third countries, groups and regions\" but an 
earlier, more specific reference to relations with 
the U.S., Russia and the Balkans has been dropped 
from the text. 
 
12.  The new European Strategy on Drugs 2005-2012, 
to be adopted at the December 17-18 European 
Council, will be added to the multi-annual program. 
In adopting the Hague program next week, the EU 
leaders will task the Commission to present an 
Action Plan in 2005, in which the aims and 
priorities of the program will be translated into 
concrete actions, with a timetable for their 
adoption and implementation.  The Commission will 
present to the Council an annual evaluation report 
(\"scoreboard\") on the implementation of the Hague 
program. 
 
FAREWELL TO VITORINO 
 
13.  Outgoing JHA Commissioner Vitorino told his 
final Council press conference he fully backed the 
efforts of the Dutch Presidency to extend the use of 
QMV in JHA matters but cautioned this was \"not a 
magic solution\" as the EU would still have to 
overcome differences in the legal cultures of its 
individual Member States.  Looking back to his five 
years in office, Vitorino assured that the EU had 
been able to maintain a \"fair balance between 
justice, security and freedom.\"  He expressed hope 
that the same equilibrium would be maintained in the 
implementation of the new program.  Pressed to offer 
his advice to JHA Commissioner-designate 
Buttiglione, Vitorino said the Commission \"should be 
part of the solution, not of the problem.\" 
MCKINLEY 
"
"22059","10/27/2004 6:43","04BRUSSELS4624","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ARN AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, ETRD, KNNP, SY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU-SYRIA:  NEA A/S BURNS MEETINGS IN BRUSSELS 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POL MINCOUNS KYLE SCOTT; REASON 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1. (C) Commission officials told A/S Burns that the Trade and 
Cooperation Agreement (TCA) with Syria will only go into 
effect after signature and ratification in all 25 member 
states.  Commission argues that initialing the agreement 
provides additional leverage over Syria, which must 
demonstrate good behavior if it hopes to gain ratification. 
A/S Burns replied that Syria is likely to misinterpret the 
decision to initial the agreement, and that Damascus will try 
to do the bare minimum to implement it. 
 
2. (C) In consultations with A/S Burns on October 22, 
Christian Leffler, Director for Middle Eastern Affairs at the 
Commission outlined next steps following initialing of the 
Trade and Cooperation Agreement with Syria.  Commission will 
now put the agreement forward to the European Council 
recommending signature.  Once signed, the agreement must be 
ratified by parliaments in all 25 member states, plus the 
European Parliament.  This will be a time-consuming process, 
Leffler noted, as the agreement can only be signed after it 
has been translated into all official languages of the EU. 
Comprising hundreds of pages, the process of translating this 
into 22 languages will be lengthy.  He suggested that 
signature is unlikely before the first months of 2005. 
 
3. (C) Leffler said the Commission considered initialing the 
agreement to be the best way to maximize the EU\'s leverage 
with Syria.  By having an agreement \"there for the taking,\" 
the EU can now argue to Syria that if it wants to gain the 
advantages of the trade and aid package, it must do better in 
its performance, or the agreement will never be signed and 
ratified by the member states. 
 
4. (C) A/S Burns thanked Leffler for this explanation, but 
said the EU should not be surprised if the US is not 
supportive of the decision to initial the agreement.  He 
suggested the Syrians are likely to misread the meaning of 
the EU decision.  The US urges the EU to continue to do 
everything possible to maximize its leverage with Syria, and 
to keep pressure on them to fully implement UNSC resolution 
1559.  He cautioned, however, that we would expect Damascus 
to try to get away with the minimum possible in implementing 
its obligations. 
 
5.  (U)  This cable was cleared by NEA A/S Burns. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"22061","10/27/2004 7:32","04BRUSSELS4625","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004625 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/FO, NEA/IPA, NEA/NGA, NEA/IR, NEA/PI, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ETRD, KNNP, IZ, IR, IS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: NEA A/S BURNS\' CONSULTATIONS WITH EU ON IRAQ, 
IRAN, FFTF AND MEPP 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POL MINCOUNS KYLE SCOTT; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (C) A/S Burns met October 22 with senior EU officials on 
the way back from his most recent trip to the region.  Topics 
discused were Iraq, Iran, Forum for the Future (FFtF) 
preparations, and the Middle East Peace Process (MEPP).  The 
EU outlined its plans to support elections in Iraq, and also 
discussions underway on a possible EU presence in Iraq. 
EU-Iranian discussions the previous day in Vienna were 
characterized as good, but will require several additional 
meetings before the November IAEA Board of Governors meeting 
to see if the Iranians will yield.  A/S Burns updated the 
Commission on Moroccan plans for the FFtF meeting, and 
reviewed unresolved issues of participation and how to deal 
with education questions.  Javier Solana expressed 
frustration with the Israeli approach to the MEPP, but 
underscored his determination to ensure that EU member states 
remained committed to the Quartet process rather than 
pursuing independent initiatives.  It was suggested the Sharm 
el Sheikh meeting could become an important venue for 
discussing approaches to many of these issues.  EU Special 
Representative for the Middle East Peace Process Marc Otte 
took advantage of Burns\' visit to hold an informal meeting of 
Quartet envoys, where the group discussed plans for the AHLC, 
now scheduled for December 8 in Oslo.   End Summary. 
 
Iraq - Elections Are Key 
------------------------ 
 
2. (C) A/S Burns briefed EU officials on the current 
situation in Iraq.  Key US goals are supporting PM Allawi\'s 
efforts at rebuilding the security apparatus, advancing 
political reconciliation (especially with disaffected 
Sunnis), and allowing economic reconstruction to proceed. 
The success of the UN\'s efforts to organize elections in 
January will prove a key milestone.  Christian Leffler, 
Middle East Director for the Commission, agreed that the 
elections were critical, and outlined EC efforts to support 
the UN.  The Commission has decided to increase its 
contributions to this effort by an additional 30 million 
euros.  He had just received approval to send reinforcements 
to Baghdad to support the UN team.  The Commission hopes they 
will operate under Carlos Valenzuela\'s umbrella, but noted 
they will remain separate so as not to exceed the ceiling for 
UN personnel.  That said, Leffler noted that the Commission 
hopes their officials can make use of security provided the 
UN team, so as to reduce costs for the Commission. 
 
3. (C) Leffler said the Commission has concluded that the 
conditions in Iraq are simply not right for meaningful 
international observation of the elections.  Instead, the EC 
intends to concentrate on training trainers/observers to 
allow Iraqis to better organize the observation effort.  In 
parallel, the EU intends to organize \"process observation.\" 
These process monitors will be based in both Baghdad and 
Amman, and will look at the organization of the overall 
process, in order to be able to pronounce on its fairness and 
organization after election day.  A/S Burns urged close 
coordination with the UN. 
 
EU \"Rule of Law Mission\" Inside Iraq? 
------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Peter Feith, Council Deputy Director General for 
Security and Defense Policy, briefed A/S Burns on his recent 
visit to Baghdad and Council proposals to establish a \"rule 
of law mission\" in Iraq to support training senior police, 
judges, prosecutors, and perhaps also prison officials.  His 
office has presented options to the member states on how to 
carry out this mission, ranging from a full-fledged training 
effort in both Baghdad and Basra, to a small advisory 
presence in Iraq with training conducted outside the country. 
 The member states had reviewed these proposals for the first 
time October 22, and would return to them again October 26. 
DG Robert Cooper suggested the French would likely oppose an 
EU mission inside Iraq.  Feith agreed, but said he hoped the 
member states would eventually decide on an option which 
would include some sort of EU presence inside Iraq.  Feith 
hopes the member states will reach agreement in the coming 
days, so that this proposal can be combined with the 
Commission\'s proposals, and presented to PM Allawi when he 
travels to Brussels for the November 5 Council session.  He 
hopes to send a planning team to Baghdad soon thereafter, 
with the goal of launching the mission soon after the January 
elections. 
 
5. (C) Cooper asked about a long-term US military presence in 
Iraq, suggesting that a sensible policy would be \"organize 
elections, train the Iraqi army, and get out.\"  He emphasized 
that it was important for the EU that Iraq end well, and 
underscored that this would also help transatlantic relations 
\"get past the bad blood of the past.\"  In all these issues, 
Cooper emphasized that \"it would help if there were some sort 
of Franco-American reconciliation.\"  Solana also cautioned 
that PM Allawi\'s public criticism of France made reaching 
agreement within the EU more difficult. 
 
Iran: Good Start, More Meetings To Come 
--------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) Secretary General Javier Solana and Cooper both 
described the October 21 meeting in Vienna with the Iranians 
as a \"good start.\"  According to Cooper, the Iranians 
accepted the EU-3 paper without reactions, other than to note 
that it was imbalanced because it contained requests for 
concrete action by Iran in exchange for promises from the EU. 
 Still, Cooper considered it encouraging that the Iranians 
suggested the process of consultations on the package needed 
to go faster than planned, and suggested several more 
meetings to discuss the package prior to the IAEA BOG. 
Cooper admitted that \"noises from Tehran are not 
encouraging,\" but felt reassured that in Vienna the Iranians 
at least appeared ready to talk.  According to Cooper, the 
Iranians indicated that they had thought through further 
steps already, have studied the composition of the BOG and 
the UNSC, and asked how the West expected to deliver on its 
\"threats.\" 
 
7. (C) Cooper regretted that the next IAEA BOG meeting came 
so soon, suggesting all parties may need more time.  The EU-3 
(plus Cooper) will meet again with the Iranians the week of 
October 25 to continue discussions on the EU\'s package, and a 
third round of talks are likely the second week in November. 
Solana also echoed Cooper\'s hint of weak EU resolve, saying 
\"New York is still an open question.\"  He also urged the US 
to find some way to talk directly to the Iranians, suggesting 
that the margins of the Sharm el Sheikh meeting might prove 
useful in that regard.  A/S Burns emphasized that we still 
considered referral to the Security Council the best step, 
and noted that our skepticism about Iranian intentions 
remains deep. 
 
MEPP: Keeping Everyone on the Ranch 
----------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Solana concentrated his meeting with A/S Burns on the 
MEPP.  He was agitated, and openly frustrated, especially 
with the Israelis and Weissglas\' statement in particular. 
The only appropriate response, Solana suggested, is to begin 
to define final status issues.  He complained that senior 
American officials are not aware enough of the unnecessary 
suffering and brutality the Israelis are inflicting on the 
Palestinian population. 
 
9. (C) Solana emphasized that the EU fully recognized the 
weaknesses in Palestinian leadership as well.  (Solana met 
with Nabil Sha\'ath immediately before his meeting with A/S 
Burns.  Otte said the basic message to Sha\'ath had been \"if 
you want the EU to help you, you must act responsibly.\")  A/S 
Burns underscored to Solana that independent European 
initiatives, such as those being hinted at by the Spanish and 
French FM\'s, were unhelpful, and would be exploited by the 
Palestinians to avoid taking responsible actions on their 
own. Solana agreed, and reassured Burns that he will keep his 
members committed to the Roadmap as the only way forward. 
Burns emphasized that support for Gaza withdrawal was part of 
a larger picture that includes the entire Roadmap, and could 
also have an impact on events elsewhere in the Middle East. 
 
Preparing for the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
10. (C) Leffler stressed the need for careful preparation for 
the AHLC, now scheduled for December 8 in Oslo.  Otte 
suggested it might be useful if major donors coordinated in 
advance of the session.  Leffler emphasized the need to keep 
this group limited.  He suggested only the US, EU, World 
Bank, and UNRWA be included (as well as the Norwegian hosts). 
 Leffler also expressed frustration with the World Bank\'s 
reluctance to share the results of its study with major 
donors, saying the need to give their results to the US and 
EU at least in the near future.  In the informal lunch that 
Otte arranged for Quartet envoys, preparation for the AHLC 
was a primary topic for discussion. 
Forum For the Future 
-------------------- 
11. (C) A/S Burns briefed on his meetings in Morocco on FFtF 
planning.  The ministerial is now set for December 11, using 
the New York format.  Morocco wants broad participation, and 
intends to invite also Libya and Syria.  Leffler noted that 
Iran was not being invited, and he and Cooper both opined 
that this was for the best.  Leffler said the Commission was 
\"not enthusiastic\" about a possible invitation to Sudan.  A/S 
Burns briefed on current thinking in Rabat about how best to 
approach the sensitive issue of education, and Leffler 
expressed sympathy with the Moroccan position.  He suggested 
that inviting an NGO regional authority to introduce the 
topic of education --perhaps making a pitch directly to 
finance ministers at this point -- might prove more useful 
than high-level participation by ministers of education. 
This could then set the stage for a meeting by ministers of 
education in 2005. 
 
12.  (U)  NEA A/S Burns cleared this message. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"22069","10/27/2004 9:41","04BRUSSELS4629","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004629 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/FO - TEFFT, EUR/RUS, EUR/UMB, EUR/ERA 
MOSCOW FOR EUR A/S JONES AND EUR/RUS DIRECTOR WARLICK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, ETTC, RS, XH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU-CIS RELATIONS:  GROWING FRUSTRATION WITH MOSCOW 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  During October 22 U.S.-EU Troika meeting on 
Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova, EU officials told EUR 
DAS Tefft that diminishing expectations for the EU-Russia 
summit and disappointment over elections in Belarus were 
leading the EU to reconsider its policies toward both 
countries.  In particular, Russian skepticism of the European 
Neighborhood Policy and EU influence in Russia\'s \'near 
abroad\' is likely to lead to EU-Russian friction in the 
future.  On Ukraine, the EU explained its new Neighborhood 
Policy as primarily an attempt to bring Ukraine closer to the 
West but noted that \"if, at the start, the Presidential 
elections are stolen\" it would be difficult going.  The 
Troika also discussed next steps on Moldova, with the EU 
unexpectedly noting that it had begun sharing the US-EU 
Stability Declaration text with Moldova, Russia and Romania. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
FOUR SPACES: RUSSIA\'S DELAYS PROMPT REEVALUATION? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. (C) Jan Lucas van Hoorn, Dutch MFA Director for Southeast 
and Eastern Europe, and Michael Leigh, Commission Deputy 
Director General, both told EUR DAS Tefft that they were 
hopeful that the EU and Russia would agree on \"roadmaps\" for 
further action in each of the four common spaces prior to the 
November 11 EU-Russia summit.  (The four spaces are Internal 
Security, External Security, Economics and Trade, and Culture 
and Research.)  Van Hoorn said that although the EU would 
prefer agreement on roadmaps for all four spaces as a package 
for the November 11 summit, the EU would settle for 
\"practical implementation\" of whatever elements are agreed by 
the summit. 
 
3. (C) Leigh and Van Hoorn noted that the EU and Russia have 
essentially agreed to the roadmaps on the economic and 
cultural spaces.  In particular, the EU is pleased with 
Russia\'s Kyoto ratification, and with Russian agreement to 
include environmental issues -- such as use of double-hulled 
tankers -- and trade-related issues, such as fees for 
Siberian overflights, in the economic roadmap.  But this 
success contrasts sharply with discussions on the external 
and internal security roadmaps, which remain \"problematic.\" 
In the internal security roadmap, Russia continues to object 
to discussion of Chechnya or human rights, lobbies for 
Russian minority rights in the Baltic states, and harbors 
unrealistic hopes the EU will grant visa free travel to 
Russian citizens.  In the external security roadmap, Van 
Hoorn said that Russia is \"not ready\" to discuss with the EU 
issues related to the \'near abroad\'.  In a separate meeting, 
Council Secretariat official Carl Hallergard said that at the 
October 19 EU-Russia ministerial, FM Lavrov had likened EU 
enlargement to CIS integration, saying, \"We each have our 
neighborhoods. If we need help in ours, we\'ll let you know.\" 
Kees van Rij, Head of Task Force in the Council Secretariat, 
noted that Russia\'s \"zero-sum approach\" to its near abroad 
precludes serious engagement with the EU on their shared 
neighborhood. 
 
4. (C) In contrast, van Rij noted Russian receptivity on 
non-proliferation and anti-terrorism cooperation, and EU 
counter-terrorism Czar de Vries will travel to Moscow in 
early November.  But substantive cooperation remains elusive, 
and van Rij was puzzled by the Russian enthusiasm to create 
common structures to deal with security issues and its 
simultaneous reluctance to engage on the issues such 
structures would have to address. 
 
5. (C) EU officials were pessimistic regarding Russia\'s steps 
to weaken democracy and failure to resolve frozen conflicts. 
The Commission said the surveillance and pressure on foreign 
companies and signs of weakening democracy are part of a 
\"consolidation of a trend that has been taking place all 
along since 2001\".  Leigh said \"managed democracy\" may be the 
best that can be hoped for; the media grab and other measures 
taken by Putin to increase control \"gives the EU pause\" to 
think about the EU\'s underlying assumption that engagement 
with Russia can be based on a slow convergence of values 
between Russia and Europe.  That isn\'t happening.  With the 
new Commission coming in, and given post-Beslan developments 
in Russia, Leigh said the EU may reevaluate its approach to 
Russia. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
MOLDOVA: STABILITY DECLARATION, SANCTIONS AND EU PEACEKEEPING 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
6. (C) Van Hoorn informed DAS Tefft that the EU had begun 
sharing the US-EU draft Stability Declaration with Moldova, 
Russia and Romania.  At the October 19 EU-Russia ministerial, 
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov dismissed the text as \"a good 
OSCE document\".  Van Rij said the EU had told these countries 
that the Text of the declaration is \"not carved in stone\" and 
remains \"open to discussion\".  The EU plans to solicit 
reactions from all concerned, and look for an opportunity to 
use the text to kick-off pentagonal talks, which the EU would 
host.  DAS Tefft said the U.S. would make parallel approaches 
in Moldova, Russia, Ukraine, Romania, and the OSCE to share 
the text.  Van Hoorn and Tefft discussed jointly visiting 
Chisinau the week of November 15 to discuss next steps. 
 
7. C) DAS Tefft informed the EU that the US was considering 
taking action against the Transnistrian banking sector, and 
asked the EU to consider doing the same.  Raul de Luzenberg, 
Moldova Desk Officer at the Commission, said that the 
Commission is \"looking into\" the possibility of financial 
sanctions, but faces legal and other challenges in collecting 
adequate information on which to take action. 
 
8. (C) DAS Tefft asked about the possibility of an EU 
Peacekeeping Mission in Moldova, should the Russian troops 
leave Moldova as part of a political settlement.  Van Rij 
said that the EU had had internal discussions on this in 
September 2003, but it had suspended its planning to focus on 
reaching a political settlement first.  Nonetheless, the EU 
said the plans could be \"dusted off\" if a political 
settlement became likely.  Van Hoorn agreed to share EU 
documents on post-settlement plans with the U.S. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
UKRAINE\'S ELECTIONS AND MIXED COOPERATION WITH MOLDOVA 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
9. (C) During October 21 meetings with the EU, Moldovan FM 
Stratan had taken a \"stronger anti-Ukrainian position than 
before\", and said he expected a negative \"break\" in 
Moldova-Ukrainian relations.  De Luzenberg said a recent 
meeting between Ukrainian and Moldovan officials on border 
issues had been tense, but progress had been made on 
demarcation and exchange of information between Moldova and 
Ukraine. 
 
10. (C) Leigh noted that the EU\'s Neighborhood Policy was 
initially conceived to encourage Ukraine to move closer to 
the West.  Ukraine did not like the Neighborhood Policy, 
preferring instead an offer on eventual membership, but had 
reluctantly agreed to negotiate a Neighborhood \"Action Plan.\" 
 Now, however, if at the start of the plan Ukraine\'s 
presidential elections are \"stolen,\" Leigh said, EU relations 
with Ukraine will be difficult.  EU officials were very 
interested in coordinating with the US on a possible travel 
ban on officials involved in undermining free and fair 
elections in Ukraine. 
 
------------------------------- 
EU HARDENING STANCE ON BELARUS? 
------------------------------- 
 
11. (C) Nadine Ernzer, Regional Director for CIS Countries in 
the Political Department from Luxembourg, said that the 
October 17 elections had had been far worse than expected 
and, combined with Lukashenko\'s consolidated grip on power, 
showed similarities to a \"fascist regime\".   The EU is now 
considering \"possible measures\" to respond to developments in 
Belarus, and Nadine said the EU would \"reappraise its Belarus 
policy\". 
 
12. (C) DAS Tefft summarized recent U.S. actions, including 
the Belarus Democracy Act, the possible expansion of the visa 
ban to penalize election defrauders, and a desire to increase 
training of political opposition and civil society, and 
student exchanges.  Ernzer said that the EU would consider 
similar actions to be implemented in early 2005. 
 
13. (C) Weidemann said that EU policy on Belarus was based on 
the assumption of an eventual change of leadership.  With 
Lukashenko increasing his chances to be president-for-life 
with the referendum, van Rij said the EU would have to go 
beyond funding civil society and look for alternative 
responses in \"a fresh manner\".  Tefft said that developing a 
joint list of possible actions would be useful, and that 
encouraging positive engagement from the Russians would be 
crucial. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
14. (C) Recent changes in Russia and the absence of 
transparent and fair elections in Belarus -- and likely in 
Ukraine -- are prompting an internal reassessment of EU 
policy toward Russia and the CIS.  Although the EU will 
continue to engage Russia and the CIS to promote democracy 
and political pluralism, continued negative trends in the 
region may lead the EU increasingly to link its engagement 
with more punitive measures such as financial sanctions and 
visa bans.  END COMMENT. 
 
------------ 
Participants 
------------ 
 
15. (U)  EU Delegation 
 
Netherlands (current EU Presidency): 
Jan Lucas van Hoorn, Director in Dutch MFA for Southeast and 
Eastern Europe 
Anthony van der Togt Head of Division in Dutch MFA for 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia 
 
Luxembourg (successor to Netherlands in EU Presidency): 
Nadine Ernzer, Regional Director for CIS Countries, Political 
Department 
Judith Feider, Permanent Representation of Luxembourg to the 
EU 
 
European Commission 
Taneli Lahti, Desk Officer, Russia, Ukraine, Moldova, 
Belarus, DG Relex 
Karsten Mechlenburg, Desk Officer, Ukraine, DG Relex 
Reinhold Brenden, Desk Officer, Moldova, DG Relex 
 
EU Council Secretariat 
Sofia Moreira de Sousa, Administrator, Ukraine and Central 
Asia Desk, DGE 
Annika Weidemann, Administrator, Belarus and Moldova Desk, DGE 
Karl Hallergard, Administrator, Russia Desk, DGE 
Kees van Rij, Head of Task Force Europe/Central Asia and 
Transatlantic Relations 
 
U.S. Delegation 
John Tefft, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European 
Affairs 
Lee Litzenberger, Political Officer, US Mission to the EU 
Tom Lersten, Desk Officer, EUR/ERA 
Elzbieta Mazur, Political Officer/TDY US Mission to the EU 
Sean Kimball, Intern US Mission to the EU 
 
16.  (U) DAS Tefft has cleared this message. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22074","10/27/2004 10:27","04BRUSSELS4630","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE229053","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004630 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ROME PLEASE PASS FODAG; 
SECSTATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID/PPC - DWORKEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2014 
TAGS: EAID, KN, PREL, WFP, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU RESPONSE TO DEMARCHE ON DPRK FOOD AID 
 
REF: SECSTATE 229053 
 
Classified By: USEU DEVELOPMENT COUNSELOR PATRICIA J. LERNER, REASONS 1 
.4 B,D 
 
 1.  (C) Summary:  Development Counselor presented reftel 
demarche to Xavier Guillou at DG AIDCO Food Security Unit and 
Maria Castillo-Fernandez, DG RELEX Desk Officer for DPRK. 
Both were receptive to demarche, had been in North Korea 
recently, largely agreed with US assessment of issues with 
some nuanced differences, and welcomed offer of a dialogue on 
this critical issue following the November 13 Troika visit to 
Pyongyang. End Summary. 
 
2.  (C)  DG AIDCO\'s Food Security Unit person responsible for 
North Korea, Xavier Guillou, is just back in Brussels from a 
three week mission in DPRK.  Guillou largely agrees with the 
US assessment of the situation in North Korea.  He noted the 
EC has not provided food aid for the past two years based on 
a similar assessment of needs, access and competing 
priorities, and given large bilateral contributions from 
China, South Korea and Japan.  As a result the EC has found 
it more cost-effective to focus on agricultural 
rehabilitation (providing agricultural materials) and food 
security programs worth euros 8 million in 2003 and euros 5 
million in 2004.  The budget is not likely to increase to the 
historically high levels of 1995 -96.  On access and 
monitoring, Guillou agreed the situation was extremely 
difficult because of the specific features of the 
distribution system developed in North Korea over the past 
fifty years.  Guillou suggested donor responses are not 
always based on needs alone, given the \"massive food aid 
program\" which the Japanese are providing, which in his view 
has little to do with \"need.\"  Guillou believes the situation 
is far different from 1996-97 because there has been a 
limited recovery in agricultural production and therefore the 
EC is not convinced food aid is necessarily the most adequate 
tool given the limitations of monitoring, especially after 
ten years. 
 
3.   (C)   DG RELEX Desk Officer for DPRK Maria 
Castillo-Fernandez is well versed in the US position on food 
aid to DPRK and very much aware of the situation in the DPRK 
since the September 15 shift in policy on monitoring food aid 
and the humanitarian situation.  An EU Regional 
Directors-level Troika will be traveling to Pyongyang 
November 13 and will raise the issue of monitoring food aid, 
which is high on the EU agenda.  That said, the EC is not 
aware of any practical implications for EU NGOs as a result 
of DPRK policies.  Castillo-Fernandez was in DPRK recently 
and visited a number of sites.  Her view was that WFP access 
has increased significantly over the last two years.  Her 
sense was that the monitoring has perhaps been too intrusive 
and culturally insensitive.  Questions such as \"what do you 
eat?\" and \"what\'s in your cabinet?\" have provoked strong 
reaction from the local beneficiaries who do not want people 
asking such questions in DPRK, any more than they would like 
that in Europe.   That said, Castillo-Fernandez acknowledged 
that high ranking DPRK officials have used this local 
reaction to impose security restrictions.  She seemed to 
think the September discussion of whether there needed to be 
a CAP (Consolidated Appeals Process) or not, was not 
important as there are plenty of countries where we work 
without a CAP.  Politically, DPRK knows development 
assistance won\'t come until the nuclear issues are resolved. 
In terms of programming assistance, the EC does not view DPRK 
as an emergency humanitarian situation, but rather as a 
post-emergency transitional situation where development 
assistance may be more what they need. 
 
4.  (C) Castillo-Fernandez noted there are many issues to 
discuss, and proposed to take up some of them in the context 
of the November 9 visit to Brussels of US Special Envoy 
Joseph DeTrani.  She further suggested more detailed food aid 
dialogue following the November 13 Troika visit to Pyongyang, 
when the EU will have a better idea of the situation. 
 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22104","10/27/2004 16:12","04BRUSSELS4639","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS4578","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004639 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, IT, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU: BARROSO WITHDRAWS COMMISSION JUST BEFORE VOTE 
 
REF: A. A) USEU TODAY 10/20/04 
     B. B) USEU TODAY 10/15/04 
     C. C) USEU TODAY 10/14/04 
     D. D) BRUSSELS 4578 
     E. E) USEU TODAY 10/26/04 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  Realizing after last-minute consultations 
that he would not obtain European Parliament (EP) approval, 
European Commission President-designate Jose Manuel Barroso 
on October 27 withdrew his Commission one hour before the 
scheduled vote.  He said he would present a new list of 
Commissioners-designate \"soon.\"  Until then, the current 
Commission, headed by President Romano Prodi, will stay on. 
While Barroso has lost some prestige and his Commission will 
get a late start, we do not believe that these events will 
provoke an institutional crisis in the EU.  END SUMMARY. 
 
BACKGROUND: BUTTIGLIONE\'S CONSERVATIVE VIEWS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) The main obstacle to the Barroso Commission\'s approval 
was MEPs\' disapproval of Commissioner-designate for Justice, 
Freedom and Security Rocco Buttiglione\'s outspoken positions 
on homosexuality and the family, including his view that 
homosexuality is a &sin.8  The EP Civil Liberties and 
Justice and Home Affairs Committee rejected Buttiglione\'s 
nomination because of fears that Buttiglione would not uphold 
the principle of non-discrimination toward gays and women. 
Although various groups in parliament complained of other 
nominations, Buttiglione\'s nomination became the causus belli 
that eventually rallied a majority against the Barroso 
Commission. 
 
BARROSO SEES WRITING ON WALL 
---------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) After Barroso\'s proposed compromise on October 21 -- 
which would have dispersed responsibility for 
non-discrimination among a team of Commissioners -- failed to 
convince center and left-wing EP leaders (ref D), further 
consultations brought no significant movement.  The centrist 
liberal faction remained the key swing voting bloc.  An EP 
source told us that, at an October 26 meeting between Barroso 
and Liberal-Democrat (ALDE) EP Deputies (MEPs), 50 said they 
would vote against his Commission, 23 said they would vote in 
favor, and 5 said they would abstain.  The results of that 
meeting tipped the scales against Barroso. 
 
BARROSO\'S SURPRISE WITHDRAWAL 
----------------------------- 
 
4. (U) On October 27, one hour before the vote set for 12:00 
noon, Barroso announced to a surprised EP in plenary session 
that he would withdraw his designated Commission.  Saying a 
vote would not be good for \"the European project,\" Barroso 
said he would work to come up with a new team within a few 
weeks.  After adjourning temporarily for internal party 
consultations, the EP reassembled in plenary and accepted 
Barroso\'s decision.  Both EP President Josep Borrell and the 
Dutch EU Presidency representative, European Affairs Minister 
Atzo Nicolai, said the current Prodi Commission would have to 
stay in office beyond the planned November 1 end of its term 
until a new Commission had been approved.  (Prodi had agreed 
in the run-up to this vote to continue in office beyond 
November 1 if necessary.) 
 
What Next? 
---------- 
 
5. (C)  Barroso must now consult closely with member states, 
and will either re-shuffle portfolios among existing 
candidates, or ask some or all member states to nominate 
different commissioners.  He will almost certainly try to 
persuade the Italian government to nominate someone other 
than Buttiglione.  Barroso did not establish any deadline for 
presenting new proposals, noting only that he would do so \"in 
the next few weeks.\"  The next plenary of Parliament is 
currently scheduled for November 15-18, but if he proposes 
new portfolios or presents a new slate of commissioners, it 
is difficult to imagine the new team would complete the 
committee hearings process by that time.  The next 
regularly-scheduled plenary is not until December 13-16, 
although the Parliament could also be called into special 
session if needed. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6. (C) Withdrawing the Commission may have averted a clear 
defeat in the vote, and several Parliamentary leaders tried 
to help Barroso save face by suggesting he would emerge 
strengthened, not weakened, from this event.  The clear 
loser, however, was the Parliament\'s largest party grouping, 
the EPP, which attempted a power play and was outmaneuvered 
when all other groups rallied against them.  A second 
parliament loser, ironically, could be the liberal democrats, 
who tipped the balance against this slate.  It is difficult 
to imagine the next team Barroso presents will be as liberal 
in orientation as the Commission that was just defeated.  It 
is possible back-room discussions at the Rome EU Summit on 
October 29 could very quickly yield the outlines of a new 
Commission, but much will depend on PM Berlusconi\'s 
willingness to sacrifice Buttiglione.  While a big bump in 
the road for Barroso, we do not believe that these events 
will provoke an institutional crisis in the EU. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22146","10/28/2004 16:13","04BRUSSELS4664","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEU4475","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004664 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2014 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, KTFN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: OCTOBER 15 US-EU COTER TROIKA REVIEWS COMMON GOALS 
AND JOINT ACTIONS 
 
REF: A. USEU 4475 
 
     B. STATE 221188 
     C. STATE 218685 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: The October 15 U.S.-EU COTER counterterrorism 
(CT) Troika focused on EU plans to identify priority 
countries for CT assistance. Dutch CT Coordinator and COTER 
Chair Ambassador Mollinger reviewed recent visits to Saudia 
Arabia, Algeria, Morocco and Indonesia.  S/CT Director for 
Regional Affairs and U.S. Chairman Hartley welcomed the COTER 
initiative, agreed in principle to seek to coordinate CT 
assistance programs, but urged that, once the COTER has 
identified areas of assistance, coordination take place among 
embassies in the capitals concerned.  EU officials reviewed 
implementation of the EU CT work plan, including efforts to 
mainstream CT policy in EU external relations, streamline the 
production of threat assessments, harmonize national CT 
policies, and implement the March Declaration.  The two sides 
also reviewed global CT developments, agreed to consider a 
second round of joint demarches to encourage countries that 
have not already done so to ratify the 12 UN CT conventions 
and protocols, discussed the draft Council of Europe CT 
conventions, and exchanged views on terrorist recruitment. 
The U.S. raised the libyan arms embargo issue and Hizballah. 
The Luxembourg representative outlined his government,s 
plans for COTER during its spring 2005 EU Presidency. 
Delegations agreed in principle to meet early in 2005, with 
the exact date to be determined.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------- 
EU FOCUSES ON PRIORITY COUNTRIES 
-------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Dutch CT Coordinator and COTER Chair Ambassador Ronald 
Mollinger noted that the implementation of the EU Action Plan 
on terrorism has encouraged the EU to look more \"toward 
external policies and less toward internal procedures.\"  Two 
resulting actions have been the focus on seven priority 
countries (Morocco, Algeria, Saudi Arabia, Indonesia, 
Pakistan, Tunisia and Kenya), and greater cooperation between 
external and internal affairs (Second and Third \"Pillar\") 
experts within the EU COTER framework. Mollinger said that he 
and EU CT Coordinator Gijs de Vries had recently visited 
Morocco, and that he (Mollinger) had also visited Saudi 
Arabia, Algeria and Indonesia, to discuss EU technical 
assistance, intelligence sharing, and political support for 
CT cooperation with the EU.  He said each of the countries 
had welcomed the prospect of greater CT cooperation with the 
EU (although Algeria complained that the EU had not helped 
more at an earlier stage).  The COTER group is trying to 
identify three more priority countries to round out their 
list at ten and solicited U.s. views. 
 
3. (C) Consistent with Ref C, Hartley welcomed the COTER 
initiative, agreed in principle to seek to coordinate CT 
assistance programs, but urged that, once the COTER has 
identified areas of assistance, coordination take place among 
embassies in the capitals concerned.  Citing the U.s. G-8 
Presidency experience, he said U.S. Embassies in several of 
the priority countries identified by the EU were already 
working with other donors to coordinate and deconflict CT 
assistance programs.  Coordination at the embassy level would 
take advantage of embassies familiarity with the assistance 
already in train, deeper understanding of the local political 
context, and an appreciation of the unique challenges in each 
country regarding program implementation.  He noted a  number 
of countries in East Asia, South Asia, the Near East and 
Africa that would be logical candidates to fill out the EU 
top ten list.  The EU side agreed that cooperation in the 
field is the most effective venue for coordination. 
 
------------------------------ 
EU VISITS TO PRIORITY COUNTRIES 
------------------------------ 
 
4. (C) Mollinger provided detailed read-outs on his visits to 
Morocco, Algeria, Indonesia, and Saudi Arabia: 
 
MOROCCO:  Morocco had a mixed response to the EU, with few 
officials making specific requests.  Moroccan officials 
viewed AQ as an ideological inspiration and not a direct 
threat to Morocco.  During the discussion, it emerged that 
Morocco had requested EU assistance with border controls even 
as the U.S. is moving forward to implement the Terrorist 
Interdiction Program (TIP) to assist GOM establishment of a 
computerized port-of-entry name check system.. 
 
SAUDI ARABIA:  The Commission noted that Saudi Arabia\'s 
wealth made the country ineligible for Commission assistance. 
 EU officials relayed Saudi concerns about the potential 
influx of jihadists back into the country once Iraq is 
stabilized.  Hartley acknoweldged that this could be a 
problem, but pointed out that the Saudis were making 
important gains in their CT capabilities and that coalition 
forces were working hard to ensure that such jihadists would 
be apprehended or killed before they have the chance to leave 
Iraq. 
 
ALGERIA:  Algeria was enthusiastic about receiving technical 
assistance from the EU, but also vocal in its grievances 
about what it saw as passive EU involvement until now.  The 
EU reminded us that the Association Agreement with Algeria 
contains a terrorism clause, but Algeria has not yet ratified 
the agreement. 
 
INDONESIA:  Indonesia told the EU visitors \"they are fed up 
with fact finding missions\" and hoped instead for some real 
assistance.  Hartley noted ongoing USG CT capacity-building 
assistance and recent developments, in particular the recent 
election of President Yudhoyono, who has given positive 
signals on CT cooperation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
NEW THREAT ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES CENTRALIZE COOPERATION 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
5. (C) EU officials related their developing approach to 
threat assessments. Instead of drawing on individual member 
state intelligence service reports on particular countries 
and themes, COTER has asked the EU Situation Centre (SitCen) 
to synthesize all available information, including from 
Europol, and present coordinated assessments to the COTER 
group.  The Dutch hope to have eleven foreign intelligence 
and internal security services pooling information at SitCen 
by the end of December (the number is currently at seven). 
 
6. (SBU) The EU is also working on a peer review process to 
identify and universalize best practices in CT policies 
throughout the 25 member states.  A report on best practices 
for CT from this evaluation will be released during the 
December JHA European Council meeting. The new member states 
will participate in the evaluation venture at a later date. 
 
 
7. (SBU) EU Counter-terrorism coordinator Gijs de Vries\' 
Deputy, Patricia Holland, said that the EU is engaging in a 
larger effort to \"mainstream\" CT concerns throughout all EU 
policy areas.  On terrorism financing, Holland said the EU 
would soon release an overview paper on terrorist financing 
policies in the EU. 
 
----------------- 
TERRORISM FINANCE 
----------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Both the US and the EU noted the productive 
discussion on terrorism finance that had taken place on 
September 23 and reported on the four key areas for our 
future work:  (1) a meeting with prosecutors, investigators 
and designation authorities to be held before the end of the 
year to share experience and best practices; (2) enhanced 
US-EU cooperation in FATF especially on non-profits and cash 
couriers; (3) continuation of the informal dialogue and (4) 
cooperation on CTF technical assistance. 
 
------------ 
OTHER ISSUES 
------------ 
 
9. (C) The two sides also discussed the following topics: 
 
-- Global Trends:  Hartley reviewed global developments, 
noting the progress made to date to defeat al-Qaida and 
associated terrorist groups but underscoring the continuing 
threat.  Acknowledging that international efforts to identify 
and neutralize AQ cells worldwide had made  significant 
progress, Dutch Internal Security Service officer Willem van 
Sluys said that the EU remained very worried about the 
ongoing capabilities and recruitment skills of AQ cells, 
especially in Europe.  The EU was also concerned that AQ was 
evolving into more of an ideology with a declining need for a 
base, which added new challenges for CT officials. 
 
-- Joint Demarches:  The two sides agreed to consider a 
second round of joint demarches, begun under the Italian EU 
Presidency, to urge third countries to ratify and implement 
the twelve UN CT conventions and protocols.  The U.S. side 
undertook to propose next steps. 
 
-- Council of Europe Draft CT Convention: USEU DOJ Attache 
Mark Richard said he understood a draft comprehensive CT 
convention had been tabled at the Council of Europe, despite 
a prior understanding that the largely redundant proposal had 
been dropped.  Troika officials confirmed that the EU did not 
have a common position on the draft and that several 
prominent EU member states oppose it.  The Luxembourg Rep 
read a statement from an EU coordination meeting in New York 
in which member states agreed that any new convention should 
focus on filling existing gaps and should not seek to reframe 
existing conventions. 
 
-- Terrorist Recruitment: Hartley described USG concerns 
about terrorist recruitment in US prisons and among military 
chaplains.  Dutch internal security service official van 
Sluys said the EU remained concerned about recruitment from 
within immigrant communities.  While EU member states had 
taken aggressive action to halt recruitment in places such as 
schools and mosques, more needed to be done to engage Muslim 
moderates to provide an alternative to radicalization.  He 
offered to share an EU Action Plan for combating terrorist 
recruitment, which should be finished by December. 
 
-- Libya:  Hartley also delivered US concerns (Ref B) 
regarding the EU decision to lift its arms embargo on Libya 
(details in Ref A). 
 
-- Hizballah: Hartley raised ongoing U.S. concerns regarding 
lack of EU consensus  on designating Hizballah and 
Hamas-linked charities as terrorist organizations.  The EU 
side indicated that movement on either front was not likely 
in the near term. 
 
-------------------------------- 
LUXEMBOURG PRESIDENCY PRIORITIES 
-------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Luxembourg Rep Tom Berend highlighted five COTER 
priorities for Luxembourg\'s EU Presidency (January 1-June 30, 
2005): enhancing CT assistance to third countries; building 
on the Dutch efforts to tackle terrorism finance; preparing 
for ministerials; and having productive troikas with third 
countries.  The fifth priority will be \"thematic\" but has not 
yet been agreed. 
 
------------ 
NEXT MEETING 
------------ 
 
11. (SBU) The two sides agreed in principle to meet again 
early in the new year (date to be determined). 
 
-------------------- 
12. (U) PARTICIPANTS 
-------------------- 
 
U.S. Delegation: 
Brent Hartley, S/CT Director for Regional Affairs 
Kimber Shearer, EUR/ERA 
Mark Richard, Department of Justice Counselor, USEU 
Frank Kerber, Narcotics and Law Enforcement Counselor, USEU 
Van Reidhead, Political Officer, USEU 
Jennifer Underwood, Economic Officer, USEU 
Sean Kimball, Intern, USEU 
 
Dutch Presidency Delegation: 
Ambassador Ronald Mollinger, MFA (COTER Chair) 
Wouter Jurgens, MFA 
Nadine van Loon, MFA 
Willem van Sluys, Internal Security Service 
 
European Commission: 
Lars-Erik Lundin, DG External Relations 
Andrew Denison, DG External Relations 
Diederick Paalman, DG JHA 
 
Luxembourg: 
Robert Rollinger, MFA 
Stephane Aumer, MFA 
Taru Berend, MFA 
 
Council Secretariat: 
Patricia Holland, Advisor to EU CT Coordinator 
Margarita Comomala, USA Desk 
Allessandra Baldi, USA/CT Desk 
Juan de Luis, CT Desk 
 
13. (U) This message has been cleared by S/CT Hartley and 
EUR/ERA Shearer. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"22147","10/28/2004 16:41","04BRUSSELS4665","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE228399","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, YI, CY, UP, ZR, IS, SU, SO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COMMISSION AND COUNCIL SECRETARIAT VIEWS ON 
GAERC AGENDA 
 
REF: A. STATE 228399 
 
     B. STATE 230353 
     C. USEU BRUSSELS 4639 
     D. USEU BRUSSELS 4602 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
1. (C) We shared Ref A and B points with Commission and 
Council officials in advance of the Nov. 2 EU FMs (GAERC) 
meeting and the Nov. 4-5 European Council summit meeting. 
Given the failure of the incoming Barroso Commission to get 
parliamentary confirmation (REF C) before this meeting, the 
Commission\'s role in these sessions will be severely 
constrained, as it will have to be represented by members of 
the caretaker Prodi Commission.  We have been told this 
ham-strung Commission representation could also limit 
conversation on a broad range of agenda items, particularly 
at the Nov. 4-5 Summit, where discussion of Barroso\'s plans 
for economic reforms (Lisbon Agenda), the multi-annual 
justice and home affairs agenda, and new efforts on 
\"Communicating Europe\" are due to be featured events. 
 
2. (C) Incoming External Relations Commissioner 
Ferrero-Waldner had been preparing to attend the Nov. 2 
GAERC, and therefore Judith Gebetstroithner, who should 
become Ferrero-Waldner\'s deputy chef de cabinet, was able to 
share views on some topics: 
-- On Iraq, Gebetstroithner said that Ferrero-Waldner 
supports all the planning done under Commissioner Patten for 
offering Iraq elections support, shares the same concerns as 
those repeatedly expressed by Patten about the security 
situation in country. Ferrero-Waldner, therefore, would also 
be unlikely to support a full-blown observer presence inside 
Iraq in January.  She added that discussions on the details 
of a police training mission were still underway internally 
within the EU. 
-- On Iran, Gebetstroithner stressed that the real GAERC 
discussion on how to proceed at the IAEA Board of Governors 
meeting would be at the November 22 GAERC, not next week. 
But she added that, from the briefings she had received, it 
was clear that Commission officials handling the issue within 
DG RELEX still felt it would be too early to refer the issue 
to the UNSC, and that more time should be given for 
negotiating with Tehran. 
-- Finally, on Somalia, she said the Commission is likely to 
approach the Transitional Federal Government in a supportive, 
but cautious, manner with a clear understanding that 
engagement with the TFG is, at best, the beginning of a 
long-term process of reforms.  Discussion has begun within 
the EU on whether it would be worthwhile to name a EU Special 
Envoy for Somalia to take this work forward. 
 
3. (C) On Sudan, Margarita Comamala of the Council 
Secretariat, said that Solana\'s team had returned from their 
 
SIPDIS 
recent visit to the region with some concerns about the AU 
mission (REF D and previous).  In particular, she understood 
they still had worries quick deployment of AU monitors could 
lead to them being in place, but without the means to perform 
their mission.  (We called her attention to Ref A\'s 
assurances that support on the ground will be in place).  She 
noted some concern within Solana\'s staff that the AU troops 
could be drawn beyond their monitoring tasks into peace 
enforcement missions, for which they might not be prepared. 
 
McKinley 
"
"22199","10/29/2004 13:46","04BRUSSELS4677","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 004677 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/PC MAREN BROOKS; DEPARTMENT PASS ONDCP 
CHARLOTTE SISSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AF, BL, CO, EU, KCRM, SNAR, XM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DRUGS TROIKA DISCUSSES EU DRUGS STRATEGY, 
ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS AND HEROIN PRODUCTION 
 
1.  (U) Summary.  The annual U.S.-EU Drugs Troika was held 
October 25 in Brussels.  INL DAS Jonathan Farrar had 
wide-ranging discussions on trends in cocaine, heroin and 
synthetics production and trafficking. The USAID Office 
Director of South America Affairs gave a detailed 
presentation on U.S. support for alternative development 
programs in the Andean Region.  The EU summarized its 
2005-2008 Drugs Strategy, noting that no new legal 
instruments would be introduced to combat trafficking; 
rather, priority would be to make use of existing legislation 
to stem the supply of drugs into the EU.  The ONDCP previewed 
its National Synthetic Drugs Action Plan and Europol 
discussed synthetics production in Europe. The UK delegation 
reported on heroin production in Afghanistan.  The incoming 
Luxembourg Presidency proposed June 21 for the next troika. 
End summary. 
 
2.  (U) The Dutch Presidency hosted the annual U.S.-EU Drugs 
Troika October 25.  The U.S. delegation was led by INL DAS 
Jonathan Farrar and included INL program analyst Maren 
Brooks, ONDCP Supply Reduction Policy Analyst Charlotte 
Sisson, USAID Office Director of South America Affairs Beth 
Hogan, Global Affairs Officer Erin Webster-Main from Embassy 
The Hague, DEA/Brussels James C. Kabel, and USEU NAS Frank 
Kerber.  The EU side was chaired by Robert van Embden, Head 
of the Judicial and Police Cooperation Division of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and included representatives 
from the Commission, the EU Drug Monitoring Center in Lisbon, 
the upcoming Luxembourg Presidency, Europol, and national 
delegations from France, Germany, Austria, Poland, Malta, 
Belgium, Ireland, the UK and Spain.  The chair of the central 
Dublin Group also attended. 
 
3.  (U) Mr. van Embden opened the meeting with an overview of 
the EU Drugs Strategy for 2005-2008.  He emphasized themes of 
international cooperation and research and evaluation found 
throughout the strategy.  No new legal instruments are 
proposed for counter narcotics; rather, priority will be 
given to making use of existing instruments to reduce drug 
supply.  Among these are the EU Mutual Legal Assistance 
Treaty and the Framework Decision on Minimum Penalties for 
Drug Trafficking.  On the latter, the Member States have 18 
months to pass national legislation along the guidelines 
contained in the Framework Decision.  Emphasis in the new 
Strategy will be on Afghanistan, Colombia, Morocco and the 
drug supply routes into Europe.  The Commission has completed 
its evaluation of the 2000-2004 Action Plan.  The new 
Strategy 2005-2008 will be formally adopted in December. 
 
4.  (SBU) DAS Farrar provided the USG introduction of the 
agenda item on cocaine, mentioning our success in reducing 
coca cultivation in Colombia and the need to protect the hard 
won progress made previously in Peru and Bolivia.  He noted 
that INL A/S Robert Charles has been invited to testify 
before Congress on November 17 on European assistance to 
counternarcotics efforts in Colombia.  He asked that the EU 
provide information on any counternarcotics or alternative 
development programs there, and also information on any plans 
to provide assistance for demobilization programs in 
Colombia.  He noted that our programs are on target to spray 
130,000 hectares of coca in Colombia in 2004, similar to the 
2003 results, and that we are prepared to spray a similar 
amount in 2005 if it were necessary. 
 
5.  (U) AID Office Director of South America Affairs Beth 
Hogan gave a presentation on USAID\'s Alternative Development 
(AD) Program in the Andean Region.  She said that U.S. 
foreign policy objectives for the program are to strengthen 
democracy, promote economic growth, eliminate narco-terorrism 
and significantly reduce narco-trafficking.  The three 
pillars of U.S. counter-narcotics strategy are eradication, 
interdiction and alternative development.  USAID\'s objectives 
for its AD assistance are to reduce coca production; prevent 
the spread of coca into new areas; promote alternative licit 
crops; develop economic and social infrastructure; and create 
sustainable, licit employment opportunities.  Among the 
challenges faced by the program are the fact that coca 
production is rooted in history, culture, economics and 
geography; coca is a low maintenance, high yield crop; coca 
provides a lucrative market amid widespread poverty; it is 
politically and tactically difficult to eliminate; and it is 
hard to maintain adequate financial support for the program 
in a time of increasing budget pressures.  USAID has learned 
valuable lessons about alternative development from its 
experience over the years.  These lessons include: crop 
substitution is not enough; community infrastructure projects 
help build social cohesion and economic opportunity; 
sustainable economic opportunity is key to long-term success; 
there is a need to create economic opportunities beyond 
coca-growing regions; expanding/strengthening state presence 
is critical; production is moving to hard-to-reach areas; 
risk avoidance is the dominant factor in decreasing 
production while production costs are a secondary concern; 
the cocaleros are becoming increasingly politically 
sophisticated and disruptive; there is increasing evidence of 
collusion across borders; and finally, the traditional 
\"agro-centric\" approach still has merit but a 
multidimensional effort is needed.  This integrated 
development approach includes expanding the state presence; 
building host government capacity to meet social needs and to 
provide security and law enforcement; strengthening 
democratic institutions; developing the private sector; 
increasing trade capacity; and generating public support and 
political will.  Hogan presented AID\'s estimated FY 05 Andean 
funding levels for AD efforts in Bolivia, Colombia, Peru and 
Ecuador as a share of total development assistance.  She then 
gave a brief summary of the AD programs in those countries, 
noting that over 30,000 families are receiving AD assistance 
in Bolivia and nearly 40,000 families in Colombia.  Tentative 
Andean targets for the program are 100,000 families in AD 
activities, completion of 2,000 economic/social 
infrastructure projects, and development of 150,000 hectares 
of licit/forest land. 
 
6.  (U) Europol responded to the presentation by noting the 
significant decrease in coca production since 1985.  The 
Andean region is also among EU priorities.  Cocaine 
shipments, seizures and consumption have increased in several 
EU Member States.  Cocaine enters the EU primarily through 
maritime means, but also via couriers and air cargo. 
Colombian groups are setting up commercial enterprises in 
West Africa (e.g., Togo, Ghana and Nigeria).  90 tons of 
cocaine was seized in the EU in 2003, mostly in Spain and the 
Netherlands.  Spain especially has become a \"depot\" country 
for cocaine imports.  There is a growing link between 
organized crime and cocaine trafficking, especially in Spain 
and Greece.  Albania is developing into a cocaine storage and 
processing area.  Half of the cocaine seized in the 
Netherlands last year came via couriers landing at 
Amsterdam\'s Schipol airport.  Couriers are also operating 
from Jamaica into the UK.  Europol does not collect Member 
State data on drug prices or purity - only data on the active 
ingredient in the drugs on the market.  However, the European 
Drug Monitoring Center (EMCDDA) noted plans underway to begin 
collecting price/parity data in order to better evaluate the 
drug situation in Europe. 
 
7,  (U) The Commission (DG External Relations) said that EC 
drug assistance to Latin America is focused on the Andean 
Region.  However, the EC\'s approach to AD is different from 
that of the U.S.  The EC never compensated farmers for not 
growing coca.  The EC stresses community development.  There 
is no conditionality with the governments for EC assistance; 
AD forms part of the political dialogue with these countries. 
 The Commission rep said the EC has two AD projects in 
Colombia, three in Peru and two in Bolivia.  The EC projects 
in Colombia are \"peace labs,\" which the Commission rep said 
were AD programs in the broadest sense, and may be expanded 
to a third site.  The Colombia projects are funded for Euro 
35 million each over eight years.  (During the luncheon 
following the Troika, EU reps said they had no new 
information on EU plans for demobilization assistance in 
Colombia but would endeavor to provide an update on the 
margins of next week\'s UNODC Major Donors meeting in Vienna.) 
 The EMCDDA rep (European Monitoring Center for Drugs and 
Drug Addiction) said that the Center\'s 2004 Annual Report, to 
be published November 25, will show that cocaine use in the 
EU is on the increase.  EU Member States are having 
difficulties identifying effective treatment for cocaine drug 
users; U.S. experience in this regard is important. 
 
8.  (SBU) The U.K. rep opened the discussion of the drug 
situation in Afghanistan by noting that opium production was 
3,600 tons in 2003 and is expected to increase in 2004.  The 
CNPA (Central Narcotics Police of Afghanistan) has been set 
up in Kabul.  The UK is working to involve ISAF and Coalition 
forces in CN efforts; a new counternarcotics annex on ISAF 
made real progress in expanding upon the actions which ISAF 
can take in this area.  Italy is heavily engaged in 
strengthening the judicial system.  A special task force on 
criminal justice in counter narcotics is being set up, and 
there is on-going training for CN prosecutors, judges and 
investigators.  There remains a need to strengthen 
Afghanistan\'s CN legislation and prison capacity.  The U.K. 
made a strong pitch to his EU colleagues to provide 
immediately additional experts on the ground for interdiction 
efforts (i.e., customs and CN police), investigations, and 
intelligence gathering.  CN efforts must be mainstreamed 
whenever feasible into development aid projects focused on 
areas that are targeted for eradication.  DAS Farrar 
responded that the new Afghan government also would need to 
take forceful steps to remove corrupt officials as part of 
its counternarcotics campaign. 
 
9.  (SBU) On the regional side, EU chair van Embden noted 
there has been an increase in the volume of heroin 
trafficking from Afghanistan to Europe through Pakistan, Iran 
and Turkey.  Drug trafficking routes through Central Asia 
serve primarily Russia\'s internal market.  DAS Farrar 
underscored our support for a regional approach to the 
problem, but added that concerns had arisen in Washington as 
to whether Tashkent was the appropriate site for the UNODC\'s 
proposed Central Asia Regional Information Coordination 
Center (CARICC).  The European Commission representative 
responded that the EU had concerns as to whether the project 
was viable given Central Asian states\' domestic capacity to 
collect and share information.  Both sides agreed that 
further discussion would be needed.  The DEA rep noted that 
most heroin flows to the U.S. are from Colombia and Mexico; 
only four percent comes from SE Asia and four percent from SW 
Asia. 
 
10.  (U) Charlotte Sisson from ONDCP previewed the new 
National Synthetic Drugs Action Plan (available on 
www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov).  The plan lays out actions to 
address the growing problems posed by synthetic drugs, 
including illicit drugs and diverted pharmaceutical products. 
 Sisson noted that the plan combines domestic and 
international efforts for attacking and disrupting the trade 
in synthetics.  Sisson highlighted the 46 recommendations in 
the areas of prevention, treatment, chemical control and law 
enforcement.  Europol noted that the Netherlands and Belgium 
remain the primary producers of Ecstasy and amphetamines. 
Authorities seize 50 to 70 major synthetic drug laboratories 
each year.  Several criminal groups supply only the equipment 
or the chemicals used in the drug production - not the drugs 
themselves.  While 24 million Ecstasy tablets were seized in 
the EU in 2003, Europol noted consumption in one Member State 
is one million tablets per week.  There has been increased 
ethnic involvement in the Ecstasy drug trade, especially 
among Turks, Moroccans and Chinese.  The Chinese connection 
is understandable given that China is the main supplier of 
precursor chemicals.  Most synthetic drug seizures are still 
at airports, but the trade is moving to maritime shipments. 
The price per tablet in the EU is approximately Euro 5.  The 
principal international traffickers are from Albania, the 
Dominican Republic, Russia and Israel. 
 
11.  (SBU) The U.S. and the EU agreed to coordinate positions 
for the 2005 meeting of the United Nations Commission on 
Narcotic Drugs (CND).  The EU will begin substantive 
discussions on the CND in late November and has received the 
U.S. documents for the thematic debates on HIV/AIDS and 
Community Capacity Building.  DAS Farrar summarized that the 
U.S position leading up to CND would be that the UNODC has an 
overly full plate already, particularly in implementing its 
commitments in Afghanistan and the Central Asia region, and 
that it should not be asked to take on additional mandates. 
The U.S. delegation also noted it has not prepared any 
resolutions for the CND. 
 
12.  (U) The incoming Luxembourg Presidency proposed to hold 
the next drugs troika on June 21.  Both sides agreed to 
monitor developments in the coming months before deciding 
whether a June meeting is warranted. 
 
13.  (SBU) Comment.  The EU schedules its drug troika with 
the U.S. around its internal horizontal drugs meeting for the 
convenience of its Member States.  Several national 
delegations use this schedule to attend the troika meeting. 
This is highly unusual, since other troikas are normally 
attended only by the Commission, the current and future 
presidencies, and occasionally the Council Secretariat.  As 
noted above, this drugs troika was attended by national 
representatives from France, Germany, Austria, Poland, Malta, 
Belgium, Ireland, the U.K. and Spain.  Only the U.K. had a 
substantive role in the agenda.  The department needs to 
consider whether it is comfortable with this extended 
attendance or whether we should raise the issue with future 
EU Presidencies.  End comment. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"22324","11/2/2004 14:00","04BRUSSELS4688","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04SARAJEVO2663","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004688 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/RPM AND EUR/ERA 
SARAJEVO FOR AMB MCELHANEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/01/2014 
TAGS: PREL, BK, MOPS, NATO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DSACEUR BRIEFS NAC-PSC ON TRANSFER OF SFOR TO 
OPERATION ALTHEA 
 
REF: SARAJEVO 02663 
 
Classified By: USEU polmil officer Jeremy Brenner for reasons 1.4 (b) a 
nd (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: DSACEUR, General Sir John Reith briefed the 
NAC-PSC Ambassadors on the progress of the December 2 SFOR 
handover to the EU\'s Operation Althea.  Delineation of tasks 
has been worked out between commanders on the ground, and 
Headquarters staffs are more than 80 percent filled. General 
Reith -- and the EU -- are determined to make Althea succeed, 
and have addressed concerns over clarity of decision-making 
and bureaucratic interference.  The EU\'s entire ESDP 
apparatus has worked hard for several months to ensure a 
successful post-SFOR mission. End summary. 
 
------- 
DSACEUR 
------- 
 
2. (C)  The New Deputy Supreme Allied Commander Europe, 
General Sir John Reith briefed the NAC-PSC October 25 on the 
state of preparations for the December 2 end of the NATO SFOR 
mission and the beginning of the EU\'s Operation ALTHEA. 
Wearing both his NATO and EU hats as operational commander of 
the EU mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Reith noted that steady 
progress was being made. While shortfalls remain in 
intelligence and aviation assets, both the NATO Headquarters 
and EUFOR HQ were staffed at better than 80 percent.  The 
commanders on the ground recently agreed to a delineation of 
tasks in further evidence of their positive working 
relationship. The final confirmation of the agreed 
delineation of tasks will be made November 4 during DSACEURs 
visit to Sarajevo. 
 
3. (C)  General Reith noted that he was the only person in 
the room who works for both NATO and the European Union. He 
reminded the assembled Ambassadors that he is NATOs Strategic 
Coordinator with the EU, and he suggested he would ask the EU 
to make him their Strategic Coordinator with NATO. 
 
4. (C)  DSACEUR assured the political bodies of the two 
organizations that cooperation is going well.  He said this 
is the case within SHAPE, where the EU OHQ cell is \"well 
embedded\" and is able to draw on full staff support.  The EU 
Command Element within JFC Naples is working well, and 
COMSFOR and COMEUFOR have excellent relations on the ground. 
 
5. (C)  General Reith reiterated the need for the force 
commander on the ground to have maximum flexibility in 
concentrating his forces where they are needed.  National 
caveats restrict this ability and should be avoided if 
possible.  Reith urged that in cases where legal 
interpretations or logistical limitations made caveats 
necessary, nations declare them from the outset so the 
commander knows the restrictions under which he must work. 
 
------------------ 
Common NATO Assets 
------------------ 
 
6. (C) EU Council HiRep, Javier Solana, said the PSC had 
approved a list of assets and capabilities that the EU would 
be requesting from NATO to support EUFOR under the auspices 
of Berlin Plus.  USNATO Ambassador Burns, after thanking 
General Reith for his informative brief, announced that the 
US has informed the government of Bosnia-Herzegovina that it 
would accept its offer to remain in Tuzla at Camp Eagle after 
the end of SFOR. 
 
----- 
UNSCR 
----- 
 
7. (C)  British Permanent Representative to NATO, Amb. Peter 
Ricketts, informed the NAC-PSC that while work continued in 
NY on drafting a new UNSCR, it was unlikely that it would be 
complete before the British turned over the UNSC presidency 
to the US.  Several Ambassadors noted the importance of a new 
resolution and urged that it be completed and approved 
quickly. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
8. (C) The EU political leadership is keenly aware of the 
pitfalls and historical baggage that face them in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina (reftel).  EU officials at all levels 
stress the robustness of the mission -- an answer to concerns 
about IFOR hesitancy.  DSACEUR\'s detailed outline of the 
liaisons and the positive working relationships among 
commanders should help assuage concerns over crossed lines of 
authority or muddled decision-making.  EU military officials 
have made clear that COMEUFOR will have the necessary 
authority -- without micromanagement from Brussels -- to work 
out areas of overlapping responsibilities with NATO HQ. The 
entire ESDP apparatus within the EU -- political and military 
-- from Solana on down has been consumed for months with the 
sole focus on ensuring a seamless and successful mission. 
"
"22436","11/3/2004 16:36","04BRUSSELS4702","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04COPENHAGEN1920|04USEUBRUSSELS4665","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004702 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, IR, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU FMS AT NOV. 2 GAERC AGREE SUPPORT 
MEASURES FOR IRAQ, KEEP PRESSURE ON SUDAN 
 
REF: (A) USEU BRUSSELS 4665; (B) COPENHAGEN 1920 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) EU FMs on November 2 agreed a package of 
measures to support Iraq ahead of a November 5 visit 
by PM Allawi.  They confirmed EU financial support 
for the electoral process and decided to send an 
expert team by the end of November \"to start 
planning\" with the Iraqi authorities \"for a possible 
integrated police, rule of law and civilian 
administration mission\" that would only deploy in- 
country after the January elections.  FMs noted the 
\"deteriorating\" security situation in Darfur and 
reiterated that the EU \"does not exclude the use of 
sanctions.\"  Solana also presented his strategy for 
a relaunch of the Middle East road map and continued 
reform of the PA.  Iran was not on the GAERC agenda 
(it will be discussed by EU FMs on November 4), but 
Solana said discussions were \"progressively more 
constructive\" and the EU \"has not lost hope.\" END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU) EU Foreign Ministers met in a General 
Affairs and External Relations Council session 
primarily devoted to preparing the November 4-5 
European Council (EU Summit).  A Council source who 
attended almost all of the event said it was a \"very 
low-key\" affair.  Full Conclusions from the GAERC 
are available on the consilium.eu.int website. 
Despite REF B indications, China was not raised in 
the formal GAERC session. 
 
IRAQ 
---- 
 
3. (SBU) The Conclusions are much as we anticipated 
(REF A), with as forward leaning a text as the 
Member States could agree.  The EU is trying to do 
all it can to demonstrate its engagement on Iraq, 
particularly in advance of PM Allawi\'s visit the end 
of this week to the European Council.  The only real 
point at issue was a suggestion by France, which was 
not accepted, to tone down the warmth of the 
language about Allawi, after his critical comments 
over the weekend.  A further declaration in addition 
to today\'s Conclusions will be issued at the Summit, 
but a Council source told us it will be \"a very 
similar package, as we won\'t have much more to say 
then\".  Some Member States had argued the EU should 
have held all the Iraq language for the Summit.  Key 
points from the Iraq Conclusions are: 
 
- EU \"could usefully contribute\" an \"integrated 
police, rule of law and civilian administration 
mission.\"  \"While judging that activities outside 
Iraq with a presence of liaison elements in Iraq 
would be feasible at this point in time, the 
Council agreed that with regard to a mission 
inside Iraq all security concerns need to be 
appropriately addressed before any decision by the 
Council could be taken.\"  Much later in the text, 
the GAERC says an \"expert team\" should go by the 
end of November to start planning with the Iraqi 
authorities for this mission, \"which is expected 
to start after the January 2005 elections\". 
(NOTE:  Two sources involved in the GAERC could 
not interpret this text for us, on whether 
activities outside Iraq could begin earlier, while 
any in-country mission would have to be after the 
elections.  One contact said the Conclusions on 
Iraq had been \"subject to much to\'ing and fro\'ing 
last week\".  Another contact said the GAERC had to 
be \"intentionally vague\" about the timing of any 
mission in this text.  This language does not/not 
necessarily mean the EU would begin such an 
integrated mission now, and then consider later 
moving it in-country.  It appears a further 
decision is needed to green light any mission 
beyond the expert team. END NOTE) 
 
- GAERC agreed to give Iraq \"the perspective of an 
agreement...to promote political and trade 
cooperation\" and asked the Commission to start on 
assistance programs \"aimed at developing the 
conditions for such an agreement\".  GAERC invited 
Commission to \"enhance as appropriate and with due 
regard to security its presence in Baghdad.\" 
 
- Affirmed ?30 million in Community assistance to 
the elections cluster of IRFFI, as well as 
intention to provide experts and training. 
- Reaffirms that Member States \"are ready to 
contribute substantially to the financing of the 
middle ring of the UN Protection Force\" and notes 
the Commission is \"still discussing with the UN a 
possible financial contribution of the Community 
to the inner ring.\" 
 
- Noted Iraq is an EU GSP beneficiary and said \"as 
soon as conditions allow\", the Commission should 
work with the Iraqi administration to get the 
system operating.  GAERC also \"agreed to continue 
efforts of the Member States to exchange views on 
debt.\" 
 
SUDAN 
----- 
 
4. (SBU) GAERC issued very familiar language with 
nothing that strikes us as particularly new.  Key 
points: 
 
- GAERC \"notes with grave concern that the security 
situation in parts of Darfur has been 
deteriorating in the last weeks.\"  Repeats that 
the EU \"does not exclude the use of sanctions.\" 
 
- EU details its readiness to support the African 
Union\'s monitoring mission (AMIS), with Council- 
level agreement on ?80 million from the Africa 
Peace Facility, as well as three references to the 
EU\'s interest in providing the AU advice or 
expertise, \"if requested.\" 
 
MEPP 
---- 
 
5. (SBU) High Rep Solana presented his ideas on an 
\"action plan\" for implementation of the road map, as 
well as some thoughts on European parameters for 
eventual talks on final status.  A paper outlining 
these ideas was circulated to EU FMs last Friday. 
Our contact said EU envoy Marc Otte and A/S Burns 
had talked over the weekend, so the USG should 
already have a very clear idea of Solana\'s approach. 
The Solana paper would probably be circulated to 
Quartet partners soon. 
 
IRAN 
---- 
 
6. (SBU) Iran was dropped from the agenda for this 
GAERC.  It will be taken up at the EU FMs\' dinner on 
Nov. 4, with possible Summit Conclusions on Nov. 5. 
In response to a question at the press conference, 
Solana said EU-Iran contacts were on-going, with the 
discussions \"progressively more constructive\", but 
if they were to be raised to the highest level, then 
a \"breakthrough\" was still needed.  \"We have not 
lost hope,\" he added.  In a separate press 
conference, French FM Barnier said the EU was 
looking for a \"durable, lasting commitment\" by Iran 
in exchange for a \"true, interesting contract\" from 
the EU. 
 
RUSSIA 
------ 
 
7. (SBU) In general, EU FMs agreed the EU should 
hold a firm line regarding what it would offer for 
the Nov. 11 EU-Russia Summit, although France and 
Italy in particular noted that the EU should also 
take note of recent positive steps (from the EU 
perspective) by Russia such as ratification of the 
Kyoto Protocol and extension of the EU-Russsia 
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement to the 10 new 
EU members.  With the media, Bot did mention these 
steps, but also stressed the EU would insist the 
four proposed EU-Russia \"spaces\" were a coherent 
package that is indivisible, and that the EU was 
prepared to accept that it might not reach agreement 
with Russia on the whole package at next week\'s 
Summit.  (One source said this was a noticeably 
\"firmer line than Bot took 10 days ago\" in the EU- 
Russia ministerial meeting, after which Bot had 
taken some criticism from other member states over 
being too soft.) 
 
BELARUS 
------- 
 
8. (SBU) Polish FM raised concerns about recent 
developments, and suggested the European Council 
Conclusions on Nov. 5 should include a paragraph on 
Belarus.  The Dutch Presidency resisted adding any 
topics to the Summit.  But several other Member 
States (Denmark, Finland, Balts) agreed the 
situation is of concern, and that the EU needed to 
take a strong line, though more through engagement 
than isolation. 
 
OTHER AFRICA 
------------ 
 
9. (U) Individual member states gave interventions 
on issues of predictable national concern -- Somalia 
(Italy), Congo (Belgium) and Guinea-Bissau 
(Portugal) -- but failed to spark any real 
discussion. 
 
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION 
---------------------- 
 
10. (U) Dutch European Affairs Minister Atzo Nicolai 
reported progress on outstanding issues in the EU\'s 
next multi-annual JHA program.  He forecast that the 
European Council would agree to extend qualified 
majority voting (QMV)to all asylum and migration 
issues, other than rules on legal migration 
(including such issues as procedures on issuance of 
work permits).  Austria, Greece, Slovakia and 
Estonia voiced concerns about extending QMV to this 
final area.  (NOTE:  Under the current treaties, EU 
Member States, acting unanimously, can agree to move 
these issues to QMV from the current consensus 
requirement.)  Nicolai also reported that 2010 
should remain the EU\'s deadline for establishing a 
Common Asylum System. 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22480","11/4/2004 16:09","04BRUSSELS4730","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004730 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/RPM AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/03/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: THE EUROPEAN DEFENSE AGENCY: CAPTAIN COLLINS GOES 
TO WASHINGTON 
 
Classified By: USEU Defense Policy officer, Mark Brunner for reasons 1. 
4 (b) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
-------- 
 
1. (C)  USEU Pol/Mil team met mid-October with British Navy 
Captain Paul Collins, currently seconded to the European 
Defense Agency Establishment Team (AET), for a readout on his 
recent Voluntary Visitor Program visit to the US.  Collins 
summarized US reaction to his trip as a \"relief\", and noted 
that US officials were surprised to learn the Agency 
currently employs just six personnel, though the Agency has 
plans to increase staff to 80 in 2005.  While the EDA is 
currently in start-up mode, it is already focusing on some 
early projects. The first will be tackling the EU\'s 
capabilities shortfalls by conducting \"assessments\" of 
several high cost European defense programs in order to 
illustrate for member states the \"true cost\" of the 
capability throughout the life of the program.  The 
assessment will also demonstrate to Defense Ministers how 
yearly maintenance of legacy programs drains scarce Euros 
from modest defense budgets.  These evaluations can be used 
by HiRep Solana to prod Defense Ministries into transforming 
their procurement processes and increasing investment on 
practical, usable capabilities.  Collins believes the EDA 
will succeed in jump-starting the EU capabilities engine 
where previous European capabilities initiatives have failed, 
because 2004 was a \"watershed year\" for ESDP, and Ministers 
are committed to transforming the EU Defense Processes.  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------------- 
Allaying US Concerns 
-------------------- 
 
2. (C)  In a debrief with USEU polmil officers, Captain Paul 
Collins summarized the reaction to his October trip to 
Washington as \"relief\" from many of his US counterparts.  He 
characterized many of his interlocutors as apprehensive that 
the EDA would bring about the creation of a \"fortress 
Europe,\" and added that a number of his US contacts had 
imagined the EDA employed a few thousand personnel.  He also 
assured us that EDA Chief Nick Witney would schedule meetings 
with counterparts in the US once the Agency got \"on its 
feet\".  Collins compared the state of the EDA to an auto 
repair shop with car parts \"lying about the floor\", but also 
stressed that Agency hires are beginning to assemble the 
auto\'s frame, and will move on to the key components shortly. 
  Collins was supremely impressed with the Allied Command 
Transformation (ACT) organization and its views on 
transformation.  He sees the EDA and ACT missions as mutually 
compatible and noted, \"EDA needs to weld itself to ACT\". 
 
3.  (C)  Although the EDA has an ambitious agenda, it is 
still developing as an organization.  Despite the EDA\'s small 
staff, Collins warned against underestimating its influence 
in the long run, \"People (in the US) need to game plan in 
their minds and to think about what they want to do with a 
stronger European Defense Market, \" and added that it\'s not a 
question of if the EDA and EU will develop a more 
comprehensive and successful approach, but \"when and how 
fast.\" 
 
4.  (C)  During his visit, a majority of the questions from 
US officials to Collins about European Defense plans focused 
on the future of ESDP and NATO.  Many asked about the added 
value of ESDP and why the EU is duplicating NATO.  Collins 
said there was a common mis-perception during his US tour 
that there were a \"few thousand people over at EDA furiously 
buggering (working) away\" on EU defense initiatives.  He 
explained that at the time of his trip, the EDA only had 2 
employees (now 6).  The EDA plans for a staff of 26 by the 
end of 2004, with a target of 80 for 2005.  The senior agency 
executives have been barraged with over 1,000 applications 
for 80 available slots. 
 
5. (C)  Collins also suggested that there is a dichotomy 
between US desire for the EU to be more effective militarily, 
and the US fear of the EU becoming \"too strong.\" His 
perception is that the US wants to ensure the EU does not 
develop too strongly industrially and compete with the US. 
His follow-up question to us was a basic one, asking what the 
US really wants the EU to do.  As for the concern in some 
circles that the EDA would prompt the EU to develop into a 
\"fortress Europe\", he suggested -- without further 
elaboration -- that the real danger in transatlantic 
relations was a development of a \"fortress US.\" 
----------- 
Why an EDA? 
----------- 
 
6.  (C)  Collins pointed to a \"change in the mindset in 
Europe\" with regard to defense.  He strongly asserted that 
Europeans are \"sick\" of NATO \"telling people what to do\". 
When asked by USEU Pol Mil how the EDA\'s approach would be 
more successful than NATO\'s, Collins argued that the EDA 
would be more effective by helping the nations achieve 
results instead of just identifying problems.  The EDA is not 
intended to be an armaments agency, although Collins 
acknowledged that such an evolution is possible in the 
future. 
 
7.  (C) Capability Assessments.  According to Collins, one of 
the primary tasks of the EDA will be to review national 
defense plans and assess capability for the EU.  EDA\'s view 
is that the majority of EU countries are still maintaining a 
cold war structure and are equipped correspondingly.  This 
cumbersome structure drains needed resources, and inhibits 
transformation.  The EDA\'s first assessment of capabilities 
will not likely occur prior to 2006.  Under this concept, the 
EDA may \"cost out\" the capability of a few large programs to 
illustrate the actual life-cycle cost of the entire program 
-- including training, maintenance, and additional expenses 
beyond the initial price tag.  Collins said they would likely 
target a few high profile programs to demonstrate how nations 
are inefficiently spending defense dollars maintaining older 
programs that deliver little in terms of real capability.  He 
believes these assessments will enable the EDA to prod 
Defense and Finance Ministers to better spend the EU\'s 
defense dollars and deliver real capabilities to the EU. 
----------------------- 
European Buy-in to ESDP 
----------------------- 
 
8. (C) Delivering the Goods.  This conclusion dovetails with 
Collins\' view that European Security and Defense Policy 
(ESDP) had a \"watershed\" year in 2004, and that the political 
actors are prepared to transform the EU procurement process 
and rationalize defense industries.  Since a key component of 
the EDA\'s mission is to make actual capabilities available to 
the EU military structures, Collins feels that by exposing 
the full costs of these capabilities the Agency will be able 
to apply pressure for reallocation of defense expenditures. 
Some EU member states would also be urged to develop \"niche 
capabilities\" rather than spend resources on expensive 
capabilities that already exist within the EU.  Importantly, 
he also said the EDA has already engaged the European 
Commission on Research and Technology (R&T) matters, and 
noted this was the first time this liaison had occurred since 
the inception of ESDP in 1995. 
 
9.  (C)  Captain Collins maintained that during 2004, there 
was a significant political shift in thinking on ESDP, where 
ministers, having agreed in principle to ESDP previously, 
have now \"signed their minds up to it (ESDP)\".  He believed 
this was a subtle, but important distinction that will propel 
the EDA\'s agenda and eventually, ESDP.  He also noted that he 
is starting to see governments shifting resources toward 
ESDP, notably the Netherlands and Sweden. 
 
10. (C)  According to Collins, ESDP Chief Solana\'s ability to 
influence the EDA Steering board will be crucial.  Early on, 
one of Solana\'s goals will be to pin down the Steering Board 
Members (Composed of EU Ministers of Defense, HiRep Solana, 
EDA CEO Witney and the Chairman of the EU Military Committee) 
whose nations only contribute legacy hardware and out-dated 
systems to make the point \"Thanks for your contributions (to 
ESDP), but they\'re still not capabilities\".  Collins also 
asserted that the EDA will make progress where others have 
failed previously, because, since the EDA is independent, it 
can tell the steering board what it (steering board) doesn\'t 
want to hear.  Collins speculated that Solana and the EDA 
might have to spend a good part of their time speaking to 
national finance ministers. Collins also noted that 
information delivery to national Parliaments would be 
crucial, since they hold the national purse strings and help 
determine defense priorities. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (C)  Collins offered few specifics to support his grand 
predictions of a stronger, transformed, more coherent 
European Defense industry able to deliver real capabilities 
to the EU military structure.  Nor did he offer any insights 
why EDA would be more successful in addressing these issues 
than we have been through NATO mechanisms.  Given the 
fragmented and internally competitive European industry, the 
EDA may need more than the simple power of persuasion to 
effect meaningful changes.  Many EU military representatives 
have also voiced concern that, given the billions of dollars 
at stake in determining defense-related standards and 
priorities, the EDA may be driven more by political 
imperatives than by genuine military requirements.  The EU 
member states\' Chiefs of Defense (CHODs) -- who set the 
requirements -- are said to be particularly apprehensive 
about their lack of input into the EDA steering board, since 
the Chairman of the EU Military Committee has a seat, but no 
vote.  Still, by exposing national defense plans to scrutiny 
-- especially by  Parliaments and the public -- EDA could 
achieve some success in improving European defense processes. 
 
12. (U) Mission would like to thank all those involved in 
preparing Collins\' highly successful VolVis program.  We 
believe it provided timely input that will have an impact on 
future development of the EDA. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22525","11/5/2004 12:25","04BRUSSELS4739","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 004739 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: BARROSO ANNOUNCES NEW LINE-UP FOR 
COMMISSION 
 
 
1. (U) EU Commission President-designate Barroso on 
November 4 announced a new line-up for his 
Commission.  Speaking on the fringes of the Brussels 
European Council, Barroso said he hoped the European 
Parliament would approve his new team during its 
November 15-18 plenary session after conducting 
hearings next week with the changed candidates. 
Barroso\'s new proposal includes only three changes: 
 
- The Italian Commissioner-designate (replacing 
 Rocco Buttiglione) will be Foreign Minister Franco 
 Frattini, who will be a Vice-President of the 
 Commission with responsibility for Justice, 
 Freedom and Security; 
 
- The Latvian Commissioner-designate (Ingrida Udre) 
 has been replaced by former Education and Finance 
 Minister Andris Piebalgs, who will take up the 
 Energy portfolio (replacing Hungarian Commissioner- 
 designate Laszlo Kovacs).  Barroso noted that 
 Piebalgs\' \"scientific education\" would make him 
 suitable for the job; 
 
- Kovacs, will take up responsibility for Taxation 
 and Customs Union (originally Udre\'s portfolio). 
 While admitting that Kovacs\' performance at his EP 
 hearing as Energy Commissioner was not deemed to 
 be very positive, Barroso was convinced Kovacs 
 would do better with Tax. 
 
2.  (U) Barroso \"promised\" these would be \"necessary 
and sufficient changes\" to earn the EP\'s approval. 
Taking questions, he defended the continued 
assignment of the Competition portfolio to Dutch 
Commissioner-designate Neelie Kroes, who responded 
to allegations about potential conflicts of interest 
\"in a very transparent way.\"  Kroes had resigned all 
her corporate directorships, sold her shares, 
declared all her interests and pledged not to return 
to business after leaving the Commission, thus going 
beyond the ethical requirements of the job.  Barroso 
said he would meet November 5 with the leaders of 
the EP political groups to discuss practicalities 
for the next stages of the confirmation procedure. 
Barroso said he expected the EP to organize new 
hearings quickly for the three Commissioners- 
designate. 
 
3. (U) Speaking at a separate press conference 
earlier, EP President Borrell (a Spanish Socialist) 
also suggested the above calendar, with hearings 
next week, assuming the EP dispensed with the 
traditional written questionnaire in advance of 
hearings.  Borrell said he could only assume that 
the EP political groups will be able to show \"as 
much flexibility as the Council (read: the EU 
governments) would have shown.\"  Borrell 
nevertheless served notice the EP \"would not lower 
our standards\" and that requirements at the new 
hearings will be the same as at the previous ones. 
According to press reports, Martin Schulz, leader of 
the EP\'s Socialist group (which was instrumental in 
blocking Barroso\'s earlier team) has welcomed 
Barroso\'s \"enlightened and courageous step.\" 
 
4. (SBU) COMMENT:  For the second time, (the first 
being when he attempted to earn EP approval for his 
original team through only minor changes to 
Buttiglione\'s responsibilities), Barroso is choosing 
to make the minimum possible changes that could get 
him through.  It is not entirely clear whether this 
approach is a reflection of his personal philosophy 
or a function of the constraints imposed upon him by 
EU governments. But Barroso was clearly given only 
limited room for manoeuver by Member States.  He 
dropped clear hints in his press conference that 
Budapest had refused to replace Kovacs, and the 
Dutch had strongly resisted any shift of Kroes\' 
responsibilities.   Based on the comments by Borrell 
and Schulz, it appears almost certain that this time 
Barroso\'s team will win EP confirmation, and be able 
to take office before the end of November. END 
COMMENT. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22526","11/5/2004 12:27","04BRUSSELS4741","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DRL/IL 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ELAB, ECON, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU SOCIAL SUMMIT RENEWS COMMITMENT TO 
LISBON STRATEGY; LABOR AND EMPLOYERS SPLIT ON 
PRIORITIES 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  EU-level organizations of labor and 
employers at a pre-European Council meeting with EU 
leaders on November 4 reaffirmed their commitment to 
the \"Lisbon strategy\" for turning the EU into the 
most competitive economy by the year 2010.  The 
employers and unions not surprisingly continue to 
have different priorities for reactivating the 
Lisbon agenda.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  The European Council meeting was preceded on 
November 4 by a \"Tripartite Social Summit,\" in which 
the EU Troika (Dutch Presidency, Luxembourg, UK and 
European Commission) as well as representative 
organizations of the \"social partners\" (labor, 
employers, \"cadres\" and employees) reviewed the 
Lisbon strategy for turning the EU into the most 
competitive economy by the year 2010.  The Social 
Summit heard a presentation by former Dutch PM Wim 
Kok of the report drawn up by his high-level panel 
on the progress of the Lisbon Strategy.  The report 
takes a gloomy view on progress made over the past 
four years.  It explains the EU\'s disappointing 
delivery by the overloaded agenda, poor coordination 
and conflicting priorities, and blames the lack of 
political will by the Member States.  In order to 
ensure that Member States take up their 
responsibilities, the Kok report calls for a process- 
redesign along three lines: \"more coherence and 
consistency between policies and participants, 
improving the process for delivery by involving 
national parliaments and social partners, and 
clearer communication on objectives and 
achievements.\"  The report rejects proposals for the 
2010 Lisbon target to be lifted.  It also states 
that the EU should not become a \"copy-paste\" of the 
US. 
 
3.  Speaking at the post-Social Summit press 
conference, Dutch PM/European Council chair 
Balkenende said participants all agreed that \"if we 
want a social Europe we need a strong economy in 
Europe.\"  Commission President Prodi underlined the 
need to actually implement the Lisbon agenda.  With 
a reference to the persisting deadlock on the draft 
legislation concerning the Community patent, Prodi 
stated: \"If we continue to decide by unanimity, the 
Lisbon agenda has no chance of being implemented.\" 
Prodi also called for Member State budgets to 
reflect the commitments taken under the Lisbon 
strategy.  Balkenende and Prodi underlined the role 
of social dialogue as being \"at the heart of the 
European Social model.\" 
 
4.  The President of the European Employers\' 
Federation (UNICE), Jurgen Strube, opined that the 
sense of urgency with the Lisbon agenda must be 
translated into implementation but called for the 
focus to be on competitiveness: \"All (Lisbon) 
objectives are interrelated but it\'s important to 
focus on the key drivers: competitiveness and 
economic growth.  ETUC Secretary-General John Monks 
said his organization (the European Trade Union 
Confederation) supported the Kok report as a 
\"realistic\" and \"balanced\" document, adding:  \"We 
know there are choices to be made, but the route is 
not the same as in the U.S.  What concerns us are 
the \"delocalisations\" (out-sourcing), working time 
related issues, etc.  There is an agenda there.\" 
 
5.  A statement released by the Dutch Presidency 
said the parties \"reaffirmed their commitment to the 
Lisbon agenda\" as \"the most effective means by which 
to fulfill\" the EU\'s economic and social objectives 
\"and thereby underpin the role of social dialogue in 
European governance,\" adding: \"All parties agreed on 
the need to add a new impetus to the implementation 
of the Lisbon strategy in order to bring about a 
balanced economic, social and environmental renewal 
in the EU.\"  The contribution of social partners was 
\"essential in unleashing the potential for economic 
and employment growth by finding the balance between 
flexibility and security.\"  Balkenende and Prodi 
were said to have \"expressed their readiness to 
continue the debate and stated that they were 
looking forward to a substantial joint contribution 
from the social partners with commitments relating 
to their area of competence in the context of the 
Mid-Term review of the Lisbon strategy next spring.\" 
 
6.  COMMENT.  Just like the members of the Kok panel 
were said to be divided on the remedies to the 
problems of the EU economy, the employers and unions 
not surprisingly continue to have conflicting 
demands on priorities to be addressed in the context 
of their \"social dialogue\" at the service of the 
Lisbon strategy:  the employers are calling for 
further liberalization, the removal of obstacles to 
cross-border provision of services, and for research 
policy to be tweaked toward boosting 
competitiveness.  In contrast, the ETUC calls for 
stronger social cohesion \"as an essential part of 
Europe\'s competitive advantage\" and insists that the 
Lisbon process should not amount to deregulation, 
weakening worker rights and protection, and cutbacks 
in living and social standards. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22545","11/5/2004 16:05","04BRUSSELS4756","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS1119","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004756 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR EAP/FO DETRANI, EAP/K FOSTER AND EUR/ERA BISHARAT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/03/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, KNNP, KN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/DPRK: PRE-BRIEF OF TROIKA VISIT TO PYONGYANG 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 1119 
 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 1081 
     C. 03 USEU BRUSSELS 5510 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: A Directors-level Troika of EU officials will 
visit Pyongyang November 13-16 to press for North Korean 
cooperation in the Six Party Talks and to press for progress 
on human rights, economic reforms, ROK-DPRK relations and 
humanitarian assistance issues.  The Troika will begin the 
trip with meetings in Beijing to prepare for the December 8 
EU-China summit and finish up in Tokyo to brief the Japanese 
on the visit.  Special Envoy DeTrani\'s visit to Brussels 
November 9-10 offers a valuable opportunity to convey USG 
concerns on these issues in advance of the Troika visit.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------- 
EU to Raise Five Issues with DPRK 
--------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Council Secretariat Principal Administrator and visit 
participant Antonio Tanca briefed poloff about plans for a 
November 13-16 Directors-level Troika visit to North Korea. 
While the terms of reference for the Troika\'s official 
meetings in Pyongyang were still in draft at the time of 
poloff\'s briefing, Tanca said that the EU would press the 
North Koreans for progress on five issues  With the exception 
of humanitarian assistance, these issues are the same as 
those discussed during the EU\'s last Troika visit to North 
Korea, in 2003 (ref C). 
 
-- Six Party Process: The Troika will express EU support for 
the Six Party Process and press for DPRK cooperation in 
future talks.  The Troika hopes also to gauge Pyongyang\'s 
views on the process following the US elections, and \"hopes 
to see a (post-election) softening,\" Tanca said. 
 
-- Human Rights: The Troika will \"express concerns\" and urge 
the DPRK to resume its human rights discussions with the EU. 
The EU wants to make it clear, however, that talking about 
human rights would not give the DPRK immunity from further EU 
criticism of its HR abuses, including in the UN. 
 
-- Economic Reforms: The Troika will encourage the DPRK to 
expand and deepen the small efforts it has taken so far on 
economic reform, while making it clear that increased 
economic cooperation with the EU would be contingent on 
resolving the nuclear issue. 
 
-- DPRK-ROK Relations: The Troika will continue encouraging 
Pyongyang to \"engage openly\" with South Korea on peninsular 
and inter-Korean issues. 
 
-- Humanitarian Assistance: The Troika will express concern 
about the DPRK\'s recent announcements that it no longer needs 
as much humanitarian assistance and will further restrict 
access for aid workers.  The Troika hopes to meet also with 
NGOs and international organization delegations in North 
Korea to discuss this issue. 
 
---------------- 
Travel Itinerary 
---------------- 
 
3. (C) The Troika will travel first to Beijing, then to 
Pyongyang for a three-day visit, and wrap up in Tokyo: 
 
-- November 12: The Troika will meet with European Affairs 
personnel from the MFA to discuss plans for the December 8 
EU-China summit.  The delegation will also put on its COASI 
(Asia Working Group) hat and hold a COASI troika with the PRC. 
 
-- November 13-15: Meetings in Pyongyang and with NGOs and 
international organizations. 
 
-- November 16: Return to Beijing to debrief the Chinese on 
the DPRK visit. 
 
-- November 17: Fly to Tokyo to debrief the Japanese on the 
visit.  The Troika will also discuss implementation of 
agreements reached at the EU-Japan summit earlier this year. 
 
------------------- 
Troika Participants 
------------------- 
 
4. (U) For the Dutch EU Presidency: MFA Asia Director Robert 
Milders (Troika Chair); Asia Deputy Director Margarita Bot; 
Korea Director Robert Dresen; Dutch Ambassador in Seoul 
 
-- For Luxembourg (incoming EU Presidency): Ambassador 
Laurence 
 
-- For the Council Secretariat: Principal Administrator 
Antonio Tanca 
 
-- For the Commission: North America and East Asia Director 
Richard Wright; DPRK Desk Officer Maria Castilla-Fernandez 
 
----------------------------------- 
DeTrani Visit an Opportunity for US 
----------------------------------- 
5. (C) The November 9-10 visit to Brussels of DPRK Special 
Envoy DeTrani and EAP/K Foster provides the US an opportunity 
to convey our concerns about current DPRK issues just prior 
to the Troika\'s departure.  As with the 2003 Troika visit, 
the EU has been very forthcoming with their plans and the 
promise of a full readout upon their return.  Council DG 
Cooper and others (refs A, B) have repeatedly made clear the 
EU\'s desire to play a constructive role in resolving the 
nuclear standoff with North Korea, and to do so in a way that 
supports the Six Party Process and US leadership on the 
issue. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"22549","11/5/2004 16:21","04BRUSSELS4758","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004758 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/RPM, EUR/ERA 
S/WCI FOR AMBASSADOR PROSPER 
SARAJEVO FOR AMBASSADOR MCELHANEY AND JENIFER MOORE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/03/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, PHUM, BK, NATO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DSACEUR\'S EU POLAD CLARIFIES DELINEATION OF TASKS 
ISSUES 
 
REF: A. MEMORANDUM ON \"DECONFLICTION AND DELINEATION OF 
        TASKS (HQ EUFOR AND NHQ SA\" FROM 
        COMEUFOR TO DSACEUR DATED OCTOBER 24 
     B. AND SUBSEQUENT REVISIONS. 
 
Classified By: Col. Michael Ryan, USEU Defense Advisor for reasons 1.4 
(b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) This is a retransmission of Brussels 4731. Paragraph 4 
has been corrected for clarity. 
 
2.  (C) Summary: EU Council Secretariat planners are unhappy 
with a number of points in the Delineation of Tasks between 
COMEUFOR and Commander Nato Headquarters (COMNHQ), but they 
will not raise further  objections.  Some aspects of the 
agreement between commanders on the ground contravene the 
guidance given by the EUMC to COMEUFOR.  End summary. 
 
3. (C) USEU pol-mil officers met November 4 with DSACEUR\'s EU 
POLAD for Operation ALTHEA, who is also a lead planner in the 
EU\'s Council Secretariat, to get the Council Secretariat 
views on progress between COMEUFOR and Commander Nato 
Headquarters (COMNHQ) Sarajevo on working out arrangements on 
the ground for delineating tasks between EUFOR and NHQ 
Sarajevo.  DSACEUR intends to submit a letter November 4 to 
both the EU Military Committee and the NATO Military 
Committee laying out the agreed way forward in the document 
\"Deconfliction and Delineation of Tasks (HQ EUFOR and NHQ Sa.\" 
 
------------------------------------ 
Reporting to the Military Committees 
------------------------------------ 
 
4. (C) DSACEUR Reith\'s original intention was to ask the 
Military Committee\'s to \"note\" this agreement between the 
respective commanders.  Our contact pointed out that this 
\"note\" might cause problems within the EUMC, since the agreed 
way forward at this point is not in line with the EUMC 
Military Guidance of 27 Jul 04 on the subject; specifically, 
the \"Agreed Mechanism\" for task number G2 \"Import and export 
of weapons and ammunition\" states \"Dual signature by (both 
COM\'s) on all import / export decisions.\"  The preferred EU 
language, which was transmitted to DSACEUR yesterday, is 
\"COMEUFOR will decide, following appropriate consultation and 
coordination with NATO SMR Sa.\"  The EU Council Secretariat 
sees this as a compliance issue only and, therefore, as an 
EUFOR-only decision.  The EU Council Secretariat asked that 
General Reith instead simply say that, as directed, the 
relevant commanders have developed implementation mechanisms 
for the delineation of tasks that in their view will work 
well, and that DSACEUR as Operational Commander has full 
confidence in the agreed procedures.  In the Council staff\'s 
view, asking the EUMC to \"note\" the agreement would cause 
political friction since it would require the EUMC to sign up 
an agreement that is in some respects contrary to their 
guidance. 
 
--------------------- 
Consultation Mechanism 
--------------------- 
 
5. (C) The second possible point of contention for the EU is 
item G-9 \"AFBiH Commanding Generals and General Staff 
Officers (ACGS)\".  Our contact reports that the EU side has 
absolutely no problem with this consultation taking place 
informally and on a regular basis.  He did note, however, 
that this forum runs the risk of presenting opportunities for 
BiH participants to misperceive the relationship between 
COMEUFOR (compliance) and COMNHQ Sa (defense reform).  To 
that end, they asked DSACEUR to add the following note under 
Agreed Mechanism:  \"Co-chairmanship runs the risk of allowing 
the ACGS to exploit a perceived weakness in the structure. 
Therefore, for reasons of clarity and reflecting the EU lead, 
this should be an EU chaired group with NHQ Sa full 
participation. (EUMC 11560/3/04 dated 28 Jul 04).\"  Having 
made that recommendation, their clear preference is to remove 
the item altogether on the \"quite acceptable\" understanding 
that the commanders on the ground would normally employ such 
a mechanism in any case for its intended purpose. 
Highlighting it in this document, in their view, only results 
in increased tensions internally in the EU. 
 
----------------------------- 
No Problems on PIFWC Language 
----------------------------- 
 
6. (C) On PIFWCs and CT the EU Council Secretariat has no 
problems with the recommendations.  Clearly, they are 
concerned that COMEUFOR might not be adequately informed 
regarding operations that could potentially involve forces 
under his command. At the same time, they are confident that 
the agreed arrangements will prevent such an occurrence. 
Specifically, their suggested language for item P-1 under 
Factors strikes out the phrase \"NATO and EUFOR have similar 
mandates for support to the ICTY with PIFWC related 
operations\" replacing it with \"EUFOR will provide support to 
ICTY and relevant authorities, including the detention of 
PIFWCs.  NATO will continue to provide support to the ICTY 
and will also have authority to detain PIFWCs.\"  In addition, 
they would like to strike the word \"troops\" from the second 
bullet.  Our interlocutor did note that the word \"mandate\" 
has a particular connotation -- hence their disagreement with 
the phrase as originally written.  The EU Council Secretariat 
does not believe they have, nor do they seek, a mandate for 
EUFOR in PIFWCs. 
 
---------- 
The Way Ahead 
---------- 
7. (C) The EU side does not/not intend to raise any issues 
regarding the agreement.  They will, rather, place their 
confidence in DSACEUR as the person charged with executing a 
vague political agreement.  It is clear from talking with the 
EU staff that any political gain at this point would come at 
an operational cost; a trade-off they are unwilling to make. 
In the end, they don\'t really like the outcome, but in the 
interest of a successful operation, they are willing to live 
with it. 
 
8. (C) In the event the EUMC does not accept the document, a 
re-drafting exercise will be necessary.  The EUMC guidance, 
which this document apparently contravenes on the issue of 
dual-signatures on arms export/import authorizations, is not 
repeated in either EU political documents or NATO documents, 
but it was, however, repeated in references in the CONOPS and 
OPLAN according to our source. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"22573","11/8/2004 6:17","04BRUSSELS4768","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS4702","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004768 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, MOPS, IZ, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: IRAQI PM ALLAWI\'S VISIT WITH THE EU: EUROPEAN 
COUNCIL CONFIRMS PACKAGE OF ASSISTANCE FOR IRAQ 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 4702 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 B/D 
 
1. (C) According to a Council source who attended the 
November 5 luncheon between the EU Heads of State and 
Government (the European Council) and Iraqi PM Allawi, the 
lunch went quite well, despite some hiccups over comments 
made by Allawi to the press the previous day calling some 
European countries \"spectators.\"  Nothing unexpected was said 
at the lunch, and no new decisions were made.  The European 
Council earlier in the day had confirmed without change the 
EU\'s package of assistance for Iraq approved by EUFMs on Nov. 
2 (REFTEL).  The general tenor of the discussion around the 
table was that, while the EU had been clearly divided over 
Iraq in the past, and continued to have differing opinions 
about military involvement there, they all had an interest in 
Iraq\'s stability, and were willing to make a contribution. 
(NOTE:  President Chirac was the only major EU leader not in 
attendance, but told the press before he left Brussels prior 
to the lunch that he had \"never refused\" to meet Allawi, had 
seen him at the G8 Summit in June.  Chirac did comment that 
Allawi \"sometimes says things that are more or less 
appreciated\", but Chirac would see Allawi again \"with 
pleasure.\" END NOTE.)  According to our contact, French FM 
Barnier, who attended the lunch for France, spoke up 
repeatedly to note to Allawi that France is not just a 
spectator in Iraq, but is an actor that is engaged in trying 
to promote Iraq\'s stability. 
 
2. (U) In a subsequent press conference, Allawi stressed that 
Iraq had received \"unanimous support\" from the EU for its 
stabilization and reconstruction, and that the purpose of his 
visit to Brussels, to both the EU and NATO, had been to \"plug 
Iraq back into the international community.\"  He denied he 
had ever called the Europeans \"spectators\", noting that 
European states had hosted Iraqi dissidents during Saddam\'s 
era.  Asked about the situation in Falluja, Allawi said the 
IIG was determined to \"liberate the people there from the 
terrorists and insurgents\" but that \"the window is closing 
for a peaceful settlement\" and if none can be find, \"we will 
have to bring the insurgents to justice.\" 
 
3. (U) Asked about the recent announcements by EU members 
such as Hungary and the Netherlands that they would withdraw 
their troops in 2005, Allawi responded that he respected 
every country\'s right to make its own decisions about its 
troops.  But, he added, Iraq continues to face big security 
challenges and an early decrease in the international 
presence would increase the risks Iraq faces.  Iraq would 
continue to need help from international forces until Iraqi 
forces are capable of dealing with the threats by themselves. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22608","11/8/2004 14:23","04BRUSSELS4789","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04USEUBRUSSELS4619","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 004789 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, SMIG, PREF, CMGT, CVIS, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU-JHA:  LEADERS ENDORSE NEW MULTI-ANNUAL 
PROGRAM FOR FREEDOM, SECURITY AND JUSTICE 
 
REF: USEU BRUSSELS 4619 
 
1.  EU leaders at their November 5 European Council 
meeting endorsed the new multi-annual program for 
\"strengthening freedom, security and justice in the 
European Union\" as prepared by their Justice and 
Home Affairs Ministers in the October 25 Council 
meeting (REFTEL).  Dutch PM/European Council chair 
Balkenende described the new plan, called \"The Hague 
Program,\" as an \"ambitious, crucial contribution to 
a safer Europe, in which justice and freedom are 
central.\"  The plan covers asylum and migration 
issues, including border management, the integration 
of non-EU nationals,  cooperation with countries and 
region of origin, and visa policy, as well as the 
fight against terrorism, judicial and police 
cooperation, and civil law (the drugs strategy 
component will be added at the year\'s end). 
Balkenende said all leaders recognized the need to 
focus on effectiveness, cooperation in the fight 
against cross-border crime, and the sharing of 
information between law enforcement authorities. 
Full text of the program appears in annex to the 
Presidency conclusions of the European Council 
available from http://ue.eu.int. 
 
2.  The leaders easily concurred on the two issues 
left outstanding by their JHA Ministers.  They 
confirmed the Common European Asylum System should 
be completed by 2010.   Balkenende said they also 
agreed in principle that nearly all EU decisions in 
the field of asylum, migration and border control 
will be taken by qualified-majority voting (QMV) in 
the Council and involvement of the European 
Parliament through the co-decision procedure.  A 
deadline of April 2005 is set for the Council to 
take the formal decision moving these areas to QMV 
and co-decision, as provided for under current EU 
treaties.  The only areas to continue under 
unanimity (at the insistence of Germany and several 
other countries) would be policies on legal 
migration, a derogation that would end if the new EU 
Constitutional Treaty ever successfully enters into 
force.  The UK, Ireland and Denmark have opt-outs on 
visas, asylum and immigration and do not feel 
concerned by this development.  Asylum and visa 
policy are already governed by QMV, although 
Parliament is only consulted on visa issues. 
 
3.  Balkenende said the leaders tasked the 
Commission to present an action plan in 2005 in 
which the aims and priorities of the multi-annual 
program will be translated into concrete measures 
with a timetable for the adoption and implementation 
of the specific proposals.  FM Bot said EU 
governments had still to decide on the location of 
for the European Agency for the Management of 
Operational Cooperation at the EU External Borders, 
to be established on May 1, 2005.  Should this prove 
impossible within the next few weeks (main 
contenders are Budapest and Warsaw), the Agency 
would start operating from Brussels as its 
provisional seat. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22686","11/9/2004 14:35","04BRUSSELS4816","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS4009","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004816 
 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON PLEASE PASS MARCIEL AND KENNEDY; EUR/SEE FOR 
SILLIMAN; EUR/ERA FOR VOLKER AND BONO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU DEBATE ON TURKEY: SIMMERING BUT INCHOATE 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 4009 
 
     B. BRUSSELS 4299 
     C. THE HAGUE 2789 
     D. THE HAGUE 2836 
 
Classified By: USEU/POL: Harry O\'Hara, reasons 1.4 b/d 
 
1. (C) Summary: The EU\'s decision on Turkey is now out of the 
hands of Commission officials, but contacts there continue to 
plan for accession talks with Turkey.  Still, they also 
express some uncertainty over how the Dutch will get a 
positive outcome at the December 17 European Council.  EUR 
Deputy Assistant Secretary Kennedy\'s November 10 visit 
provides a chance to further explore how the Commission and 
the Dutch Presidency will proceed over the next five and a 
half weeks.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) Debate within the EU over how to handle a date for 
accession talks with Turkey at the December 17 European 
Council has continued to simmer since the October 6 
Commission announcement on Turkey (refs a/b), but the tough 
decisions are now in the hands of EU heads of government, 
under the leadership of the Dutch Presidency. Commission 
officials note that the Dutch Presidency\'s major concrete 
action to date was to use their agenda-setting Presidency 
role at last week\'s European Council to limit member-state 
discussion of Turkey to an update on Turkey\'s application for 
membership.  Our understanding is that the Turkey matter was 
considered \"not ready\" for high-level discussion, and the 
Dutch sought to avoid what otherwise could have been an 
unconstructive or unduly negative debate over Turkey. 
 
Commission moves ahead... sort of 
--------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Commission officials working on Turkey are laying the 
groundwork so that the accession talks can begin whenever the 
Council gives them a political green-light. A key Commission 
official, who has traveled to Turkey numerous times in the 
last few weeks, told us that his goal is to be ready for a 
date in 2005.  He had no further specificity, other than to 
say he personally views it impossible before April. 
 
The Challenge for the Dutch Presidency 
------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Based on the very difficult debate in the Commission 
in early October, where a number of Commissioners reflected 
national and political party views, Commission official 
expect debates to be neither smooth nor easy.  Privately, 
they tell us that the Turkish decision to embrace the 
positive thrust of the recommendation, rather than dwell too 
much on the details -- some of which are compromises and 
concessions to particular member state concerns -- has been 
helpful.  Nonetheless, the Commission faces a dilemma. One 
contact said that the Commission finds it \"inconceivable\" 
that Turkey would get spurned in December: the consequences 
would disastrous for the EU.  But they also worry about how 
all 25 member-states can get to a yes.  They view this 
decision as likely to be the defining moment for the Dutch 
Presidency. 
 
US role? Commission reaction 
---------------------------- 
 
5.  (C) When asked about a US role in helping Turkey, 
Commission officials invariably state that our current 
low-profile is the right tack. Commission contacts tell us 
that extensive US lobbying for Turkey during the Danish 
Presidency actually hurt Turkey. 
 
Council Secretariat Quiet 
------------------------- 
 
6.  (C) So what\'s going on inside the Council?  Very little 
here in Brussels, as far as we can tell.  Council Secretariat 
officials active on enlargement issues tell us that Council 
apparatus by and large is in a watching mode. We were told 
that the main dynamics were between the Commission and the 
Dutch Presidency, and mainly within the Council between the 
heads of state and the Dutch Presidency (refs c/d). 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7. (C) From our optic, the situation is very fluid. How the 
EU handles the end game on Turkey is in the hands of the 
Dutch Presidency.  There are many trial balloons being 
floated over starting dates (2005/2006) or conditions (labor 
movement restrictions, Cyprus recognition, etc.), but nothing 
has been decided. If past experience from the 2002 Danish 
Presidency is any guide, all these issues will be intensely 
debated and discussed at the last minute, with the final 
decisions made by prime ministers and presidents.  Our 
Brussels contacts believe European political leaders from 
countries where the majority of the population is skeptical 
about Turkish EU membership will need some sort of 
face-saving compromise measures to bring them to say yes. The 
options we hear being discussed -- a beginning date slightly 
later than the norm, automatic braking mechanisms, or human 
rights or labor caveats -- will have to be weighed against 
the primary goal: a positive decision with a date on December 
17. 
 
McKinley 
"
"22688","11/9/2004 14:59","04BRUSSELS4817","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004817 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ETRD, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ACCESSION NEGOTIATION TIMELINES:  THE 
HISTORICAL RECORD 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) The EU is now preparing for its sixth wave of 
enlargement with the expected accession of Bulgaria and 
Romania on 1 January 2007.  Croatia and Turkey, and perhaps 
Macedonia and other Balkan states, are waiting in the queue. 
The only consistent lesson that can be drawn from looking at 
the historical record is that the EU has traditionally 
preferred to handle candidates in groups (Greece\'s accession 
in January 1981 was the exception).  There is considerable 
variation in how quickly accession negotiations start after 
agreement to open them, or how long it then takes for the 
candidate countries to actually join the EU. END SUMMARY. 
 
FROM APPROVAL TO OPENING OF NEGOTIATIONS 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) In previous accessions, the amount of time it has 
taken the EU (or its predecessor the EEC) to move from a 
formal decision to begin negotiations to the actual 
commencement of those negotiations has varied.  For the 
newest EU members from Central Europe, the time lag was 
either 2 or 3 months.  But the time has ranged anywhere from 
just one month (in the case of Austria, Finland and Sweden in 
1993) to six months (with Denmark, Ireland and the UK in 
1970).  The latter number, however, is in the process of 
being extended as Croatia, which received a formal decision 
to begin negotiations in June 2004, will have to wait at 
least nine months to March 2005, or perhaps even more than a 
year, for its negotiations to begin. (A table listing all 
dates for previous enlargements can be found at 
www.state.sgov.gov/p/useubrussels). 
 
FROM BEGINNING NEGOTIATIONS TO ENTRY INTO THE EU 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
3. (U) The variation among time lags for starting 
negotiations, however, has no correlation to how long it has 
taken candidates to join the EU.  Again, Austria, Sweden and 
Finland represent the fastest end of the range, with their 
entry to the EU coming just twenty four months after 
beginning negotiations.  But the next fastest group was the 
trio with the longest lead time prior to opening of 
negotiations -- Denmark, Ireland and the UK -- who entered 
the EU just 37 months from the date of beginning talks.  At 
the other end of the range are Spain, which waited just two 
months to begin negotiations, but then spent 83 months, or 
just under seven years, before joining the EU; and Portugal, 
whose accession treaty negotiations and ratification took 
over seven years (87 months) to complete. 
 
WHY THE VARIANCE? 
----------------- 
 
4. (U) It is no coincidence that the speediest accession 
process involved Austria, Finland and Sweden.  EU accession 
is essentially about how quickly new Member States can commit 
to applying the EU\'s body of laws and regulations (the 
\"acquis communitaire\") and how quickly the EU is willing to 
include the new Members in all of the EU\'s budgetary 
programs, including agricultural, regional and cohesion 
funds.  Therefore, accession negotiations for small, open, 
and thoroughly regulated rich economies that will become net 
contributors to the EU budget (read: Austria, Sweden and 
Finland, or, in the future, Iceland or Norway) can negotiate 
entry quickly.  These countries were helped by the fact that 
their membership in the European Free Trade Area (EFTA) meant 
much of their legislation had already been adapted to EU 
legislation.  Bigger or poorer economies with far greater 
tasks ahead to align their legislation, such as Spain or 
Portugal, took longer to agree the various \"transition 
periods\" required for full application of the acquis. 
 
5. (U) Finally, the timetable for accession negotiations is 
heavily influenced by political will within the EU.  Six of 
the ten new entrants of 2004 began their negotiations in 
1998, while the other four only got underway in 2000.  And 
yet they all entered on the same date.  This was because the 
EU-15 decided it would be much easier to bring them in 
together and adjust EU budgets, Commission assignments, 
voting weights in the Council, or seats in the European 
Parliament for the group as a whole rather than individually. 
 But this logic only goes so far.  Bulgaria and Romania, 
despite beginning negotiations just as quickly as Malta or 
Lithuania in 2000, faced much larger administrative, 
financial and economic hurdles than their classmates (not 
least their impact on the EU budget), and will spend some two 
and a half to three years longer securing their eventual 
entry into the Union. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6. (SBU) Only wealthy countries can expect to negotiate entry 
into the EU at all quickly.  And even some relatively rich 
countries (Cyprus, Malta) that would not demand much from the 
EU budget have seen accession take many years when their 
domestic structures and politics were complicated enough. 
The real lesson from the historical record of EU accession is 
that, in all 22 cases where the EU began accession 
negotiations (including Norway, which later decided not to 
join the EU), the EU has NEVER failed to finish them 
successfully. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"22758","11/10/2004 16:35","04BRUSSELS4843","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04BRUSSELS4082|04BRUSSELS4295","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004843 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/ERA AND EUR/RPM 
VALLETTA FOR DCM GRANT 
ANKARA FOR DAVID BERGER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MT, CY, TU, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: MALTESE SEEKING ITS WAY OUT OF NATO-EU BLOCKAGE 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 4082 B. BRUSSELS 4295 C. IIR 6 917 
     0014 05 
 
Classified By: USEU Political Military Officer Jeremy Brenner for reaso 
ns 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary. Malta\'s Ambassador to the EU will propose to 
Valletta that Malta should declare its PfP agreements from 
1994 remain in force, although the country has withdrawn from 
active participation. Under this approach, Malta would make 
the argument that they satisfy the requirements for 
participation in EU-NATO strategic discussions. End summary. 
 
2. (C)  In the course of an introductory meeting with Major 
Martin Xuereb, Maltese Attache to the EU for Military and 
Foreign Policy Affairs, USEU polmiloffs discussed the current 
Cyprus/Malta blockage in EU-NATO cooperation.  Also present 
was Deborah Mangion, Maltese First Secretary for Legal 
Affairs. 
 
3. (C/NF) Membership in PfP, or even subscription to the 
Framework Document as required by the EU-NATO Security 
Agreement, face difficult obstacles in the closely divided 
Maltese political environment.  Malta Officials estimated 
that popular sentiment is running 50/50 over Malta re-joining 
NATO PfP.  Malta\'s neutrality clause is also an issue that 
enjoys strong support among the population.  Given the 
current stalemate over the NATO security agreement and 
political challenges of Malta re-joining PfP, the question 
arose whether Malta had withdrawn completely from PfP in 
1996, or simply ended its active participation and its 
Individual Partner Program (IPP).  In seeking a way forward, 
it was suggested that if Malta had simply ceased active 
participation in PfP -- but had not formally withdrawn from 
the agreements -- it might be possible for Malta to reaffirm 
that their prior PfP agreements remained in force.  This 
would spare the Maltese government from requesting a divisive 
Parliamentary vote to join Pfp, and could set the stage for 
Malta to participate in EU-NATO strategic discussions. 
 
4. (C/NF)  In a follow-on discussion with Maltese Ambassador 
to the EU Richard Cachia-Caruana, he told us that he was, in 
fact, advocating precisely such an approach to Valletta. 
According to his interpretation, the Government of Malta can 
argue that they never withdrew from or renounced the security 
agreement they had entered into with NATO as part of their 
PfP membership, nor did they rescind their adherence to the 
Framework Document.  Such an approach would obviate the need 
to return to Malta\'s Parliament to request approval of a 
(new) subscription to the PfP Framework Document, and also 
eliminate the need to negotiate (and ratify) a security 
agreement with NATO.  Ambassador Cachia-Caruana said that he 
hoped this could be done before the December decision on 
Turkish accession to the EU, so as to avoid any linkage 
between the two issues. 
 
5. (C/NF) Comment: This Maltese initiative presents some 
potential for movement toward breaking the logjam that has 
grown increasingly frustrating to both EU and NATO 
representatives.  If Valletta declares unilaterally that the 
pre-existing agreements remain in force, Turkey\'s legitimate 
legal concerns based on its reading of the two relevant 
documents will be addressed -- at least in the case of Malta. 
Turkish acquiescence to a solution for Malta might allow a 
possible way forward to emerge, as Cypriot representatives 
have already expressed a willingness to consider subscribing 
to the PfP Framework document (ref B).  Ambassador 
Cachia-Caruana is scheduled for a courtesy call with 
Ambassador Schnabel in the coming days.  We anticipate he 
will raise the Maltese proposal in that meeting, and seek any 
Washington guidance on this idea. 
 
McKinley 
"
"22761","11/10/2004 17:08","04BRUSSELS4844","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","03BRUSSELS4747|04BRUSSELS928","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 08 BRUSSELS 004844 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CA FOR FMOSS AND JJACOBS; EUR/ERA FOR KSHEARER; DOJ FOR 
CRIMINAL DIVISION - BSWARTZ; DHS FOR SBOYLAN, BTS - MCLAYTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/10/2014 
TAGS: CMGT, SMIG, PTER, PREL, CPAS, CVIS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: BIOMETRICS: EU ON PARALLEL TRACK WITH U.S. AND 
MOVING FORWARD 
 
REF: (A) 03 BRUSSELS 4747 (NOTAL) (B) BRUSSELS 0928 
     (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D). 
 
1. (U) Summary.  In parallel with U.S. efforts to incorporate 
the use of biometric identifiers, the EU is finalizing plans 
to enhance its border controls through the use of biometrics. 
 On October 26, EU Justice and Interior Ministers agreed to 
incorporate two biometrics into national passports, thus 
surpassing the ICAO recommendation and U.S. plans for its own 
passports.  If the three Member States which have expressed a 
reservation about this decision give it the green light, EU 
Member States will have until mid-July 2006 to begin issuing 
passports with digitized photographs and until the end of 
2007 to add digital fingerprints to the chips.  The EU may 
decide to restrict international access to some of the 
biometric data, particularly the passport fingerprints. By 
the end of 2007, the EU hopes that its 3500 consular posts 
and all its international ports of entry will be connected 
through the Visa Information System, and name checks against 
the EU lookout system will be automatic.  Given the 
technological challenges, implementation of these plans may 
slide.  Switzerland has been given the green light to align 
itself with the EU\'s visa and passport policies.  The EU is 
also considering enhanced consular cooperation abroad as it 
moves to biometric visas.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Overview 
------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) The EU and the U.S. have been working together in a 
variety of international fora (such as ICAO and the G8), as 
well as bilaterally, to combat terrorism and illegal 
immigration through the use of biometrics.  Close cooperation 
between these key players is essential to ensure worldwide 
interoperability.  The terrorist attacks of 9/11 in the U.S. 
and 3/11 in Spain were catalysts for countries on both sides 
of the Atlantic to expedite their plans for securing travel 
documents and strengthening border controls. 
 
3. (SBU) On parallel tracks, both the U.S. and EU are 
incorporating biometrics into their consular and border 
management systems to cut down on visa fraud, asylum fraud, 
visa over-stayers and the use of stolen documents by 
imposters.  The European Commission (EC) has proposed using 
biometrics in the following critical areas:  visas and 
residency cards, lookout systems and national passports. 
While the EU is strongly committed to establishing a closer 
link between the applicant and the travel document through 
the use of biometrics, Member States will not fully avail 
themselves of biometrics to check applicants against existing 
EU lookout databases.  Critics have questioned the need for 
biometrics, citing privacy concerns and financial costs. 
Nevertheless, political agreement to go forward with 
biometrics has already been achieved; technical standards 
should be finalized in early 2005. 
 
4. (U) Because of \"opt-outs\", these requirements do not 
automatically extend to the UK, Ireland and Denmark. 
However, the three countries are expected to \"opt in\" or 
adopt similar provisions in parallel with the rest of the 
union.  EU decisions on biometrics will automatically apply 
to Iceland and Norway because of their participation in the 
Schengen Agreement.  Furthermore, on October 26 the 
Government of Switzerland signed an association agreement on 
to bring the country into the Schengen area.  While 
ratification of the agreement remains pending (possibly by 
referendum), Switzerland \"will be involved in all discussion 
taking place in the Council as far as the further development 
of the Schengen acquis is concerned.\" 
 
------------------------ 
Schengen Visas 
------------------------ 
 
5. (U) As reported in reftel a, the EU decided to expedite 
the incorporation of biometrics into some of its travel 
documents following the terrorist attacks of 3/11 in Spain. 
The date for including digitized photographs into visas and 
residency permits was moved up to 2005 (from 2007). 
 
6. (C) Discussions are still taking place in the EU\'s \"visa 
working group\" regarding the technical standards related to 
biometrics in visas.  Most Member States have expressed an 
interest in a flat scan of all ten fingerprints of each visa 
applicant.  According to Silvia Kolligs, the DG Justice and 
Home Affairs (JHA) policy officer who is drafting the 
biometrics proposals, the EC will only require that the two 
index finger scans be included in the biometric visa.  The 
other eight, if taken, would be stored by the Member States 
and used for national purposes or to mitigate \"false hits\" at 
ports of entry. 
 
7. (C) Last month, the Article 6 subcommittee re-examined the 
EC\'s proposal to incorporate these two biometrics on a \"radio 
frequency identification chip\" (RFIC) embedded in the visa 
foil.  According the Head of Unit for Large Scale IT Systems 
at DG JHA Frank Paul, the EC is backing away from this method 
for four reasons.  First, the more chips being sandwiched 
into a passport, the more likely it will be for \"collision\" 
to occur from the various chips emitting radio signals. 
Second, privacy advocates who favored a system where the 
citizen alone has physical custody of the biometric chip and 
its data (instead of depositing the data into a central 
database) are increasingly concerned about privacy breaches 
caused by chips emitting data.  Third, the U.S. experience 
has shown that the \"response time\" of querying a centralized 
system is minimal and will not seriously affect the workflow 
(either at consulates or ports of entry).  Fourth, the U.S. 
system of sending biometrics electronically to a central 
database is much cheaper than procuring chips. 
 
8. (C) As an alternate to chips being embedded in the visa 
foil, the EC is examining two possibilities.  The first, 
strongly supported by Germany and France, would be an interim 
solution with a separate plastic card containing the 
biometric chip being issued to the applicant at the same time 
the visa foil is placed in the passport.  The second option 
would be to copy the U.S. model and have all the data stored 
in a centralized system.  This, however, would push the 
biometric visa to 2007 when the Visa Information System (VIS) 
is operational (more information below).  Most states arguing 
against the interim solution of a separate card do so for 
financial reasons.  The supporters of the plan, besides being 
eager to move forward with biometrics, point out that the 
separate card format can be used for longer-term residency 
cards.  (Currently, Member States have the option for 
long-term residency documents to be either in foil or card 
format.) 
 
9. (C) If the deadline for incorporating biometrics into 
visas is pushed to 2007, the EC will still begin issuing 
Schengen visas in 2005 with scanned photographs on the foils. 
 Although capturing an image from a photograph attached to 
the visa application is good enough to print images on foils, 
Kolligs said that once biometrics are fully implemented with 
the option of running facial recognition checks, live 
photographs will probably have to be taken at the time of the 
visa applications. 
 
10. (C) Another technical issue under discussion relates to 
security standards for collecting the biometric fingerprints 
of visa applicants.  Because a decision to require consular 
officers to personally collect each scan would lead to 
serious workflow problems and require applicants to travel 
far distances in many instances, the EC is considering 
alternative methods (like certifying travel agencies). 
Ensuring security without disrupting legitimate travel will 
be key in this decision.  According to Kolligs, she does not 
see any realistic alternative other than copying the U.S. 
model and requiring all visa applicants to apply in person 
for a visa. 
 
11. (SBU) The EU will also reconsider the price of its 
Schengen visas, given the cost of incorporating new 
technologies.  Under current policies, the uniform price for 
a Schengen visa is 35 euros.  Member States are free to waive 
fees (for humanitarian or other reasons), but may not charge 
more. 
 
12. (C) All of the above changes will be discussed at the 
next visa working group, November 16-17.  Decisions will be 
sent up the chain of command (SCIFA and COREPER) to the JHA 
Ministers for a final decision in early December.  Then, 
Kolligs will revise the various EC proposals and amend the 
Common Consular Instruction to reflect the requirement to 
take fingerprints, etc.  She estimates that final versions 
will be finalized by January 2005. 
------------------------ 
Visa Information System 
------------------------ 
 
13. (SBU) The biometric visa will be the fundamental unit of 
the EU,s Visa Information System (VIS), currently in the 
last phases of discussion.  Once fully operational, the VIS 
will tie together all 3500 visa issuing posts of the 25 
Member States abroad and all the EU\'s international ports of 
entry, as well as those of the three associated countries. 
The system will be the largest in the world, handling 
approximately 20 million visa applications per year.  The EC 
expects that the central component of the VIS system will be 
operational by the end of 2006 using alphanumeric data and 
that the biometric components will be quickly integrated in 
2007.  While the EC develops the central system, Member 
States must build their own national visa systems than can 
support a biometric component.  Each of the national systems 
will connect via an \"interface\" with the central database 
managed by the EC. 
 
14. (SBU) Member States will gradually roll out (at their own 
expense and effort) the equipment to scan fingerprints at 
their consulates and their international ports of entry. 
Among those cited by the EC as potential \"first wave\" 
participants in the VIS, beginning in 2007, are France, 
Germany, Italy, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary and 
Slovenia.  Visa holders will have their fingerprints verified 
at ports of entry by scanning one or two of their prints 
(similar to US VISIT, although without the check against 
criminal databases). 
 
15. (U) The EC proposal includes the following advantages of 
an EU-wide visa system: 
-- boost anti-fraud efforts by improving exchanges of 
information between Member States regarding information 
contained in visa applications; 
-- prevent \"visa shopping\"; 
-- facilitate communications between consular posts and 
European ports of entry, as well as between consulates abroad 
and consular headquarters in European capitals; 
-- verify the identity of visa holders at external borders, 
immigration posts or police checkpoints; 
-- verify the identity of visa over-stayers and assist in 
their removal if undocumented; 
-- help determine the state responsible for adjudicating an 
asylum application (if the asylum seeker had been issued a 
visa); and, 
-- contribute toward improving the administration of a common 
visa policy to improve internal security and combat terrorism. 
 
16. (SBU) Once the VIS is operational, a person who is caught 
illegally in the Schengen area and claims to have no 
identification can have his or her biometric fingerprint run 
against the VIS to establish identity and nationality.  If 
the individual makes an asylum claim, a check against the VIS 
can also be made to determine responsibility for adjudicating 
the claim (i.e., the country that issued the visa).  The VIS 
cannot, however, be used for investigative or law enforcement 
purposes.  (Example.  A fingerprint found at the scene of a 
crime could not be run against the VIS to see if by chance 
there were a match.)  Approximately 25 percent of EU visa 
requests are refused. 
 
17. (SBU) Under EU data retention rules, information in the 
VIS will be kept five years after the expiration of the visa. 
 In exceptional circumstances, the information can be kept up 
to ten years.  If an alien becomes a citizen, personal data 
must be removed from the VIS.  After the data is removed, it 
is kept for an additional year in a \"locked file\" that can 
only be accessed if fraud is suspected.  Given these 
parameters, the EC estimates that at once fully operational, 
the VIS will have data on over 70 million applicants in the 
system.  Electronic files would include a digitized 
photograph, fingerprints and scanned documents to support the 
visa application. 
 
------------------------ 
Name Checks at the European Level 
------------------------ 
18. (SBU) The VIS will share a common structural platform 
with the EU\'s lookout database, the upgraded Schengen 
Information System (SIS2), but will retain separate 
operational controls.  Visa applications will be 
automatically checked against the SIS2 to determine whether 
the individual is prohibited from entering the Schengen area 
(the so-called Article 96 list).  Under the current system, 
visa posts must perform manual checks against the SIS.  Most 
countries use compact discs sent through diplomatic pouches 
for the mandatory name check.  Under this system, the lookout 
information is dated, and there is no certainty that a name 
check has actually been run.  In contrast, the VIS check 
against the SIS2 will be automatic, instantaneous and an 
integral part of the visa issuance process. 
 
19. (SBU) According to standard EU procedures, if there is a 
hit against an individual in the SIS, the visa is usually 
denied without further questioning.  The adjudicating officer 
has the ability to ask the country that entered the name onto 
the Article 96 list for additional information.  (Language 
difficulties and time lapses frequently discourage requests 
for additional information by the interviewing officer.)  A 
consular officer has the option to issue a 
geographically-limited visa to an applicant placed on the 
Article 96 list by another EU Member State.  A geographically 
limited visa, in theory, does not permit free circulation to 
other Member States (although lack of internal border 
controls means there is no physical barrier to prevent 
circulation). 
 
20. (SBU) Although both the VIS and SIS2 will both contain 
biometrics, the EU is not currently considering biometric 
checks against any SIS2 files such as law enforcement 
databases (fugitives from justice, suspected criminals, etc.) 
or judicial databases (those wanted for extradition or to 
appear in court as witnesses).  At the European level, the 
SIS2 biometric function will only be used to confirm identity 
in the case of an alphanumeric hit on the system,s Article 
96 list and used for border management purposes. 
 
21. (SBU) The SIS2 is programmed to be operational by March 
2007.  This is a key date, not only for the VIS, but also for 
the new EU Member States.  Border controls between the old 
and the new Member States cannot be removed until the new EU 
countries have access to the SIS2.  (The EC must also certify 
that external borders and other technical standards are up to 
Schengen requirements before internal borders fall.) 
 
------------------------ 
Additional Name Checks at the National Level 
------------------------ 
 
22. (SBU) In addition to the EU-wide SIS checks, Member 
States can -- and often do -- run name checks against their 
own national lookout systems.  These systems frequently 
contain derogatory information not entered into the SIS, 
including intelligence and other sensitive information 
countries are not willing to share with other Member States. 
Any fingerprints collected as part of the visa application 
could also be run against a Member State\'s criminal database. 
 
23. (SBU) Another method to restrict visa issuance apart from 
the Article 96 list relates to the so-called \"VISION\" 
consultation network.  VISION lists nationalities (not 
specific names) which require prior notification to certain 
interested countries before Schengen visas can be issued by 
consular officers of other EU Member States.  Although the 
list is classified, VISION lists generally follow colonial 
patterns.  For instance, before any Member State issues a 
visa to an Algerian citizen, France must be given the name of 
the applicant.  Even though the applicant might not be on the 
Article 96 list, France can refuse to allow the partner 
Member State to issue the visa.  Because of magnet 
communities and language ties, citizens of former colonies 
are thought to be more likely to eventually end up in the 
territory of the former colonial power.  The VISION list can 
also help to combat both the movement of suspected 
terrorists. 
 
------------------------ 
Tenders and Contracts 
------------------------ 
24. (SBU) On October 26, the EC signed its first contract for 
the VIS and SIS2, awarding the 40 million euro project to a 
multinational team of IT companies led by STERIA-France and 
HP-Belgium.  This project will allow a preliminary version of 
both systems to go forward with capabilities for alphanumeric 
data and digitized photographs.  Tenders for a much larger 
contract (up to 400 million euros) will be issued in 2005. 
The second phase will permit the two systems to incorporate 
digital fingerprints, as well as scans of documents that 
support the visa applications. 
 
25. (SBU) Note.  Frank Paul plans to travel to the U.S. on 
his IVP program in early 2005 to consult with policymakers 
and technical specialists as the EC begins implementing the 
decisions made regarding biometrics.  While there, he also 
hopes to meet with U.S. companies that supply biometric 
technologies.  The EC has been very happy with the products 
supplied by U.S. firm Cogent to EURODAC, the EU,s 
biometric-based system for asylum seekers.  End note. 
 
------------------------ 
Passports 
------------------------ 
 
26. (C) On October 26, JHA Ministers decided to require two 
biometrics in national passports:  a digitized photograph and 
digital fingerprints.  Their decision significantly altered 
the original EC proposal, which called for just digitized 
photographs.  Among those countries pressing hardest for the 
double biometric were France, Germany, Greece, Italy, 
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovenia, and Spain.  Those most 
skeptical were Estonia, Finland, Latvia and Sweden, while 
those expressing reservations over the cost were Denmark and 
Portugal.  At the JHA meeting, both Finland and Austria 
placed \"scrutiny reservations\" on the decision, meaning they 
wish to examine the issue more closely.  (Note.  During a 
meeting on November 4 in Vienna with an Austrian official in 
charge of biometrics, he told PRMOff that Austria was 
concerned over the price of this endeavor.  According to 
Kolligs, Austria also questions the need for fingerprints in 
passports.  End Note.)  The Netherlands also has a 
reservation until its national parliament can review the 
decision.  Any of these countries could render a negative 
decision and scuttle the process, although the likelihood of 
this is very small. 
 
27. (SBU) Another change from the original proposal allows 
for a longer implementation phase:  18 months (instead of 12) 
for the digital photographs and 36 months for the digital 
fingerprints.  The 18-month implementation phase would give 
EU countries until mid-2006 to issue biometric passports (far 
past the USG\'s current October 26, 2005 deadline for visa 
waiver countries).  Passports in circulation at the time the 
deadlines kick in will remain valid.  Several smaller EU 
Member States -- such as Belgium, Austria and Slovenia -- 
should be able to meet the USG deadline.  During a 
ministerial meeting on June 8, Germany and Denmark publicly 
stated they planned to begin issuing biometric passports with 
digitized photographs before the end of 2005 partly because 
of the U.S. visa waiver legislation.  At a CIREFI meeting on 
October 29, Italy committed itself to the same implementation 
timeline. 
 
28. (C) The EC is now working to spell out the technical 
standards for the biometric passports.  Important questions 
related to data protection and data privacy include:  1) what 
information is stored; 2) how can it be used; and, 3) who has 
access to it.  According to Kolligs, the EU will probably 
determine two levels when restricting access to the chip. 
For the biographic data and photograph, the EU is considering 
\"basic access\" control, requiring that the passport\'s 
machine-readable zone be swiped before the chip can be read. 
This procedure would reduce concerns of privacy advocates who 
fear that a chip which continually emits data could be read 
by a curious bystander using basic equipment.  For the 
sensitive fingerprint data, which will not be displayed on 
the passport\'s photo page, the EU is considering \"extended 
access\" or \"key code\" controls.  Once the passport is swiped, 
the reader will recognize the user\'s authority to view the 
fingerprint and the user will be asked to enter a key code to 
view the fingerprint. 
 
29.  (C)  It will be up to the Member States to decide on a 
broader range of technical issues related to passports, 
including how many fingerprints to scan.  The EC envisions 
requiring two index fingers (with a descending priority of 
other fingers if those two are missing).  However, Member 
States could require their citizens to have all ten 
fingerprints scanned.  They will also be responsible for 
determining where and how the prints are taken and to which 
other national authorities (including the U.S.) they might 
grant \"extended access\" to view the fingerprints inscribed on 
the chips.  It will also be up to Member States to decide 
whether to run the fingerprints of applicants against lookout 
databases before issuing the passport.  According to Kolligs, 
Germany is the driving force behind fingerprints in 
passports; she said that other countries such as Spain and 
Portugal, which have routinely fingerprinted their nationals, 
are also supportive. 
 
------------------------ 
Towards an EU Consular Service? 
------------------------ 
 
30. (U) Given the developments related to passports and 
visas, some Europeans question whether it remains practical 
for each Member State to maintain a fully operating consular 
section in major cities.  Already, EU citizens abroad can go 
into other EU Member State consulates for assistance if their 
own government is not represented locally.  Consular officers 
can issue temporary EU travel documents to citizens of other 
EU countries for emergency onward travel. 
 
31. (SBU) With the development of the VIS, further 
cooperation or consolidation may occur.  Two scenarios have 
been proposed to streamline visa issuance procedures.  The 
basic version envisions a visa processing center jointly 
shared by the Member States represented in that city. 
Employees would do all the pre-processing (i.e., collection 
of the fingerprints and fees, name checks, etc.) and then 
send the applications to the appropriate consulate for 
adjudication.  An enhanced variation provides for the visa 
officers of the various countries being co-located in these 
centers and adjudicating there as well.  This would 
undoubtedly result in closer cooperation and further reduce 
visa shopping.  However, it might restrict access to national 
lookout databases. 
 
32. (U) In its proposal for JHA goals over the next five 
years (known as \"Tampere II\" or \"The Hague Program\"), the 
Dutch Presidency states the need for \"further harmonization 
of national legislation and handling practices at local 
consular missions.  Common visa offices should be established 
in the long term, taking into account discussions on the 
establishment of a European External Action Service.\"  The 
Dutch Presidency also welcomed some initiatives by individual 
Member States, on a voluntary basis, in pooling their staffs 
and resources to issue visas. 
 
------------------------ 
EU Time Line:  Next Steps 
------------------------ 
 
33. (SBU) Important dates in the EU decision-making and 
implementation process are as follows: 
 
-- February 18, 2004:  The EC put forth its proposal for 
biometrics in EU passports.  Commissioner Vitorino briefed 
the JHA Council and said the proposal was not intended to 
harmonize passports: \"We are just dealing with basic security 
features.\" Though the introduction of fingerprints should be 
considered optional for the time being, it could become 
mandatory in the future,\" he said. 
 
-- June 8, 2004:  The JHA Council agreed to include one 
biometric in EU passports (digitized photographs). 
 
-- October 26, 2004:  The JHA Council agreed to include a 
mandatory second biometric in EU passports (digitized 
fingerprints).  Switzerland signed an agreement with the EU 
to accede to the Schengen agreement and was allowed to begin 
participating in policy discussions on visas and passports. 
 
-- by December 2004: The JHA Council should makes its 
decision of October 26 final.  Agreement on the technical 
standards for biometric passports should also be finalized. 
 
-- by January 2005:  Biometrics proposals and the Common 
Consular Instruction are re-written and approved;  the clock 
will begin ticking for the 18-month and 36-month 
implementation deadlines for the two biometrics to be 
included in passports. 
 
-- February 2005:  IVP nominee Frank Paul should begin a 
three-week visit in the U.S. to coordinate on biometrics with 
governmental and industry representatives. 
 
-- May 1, 2005:  The EU Border Management Agency should 
become operational and help the Member States coordinate on 
risk analyses and training, joint border control operations, 
and purchasing of equipment.  The agency will be located in 
either Poland, Hungary, Estonia, Malta or Slovenia. 
 
-- December 2005:  The Schengen visa foils should include 
digitized photographs.  Most EU legal permanent residency 
cards should also contain digitized photographs. 
 
-- July 2006:  All EU Member States should be issuing 
biometric passports compliant with the ICAO standard. 
 
-- October 2006:  The central component of the VIS should be 
operational with one biometric identifier (digitized 
photographs) and alphanumerical data. 
 
-- March 2007:  The upgraded SIS2 should come online.  Member 
States will begin the process of linking their national visa 
systems to the combined VIS/SIS2.  The VIS should support the 
biometric fingerprint function with search capabilities and 
scanned supporting documents should be added to the VIS. 
 
-- December 2007:  All countries should be issuing visas, 
residency cards and passports bearing two biometric 
identifiers.  Internal borders between old and new EU Member 
States should be abolished.  Preliminary decisions about 
expanded use of the SIS2 and biometric-based searches in the 
system should be taken. 
 
34. (SBU) Because of the serious technological challenges and 
the political/public debate that frequently surrounds the 
issue of biometrics, some of these projected dates may slide. 
 The European Parliament (EP), which has questioned the need 
for biometrics (reftel b) is expected to gain a stronger 
voice on these matters in the coming years.  Like some Member 
States, the EP questions the costs of biometrics, both in 
financial terms and in threats to civil liberties. 
Furthermore, many of the costs associated with biometrics 
will be born by the Member States. 
Although the EC sets policy, it has very few teeth available 
to force implementation.  This could also adversely affect 
speedy implementation of these measures. 
 
------------------------ 
Comment 
------------------------ 
34. (SBU) Given its extensive effort with regard to 
biometrics, the EU is now on a parallel track with the US in 
incorporating biometrics into travel documents.  They have 
demonstrated that they are equally interested in combating 
terrorism and illegal immigration through the use of 
biometrics, but the practical realities are extremely complex 
since it involves 28 different countries, each with its own 
policy reservations and resource limitations.  Despite all 
the progress the EU has made (even exceeding US standards by 
moving to include two biometric indicators), they are 
unlikely to meet our 10/26/2005 biometrics deadline, and are 
sure to press for its extension or for individual waivers to 
countries who are working hard but unable to meet the 
deadline.  Since standard-setting is an EU forte, it is also 
possible we may see a future EU effort in multilateral fora 
to incorporate two biometrics into all travel documents to 
further bolster border controls. 
 
35. (SBU) We should attempt to build on the progress the EU 
has made to press harder to reach an agreement with the EU on 
sharing lookout information on suspected terrorists and those 
ineligible to receive visas to enter the EU -- in accordance 
with Homeland Security Presidential Directive 6.  During 
consultations with CA/VO/BIP on October 27 in Brussels, the 
EC stated that once the new systems are in place, information 
sharing will be technically feasible.  To bring the EU to 
yes, however, we will have to come to some understanding with 
them on the data privacy concerns which have formed a basic 
stumbling block -- and to which the EU must also respond in 
its efforts to strengthening its border control mechanisms. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22851","11/15/2004 17:13","04BRUSSELS4874","Embassy Brussels","SECRET//NOFORN","04STATE241651","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","S E C R E T BRUSSELS 004874 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
THE HAGUE FOR CLIFF JOHNSON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KAWC, SR, YI, ICTY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COUNCIL RESPONSE ON QUINT ICTY DEMARCHE 
 
REF: STATE 241651 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
1. (S/NF) We delivered reftel points to Stefan Lehne of High 
Rep Solana\'s office on November 15.  Lehne noted that, since 
this was a Quint initiative and there was no agreed position 
from the EU at 25, the Council Secretariat could not 
participate in an external representation of this sort.  This 
was an issue appropriately handled by the five governments 
alone (he also did not think it would be appropriate to 
include the Dutch EU Presidency). 
 
2. (S/NF) Lehne agreed the points generally reflected the 
Quint agreement.  He added that del Ponte had stated quite 
clearly in her meetings in Brussels at the beginning of 
November that the Haradinaj indictment would be sealed. 
Lehne also said that the call for del Ponte to give the Quint 
\"more time and warning\" in order to prepare for reactions in 
Kosovo was a better approach than the option discussed among 
the Quint of simply urging a delay of the indictment for as 
long as possible.  Lehne said UNMIK SRSG Jessen-Petersen had 
told Solana on Nov. 11 that it might be better to deliver the 
indictment earlier and avoid the destabilizing impact of 
continued rumor and uncertainty.  Lehne urged the USG to 
discuss assessment of the situation with Jessen-Petersen. 
 
3. (S/NF) Lehne was also very appreciative of the suggested 
points for use with Haradinaj.  Solana has received letters 
from both Haradinaj and Rexhepi about the pending indictment, 
and Lehne said he would use the suggested Quint points as a 
model for drafting Solana\'s replies. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"22877","11/16/2004 12:38","04BRUSSELS4881","Embassy Brussels","SECRET","04USEUBRUSSELS1081|04USEUBRUSSELS1119|04USEUBRUSSELS4756","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004881 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, KNNP, PHUM, EAID, PINR, IR, KN, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/DPRK: SE DETRANI DISCUSSES 6PT, KEDO, 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE, AND MISSILES 
 
REF: A. USEU TODAY 11/10/04 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 4756 
     C. USEU BRUSSELS 1119 
     D. USEU BRUSSELS 1081 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: During consultations November 9 with Special 
Envoy Joseph DeTrani and EAP/K Director Jim Foster, EU 
officials underscored the EU\'s firm support for the Six-Party 
Process and willingness to play a constructive role when the 
time comes.  They urged the US to consult early if the EU is 
ever expected to provide assistance as part of any resolution 
of the nuclear issue.  DeTrani and Foster urged the EU not to 
agree to anything with Iran that the DPRK could cite as 
precedent for demanding something short of full disarmament 
itself.  Commission interlocutors said the EU is grappling 
with what to do about KEDO, and hopes for a signal from the 
US about its 2005 funding plans.  On humanitarian assistance, 
the EU is disappointed with North Korea\'s lack of cooperation 
and decision to quit participating in the UN Common Appeals 
Process, but will look for other ways to coordinate 
international assistance.  DeTrani and Foster, accompanied by 
INR Analyst Anthony Ruggiero, also delivered a briefing on 
the DPRK\'s ballistic missiles program.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Special Envoy for North Korea Joseph DeTrani and EAP/K 
Director Jim Foster met on November 9 with EU Council, 
Commission and Member State officials to discuss the 
Six-Party Process and other DPRK issues in advance of a visit 
to North Korea by the EU\'s Regional Director-level Troika 
(ref. B).  DeTrani and Foster also met with the EU Political 
and Security Committee and, accompanied by INR Anthony 
Ruggiero, briefed cleared EU officers on North Korea\'s 
ballistic missiles program. 
 
SIX-PARTY TALKS 
--------------- 
 
3. (C) DeTrani briefed his interlocutors on US thinking about 
the Six-Party Talks and thanked them for the EU\'s consistent 
support.  He expressed US hope that China will be able to 
bring North Korea back to the negotiating table in late 
November or early December, and asked the EU to urge China to 
increase its pressure on North Korea.  Council DG Robert 
Cooper said he thought we were entering a critical phase 
because, with President Bush now re-elected, Pyongyang had to 
decide whether to return to the table or wait out another 
four years in the unrealistic hope that something might 
change.  DeTrani agreed, and said he was guardedly optimistic 
that North Korea would make a strategic decision to 
re-engage. 
 
4. (C) Several interlocutors, including Cooper, wanted to 
know if the US had a \"Plan B\" for if the Six-Party Talks 
failed to resolve the nuclear issue.  DeTrani and Foster 
explained that the US saw the Six-Party Process -- a 
multilateral mechanism involving all major regional parties 
-- as the only viable way to ensure North Korea\'s complete, 
verifiable and irreversible disarmament.  The ultimate prize 
for North Korea was full normalization with the international 
community.  The DPRK needs to make a fundamental decision 
about what kind of state it wants to be.  Until then, there 
was little the international community could do except keep 
the pressure on and the Six-Party avenue open.  While not 
ruling out options as a matter of principle, the US was not 
contemplating any kind of unilateral or military solutions to 
the problem. 
 
EU WILLING TO HELP, WILL NEED EARLY CONSULTATION 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
5. (C) DeTrani\'s interlocutors were grateful for the timely 
US briefing on the Six-Party Process.  They reiterated the 
EU\'s willingness to play a supportive role when the time is 
right (refs. C, D).  Council Secretariat North America and 
Human Rights Director Jim Cloos said the EU was ready to help 
in any way it could, while \"recognizing our secondary role.\" 
Commission External Relations Director Richard Wright pointed 
out that even though the EU is not part of the Six-Party 
Talks, the EU would expect to contribute if the talks result 
in a long-term plan, and therefore should be kept in the loop 
along the way. 
 
6. (C) In separate meetings, Council DG Cooper and HiRep 
Solana Policy Advisor Chris Holtby urged the US to consult 
early if it wanted the EU to provide incentives and 
assistance to the DPRK as part of an eventual resolution of 
the nuclear issue.  The EU will need time and will want input 
from the US if it is ever expected to play a role, Holtby 
said.  Cooper said the EU would need to know early if the US 
wanted it to play a bigger role.  \"It will be easier for us 
to help you,\" he said, \"if we feel consulted early, rather 
than just handed a bill.\"  DeTrani and Foster thanked the EU 
for its willingness to help and said they would bear in mind 
the EU request for early consultation when the time comes. 
 
EU LOOKING FOR SIGN ABOUT FUTURE OF KEDO 
---------------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) During a meeting with Commission Director Richard 
Wright and members of his staff, Wright asked about US 
intentions toward the Korean Energy Development Organization 
(KEDO).  The KEDO issue is becoming time-sensitive for the 
EU, since they must decide whether to fund KEDO next year. 
Wright said the EU is inclined to continue support for KEDO\'s 
administrative costs (Euros 1 million per year), but to 
discontinue the Euros 4 million they provided for suspension 
costs last year.  The fact that the US is not contributing 
this year \"is not helping,\" Wright said.  He asked for some 
sort of signal from Washington to indicate whether the US 
will fund KEDO next year, so the EU can make an informed 
decision on whether to continue funding.  He also pointed out 
that the legal basis for EU contributions to KEDO runs out at 
the end of 2005.  If KEDO is terminated, Wright said, there 
will be \"contingent liabilities,\" and \"we do not consider 
ourselves at risk for these.\" 
 
8. (C) DeTrani told Wright that the U.S. continues to see 
KEDO as a viable entity, but that the KEDO light-water 
reactor project is not viable.  Wright responded that as part 
of an international settlement, \"I don\'t think we\'d object\" 
to termination of the light-water reactor project. 
 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
9. (SBU) Commission Director Richard Wright said that a major 
goal of the EU\'s November 13-16 Troika visit to North Korea 
(ref. B) was to assess recent changes in the climate for 
humanitarian aid and development projects.  Wright said the 
EU was disappointed by North Korea\'s recent decision to 
terminate the UN\'s Common Appeals Process (CAP), but said the 
EU would find other ways to coordinate aid to the DPRK.  He 
underscored, however, that monitoring was \"non-negotiable\" 
for the EU. 
 
10. (SBU) During its November 13-16 trip, the EU Troika also 
plans to conduct monitoring visits to ongoing development 
projects, Wright said.  The EU was trying to develop a better 
sense of the economic situation, and hoped to see a deepening 
of the economic improvements observed in recent Troika trips 
to North Korea, including an influx of Chinese electronics 
and revitalization surrounding the Kaesong industrial zone. 
11. (C) Over dinner with other EU and third-country 
officials, Wright also mentioned that the EU had two pilot 
development projects on the books that \"could be launched in 
just a few weeks if North Korea did the right things.\"  But, 
as we have seen with regard to humanitarian assistance, the 
DPRK seems to be \"going backward rather than forward,\" he 
said.  Japanese Mission DCM Yoshihisa Kuroda cautioned the EU 
not to invest too much of itself in planning for possible 
development projects.  He underlined that the first priority 
of Japan, the US, and others in the region was security, not 
the development of North Korea.  The EU does not have to live 
in North Korea\'s neighborhood, he said, and should be very 
careful not to say or do things that undermine the security 
interests of those who do.  EU interlocutors reassured 
Yoshihisa that the EU fully supported the Six-Party Process 
and saw North Korea as a grave global threat.  The EU would 
take its cue from Six-Party partners about the timing and 
design of any future increase in economic engagement. 
 
BRIEFING THE PSC: DPRK-IRAN PARALLELS? 
-------------------------------------- 
 
12. (SBU) In a meeting with the twenty-five Member State 
Ambassadors to the EU Political Security Committee (PSC), 
DeTrani provided an overview of the Six-Party Talks, then 
opened to the floor to a range of questions from the 
audience.  Ambassadors asked about the future of KEDO, the 
possible impact of a nuclear agreement with Iran on the 
Six-Party Talks, a possible \"Plan B\" if the Six-Party Talks 
remain at an impasse, and the climate for humanitarian aid to 
North Korea. 
 
13. (C) DeTrani noted that the EU should be very careful 
about any potential agreement with Tehran over its nuclear 
activities, because North Korea could use any relatively weak 
deal with Iran to try to leverage concessions in the 
Six-Party Talks.  As with North Korea, the international 
community should accept nothing less from Tehran than the 
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement of all 
nuclear-related programs.  DeTrani and Foster also made this 
point in their other meetings throughout the day.  EU 
interlocutors were in listening mode, but several observed in 
very general terms that the multilateral track the US was 
pursuing with the DPRK was similar in many ways to the EU\'s 
approach to Iran.  Only Council DG Cooper underscored the 
differences, arguing that geography and regional political 
dynamics made Iran the more dangerous -- if also more 
potentially democratic -- of the two.  At the same time, both 
had a history of \"lying and cheating\" which made them equally 
hard to trust, he said (ref. A). 
 
BRIEFING THE EU ON DPRK MISSILES PROGRAMS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
14. (S) INR Analyst Anthony Ruggiero, who accompanied DeTrani 
and Foster, delivered a briefing to cleared EU officials on 
recent developments in North Korea\'s ballistic missiles 
program and indications that the DPRK might be preparing for 
a new test launch.  The EU officials thanked the US for the 
briefing -- which went smoothly despite incompatible US and 
EU security guidelines that prevented the use of visual aids 
-- and expressed hope that North Korea\'s missiles 
proliferation activities could be addressed once the nuclear 
issue was resolved.  Several officials asked about DPRK links 
to outside technology suppliers (especially Russia) and 
missile customers (Pakistan, Iran, private groups and 
terrorists).  DeTrani and Ruggiero said that the DPRK\'s 
willingness to sell complete systems to any country able to 
pay was alarming, but noted that Pyongyang did not seem 
interested in selling to non-state entities, probably because 
of the risks involved.  The real danger was that corruption 
and established DPRK links to organized crime could result in 
unauthorized technology transfers.  Commission 
representatives said that the EU has raised missiles concerns 
in its (low-level) political dialogue with North Korea, and 
said the EU would discuss the problem with China during the 
December 8 EU-China Summit. 
 
(U) This cable has been cleared by SE DeTrani and EAP/K 
Foster. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"23002","11/18/2004 16:01","04BRUSSELS4915","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE4629","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/RUS AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, ETRD, RS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU-RUSSIA SUMMIT: TWO-WEEK DELAY UNLIKELY TO 
BRIDGE DIFFERENCES 
 
REF: STATE 04629 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  The EU-Russia summit will take place 
November 25, a two-week delay at Russia\'s request.  Moscow 
said it wanted to allow the EU\'s new Barrosso Commission to 
participate, but many here believe that the EU\'s insistence 
on a simultaneous agreement on roadmaps for all four \"spaces\" 
of EU-Russian relations was the true motivation and Moscow 
wanted time to undermine the EU consensus for a package deal. 
 The delay provides opportunity for progress, but there is 
little mood for compromise on either side and there will be 
no joint declaration, merely a joint press statement.  Only 
the roadmap on cultural issues is nearly agreed.  In the 
economic space, Russia refuses to include May 2004 
commitments to phase out Siberian overflight fees and 
increase domestic energy prices.  In the internal security 
space, Russia is unwilling to discuss Chechnya or human 
rights, but wants references to Russian minority rights in 
the Baltic states and a visa-free travel regime for Russian 
citizens.  In the external security space, Russia rejects the 
EU\'s \"common neighborhood\" concept, emphasizing that its 
unique connection to the CIS is unlike that of the EU. 
Instead, Moscow wants to highlight joint efforts against 
terrorism and seeks to participate in EU crisis management 
decision-making.  The EU will also seek Russian support in 
organizing an EU mission to the Northern Caucuses and holding 
regular consultations on human and minority rights.  End 
Summary 
 
Delay Buys Time, but for what? 
------------------- 
2.  (C) Moscow\'s surprise request to postpone the planned 
November 11 EU-Russia summit, which has now been re-scheduled 
for November 25, provides the two sides with a small window 
of opportunity to make further headway in the negotiations 
over the \"Four Common Spaces\" -- the EU\'s headline documents 
for EU-Russia relations.  (The four spaces are Internal 
Security, External Security, Economics and Trade, and Culture 
and Research.)  At present, texts on two spaces * Economics 
and Culture * are close to agreement; the other two are 
problematic.  The EU is insisting that texts for all four 
areas be agreed simultaneously; Russia wants to move ahead 
and announce agreement on the first two at the Summit.  EU 
officials, however, say that the EU has already reached its 
redlines, and progress will only be possible with concessions 
from Russia.  According to Commission Russia Desk Officer 
Michael Miller, this will require the engagement of Russia\'s 
Presidential Administration to overrule the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs.  Russia has so far rejected the EU\'s 
approach, which Moscow considers an excessive intrusion in 
Russia\'s foreign and economic policies that betrays a lack of 
respect for Russia as an independent power.  EU-Russia 
negotiations are expected to continue right up to the summit. 
 
 
Why the Delay? 
-------------- 
3. (C) The EU accepted Moscow\'s request to delay the summit 
until after the new Commission is approved (Parliament 
approved the Barroso Commission on November 18), but 
unofficially some in Brussels doubt that Putin\'s desire to 
meet Barrosso was the true motivation.  Some EU officials 
suspect that Moscow simply wanted more time to press its case 
bilaterally with countries with which it enjoys close 
relations, such as Germany, Italy, and France.  Moscow\'s 
goal, these officials suspect, is to undermine the EU 25 
resolve to insist on a package deal on the four roadmaps. 
Moscow, they said, may also hope to dangle the prospect of 
significant summit deliverables in front of the Dutch, who 
hold the EU presidency, if the Hague agrees to a partial 
agreement, dividing the four spaces.  Negotiations on the 
roadmaps continue, but EU officials say there is little time 
or mood to compromise on the part of Brussels, and they do 
not anticipate significant breakthroughs. 
 
4. (C) There appears to be little disposition to compromise 
on Russia\'s side either.  Moscow insists its recent 
ratification of the Kyoto and PCA (Partnership and 
Cooperation Agreements) treaties should suffice as 
concessions on its part.  Moscow expects to resolve the 
outstanding issues at the political and not technical level. 
To facilitate a political breakthrough, Moscow appointed 
high-level coordinators responsible for each roadmap, and 
appears disappointed at the lack of reciprocation on the part 
of the EU.  According to Russian Embassy officials here, two 
out of four coordinators are close Putin aides:  Sergei 
Yastrzhembskiy (responsible for the cultural space) and 
Victor Ivanov (internal security space).  The other two 
coordinators are Foreign Affairs Minister Sergei Lavrov 
(external security space) and Victor Khristenko, Minister of 
Industry and Energy and until recently Deputy Prime Minister 
(economic space). 
 
5. (C) The tactic of appealing bilaterally to the political 
will of its friends within the EU may benefit Moscow. 
Council Secretariat\'s Carl Hartzell admitted that there would 
be pressure in EU circles to make more progress.  He said 
that the EU suffered from a certain \"psychological effect\" 
that inevitably leads some members to call for compromise 
when no deal with Russia appears possible.  Possibly taking 
advantage of this EU weakness, Yastrzhembskiy told Brussels 
on November 11 that Prime Minister Fradkov would replace 
Putin at the summit if no agreement on the four spaces was 
made. 
 
Four Spaces: Status of the Roadmaps 
----------------------------- 
6. (C)  The EU and Russia have essentially agreed to the 
roadmap text on the cultural space and, according to Miller, 
cooperation in this area will continue regardless of the 
outcome of negotiations on the remaining three spaces -- 
economic, external and internal security.  Even in the 
cultural space, however, Russia appears to be backtracking 
from its earlier proposal to establish a European studies 
institute at a Russian university. 
 
7. (C) According to Miller, the economic space, which until 
recently appeared largely agreed, now poses problems.  For 
example, Russia refuses to include its May 2004 commitments 
to phase out by 2013 Siberian overflight fees and increase 
domestic energy prices.  The EU aims to reinforce these 
commitments by including them in the economic roadmap, but, 
according to Miller, the corrupt Russian Ministry of 
Transport is reluctant to forego the slush fund that 
overflight fees generates.  The EU has made progress with 
Russia on other economic issues, however.  For example, 
Russia no longer blocks EU-wide meat exports, imposing only 
regional restrictions that are dealt with at the technical 
rather than political level. 
 
8. (C) The near agreement of the cultural and economic spaces 
contrasts with the \"extremely problematic\" external and 
internal security spaces, according to Commission Deputy 
Director General Michael Leigh.  In the internal security 
roadmap, Russia continues to object to discussion of Chechnya 
or human rights, lobbies for mention of Russian minority 
rights in Latvia and Estonia, and harbors unrealistic hopes 
that the EU will grant visa free travel to Russian citizens. 
Viewing visa free travel as a long-term goal, the EU is 
willing instead to discuss visa facilitation when linked to a 
readmission agreement that Russia rejects.  Russia has only 
one readmission agreement (with Tajikistan), and refuses to 
be responsible for other third country citizens who transit 
Russia and seek asylum in Europe. 
 
9. (C) In the external security roadmap, Russia is \"not 
ready\" to discuss issues related to the \"near abroad.\" 
Moscow objects to the EU\'s \"common neighborhood\" concept, and 
refuses any mention of it in the roadmap.  According to 
Miller, the EU wants a \"big leap forward\" in cooperation with 
Russia to advance what the EU sees as \"shared interests\" in 
Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, and Southern Caucuses.  The EU 
wants a stable, prosperous neighborhood, but it encounters 
difficulty overcoming Russia\'s belief in exclusive spheres of 
influence that views the EU\'s interest as a zero-sum threat. 
Russia is adamant about its unique relationship with the 
neighborhood countries, which is a much older, deeper and 
more privileged one than the EU enjoys with these countries. 
Our Russian embassy contacts told us that the EU must 
understand Russia\'s exceptional connection to the CIS.  These 
diplomats argued that the countries of the \"near abroad\" are 
\"relatives\" who are \"very near to our heart,\" while to the EU 
they are merely neighbors, and new ones at that. 
 
10. (C) In the external security roadmap, Russia wants to 
stress the need to fight terrorism, but rejects EU attempts 
to link these efforts to the need to respect human and civil 
rights.  Mirroring debates in NATO, Moscow also seeks to 
participate in EU crisis management decision-making, while 
the EU offers to facilitate Russian participation in future 
ESDP (European Security and Defense Policy) missions only on 
the basis of an invitation.  In effect, Russia is seeking a 
de facto veto over potential EU peacekeeping operations in 
the CIS. 
 
Possible Summit Deliverables 
----------------------- 
11. (C) The EU has nixed Russian proposals for a joint 
political statement at the summit, and there is agreement at 
present only for a joint press statement.  The statement may 
emphasize the progress in \"practical implementation\" in the 
roadmaps on the economic and cultural spheres, and will 
likely include a pledge to continue working on the remaining 
two spaces, external and internal security. 
 
12. (C) Additionally, the EU seeks Russian support in 
organizing an EU post-conflict assistance exploratory mission 
to the Northern Caucuses, and would like to hold regular 
consultations on human and minority rights.  According to 
Miller, the EU is hopeful that Moscow will reciprocate with a 
dialogue on human rights in Chechnya in return for the EU\'s 
recent flexibility in agreeing to discuss Russian minority 
rights in Latvia and Estonia. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
13. (C) The EU complains it is getting mixed messages from 
Moscow.  On the one hand, Moscow says it wants a successful 
summit and seeks political deliverables that would show that 
Moscow is not isolated internationally.  Russia wants a 
demonstration of EU solidarity in the fight against 
terrorism, but also seeks to limit EU criticism of political 
developments in Russia.  Some here think that Russia decided 
to postpone the summit because it failed to get the 
concessions it expected on the roadmaps, underlying Russia\'s 
apparent frustration with the EU\'s insistence that all four 
roadmaps go forward together. 
 
14. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED:  Beyond the planning for the 
current summit, EU officials say that policy toward Russia 
shifted substantially after the 2003 EU-Russia summit, when 
Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi\'s statements in support of 
Putin were out of step with the general EU policy toward 
Russia.  For Brussels, this highlighted the need for the EU 
to have a more coherent and disciplined policy that could 
withstand Russian attempts to undermine consensus by 
exploiting its bilateral relationships with individual EU 
countries.  Additionally, the 1 May EU enlargement brought in 
former Soviet states and satellites that have a strong 
interest in pursuing a tough policy with Russia.  Some in 
Brussels suggest that a more assertive EU policy that views 
Russia as just another Eastern European state*a view that 
contrasts sharply with Moscow\'s image of itself as uniquely 
important*may have motivated Moscow to demonstrate its 
weight by postponing the summit.  The tension between 
hard-nosed new members and the EU\'s larger veteran states, 
who often prefer a more moderate approach to Russia, is not 
fully resolved.  As the new member states find their voice 
within the EU, they will continue to influence the EU\'s 
approach to Russia.  How Russia chooses to engage the EU as 
this process is underway will also affect the outcome.  At 
present, Moscow is not winning many friends. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23044","11/19/2004 13:05","04BRUSSELS4936","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004936 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA - L.DIBBLE; NEA/IPA AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2009 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, EAID, IS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: MEPP:  EU IS FOCUSED ON PA ELECTIONS TO GET 
ROADMAP BACK ON TRACK 
 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C) Summary. In meetings with a wide range of EU 
officials, NEA DAS Elizabeth Dibble discussed next steps in 
the Middle East Peace Process on November 16.  The EU is 
focused on the need to support Palestinian presidential 
elections as a first step to getting the roadmap back on 
track.  The EU looks to Israel to ease restrictions on 
movement in the territories to permit elections, and to 
coordinate with the Palestinians on the economic aspects of 
the Gaza disengagement plan.  The EU looks to the U.S. to 
work with Israel on both issues, and floated the idea of 
articulating with the U.S. a more detailed vision of a 
negotiated solution as a means to spur the roadmap forward. 
End Summary. 
 
2.  (C)  On November 16, NEA DAS Elizabeth Dibble held US-EU 
COMEP (Middle East Peace Process) discussions with EU 
officials; met separately with EU Special Middle East Envoy 
Marc Otte and EU High Rep Solana\'s Foreign Policy Advisor 
Robert Cooper; and participated in an informal donors meeting 
in advance of the December Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC) 
meeting on assistance to the Palestinian Authority (PA). 
 
EU Post-Arafat Priorities 
------------------ 
3.  (C)  EU Special Envoy Marc Otte outlined three main 
priorities for US-EU (and Quartet) coordination:  Supporting 
Palestinian presidential elections in 60 days; supporting PA 
efforts to maintain and enhance law and order and national 
unity; and providing economic assistance to keep the PA 
solvent.  He saw Abu Mazen as the likely winner of 
presidential elections, and viewed him as the one candidate 
who could bridge the old/young and inside/outside(Tunisia) 
splits in the PLO.  Otte said Abu Mazen told him and EU High 
Rep Solana in Ramallah at Arafat\'s funeral that he, Abu 
Mazen, now controlled security forces and was focused on 
restoring law and order, has been in touch with Hamas, which 
Abu Mazen said would support a Palestinian State in the West 
Bank/Gaza strip if it is involved in the political process. 
Abu Mazen asked for help in two areas:  rebuilding the police 
force, and forging a cease-fire leading to a political 
process that would enable him to disarm militias.  On the 
economic front, PA Finance Minister Fayyad needs end of year 
help and wants the international community to press Arab 
states to deliver on their pledges to support the PA 
financially. 
 
4.  (C)  Commission Middle East Director Christian Leffler 
reinforced the point that elections within 60 days are key, 
but also stressed the need to support Fayyad and keep the PA 
afloat financially.  It will be difficult for the EU, he 
said, to find additional money before 2005; one or two EU 
member states may soon announce a contribution to the PA\'s 
Trust Fund, but Fayyad is \"running out of both ideas and 
money now.\" Leffler urged \"weekly\" US-EU pressure on Arab 
states, who are enjoying an enormous oil-price windfall, to 
close the end-of-year PA budget shortfall.  He also pointedly 
called on the U.S. to make a donation to the Trust Fund.  He 
welcomed Israel\'s recent decision to transfer tax receipts, 
which should be encouraged to continue as a gesture of 
goodwill toward Fayyad. 
 
Solana message to Israel:  support elections 
------------------------ 
5.  (C)  Otte said Solana\'s message to the Israelis following 
Arafat\'s funeral was that while there was no need of public 
statements embracing Abu Mazen, there was also no need to 
\"test\" the emerging Palestinian leadership; they were known 
quantities.  Israel needs to lift the closures, improve 
living conditions in the territories, and allow movement to 
facilitate elections, including in East Jerusalem.  Solana 
told the Israelis that the EU would do everything it could to 
ensure the Palestinians do the right things.  He said the 
Israelis he met with (including Weisglass) responded 
positively. 
 
6.  (C)  Leffler noted that the EU had reviewed how election 
observation was handled in 1996, and said that at that time 
the EC spent 20 million Euros for all aspects of presidential 
and parliamentary elections:  preparation, technical 
assistance, and observation.  The fielded 300 out of a total 
of 600 international observers.  Otte said the Palestinians 
want international observers on the ground \"so the Israelis 
will behave.\"  Otte asked whether the Quartet should not soon 
begin endorsing the concept of international observers.  EU 
officials said they agree with the U.S. that the PA should 
focus on presidential elections now; municipal elections 
should follow and not be held simultaneously.  Leffler said 
the EC strongly insisted on this point; under current PA 
plans municipal elections would be fatally flawed.  Leffler 
said the PA has submitted an initial request for 5.8 million 
dollars in assistance for the Presidential election.  Leffler 
noted that the EU would be able to provide the bulk of that 
amount from existing funds, but that there would be a 
shortfall of approximately 1 to 1.5 million dollars that 
would have to come from other donors. 
 
EU seeks more US engagement 
-------------------------- 
7.  (C) EU officials across the board stressed the need for 
political and financial support for the emerging Palestinian 
leadership, and for U.S. engagement to get the roadmap back 
on track.  Solana Foreign Policy Advisor Cooper said the EU 
has been disappointed by past U.S. rhetoric that was not 
matched by actions.  Dutch Presidency MFA rep den Hond 
pressed for the US and EU to articulate a more detailed 
vision of the two-state solution that would clarify the end 
state of final status issues.  In response, DAS Dibble 
commented that this was premature, given the need to get past 
elections and give both parties time to build confidence. 
Commission Middle East Director Leffler urged the U.S. to 
provide direct assistance to the Palestinian Authority.  All 
EU officials noted the importance of Israel making gestures 
and taking steps to support Palestinian elections by easing 
restrictions on movement in the territories, facilitating 
voter registration, releasing detainees, reducing its 
military incursions and presence, and promoting Egyptian-PA 
efforts for a cease-fire.  They said they look to the U.S. to 
work with Israel on these issues. 
 
AHLC informal donors meeting 
---------------------- 
8.  (C)  Representatives from Norway, Canada, the 
Netherlands, and the World Bank joined US and EU officials 
for an informal meeting to -discuss the upcoming AHLC 
meeting, which all agreed would be one of the most important 
ever.  Notwithstanding a sharp exchange between Leffler and 
the Norwegian rep over a relatively minor scheduling issue, 
general agreement was reached on an approach to the meeting. 
Norway circulated a draft agenda, and agreed to draft and 
circulate a framework chairman\'s summary.  This would begin 
with a preambular statement referring to previous Quartet 
statements and laying out the political context of the 
meeting that would make clear the agenda was broader than 
just Gaza disengagement, but was linked to the objective of a 
political process.  The Summary would report donors\' 
assessment of the WB report on Gaza disengagement as useful 
work, but will note the need for more to be done to ensure 
the economic viability of Gaza.  The summary will list 
specific projects that need financing in Gaza, including the 
port (a RO-RO facility), the airport/heliport, and water 
projects.  The chairman\'s summary would also address Trust 
Fund/Budget issues, noting the needs of the PA and recording 
what donors (especially Arab donors) intend to provide in 
terms of end-of-year budget support in 2004 and in 2005.  The 
summary would note Israel\'s impressive effort to implement 
disengagement and the importance of the AHLC reciprocating 
with a program to support the process.  Finally, the summary 
should set a date for a follow-on pledging conference and 
AHLC to demonstrate that a process is underway. 
 
Comment 
------- 
9.  (C)  The EU has high expectations that the U.S. will 
increase its engagement following Arafat\'s demise to take 
advantage of the resulting window of opportunity to move 
ahead on the roadmap.  They are, however, more focused on how 
the U.S. can persuade Israel to take a list of steps to work 
back to the roadmap than on how to ensure the new Palestinian 
leadership takes action to curb terrorist violence and 
demonstrate that it is a credible negotiating partner. 
 
McKinley 
"
"23045","11/19/2004 13:30","04BRUSSELS4937","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BERLIN3648|04BRUSSELS4686","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004937 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/RPM, EUR/ERA, AND S/CRS 
LONDON FOR DAVID BAME 
BERLIN FOR KRISTINE PELTZ 
PARIS FOR GUS RECINOS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU CIV/MIL PLANNING AND THE OPS CENTER: SHAPING 
THE OUTCOME 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 4686 B. BERLIN 3648 
 
Classified By: USEU polmil officer Jeremy Brenner for reasons 1.4 (b) a 
nd (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  As EU High Representative for Common Foreign 
and Security Policy Javier Solana and the PSC review papers 
designed to create a civ/mil planning cell and a capacity to 
stand up an EU Operations Center, they will consider it in 
the context of strategic EU efforts to define its future 
global role in security matters.  In line with last year\'s 
adopted European Security Strategy (ESS), Solana\'s focus is 
on development of the EU\'s concept of its comparative 
advantages, with a special focus on the instruments of \"soft 
power\" and integrating civilian and military components of 
crisis management.  By 
pushing for stronger NATO liaison relationships with the EU 
civ/mil cell, we can help channel its evolution and, in so 
doing, strengthen joint NATO-EU efforts to integrate 
civil/military activities rather than emphasize core military 
activities better 
left to NATO.  End summary. 
 
------------- 
December 2003 
------------- 
 
2. (C)  A FR-UK-GE paper on civ/mill planning and an EU 
Operations Center that went to Javier Solana for his 
consideration in early November 2004, put flesh on the bones 
of a long-standing EU idea.  At the same time that the EU 
adopted the European Security Strategy (ESS), the December 
2003 European Council (Heads of State and Government) invited 
Solana to \"propose the necessary measures for establishing  a 
cell with civil/military components to meet the objectives 
and comply with the principles\" set out in the EU Presidency 
document entitled \"European Defense: NATO/EU Consultation, 
Planning, and Operations.\"  The Heads 
of State stressed that this cell should be functional as 
early as possible in 2004. 
 
---------- 
June 2004 
---------- 
 
3. (C) The European Council Conclusions of June 2004 took the 
idea further, agreeing to work on establishing an EU 
Operations Center.  The Council specified that the Operations 
Center would not be a standing headquarters, and that the 
primary option for conducting autonomous military operations 
would remain National Headquarters. A decision to draw on the 
\"collective capacity \" of the EU Military staff would be 
taken, upon the advice of the Military Committee, in a case 
where a joint civil/military response is required and no 
National HQ is identified.  The Operations Center\'s charter 
would be to plan and conduct operations -- within the 
spectrum envisaged in the Treaty -- on the scale of Operation 
Artemis (Note: Operation Artemis involved a deployment of 
2000 personnel controlled by an OHQ of 70. End note.)  The 
Council specified that the civ/mill cell and facilities for 
the Operations Center would be located in the same building 
as the main structures of the EU Military staff. (Note: 
Currently, EUMS is housed at 150 Avenue de Cortenburgh in 
downtown 
Brussels. End note.) 
 
4. (C)  In that same month, ESDP HR Solana presented concept 
papers that spelled out the mission, functions, and terms of 
reference of both the civ/mil cell and the Operations Center. 
 
------------ 
Civ/Mil Cell 
------------ 
 
5. (C)  Under Solana\'s concept, the civ/mil cell would 
undertake strategic contingency planning at the initiative of 
the High Representative or the EU Political and Security 
Committee. Its mission would be to reinforce the national HQ 
designated to conduct an autonomous operation, and assist in 
integrating civilian and military operations.  Solana\'s 
concept charged the civ/mil cell with responsibility for 
creating and maintaining the capacity to stand up an 
Operations Center capable of planning and running an 
autonomous EU 
military operation. That responsibility is vested in a 
permanent 8-member core staff within the civ/mil cell (also 
referred to as the \"Key Nucleus). 
 
----------------- 
Operations Center 
----------------- 
 
6. (C)  On paper, the Operations Center is designed to exist 
only as an empty room with 60 workstations, and required 
communications equipment -- until it is activated by a 
consensus decision of the European Council.  The FR-UK-GE 
paper added a requirement that the EU Military Committee must 
conduct a risk assessment and make a finding that the 
operations center is capable of running the operation -- 
including the risk of escalation.  This provision was 
conceived as one of several institutional \"locks\" that will 
provide political 
limits on the scope and ambition of the Ops Center. This is 
in addition to the other stipulations on size and location. 
The latest draft paper dated November 10, prepared by 
Solana\'s Council Secretariat staff dropped the requirement 
for military advice, calling only for an \"assessment\" that 
the Ops Center is capable of managing the risks associated 
with the Operation. If this language remains as currently 
drafted, it could represent a weakening of the political 
\"locks\" put in place in previous versions. 
 
---------------------- 
Looking at the Numbers 
---------------------- 
 
7. (C)  The proposed numbers of personnel designated for the 
civ/mil planning cell and the Operations Center (detailed ref 
a) are in keeping with previous estimates, and do not 
represent a departure from long-standing figures.  The 
Operations Center is designed to be able to support a command 
element in line with the \"scale\" of Operation Artemis, in 
which there were seventy Headquarters staff. The Council 
Secretariat\'s November 10 paper calls for a total of 29 
 
SIPDIS 
people within the civ/mil planning cell. Of those, 17 would 
constitute the Strategic Planning Branch, 4 represent the 
Command Group -- including the Commander and his personal 
staff, and 8 (including 4 housekeepers) would form the 
permanent core staff of the Operations Center in the event it 
is activated. The Strategic Planning Branch is to be 
operational as of January 1, 2005, while the Key Nucleus 
staff would become operational in January 2006. 
 
8. (C) It is important to note, however, that the personnel 
to staff an operation of this size is not actually assigned 
to the Operations Center; to staff an HQ of the size of 
Artemis would require transferring military and staff members 
who currently have other responsibilities in Brussels, as 
well as augmentation by experts from member states.  The 
FR-UK-GE paper proposed staffing limits: quantitative 
limitations are not specified in any of the relevant European 
Council mandates to Solana. Despite some efforts to limit its 
scope, political desire within the EU to move ahead with this 
project seems to be unequivocal. 
 
-------------------- 
Defining the Mission 
-------------------- 
 
9. (C)  US and Allied forces currently conduct planning for 
crisis management and military intervention at a combined 
force level, and joint force level (inter-service  According 
to our contacts, the EU civ/mil planning cell and Ops Center 
would be expected to plan and operate on the equivalent of 
the US inter-agency level, bringing together the full range 
of EU \"instruments\" including Commission experts on law 
enforcement, development and 
reconstruction, and civil administration, in conjunction with 
the required military component to ensure a secure 
environment in which the other instruments can be 
successfully deployed. 
 
--------------------- 
Channeling the Effort 
--------------------- 
 
10. (C)  EU planners and political leaders of some member 
states argue the civ/mil planning cell will provide a 
capability that has not previously existed by better 
integrating military tasks with the law enforcement and civil 
administration challenges that are part and parcel of most 
regional crises.  They frequently speak to us as if this is a 
new capacity that is lacking elsewhere in the world.  They 
also argue that it goes beyond the capabilities embodied in 
NATO\'s crisis management planning, or our own ability to 
integrate 
military, assistance, and political elements in a 
comprehensive approach to a crisis situation.  Those who 
belong to this school of thought believe in the need for the 
Operations Center, where all the EU \"instruments\" brought to 
bear in a crisis management operation can be coordinated.  In 
many ways, the EU focus is in keeping with the vision 
expressed by NATO\'s Strategic Commanders in an August 2004 
paper on the military challenges facing the Alliance over the 
next fifteen years, and offers areas for cooperation rather 
than duplication. 
 
11. (C)  Comment: Solana\'s strategic goal, supported by EU 
heads of government, is to carve out a more robust role for 
the EU on the world stage.  To do so, he believes this must 
include the ability to play a larger role in regional 
conflicts -- a role that includes not only political 
declarations and assistance programs, but also an integrated 
military component in support of the UN Security Council.  An 
EU better capable of handling the full range of challenges 
arising from failed and failing states is in our interest 
also, and 
should be encouraged.  In moving ahead, however, Solana is 
walking a tightrope between countries (led by France) that 
seek capabilities for the EU that would parallel those of 
NATO, and those countries (led by the UK, but cheered on by 
many of our other allies) which still see NATO as the primary 
structure for \"hard security.\"  Sustained US engagement with 
the EU on the evolution of the civ/mil planning cell and 
Operations Center can be important in helping ensure that the 
 NATO-EU relationship remains viable for all future 
operations. To the extent that we can encourage progress in 
EU \"inter-agency\" planning, we can help 
ensure that the civ/mil cell is populated with Justice and 
Home Affairs (JHA) experts, development and reconstruction 
planners, and civil administrators rather than military 
headquarters staff. Such an approach would emphasize the EUs 
capabilities in \"soft power\" projection, provide a multiplier 
for US efforts in the same direction, reinforce the role of 
NATO (SHAPE) planning for military missions, and forestall 
development of an EU Operational Headquarters. 
 
McKinley 
"
"23051","11/19/2004 14:43","04BRUSSELS4938","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04RANGOON1421","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004938 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/ANE - KGELNER AND EAP/BCLTV; BANGKOK FOR 
REFCORD - MHONNOLD; USAID/RDM ASIA; GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2014 
TAGS: PREF, PREL, EAID, BM, PHUMPGOV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ECHO AWAITING GREEN LIGHT FOR BURMA PRESENCE 
 
REF: RANGOON 1421 
 
Classified By: PRMOFF MARC J. MEZNAR.  REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D). 
 
1.  (SBU) Following up on reftel, PRMOff asked the European 
Commission Humanitarian Aid Office (ECHO) about its plans to 
open an office in Burma.  Head of Unit for Asia/Americas Ruth 
Albuquerque confirmed the report and said that there was a 
need for in-country presence; she noted that about half of 
ECHO\'s aid goes to help ethnic minorities and other 
vulnerable people within Burma proper.  Albuquerque mentioned 
that aid to Burmese is one of ECHO\'s fastest growing programs 
which has increased in size from about 2 million euros four 
years ago to about 12 million euros today.  ECHO-funded 
programs help combat malnutrition in the northern Rakhine 
state; ECHO also funds MSF to combat malaria and other 
diseases among ethnic minority communities in the 
northeastern part of the country and elsewhere by supplying 
medicines and improving water/sanitation systems. 
 
2. (U) The other half of ECHO funds assist Burmese refugees 
in camps along the Thai border.  Support to Burmese refugees 
in Bangladesh comes from  European Commission\'s (EC) Foreign 
Affairs (RELEX) \"aid to uprooted people\" funding line. 
 
3. (C) Albuquerque reported that the EC and Government of 
Myanmar had exchanged diplomatic notes regarding the proposed 
office, but that final approval by the Burmese was derailed 
by the recent, abrupt change in leadership.  She said the new 
people are completely unfamiliar with the humanitarian issues 
and that it may take a while before ECHO gets a green light 
to open the office.  In the meantime, ECHO has already 
undertaken a procedural mission to scope out logistics, 
including an office site.  According to ECHO Head of Unit for 
Multilateral Issues Michel Arrion, ECHO flatly turned down an 
invitation by the UK Embassy to be co-located with the 
British.  (Note.  UK Ambassador Vicky Bowman formerly was 
part of RELEX Commissioner Patten\'s cabinet in Brussels. End 
Note.)  He said it was important for ECHO\'s work to be viewed 
as clearly distinct from the political activities of the EU 
Member States. 
 
4. (C) Albuquerque said that RELEX is very supportive of 
ECHO\'s plan to open an office and had even considered having 
one of its own working out of the facility if opened.  This 
idea was rejected by ECHO, which is keen to underscore its 
neutrality and lack of ties to political considerations. 
Because of the EU Common Position on Burma, RELEX could not 
open its own office in Rangoon at this point, according to 
Albuquerque.  Nevertheless, the EC as a whole could benefit 
from having \"eyes and ears\" in Burma proper.  If ECHO opens 
an office it would be staffed with one international officer, 
one local technical expert and two administrative support 
persons.  The office would depend on ECHO/Bangkok for 
administrative support but would report directly to Brussels 
for policy and program decisions. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23064","11/19/2004 15:41","04BRUSSELS4944","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE244333|04USEUBRUSSELS4936","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, MASS, MARR, IR, CH, BO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: COMMISSION AND COUNCIL RESPONSES ON NOV. 22 GAERC 
DEMARCHE 
 
REF: A. STATE 244333 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 4936 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 B/D 
 
1. (U) PolOffs have delivered Ref A points to contacts in the 
Council Secretariat and the personal staff of new External 
Relations Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner (who will be attending 
her first GAERC as a Commissioner on Monday). 
 
MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS 
------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Margarita Comamala of the Council Secretariat said the 
EU looked forward to continued engagement with the US on 
this, but there is a strengthening view of Member States in 
the Council that the US and EU should be talking more about 
the details of what a final status solution could look like. 
She noted that the Dutch Presidency had raised this point in 
the November 16 Middle East (COMEP) troika meeting, but had 
received a cool reaction from NEA DAS Liz Dibble (REF B). 
Dutch contacts have told us Conclusions are nearly agreed, 
after lengthy debates over the precise tone, and should call 
for immediate action in three main areas: support for 
presidential elections preparations; efforts to improve the 
security situation; and financial support for the Palestinian 
Administration.  At the Commission, Ferrero-Waldner\'s staff 
only commented that they were not familiar with the IFC 
Facility. 
 
CHINA 
----- 
 
3.  (C) The Commission commented that the China agenda item 
(including preparations for the December 8 EU-China Summit) 
had been moved to the GAERC\'s restricted lunch discussion. 
Ferrero-Waldner\'s staff understood this was done because 
there is little chance the EU could reach agreement on 
November 26 to take a decision on the arms embargo issue. 
Dutch Presidency diplomats tell us they expect this 
discussion to \"take the temperature\" rather than achieve 
formal agreement. 
 
BELARUS 
------- 
 
4. (C) Ferrero-Waldner\'s staffer said the Commissioner would 
support existing EU measures such as travel restrictions 
against Belarus, but that Ferrero-Waldner would make a strong 
push that any measures considered should be carefully 
targeted not to harm the general public, and in fact could be 
accompanied by measures to \"send a message to the people that 
they are not forgotten.\"  The Council\'s Belarus desk told us 
the GAERC Conclusions would include a reference to visa bans 
on two groups of people: human rights violators, and 
individuals engaged in electoral abuse.  But the EU might not 
have agreement on specific names to add to the list. 
 
ESDP 
---- 
 
5. (SBU) Lengthy Conclusions have been agreed (as is 
traditionally the case for the \"jumbo\" GAERC each Presidency 
that includes DefMins).  From the Commission\'s point of view, 
the most notable aspect is that Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 
plans to exercise a privilege they understand Patten never 
did, and attend the DefMins separate meeting for at least a 
short period of time to emphasize to DefMins that the 
Commission is also interested in ESDP developments.  At the 
EU\'s Military Capabilities Commitment Conference on 22 
November on the margins of the GAERC, member states are 
expected to announce their intended commitments to 
Battlegroups.  USEU anticipates enough national offers for 
the EU to form at least nine national and multinational 
battlegroups. 
 
IRAN AND OTHER ISSUES 
--------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Council sources have confirmed that Iran will be on 
the agenda, and the GAERC will likely issue Conclusions 
welcoming the EU-3 agreement, and calling on Iran to fulfill 
its obligations.  They did not expect that either Cyprus or 
Turkey would see much discussion on November 26, and Balkans 
have been  dropped from the agenda (although the side meeting 
of the EU-Western Balkans Forum will still take place). 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23071","11/19/2004 16:28","04BRUSSELS4949","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004949 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS EPA (STEPHEN JOHNSON, AUER, HAZEN) 
STATE FOR OES/PCI, EB/ESC/IEC, EUR/ERA, E, G 
WHITE HOUSE FOR OSTP, CEQ 
COMMERCE FOR ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT 
PARIS FOR NSF (SUSKIN) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, SENV, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S MEETING WITH ENVIRONMENT COMMISSIONER 
WALLSTROM 
 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Incoming European Commission Vice Present 
(and Former Environment Commissioner) Margot Wallstrom told 
Ambassador Schnabel November 15 that the main focus of her 
new vice presidential position in charge of the EU\'s 
intra-Europe and global communications strategy will be 
improving Commission ties to the Council, European 
Parliament, and national parliaments.  She noted with 
interest the President\'s recent statements on reaching out to 
Europe, and suggested that the USG could have the most impact 
by taking steps to project a positive environmental agenda, 
create forward movement in the Middle East peace process, and 
tackle the number of trade disputes that color the otherwise 
extremely positive overall economic relationship.  (Notably, 
she did not suggest a need for European actions.)  The two 
also discussed an agreed outcome on methyl bromide in the 
upcoming Prague meetings, and REACH.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Ambassador met November 15 with Commissioner Margot 
Wallstrom amid packing boxes, as she prepared to move from 
her current position as Commissioner for Environment to her 
future job as Commission Vice President in Charge of 
Communications and Institutional Issues. 
 
On Her New Role 
--------------- 
 
3. (C) Wallstrom noted that the details of her new portfolio 
still need to be fully developed.  Her main responsibilities 
will concentrate on improving communications and 
institutional relations with the European Parliament, the 
Council, and national parliaments.  She will also lead 
Commission efforts to reach out to civil society throughout 
Europe, and to put a human face on EU activities for average 
European citizens.  Wallstrom said this summer\'s European 
Parliament elections had been a wake-up call for the 
Commission that they needed to do more to counter growing 
European hostility toward politics and politicians on the 
continent, and especially toward the overall European project. 
 
4. (C) The constitutional treaty will be one of her first 
priority tasks.  Wallstrom said it would \"inappropriate\" for 
the Commission to play a major role in pressing for 
ratification in the 25 Member States, especially not in 
countries where referenda will be held.  Instead, she 
suggested that national governments must take the lead, since 
they know local circumstances best.  For instance, she said 
in her native Sweden, \"federalism is an f-word.\" For Germans, 
in contrast, federalism is the constitutional framework. 
The Commission\'s role, she said, will be to prepare 
information on the constitution, get it out in all languages, 
and perhaps also to provide informed speakers who can 
contribute to national discussions of the treaty.   Wallstrom 
expected that the referendum in the UK will prove the most 
difficult, but suggested that success was hardly assured in 
France or other countries as well. 
 
US-EU Relations 
--------------- 
 
5. (C) Wallstrom welcomed the Ambassador\'s presentation on 
President Bush\'s commitment to reach out to Europe.  She 
urged in particular that the President signal his commitment 
to seek multilateral solutions to global problems.  Europe 
does not expect major policy reversals in areas like the 
environment, she said.  Instead, it will be important to look 
for areas where we can cooperate, such as research and 
development, or some of the international conventions under 
consideration.  As a follow-on to Johannesburg, Europe would 
also welcome more active US involvement in sustainable 
development efforts within the OECD, she suggested. 
 
6. (C) Wallstrom suggested three major areas where US 
engagement can help change prevailing attitudes in Europe: 
 
-- Projecting a positive environmental agenda by indicating 
US commitment to progress on sustainable development (even if 
Washington remains reluctant to join Kyoto); 
-- Creating forward movement in the Middle East peace 
process; and 
-- Tackling the number of trade disputes that color the 
extremely positive overall economic relationship across the 
Atlantic. 
 
On the New Commission 
--------------------- 
 
7. (C) Wallstrom said she did not expect major policy changes 
to come from the new Barroso Commission.  The Commission is 
like an oil tanker, she suggested: difficult to change 
direction, and slow to maneuver.  Still, there was no doubt 
that the Barroso Commission was slightly more \"liberal\" (in 
the European sense) in its economic outlook.  But she 
emphasized that it must be clear that the Commission 
represents all of Europe, and cannot be a reflection of only 
one major political stream of thought in Europe. 
 
8. (C) One major policy challenge for the next Commission 
will be integrating the EU\'s new role in security and foreign 
policy, especially by preparing the way for the shift toward 
a new Foreign Minister for Europe and an integrated \"external 
action service.\"  The second key priority will remain the 
Lisbon agenda of competitiveness and growth. 
 
Environment, Methyl Bromide, REACH 
---------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) Wallstrom repeatedly hit on the theme that the US and 
EU need to find ways to work together cooperatively on all, 
and especially environmental, issues.  She wants a \"fresh 
start\", she said, and believes that she sees in Europe a \"new 
climate of cooperation\" that will allow a greater readiness 
to listen to what the US has to say.  In that context, she 
offered help in our reaching a compromise solution on a 
methyl bromide critical use exemption (CUE) at the Montreal 
Protocol meeting in Prague next week.  She said that we 
should be able to find a reasonable solution to US needs and 
EU desire to reduce CUEs.  She will encourage Environment 
Director General Catherine Day to telephone US counterparts 
ahead of Prague in order to try to develop a compromise.  (We 
recommended that Day phone James Connaugton in the Council on 
Environmental Quality.)  Wallstrom also is ready to support 
the idea of developing a High Level Environmental Dialog. 
She commented that the EU\'s new chemicals regime, REACH, is 
likely to go into force as planned in 2007 but with a 
flexible approach to chemicals testing and enforcement. 
Wallstrom\'s comments were positive and cooperative, but, as 
she transitions to her new job as vice president, she said 
that she preferred to leave detailed discussion of REACH and 
other issues to her successor as Environment Commissioners. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"23072","11/19/2004 16:32","04BRUSSELS4951","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE244290","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 004951 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/UMB AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2009 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, BL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ON BELARUS PARTICIPATION AT CEI SUMMIT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 244290 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C)  We presented reftel demarche to Commission and 
Council officials on 17 November, asking their support in 
pressing the Government of Slovenia to rescind its invitation 
of a senior Belarus government official to the November 24-26 
Central European Initiative (CEI) Summit hosted by Slovenia. 
The EU is unlikely to put additional pressure on the 
Slovenes.  The Council explained that it approached Slovenia 
two months ago with a concern that Lukashenko might attend, 
and urged the Slovenes to keep attendance below the level of 
Prime Minister.  Slovenia therefore acted according to the EU 
guidance it had received. 
 
2.  (C)  The Commission noted that Slovenia\'s position was in 
line with EU policy to limit bilateral contacts, but not 
multilateral contacts.  Additionally, according to the 
Council Belarus desk, a potential EU visa ban on the minister 
in question would not apply to the CEI summit because it is a 
multilateral event.  Under the EU\'s policy, the Slovenes may 
not bilaterally meet with the Belarussian minister on the 
margins of the conference.  In response to our point about 
Greece and the EU\'s successful exclusion of Sports minister 
Sivakov from the Olympics, our Commission contact replied 
that this exclusion was based on Sivakov\'s direct implication 
in disappearances as related in the COE\'s Pourgerides report. 
 
3.  (C)  We pressed for the EU to reconsider its policy on 
multilateral events or, at least, consider making an 
exception to its policy at this event to send strong signals 
of disapproval and honor the spirit of the EU\'s \"selective 
engagement\" policy toward Belarus.  We argued that inviting a 
Belarusian official at the ministerial lever shortly after 
the elections and referendum on the elimination of term 
limits on the presidency, which fell significantly short of 
the OSCE\'s standards for democratic elections, could 
undermine the EU effort to publicly support democracy and 
human rights in Belarus.  The Commission official argued that 
the EU is unlikely to expand its \"selective engagement\" 
policy to multilateral events because EU Member States that 
neighbor Belarus, such as Poland and Lithuania, maintain they 
must have a means of engaging Belarus. 
 
4. (C)  The EU is meeting next Monday to prepare Conclusions 
on Belarus for the EU Foreign Ministers\' GAERC on November 
22-23.  They are preparing to impose visa bans on officials 
responsible for electoral fraud and violation of human rights 
of demonstrators, but do not have a list of names.  The 
Council asked if we had a list of names we were considering, 
which we could share so we act on the same individuals.  We 
encouraged the EU to include consideration of the CEI issue 
in Monday\'s discussion.  However, it appears extremely 
unlikely the EU will approach Slovenia on this issue. 
McKinley 
"
"23119","11/22/2004 10:41","04BRUSSELS4959","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04USEUBRUSSELS4739|04USEUBRUSSELS4789","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 004959 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: THE BARROSO COMMISSION: WHAT CAN WE EXPECT? 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 4739 
     B. USEU BRUSSELS 4789 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) The new Barroso European Commission, having finally 
emerged from a rough confirmation process, takes office 
November 1.  Barroso intends to project a more hands-on, 
activist approach focused on economic reform under the 
\"Lisbon Agenda,\" but we expect a great deal of policy 
continuity.  Greater integration and a growth-oriented agenda 
for the EU are goals the U.S. has in interest in, and this is 
indeed a more laissez-faire Commission on economics.  But its 
impact is likely to be fewer damaging new proposals rather 
than changes in existing policies.  On foreign policy, 
however, we expect few changes in priorities. 
Ferrero-Waldner is no Chris Patten, and Solana (who will 
increasingly assume a role as the EU\'s Foreign Minister) has 
made clear the Middle East is his priority.  Barroso\'s 
transatlantic perspective is likely to be helpful on tone, 
but less so on substance, as he looks over his shoulder at 
certain Member State governments.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU) Commission President Barroso succeeded in getting a 
strong majority of the European Parliament to approve his 
Commission team, with two of his original nominees replaced, 
and one pair of portfolios swapped (REF A).  Still, the 
last-minute controversy over the French Commissioner\'s 
undisclosed prior conviction for embezzlement, coupled with 
the EP\'s previous rejection, means Barroso is starting from a 
much deeper hole than he anticipated.  Nonetheless, we can 
now draw some conclusions from the lengthy testimony by each 
Commissioner-delegate before the EP over the past month and a 
half. (Detailed recaps of the most important Commissioners\' 
testimony will be provided septel.) 
 
POLICY CONTINUITY, RATHER THAN INNOVATION, TO DOMINATE 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
3. (SBU) A change in Commission is not analogous to a change 
in government in a Member State.  No party or ideology has 
been voted into or out of power.  Thus, policy continuity, 
rather than change or innovation, is the likeliest outcome. 
In a conversation with Ambassador recently, one long-serving 
Commissioner likened policy change in the Commission to the 
difficulties of turning an oil tanker. 
 
4. (SBU) In addition, the personnel changes brought on by a 
new Commission are shallow.  Only the Commissioners and their 
personal cabinets change, and a considerable proportion of 
both groups are familiar faces, just in new jobs.  Within the 
Directorates-General of the Commission, the supporting 
bureaucracy remains the same.  The impact of this was 
particularly evident in the questionnaire responses provided 
by the Commissioners-designate in advance of their hearings. 
Without exception, it was clear these texts were drafted by 
the relevant staff and at most lightly edited by the 
Commissioners themselves.  We are not aware of any instance 
where an incoming Commissioner challenged current Commission 
policy. 
 
5. (SBU) Adherence to existing policy was also the 
predominant theme in the Commissioners\' oral testimony.  This 
was understandable, as staying on the well-worn path proved 
to be the best strategy for avoiding controversy with MEPs, a 
lesson underlined when Justice, Freedom and Security 
(formerly Justice and Home Affairs) nominee Rocco Buttiglione 
spoke freely about his personal views about homosexuality and 
the role of women, even as he stressed that he would not 
change existing Commission and EU policies on 
non-discrimination protections.  The firestorm that erupted 
eventually led to Buttiglione\'s replacement by former Italian 
FM Franco Frattini 
 
6. (SBU) That said, the Barroso Commission does include some 
significant personnel changes.  Ten of the Commissioners, 
including Barroso himself, will be brand new to Brussels. 
And 11 returning Commissioners, primarily from the new Member 
States, served less than a year under Prodi.  The ten 
Commissioners from the new Member States will begin 
exercising real authority for the first time.  There are 
other changes as well.  Seven of the new Commissioners are 
women, the highest number ever.  And nearly a third of the 
Commissioners hail from Europe\'s \"liberal\" parties (meaning 
parties generally skeptical about heavy state involvement in 
economic affairs), another high-water mark. 
 
AMONG PRIORITIES: AN INCREASED FOCUS ON THE LISBON AGENDA 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
7. (C) The out-going Prodi Commission had a handful of \"top 
priorities\" -- enlargement, introduction of the Euro, 
involvement in institutional and treaty reform for the EU, 
the Tampere agenda for justice and home affairs, and the 
Lisbon Agenda to promote economic reform and competitiveness. 
 As Prodi himself has recognized, it is on the last of these 
priorities that his Commission has most clearly failed to 
deliver.  Barroso, however, has said his Commission will have 
one priority dominating all others: the Lisbon Agenda. (His 
other big push will be an internal effort to improve 
communications with European publics on what the EU is and 
does.) 
 
8. (C) In this context, there is some chance Barroso\'s 
Commissioners responsible for economic issues will take a 
somewhat more \"liberal\" (i.e., market-oriented)  approach. 
For example, Gunther Verheugen (Enterprise and Industry), 
Stavros Dimas (Environment), and Markos Kyprianou (Health and 
Consumer Protection) all made reference to the need to take 
industry concerns into account when considering EU 
legislation on chemicals, with Verheugen and Kyprianou noting 
that the legislation should avoid harming Europe\'s 
competitiveness.  In the competition field, 
Commissioner-designate Nellie Kroes hinted at more focus on 
the structure of the market, and less on the size of the 
firms concerned, saying distortions to competition have 
nothing to do with the size of firms involved but with 
whether a monopoly exists.  Even Taxation Commissioner Lazslo 
Kovacs, who faced opposition from the center-right EP parties 
because of his Communist past, said he did not believe tax 
competition per se was a bad thing.  He only opposed 
\"harmful\" tax competition, but said he did not believe there 
was any evidence of a \"race to the bottom\" on corporate tax 
rates in the EU. 
 
9. (C) Despite these slight shifts in emphasis on the new 
Commission  in the areas of economic policy and regulation, 
we still expect a strong sense of policy continuity.  From 
Peter Mandelson\'s testimony on trade policy to Dimas on GMOs 
to Jacques Barrot on transport, the common thread has been 
support for policies and legislative proposals put forward by 
their predecessors.  In areas of direct relevance to 
transatlantic relations such as the Passenger Name Record 
agreement or US-EU aviation negotiations, 
Commissioners-designate Frattini and Barrot, respectively, 
supported current Commission positions (although Frattini 
hedged slightly by saying he wanted to see how the European 
Court of Justice would rule on the PNR issue).  Several 
Commissioners, including Kyprianou and Charlie McCreevy 
(Internal Market), also stressed the need for the Commission 
to focus more on implementation and enforcement of existing 
regulation, rather than introducing new legislation.  Where 
the \"liberal bias\" of the new Commission, if such exists, 
might make itself visible will be in reduced willingness to 
propose new legislation injecting EU-wide regulation into the 
market (such as the outgoing Commission\'s efforts on working 
time, temporary workers, or insurance discrimination). 
 
EXTERNAL RELATIONS:  EVEN MORE OF THE SAME 
------------------------------------------ 
 
10. (C) While Commission economic policy may see a limited 
injection of new thinking, we forecast that Commission 
attitudes on external relations policy will be more familiar. 
 Olli Rehn (Enlargement) indicated the Commission will remain 
institutionally committed to the enlargement process, 
although perhaps even more cautious than his predecessor, 
Gunther Verheugen, about the political constraints within theEU facing the next 
tranches of applicants: Romania, Bulgaria, 
Turkey and the Balkans.  Benita Ferrero-Waldner (External 
Relations and Neighborhood Policy) and Louis Michel 
(Development and Humanitarian Aid) both were supportive of 
the EU\'s traditional tendency to pursue engagement as opposed 
to isolation of problem countries, which is not surprising as 
both have served as advocates for this approach repeatedly 
during their days as FMs in the EU\'s Council of Ministers. 
There may be slight shifts in emphasis from their 
predecessors, but within the context of existing policy. 
Michel, for example, has a strong interest in Africa. 
Ferrero-Waldner, for her part, can be expected to pay more 
attention to the EU\'s \"Neighborhood\" in both North Africa and 
the former Soviet Union, in part because she no longer needs 
to follow the Balkans, after that region\'s transfer to the 
Enlargement portfolio. 
 
11. (C) The replacement of Buttiglione with Frattini has 
probably made continuity in this policy area also more 
likely.  Frattini\'s testimony before the EP hewed closely to 
the existing Commission line, and was perhaps more skeptical 
than even outgoing JHA Commissioner Vitorino about the value 
of considering potentially controversial initiatives such as 
off-shore reception centers for illegal immigrants and 
refugees.  In other areas, a new multi-annual program for JHA 
has just been adopted (REF B), and it is certain to set the 
terms for the work of the Commission in this field. 
 
CONCLUSION 
---------- 
 
12. (C) Our sense is that Barroso and his Commission have 
emerged from their battle with the EP weakened, but not 
crippled.  As they assume office on November 22, they face 
the challenge of whether they should now act with particular 
care and attention to the EP (which the EP would love to 
see), or whether they need to assert themselves by using the 
right of initiative that the EU Treaties gives only to the 
Commission.  It will take some time to see if any trend 
emerges.   Those such as Trade Commissioner Mandelson or 
Enlargement Commissioner Rehn, who sailed easily through the 
confirmation process, are among those most likely to feel 
they have a mandate to act.  For others, particularly 
Competition Commissioner Kroes or Taxation Commissioner 
Kovacs, the instinct may be to move more cautiously. 
 
13. (C) New priorities and initiatives within the Barroso 
Commission may develop as Commissioners settle into their new 
roles, and as events provoke them.  But all EU institutions 
(Commission, Council and Parliament) are likely to have a 
very inward focus in the coming years, as the EU adjusts to 
having ten new Members, debates its next five-year budget, 
and struggles to ratify its Constitutional Treaty.  Over 
time, the new Commission team could prove slightly more 
\"liberal\" economically and slightly less \"Euro-federalist\" 
politically than its predecessor, with those shifts in tone 
perhaps most evident in the change at the very top from Prodi 
to Barroso.  Barroso has so far appeared a self-confident 
operator, and his keen focus on the Lisbon Agenda and 
\"Communicating Europe\" may succeed in breathing real life 
into those two, somewhat moribund, policies.  But this is not 
a new group brimming with new ideas or any revolutionary 
vision for the Commission or the EU as a whole.  They will 
also have to be sensitive to how their actions are perceived 
in the run-up to referenda in many Member States on the 
Constitutional Treaty.  Outside Barroso\'s determination to 
emphasize the Lisbon Agenda, which could produce a new and 
improved economic dynamic inside the EU, changes in policy 
will be nuanced at most, and in the end, from the U.S. 
perspective, even imperceptible.  On balance, however, this 
continuity may not be a bad thing. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23120","11/22/2004 10:42","04BRUSSELS4960","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04ANKARA6402|04BRUSSELS4843|04VALLETTA1048","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004960 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR P (DEHART) EUR (PDAS BRADTKE), EUR/ERA 
(VOLKER/BISHARAT), EUR/RPM (HOVENIER), EUR/SE 
(SILLIMAN/MARCIEL) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/21/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MT, TU, CY, EUN, NATO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: MALTA SEEKS US SUPPORT FOR PLAN TO RESOLVE NATO/EU 
PARTICIPATION ISSUE 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 4843 B. ANKARA 6402 C. VALLETTA 1048 
 
     D. BRUSSELS 4082 E. NICOSIA 1974 F. 
     BISHARAT/BRENNER EMAIL NOVEMBER 16. 
 
Classified By: USEU Political Military Officer Jeremy 
Brenner for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C)  Summary.  Malta\'s Ambassador to the EU was 
disappointed by the perceived lack of U.S. support for his 
proposal to resolve the issue of Malta\'s participation in 
NATO-EU strategic discussions.  Turkish representatives to 
the EU have expressed a desire to see a resolution to the 
issue.  End summary. 
 
2. (C)  In discussions with Martin Xuereb, Foreign and 
Security Policy Attache at the Maltese Mission to the 
European Union, and subsequently with Malta\'s PermRep to the 
EU, we advised (per ref f) the need for the Maltese to talk 
directly with the NATO International Staff legal experts 
about their plan for resolving the issue of Malta\'s 
participation in NATO/EU strategic discussions and to stay in 
touch with USNATO.  Xuereb told us that the decision has now 
been made in Valletta to pursue a course of action under 
which they would argue that documents signed in 1994 at the 
time of Malta\'s entry into PfP remain valid, despite their 
withdrawal from active participation in the program in 1996. 
Given the complexity of the issue, and accompanying broader 
political problems, we cautioned Xuereb not to expect 
significant movement before the end of the year. 
 
3. (C)  Xuereb noted that he had already made contact with 
Ms. Burcu San, Deputy Director for EAPC in the NATO Secretary 
General\'s Private Office.  Ms. San was reportedly unfamiliar 
with the Maltese plan, but offered to have the Legal Advisor 
and a representative from the Political section (we 
understand that this will be D/ASYG Robert Simmons) present 
at their as-yet-unscheduled meeting. 
 
--------------------------- 
DISAPPOINTMENT WITH MESSAGE 
--------------------------- 
 
4. (C) We were called later in the afternoon by the Maltese 
Legal Attache, asking us to attend another meeting with 
Malta\'s EU Ambassador Cachia-Caruana. The Ambassador said he 
was \"very unhappy\" with the U.S. position, characterizing it 
as showing a lack of support.  He fears that once the 
decision on Turkish accession is made, there will be little 
interest in resolving Malta\'s participation issue.  He 
reiterated his view that a solution to Malta\'s NATO-EU 
participation issue would simplify -- not complicate -- the 
Turkey/Cyprus problem in the weeks before the December 17 EU 
decision on accession.  According to Ambassador 
Cachia-Caruana, those who argue that a resolution to the 
Maltese problem would harm Turkey\'s EU prospects, \"don\'t 
understand what\'s going on within the EU.\" 
 
------------------- 
FINDING A \"SPONSOR\" 
------------------- 
 
5. (C) Ambassador Cachia-Caruana said that dealing directly 
with the International Staff without a \"sponsor\" or a show of 
political support could result in Malta\'s proposal getting 
bogged down or lost within the I.S. bureaucracy.  He argued 
that if the political will were present, Malta\'s proposal 
could pass through the internal legal review very quickly. 
He said he has approached Javier Solana informally, and has 
suggested that he might go directly to NATO Secretary-General 
De Hoop Scheffer for support. 
 
--------------- 
TURKEY ON BOARD 
--------------- 
 
6. (C) Cachia-Caruana also reported that the Turkish EU 
Ambassador had visited him on the morning of November 17 to 
express Ankara\'s support for a resolution to the Malta 
problem.  Turkey, according to the Maltese Ambassador, was 
\"fully available\" for any solution.  We spoke subsequently 
with counterparts in the Turkish Mission to the EU, who 
confirmed that Turkey sees a resolution of the Maltese issue 
as a positive step.  According to our contacts, Turkey sees 
this as a way to solidify Malta\'s positive vote for 
accession, and demonstrate flexibility and a positive will to 
other Member States.  Similar views are reported from Ankara 
(ref B).  The Turkish Foreign Minister will visit Malta on 
November 26, and we are told by Turkish EU Mission 
representatives that the Minister will pledge Turkish support 
for a resolution of the problem. 
 
------------ 
THE TIMELINE 
------------ 
 
7. (C) Ambassador Cachia-Caruana will travel to Valletta on 
November 25.  He made clear to us that, in the absence of 
support for Malta\'s course of action, he will recommend that 
the idea be shelved.  The Maltese Prime Minister was to have 
raised this issue in discussions November 18 in Valletta with 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Meyers. 
 
---------- 
THE STAKES 
---------- 
 
8. (C) COMMENT:  Until we can make progress on Malta/Cyprus 
participation, the NATO-EU dialogue will remain blocked. 
While we recognize that any possible solution to this impasse 
will likely have to await the EU\'s fateful December 17 
decision on Turkey, there is nothing to suggest that a \"yes\" 
vote will uncork the bottle for progress on EU-NATO 
cooperation.  The different EU and NATO decisions remain 
incompatible, and will still be in force.  Malta is proposing 
a procedural bandaid that meets its own political 
constraints.  Solving Malta\'s problem alone will do nothing 
unless a path for Cypriot participation opens as well. 
 
McKinley 
"
"23234","11/24/2004 10:08","04BRUSSELS4994","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04THEHAGUE2924","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004994 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PTER, AF, PK, IN, CE, NP, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: A/S ROCCA DISCUSSES SOUTH ASIA WITH EU 
 
REF: THE HAGUE 2924 
 
Classified By: USEU PolOff Sarah Groen for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY.  On November 12 and 15 in Brussels, SA A/S 
Christina Rocca met with DG Robert Cooper of the European 
Council and DDG Herve Jouanjean of the European Commission to 
discuss the current situation and upcoming challenges in 
South Asia.  A/S Rocca raised concerns about deteriorating 
political conditions in Bangladesh and the burgeoning 
narcotics problem in Afghanistan.  EU officials provided a 
readout of the recent EU-India summit, and described what the 
new \"strategic partnership\" between the EU and India may look 
like.  They discussed how European Commission (EC) assistance 
could be given a \"clearer political foundation\" to improve 
conditions in Bangladesh, requested that the US continue to 
encourage the Nepalese government and military to support 
human rights, and asked when the U.S. would be ready for 
another meeting of the Sri Lanka Donors Co-Chair Group.  The 
Council\'s Cooper said he would look into having Nepal\'s 
Maoists placed under EU terrorist financing sanctions.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
BANGLADESH 
========== 
 
2.  (C) Conveying the seriousness of snowballing problems in 
Bangladesh was one of A/S Rocca\'s most urgent messages.  She 
pointed out that the government of Bangladesh is nearly at a 
standstill, that violence is rising between political 
parties, and that extremist groups are gaining influence. 
The political problems will be exacerbated by job losses due 
to the expiration of the Multi-Fiber Agreement in January. 
Corruption at Bangladesh ports is a major area of concern. 
The USG was also concerned about the lack of transparency in 
the Bangladeshi investigation into the August 21 
assassination attempt on Sheikh Hasina. 
 
3.  (C) Commission DDG Jouanjean, who had recently returned 
from a trip to Bangladesh, expressed deep concern about the 
situation there.  He pointed out that general instability and 
increasing fundamentalism could pose major security problems 
for both the EU and the US.  He discussed how EC assistance 
to Bangladesh could be used more effectively to address the 
political situation there, perhaps by tying assistance to 
benchmarks.  Council interlocutors made the same point, 
saying EC assistance to Bangladesh could be given \"a clearer 
political foundation,\" with more attention to which types of 
groups receive EU funds.  Jouanjean also suggested the EU and 
U.S. get together with World Bank and others to explore how 
to deal with the situation in Bangladesh and work out a 
common strategy.  Rocca agreed such a meeting could be useful. 
 
AFGHANISTAN 
=========== 
 
4.  (C) A/S Rocca pointed out that another crisis requiring 
immediate attention is the increasing drug cultivation in 
Afghanistan.  She told the EU officials that levels of poppy 
growth next year will likely be significantly higher than 
previously forecast, and that if action is not taken, 
Afghanistan risks deteriorating into a narco-state along the 
lines of Colombia.  A multi-year plan for drug eradication 
and alternative livelihoods, with broad support from 
international donors, would be required to stave off the 
crisis.  Such a program would need an Afghan face in order to 
be successful. 
 
5.  (C) Cooper agreed on the seriousness of the problem, but 
expressed a slightly different perspective, saying \"tons of 
money\" has already been spent on combating drugs in 
Afghanistan, and the problems remain.  \"The missing 
ingredient has been a functioning government,\" he said, and 
expressed optimism that as Karzai gains strength, he will be 
able to address the country\'s drug problems.  He doubted that 
eradication alone could solve the problem, saying any 
eradication would have to take place in parallel with 
development of alternative livelihoods. 
 
INDIA 
===== 
 
6.  (C) A/S Rocca inquired about the recent EU-India summit, 
and what the new EU-India \"strategic partnership\" might look 
like (Reftel).  Commission officials said the summit was a 
huge success, and that they were particularly impressed with 
the \"fantastic quality\" of Manmohan Singh\'s participation. 
Both Council and Commission interlocutors said the 
partnership is still very undefined, but will likely include 
increased cooperation on opening markets, nonproliferation, 
counter-terrorism, and regulatory issues.  New areas of 
cooperation will include energy, environment, industrial 
policy, and cultural dialogue.  The next step is for 
expert-level working groups to create a more definitive 
action plan for cooperation between the EU and India, to be 
presented at next year\'s summit. 
 
7.  (C) A/S Rocca and Council officials agreed that a major 
priority for both the US and EU is to see India take more 
responsibility for export control.    Cooper mentioned that 
perhaps the EU could talk to India about the EU peer review 
process on export controls. 
 
PAKISTAN 
======== 
 
8.  (C) On Pakistan, A/S Rocca expressed cautious optimism 
about ongoing India-Pakistan dialogue over Kashmir.  \"They 
know what has to be done,\" she said, \"but they need to sense 
that the world is still watching.\"  She said President 
Musharraf had made recent controversial remarks about 
\"options\" intentionally in order to force a public debate. 
Musharraf said that if Pakistan and Indian governments were 
to reach a solution in secret, and then try to force it on an 
unprepared public, the solution would not work. 
 
9.  (C) Cooper suggested that perhaps the EU could sponsor a 
seminar in Pakistan (or elsewhere in the region) to discuss 
ten European dilemmas involving ethnic enclaves (such as 
Macedonia, Northern Ireland or South Tyrol), to help foster a 
public dialogue about resolving the Kashmir issue. 
 
NEPAL 
===== 
 
10.  (C) A/S Rocca raised the issue of placing Nepal\'s Maoist 
rebels on the EU\'s finance terror list.  Cooper responded 
that he was not sure why they were not already on the list, 
and said he would verify their status and inquire why the EU 
was resisting placing them on the list. 
 
11.  (C) Commission officials asked that the US continue to 
stress the importance of human rights in its dealings with 
the Nepalese government and military, asserting that \"If 
there is no accord on human rights, it undermines 
everything.\"  In her Council meeting, A/S Rocca pointed out 
that all U.S. training programs for the Nepalese government 
and military have a human rights component and suggested 
other nations could also provide human rights training. 
 
SRI LANKA 
========= 
 
12.  (C) Regarding the Sri Lanka Donors Co-Chair Group, 
Commission DDG Jouanjean asked when the next round of 
meetings could take place, suggesting December.  A/S Rocca 
said that with personnel changes in the Department of State, 
the timeline for the next meetings could not be determined 
yet, but that Deputy Secretary Armitage is not opposed to a 
co-chairs meeting. 
 
13.  (U) A/S Rocca has cleared this message. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"23299","11/26/2004 9:54","04BRUSSELS5014","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 005014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/RSA (MBITTRICK) AND PM/PPA (RFEATHERSTONE) 
DOD FOR USDP (BRZEZINSKI AND WHALEN) 
PASS USAID FOR DCHA AND AFRICA BUREAU 
PASS USUN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREF, PREL, MOPS, SU, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU MILITARY COMMITTEE ADVICE ON THE AU MISSION IN 
DARFUR 
 
Classified By: USEU political military officer Jeremy Brenner for reaso 
ns 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  USEU was passed the text of the European 
Union Military Committee\'s military advice to the Political 
and Security Committee on the AU Plan for the AMIS II mission 
in Darfur. It was likely passed with the intention to 
influence, as well as inform. The Military Committee finds 
significant risks for the operation and concludes that some 
of the AU\'s assumptions are unrealistic. They express concern 
that the AU has shifted away from its original planning as 
the result of \"uncoordinated donor action\" and political 
pressure for rapid action. End summary. 
 
-------- 
Excerpts 
-------- 
 
2. (C) Begin salient portions of text from the European Union 
Military Committee Advice. Internal paragraph numbering does 
not reflect the original text: 
 
3. (C) The EU Military Committee considers that in general, 
the plan is realistic and structured and constitutes a 
significant improvement to the current mission.  It 
introduces a more proactive monitoring approach and there is 
a clear intention for the early deployment of additional 
MILOBS.  It takes a positive view on a liaison with non-AU 
organizations in particular the UN.  Furthermore, the 
intention to include a police component as an integrated 
element of AMIS II demonstrates recognition of the need to 
take a comprehensive approach to improving security 
conditions.  Overall it is the EUMC opinion that the plan 
would contribute to the achievement of the political aim, \"to 
assist the parties to reach a political settlement in Darfur, 
contributing to a stable, peaceful and united Sudan.\" 
 
4. (C) The plan hinges on the assumption that all parties 
will comply with the HCFA and therefore implies that 
violations of the HCFA would be isolated and sporadic rather 
than structural.  The Government of Sudan (GoS) has primary 
responsibility for the protection of its civilians. 
Furthermore, and of equal importance, there is an underlying 
assumption that the GoS is capable of, and willing to 
exercise appropriate control over armed militias and 
Janjaweed who are not signatories to the HCFA.  The EUMC 
considers that these underpinning assumptions are not 
supported by a threat assessment of the situation and 
consequently that the plan carries a high level of risk. 
 
5. (C) The EUMC considers that in general terms the military 
mission supports the political intent and the mandate for 
AMIS II.  It is clear that AMIS II is not mandated to enforce 
compliance.  Certain tasks (\"match threat levels as well as 
demonstrating an increased military presence where 
necessary.\")  would seem to go beyond what was originally 
intended in the mandate.  The non-availability of ROEs 
however does not allow assessment of this question.  The 
current formulation of protection tasks, albeit contingent 
upon means and capabilities, will undoubtedly create 
expectations which cannot be met by a force the size of AMIS 
II in an area the size of France.  The EUMC therefore is 
concerned that AU Protection Elements operating beyond the 
mandate could be drawn into \"enforcement\" operations for 
which they are neither prepared nor equipped. 
 
6. (C) The expansion will lead to a new force consisting of 
some 530 MILOBS out of whom 450 will be working in 
operational observing teams.  The ratio between the actual 
number of MILOBS and the Protection Element is 450:1703 
(1:4).  Although it is understood that this ratio has been 
largely based on UN experience of peacekeeping operations 
elsewhere, the EUMC has difficulties to estimate if this 
ratio is sufficient for success due to absence of a risk 
assessment and the size of the Area of Operations. 
 
7. (C) The EUMC is concerned that command relationship 
between the MILOBS teams and the Protection Element is not 
clear.  Both are (under the local tactical control of) their 
respective Sector Commanders, however it is not clear who 
decides on actions where operations need to be conducted 
across sector boundaries. The EUMC believes that in addition 
to creating command and control complexities and increasing 
overall levels of risk, the limited presence of EU and US 
observers could have an impact on rebel parties acceptance of 
the expanded mission. 
 
8. (C) Although the plan provides and Exit Strategy, this 
focuses on the political/strategic End State.  The EUMC 
considers the criteria for success very ambitious, which 
could result in a mission of long duration.  Furthermore, the 
plan does not provide a military end state, just some 
benchmarks for the Military Component.  The EUMC notes that 
the plan does not provide for a periodic Mission Review 
process that could measure the progress towards the desired 
End State. 
 
9. (C) Although the possibility for deterioration of the 
situation is not excluded, the EUMC notes the absence of the 
mechanisms for possible evacuation of MILOBS and Protection 
Elements. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Factual Evolution of the Implementation 
--------------------------------------- 
 
10. (C) The plan under assessment is the written plan that 
was briefed to the AU Military Staff Committee and 
subsequently the AU PSC. However, a different plan has been 
subsequently implemented, according to the EUMC\'s 
information, partially as a result of uncoordinated donor 
action and political pressure for rapid action.  The 
principles that underpinned the initial plan developed by the 
Technical Assistance Group: 
 
- operational and logistic enablers in place prior to 
deployment 
- sufficient staff at all levels 
- priority to deployment of additional MILOBS 
- adequate force protection 
 
have been set aside.  Although the revised plan retains the 
political intent, military mission and mandate of the 
original plan, the implementation and timelines are 
significantly altered. 
 
11. (C) The scheme for the expansion of AMIS that initially 
foresaw 5 phases was accelerated and condensed concentration 
on the deployment of Protection Elements with little regard 
to what they might be able to accomplish once deployed.  As a 
consequence, troops are now being deployed to staging areas. 
Follow-on deployment to final destinations is delayed by the 
lack of adequate infrastructure and facilities at the final 
destinations.  This leads to congestion at the staging areas 
and possibly to the perception of mismanagement of the 
operation and idling troops in the public eye.  The current 
focus on deploying the Protection Element without the MILOBS 
does not directly contribute  to the intent of AMIS II (\"to 
strengthen the monitoring capacity of the AMIS to a level 
where it conducts pro-active monitoring and through political 
and diplomatic means increase the level of compliance of the 
Parties to the HCFA thus discouraging attacks on civilians\"). 
 
12. (C) Many of the pre-conditions detailed in the first 
deployment phases of the original plan have yet to be met 
thus increasing levels of risks.  The TAG brought this issue 
to the attention of the AU in writing when plans were 
amended.  The continuing absence of a capable AU planning 
capacity at all levels (the DITF in Addis, the Mission HQ in 
Khartoum and the Force HQ in El Fashir), coupled with a 
continuing reluctance to accept international planning 
support remain primary concerns. 
 
----------- 
Conclusions 
----------- 
 
13. (C) Following the analysis, the EUMC concludes that in 
general, the plan is realistic, structured, and if properly 
implemented - a significant improvement on the current 
mission, however the EUMC has identified deficiencies that 
might put the whole mission at risk.  The EUMC therefore 
believes that there is a requirement for the following points 
to be brought into the AU attention. 
 
- The assumption that all parties will comply with the HCFA 
without taking account of GoS willingness/capability to 
control armed militias nor the Janjaweed activities seems to 
be unrealistic; 
- The absence of a risk assessment is an essential flaw in 
the plan; 
-Some military tasks could have the potential for mission 
creep or, at worst, mission failure.  Significantly, a number 
of supporting appendices including ROEs are not included with 
the document. 
-Potentially significant supporting capabilities such as 
SATINT and aerial surveillance are not addressed; 
-Command and control arrangements are rigid and do not take 
account of the need for cross-sector boundary operations and 
this could limit the capacity for proactive operations and 
speed of reaction to certain incidents. 
-The arrangements for liaison with the EU, a principal 
partner, are not satisfactory and need improvement. 
- The plan is lacking mechanism to review the effectiveness 
of the mission 
-The plan differs significantly from the plan currently being 
implemented by the AU, that carries a significantly higher 
level of risk. 
 
14. (C) Against this background, for the support of the AU 
interest, the EUMC sees an urgent need for the AU to: 
- Establish the DITF in Addis and Force HQ at El Fashir as 
soon as possible 
-With the framework of the AU ownership, accept international 
support wherever needed 
-Consider non-AU MILOBS 
-Develop and implement ROEs for this operation consistent 
with its mandate and international law 
-Accept an EU presence, where the EU deems it necessary, at 
all levels to increase the situational awareness of one of 
its principal donors 
-Review its Command and Control structure and be urged to 
support this by adequate communications and information 
systems. 
-Implement a pre-deployment training scheme for both MILOBS 
and Protection Elements.  End abridged text. 
 
Schnabel 
"
"23321","11/26/2004 15:38","04BRUSSELS5029","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 005029 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/26/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TU, CY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: (C) COMMISSION CONSIDERS TURKEY/CYPRUS \"PACKAGE\" 
FOR DECEMBER 17 
 
Classified By: useu/pol: o\'hara, reasons 1.4 b/d. 
 
1.(C) Summary: Under their new Commissioner, Commission 
officials working on Turkish accession and the Commission\'s 
now-stalled trade and assistance package for North Cyprus are 
determined not to be sidelined as the Dutch Presidency 
prepares for the December 17 European Council decision on 
Turkey. Specifically, the Commission is informally talking up 
a package of things that the Dutch Presidency could offer to 
Turkey and Cyprus as part of a last-minute end-game. So far, 
the Commission sees the Dutch Presidency as being tough on 
the Turks, with the Turks not giving up anything in return. 
On Cyprus, the Commission very much wants the Dutch and other 
member states to entice the Cypriots to join the EU \"culture 
of compromise.\"  End Summary. 
 
Package 
------- 
 
2. (C) Commission DG-Enlargement experts tell us that they 
are stitching together a package of things that Turkey, 
Cyprus and the EU could do to ensure a clean and clear 
December 17 European Council outcome on Turkey.  What they 
are informally proposing is that the Dutch Presidency offer 
Turkey a trade and aid package for north Cyprus in exchange 
for Ankara signing the protocol to the current EU/Turkey 
association agreement (also known as the Ankara Agreement) 
recognizing its validity for all ten new EU member states -- 
including Cyprus.  The Commission wants the Cypriots and the 
Turks to get the message that both sides need to do something 
in order to get something.  There is some concern in the 
Commission that Cyprus, if it feels cornered or feels that it 
has nothing to gain from a December 17 decision to provide 
Turkey with an accession date, could veto what otherwise 
would be a positive decision.  The Commission is being 
careful not to broadcast such a proposed deal.  They believe 
the current moment is too far from December 17.  Instead, 
they say they are trying to help the Dutch Presidency manage 
this issue over the next few weeks. 
 
3.  (C) In addition, the Commission is interested in seeing 
how the December 17 decision and a start of accession talks 
might be used to get the peace process in Cyprus back on 
track.  The Commission wants to repackage and re-craft the 
Annan plan to get the leaders of both parts of Cyprus talking 
to each other again. 
 
EU/Turkey Ministerial 
--------------------- 
 
4. (C) Commission contacts noted as \"personal views\" their 
sense that the Dutch had been \"very tough\" with Turkey at 
their November 24 troika ministerial meeting in the Hague 
(septel).  They said that the Dutch had pushed not only for 
the protocol but also recognition of Cyprus.  The Commission 
commented that the Turks had been just as tough -- giving no 
ground on either the protocol or recognition. 
 
New Commissioner Rehn steps in... 
--------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) Commission contacts admitted that Turkey had felt 
disappointed with Commissioner Verheugen\'s move from 
Enlargement, but stressed that replacement Enlargement 
Commissioner Rehn is fully seized with the importance that 
Turkish accession has for the EU. Rehn plans to be fully 
active in the internal EU deliberations between now and 
December 17 -- even if most of the work is now in the hands 
of the Dutch Presidency. Rehn told his staff that he felt 
that he had had good meetings at the November 24 EU/Turkey 
ministerial -- not only with the Turks, but also with the 
Dutch Presidency. Rehn\'s marching orders to his DG are to 
keep fully engaged, including providing various options for 
the Dutch Presidency to exploit to ensure a favorable 
outcome. 
 
6. (SBU) Commissioner Rehn is going to London November 29-30 
and, among other things, will be interested in brainstorming 
with UK officials on Turkey accession and Cyprus (trade and 
aid for the North, possibly peace process). 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"23322","11/26/2004 15:40","04BRUSSELS5030","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04USUN2630","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 005030 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/SCE, EUR/RPM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, BK, MOPS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION LAUNCHES OPERATION 
ALTHEA 
 
REF: USUN 2630 
 
1. (U) Under the provisions of the Treaty of the European 
Union, the Council of the European Union on November 23 
launched Operation Althea in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The EU 
Operation Commander was authorized to release the activation 
order (ACTORD) in order to execute the deployment of the 
forces and start execution of the mission on December 2, 
2004.  The decision will remain in force until the Council 
decides to end the mission.  (NOTE: UNSCR 1575 (see below) 
has given the mission a mandate for \"an initial planned 
period of twelve months.\" END NOTE.) 
 
2. (U)  The launch of Operation Althea is based on a Council 
Joint Action (decision of Heads of State and Government) from 
July 2004.  The UN Security Council on November 22 
unanimously adopted UNSCR 1575 authorizing an EU-led military 
mission and a residual NATO Headquarters presence (reftel). 
High Representative Solana will be in Sarajevo December 2 to 
participate in ceremonies celebrating the end of SFOR and the 
beginning of the EU\'s European Security and Defense Policy 
(ESDP) mission \"Operation Althea.\" 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"23358","11/29/2004 9:30","04BRUSSELS5032","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE251819","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 005032 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BE, CASC, FI, KCRM, PREL, SW, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: SIGNING BILATERAL INSTRUMENTS TO U.S.-EU 
EXTRADITION AND MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE AGREEMENTS 
 
REF: STATE 251819 
 
 In response to inquiry in para. 6 reftel, both DOJ Senior 
Counsel Mark Richard and USEU/NAS Frank Kerber will be 
involved in the process of preparing for the instrument 
signings in Brussels.  However, given that Richard has been 
requested to accompany the Attorney General during his entire 
trip to Europe, Kerber will likely be primary USEU action 
officer for this event.  Schnabel 
"
"23370","11/29/2004 11:29","04BRUSSELS5035","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BRUSSELS 005035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM - RHILTON; PA - ARUPPE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PREF, PHUM, KPAO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: MIGRANT INTEGRATION AND REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT: CAN 
THE U.S. HELP EUROPE? 
 
1. (U) This is an action message.  See paragraph 20. 
 
2. (U) Summary.  Two unfolding migration-related crises have 
riveted Europe in recent days:  1) the assassination of Dutch 
filmmaker Theo Van Gogh by a Muslim extremist of Moroccan 
descent, and 2) the uncontrolled arrival of shiploads of 
migrants in Italy and subsequent deportations to Libya. 
Europeans ask:  how can the EU promote the integration of 
migrants, and how can the EU offer protection to legitimate 
refugees?  USEU asks:  can a VolVis program help Europe\'s 
search for effective responses?  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Assassination Deepens EU Concern Over Migrant Integration 
------------------------ 
 
3. (U) One of the latest hot-button issues in the EU is the 
integration of foreign migrants into host European societies. 
 While the EU has long focused on ways to discourage 
international migration, it increasingly is resigned to the 
fact the movement of people will continue despite best 
efforts to develop countries of origin and enhance controls 
at the EU\'s external frontier.  The rise of anti-immigration 
political parties across Europe, as well as increasing 
instances of racist attacks and xenophobia, have convinced 
many European policymakers of the need to consider a 
two-pronged approach to international migration.  They 
advocate continuing efforts to reduce and control the flows 
of migrants to Europe, while simultaneously promoting 
measures to encourage integration of those already present. 
 
4. (U) On November 9-11, the Dutch Presidency sponsored the 
first European Ministerial Conference on Integration, just as 
Europe was recovering from the shocking assassination of 
Dutch filmmaker Theo Van Gogh by a Muslim extremist on 
November 2.  The assailant, an economically comfortable 
dual-national citizen of Moroccan descent, objected to Van 
Gogh\'s controversial portrayal of Muslim women as 
subservient. 
 
5. (U) Around the same time of the murder, newspapers 
reported that growing numbers of European-born Muslims were 
traveling to Iraq to join the insurgency and conduct jihad, 
as well as assisting with terrorist attacks in Europe and 
neighboring regions.  One newspaper quoted Gilles Kepel, 
author of The War for Muslim Minds, who argued that the 
feeling of marginalization is one of the root causes of the 
link between migrants and violence.  He said that evidence 
from the arrest of Muslim extremists in Europe indicated that 
economic hardship is not a primary reason behind radicalism, 
as many of those arrested were educated professionals.  Kepel 
further noted that economic success has not necessarily 
brought social integration. 
 
6. (U) Responding to the communal unrest in The Netherlands 
which followed the assassination of Van Gogh, outgoing JHA 
Commissioner Vitorino appealed to both citizens and 
immigrants during a BBC interview.  He said, \"I think that 
the Muslim communities should mobilize in a more active way 
to be integrated.  But, at the same time, we the Europeans 
should also recognize that for a long time we have neglected 
being more active in promoting integration.\"  He noted that, 
\"What is happening now in The Netherlands could happen 
anywhere in the EU.\"  Vitorino\'s replacement also spoke of 
integrating migrants during his Parliamentary hearing on 
November 16, stressing the importance of education in 
striving towards mutual respect and tolerance. 
 
7. (U) On November 17, the Dutch Prime Minister also urged 
the EU to work harder on integrating ethnic minorities during 
a debate at the European Parliament in Strasbourg.  He was 
quoted in the press as saying, \"The strong reactions and 
counter-reactions after the death of Van Gogh shows there is 
tension in our society.  In Europe, we have to learn from one 
another in the area of integration of minorities.\"  Also 
commenting on the fallout of the assassination, which 
included arson attacks on Muslim schools, mosques and 
churches in Holland, was the EU\'s anti-terrorism coordinator 
Gijs de Vries:  \"The bombing of schools anywhere in the world 
is an inexcusable act of barbarity,\" he told reporters. 
 
------------------------ 
Poor Economy Underscores Need for Immigrants 
------------------------ 
 
8. (U) Another Dutchman was also in the news on November 3, 
referring to a positive consequence of increased immigration 
to Europe.  Wim Kok\'s scathing mid-term report of the Lisbon 
Strategy underscored the poor estate of Europe\'s economy and 
predicted a gloomier future based, in large part, on 
deteriorating demographics.  His report noted that the \"pure 
impact of aging populations will be to reduce the potential 
growth rate of the EU from the present rate of 2 percent to 
2.25 percent to around 1.25 percent by 2040.\"  The report 
goes on to state that, \"...selective non-EU immigration will 
be needed to meet European labor market shortages and partly 
to offset the negative consequence of the \'brain drain\'.  It 
would be wise for Member States to prepare themselves timely 
and thoroughly for this decision because experience shows 
that the successful inclusion of migrants and ethnic 
minorities in society, and especially in the labor market, 
demands considerable and sustained effort.\" 
 
------------------------ 
EU Strategy for Migrant Integration 
------------------------ 
 
9. (U) The high-level conference on migrant integration, 
chaired by Dutch Minister for Aliens Affairs and Integration 
Rita Verdonk and supported by the Washington-based Migration 
Policy Group, sought to develop a list of \"best practices\" 
with regard to integration, particularly of young people from 
ethnic minority backgrounds.  A \"Handbook for Integration\" 
was developed for the conference and presented by the 
European Commission.  Special workshops focused on:  a) 
protecting the democratic rule of law and combating 
radicalization; b) the role of parents and mentors; and, c) 
fighting discrimination. 
 
10. (U) On November 19, the European Council adopted 
conclusions regarding migrant integration, which included the 
following overview statements highlighting the reality of 
immigration and its benefits: 
 
-- \"Immigration is a permanent feature of European society. 
If the flow of immigrants -- who should be understood 
throughout the text as legally residing immigrants in the 
territory of the Member States -- is orderly and well 
managed, Member States reap many benefits.  These include 
stronger economies, greater social cohesion and increased 
feeling of security, and cultural diversity.  Taken together 
and across all Member States, these benefits advance the 
European process and strengthen the Union\'s position in the 
world.  Therefore, the effective management of migration by 
each Member States is in the interest of all.\" 
 
-- \"A critical aspect of managing migration is the successful 
integration of legally residing immigrants and their 
descendants....It is vital for Member States to maintain and 
further develop societies in which newcomers feel welcome, 
which are defined by a spirit of mutual understanding and 
accommodation, and where there are clear expectations of all 
residents -- old and new.\" 
 
11. (U) The common basic principles for the integration of 
legal immigrants adopted by the EU Council are as follows: 
 
-- integration is a dynamic, two-way process of mutual 
accommodation by all immigrants and residents; 
-- integration implies respect for basic EU values; 
-- employment is a key part of the integration process, and 
is central to the participation in and visible contributions 
to the host societies; 
-- basic knowledge of the host society\'s language, history 
and institutions is indispensable to integration, and 
immigrants must acquire this basic knowledge; 
-- education is also critical in this process; 
-- access for immigrants to institutions, as well as to 
public and private goods and services, on a basis equal to 
citizens is critical; 
-- frequent interaction between immigrants and citizens, such 
as shared forums, inter-cultural dialogue, etc., is important; 
-- practice of diverse cultures and religions must be 
safeguarded (unless practices conflict with other inviolable 
European rights or with national law); 
-- the participation of immigrants in the democratic process 
and in formulating integration policies, especially at the 
local level, support integration; 
-- mainstreaming integration policies throughout government 
is an important consideration; and, 
-- developing clear goals, indicators and evaluation 
mechanisms are necessary to adjust integration policies. 
 
------------------------ 
Identifying Refugees within the Broader Migration Flows 
------------------------ 
 
12. (U) While agreement has solidified around the integration 
of legal immigrants, divisions in the EU still exist over the 
handling of clandestine migration flows, which often include 
people claiming a need for international protection.  On 
November 19, the European Parliament voted to confirm the new 
European Commission, which noticeably did not include Rocco 
Buttiglione, Italy\'s nominee who was to have held the 
Justice, Freedom and Security (JFS) portfolio.  Buttiglione 
first created a furor over reviving a controversial scheme to 
set up migrant camps in Libya to screen out economic migrants 
from asylum seekers attempting to enter the EU without 
authorization.  (It was Buttiglione\'s comments on 
homosexuality and the role of women in society which proved 
his downfall, however, not his views on migration.) 
 
13. (U) In prepared questions and answers for the Parliament, 
the new Italian nominee for JFS issues Franco Frattini 
reversed course regarding migrant camps.  He stated:  \"The 
initial ideas put forward by the two Member States (Germany 
and Italy) address the specific situation of last countries 
of transit where migrants and refugees stop before entering 
the EU....Our first aim should be to address humanitarian 
needs and prevent the Mediterranean from becoming a 
\"graveyard\".  A viable, legal and safe alternative to 
smuggling should be offered to those who find themselves in 
these circumstances who require protection and for whom there 
is not integration potential in these countries, amongst 
others by offering resettlement schemes to the EU.  However, 
these policies simultaneously need to be able to address the 
mixed migratory character of the transitory populations in 
these countries and to facilitate information sharing on the 
real possibilities for migration to the EU....Any new 
approaches will however need to respect a number of basic 
principles, in particular full respect for the international 
legal obligations of Member States, including the full and 
inclusive application of the 1951 Refugee Convention, the 
non-refoulement principle, and the European Convention on 
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.\"  In so declaring, 
Frattini washed his hands of the Libya venue and stepped away 
from Buttiglione\'s ill-timed initiative.  Italy, however, 
pursues a bilateral agreement with Libya. 
 
------------------------ 
Encouraging Refugee Resettlement Programs 
------------------------ 
 
14. (U) The European Commission is currently drafting a 
proposal to establish a program to identify bona fide 
refugees in regions of origin and resettle them in Europe. 
JHA Administrator Phil Douglas, who is drafting the proposal, 
told PRMOff the initiative would: 
-- be part of a package deal aimed at ensuring a \"more 
orderly and manageable entry\" into the EU (in other words, 
part of the crack down on illegal immigration); 
-- contribute to \"safe access to the EU for those in need of 
international protection\" by identifying in advance those 
abroad who are most desperately in need; 
-- address negative attitudes many Europeans have about 
asylum seekers (Douglas illustrated by noting that those 
fleeing conflict in Kosovo -- i.e., obvious refugees -- were 
greeted warmly in Europe unlike the \"self-selecting\" asylum 
seekers who do not have a clearly evident need of 
protection); and, 
-- facilitate integration via a comprehensive mechanism to 
prepare housing, job training and other tailor-made programs 
in advance of arrivals. 
 
15. (U) Douglas stressed that the program would be modest, 
with no set annual quotas or ceilings.  Target numbers would 
be notional, non-binding, and invoked to respond to specific, 
emerging situations.  Furthermore, the numbers most probably 
would be derived from pre-existing Member State resettlement 
programs.  (Note.  Currently, the following annual refugee 
resettlement quotas exist in Member States: Sweden - 1000; 
Finland - 750; Denmark - 500; Netherlands - 500; UK - 500; 
Ireland - 10.)  The European Commission should propose using 
the European Refugee Fund to financially augment these 
programs and in the process reserve some numbers for its own 
use.  Funds might also be used to help other Member States 
initiate refugee resettlement programs.  Despite the very 
modest nature of current thinking, which is heartily endorsed 
by the European Parliament, several Member States are \"cooler 
than neutral\" to the Commission\'s proposal.  Germany is among 
those who object to any plan to bring in more refugees to 
Europe. 
 
16. (U) A few reasons given by humanitarian workers in Europe 
who oppose refugee resettlement programs are: 
- it\'s unpalatable to select some refugees over others; 
- resettled refugees might get a \"good\" label while asylees 
end up stigmatized as \"queue jumpers\"; and, 
- governments will have a pretext for sealing borders and 
access to asylum. 
 
------------------------ 
Speaking Out in Favor of Refugees 
------------------------ 
 
17. (U) Nevertheless, the EU has some high level supporters 
for increased protection, including resettlement 
opportunities, for needy refugees.  Responding to the growing 
humanitarian crisis in the Mediterranean and the 
German/Italian proposal for migrant camps, Swedish Minister 
for Migration and Asylum Policy Barbro Holmberg called on the 
EU to take more responsibility for refugees and for 
resettlement.  In a letter to the editor of the Financial 
Times she wrote: 
 
-- \"People trying to get to Europe are being exploited by 
smugglers and risk their lives at sea.  Some of them are 
asylum seekers.  Others plan to enter Europe illegally.  This 
is a human tragedy that we in the EU must do our utmost to 
solve.\" 
 
-- \"Resettlement is another way of sharing the responsibility 
for the refugees in the world.  It is a way to give 
protection to individual refugees but it could also help 
solve protracted refugee situations, if used strategically. 
Four of the EU Member States have had resettlement programs 
for a long period of time.  Another two have newly started 
programs.  I urge more to follow the lead.  In countries such 
as the U.S., Canada and Australia, resettlement has been an 
important part of asylum policy for a long time.  They have 
large quotas each year.  The EU ought to consider seriously 
having a common resettlement program.\" 
 
-- \"With the demise of Rocco Buttiglione\'s candidacy for the 
position of Justice & Home Affairs Commissioner, the support 
for migrant camps in North Africa has waned.  The only 
remnants of this debate are plans for the EC to fund UNHCR 
capacity building measures in five North African countries -- 
no physical camps.  As to the Swedish hope for resettlement, 
the EC plan for an EU-wide program has encountered serious 
opposition from Germany and other important Member States.\" 
 
18. (U) Liberal MEP Graham Watson, whose party was 
instrumental in de-railing the Buttiglione nomination, made 
an eloquent pro-refugee appeal in an editorial published in 
the International Herald Tribune on November 17.  Highlights 
include: 
 
-- \"Protecting those who seek asylum is an absolute duty, not 
just according to any basic notion of human charity but in 
international law.  Refugees are helplessness incarnate. 
They are usually poor.  They often barely speak the language 
of their destination country.  They ask for help while 
offering nothing obvious in return.\"  (Comment.  Despite 
Watson\'s good intentions, this portrayal of refugees is apt 
to perpetuate the stereotype that refugees will drain social 
services and contribute little to countries which provide 
protection.  End Comment.) 
 
-- \"Before his appoint to the new European Commission was 
blocked by the European Parliament, the 
commissioner-designate for JHA, Rocco Buttiglione, speculated 
publicly on the merits of reviving a plan that had been 
scrapped last year to develop a system of reception camps 
outside the EU\'s borders for asylum seekers.  The camps, 
administered by states like Libya, Ukraine and Russia, would 
process applications for asylum in Europe....European states 
would effectively be outsourcing their obligations to 
refugees under international law.\" 
 
-- \"Treating refugees with respect imposes political and 
financial costs and demands tolerance and compassion, but it 
is a badge that we should wear with pride.  The day we deem 
that cost too high to pay, we surrender that badge and that 
high ground, for good.\" 
------------------------ 
Potential VOLVIS: Helping Europe Handle Migrants and Refugees 
------------------------ 
 
19. (U) USEU would like to expand on its successful use of 
the voluntary visitor program  in addressing issues that 
resonate through all the Member States by exploring the 
possibility of a volvis on integrating migrants and 
resettling refugees.  These two issues are much in debate 
throughout the EU, and the international community as a whole 
could benefit if the U.S. is able to provide a positive 
example.  Immigrants that feel a part of Europe should be 
less receptive to recruitment efforts by extremist 
organizations.  Refugees in need of international protection 
can find a haven if more EU countries establish formal 
resettlement programs.  At a meeting with EU officials on 
November 26, both the incoming Luxembourg Presidency and the 
European Commission said that a voluntary visitor program 
dealing with these issues should receive robust interest. 
 
20. (U) Posts that would consider nominating either a 
government official or prominent NGO representative to 
participate should send an email to PRMOff Marc Meznar 
indicating interest, as well as any specific suggestions.  If 
USEU receives enough positive responses, we will pursue the 
idea of a volvis with the Department of State. 
 
SCHNABEL 
"
"23597","12/3/2004 17:22","04BRUSSELS5125","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04STATE254097|04THEHAGUE3133|04VIENNA4164","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005125 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/03/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, HR, TU, ICTY, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU WRESTLING WITH WHAT TO DO ABOUT CROATIA NOW 
 
REF: A. STATE 254097 
     B. THE HAGUE 3133 
     C. VIENNA 4164 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) The discussions among EU Member States in the Council 
on Croatia have been tense, and the EU remains fairly evenly 
divided on how strictly to condition open accession 
negotiations with Croatia on improved cooperation with the 
ICTY.  The Commission supports our position (REF A) and High 
Rep Solana has been delivering a firm message to the Croats, 
even if he is not taking any explicit position in the EU\'s 
internal debate.   For now, the Dutch and the British are 
optimistic that the Presidency\'s proposed text will hold 
through next week.  But Germany, at the level of Chancellor 
Schroeder, is pushing hard for a softer text.  Both the Dutch 
and British reps in Brussels would like to reach consensus at 
25 in COREPER on Dec. 8 on the Croatia text for the European 
Council Conclusions, to reduce the risk of trade-offs over 
Turkey or elsewhere in the end game closer to Dec. 17. 
Whatever we could do to persuade doubters (and stiffen 
supporters) that Croatia really can do more to meet its ICTY 
obligations on Gotovina would help.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) The meetings of the EU\'s Balkans Working Group (COWEB) 
on Nov. 29 and Committee of Permanent Representatives 
(COREPER) on Dec. 1 established that the EU remains firmly 
split on what to decide about opening accession negotiations 
with Croatia in early 2005.  The starting point of the debate 
has been the summit Conclusions language circulated by the 
Dutch on Nov. 29.  Two phrases are at the core of the 
discussion: 1) \"that the remaining indictee must be located 
and transferred to the Hague as soon as possible\"; and 2) 
\"opening the accession negotiations on (date) provided that 
full cooperation with ICTY has been confirmed by the Council.\" 
 
3. (C/NF) The UK has been leading the camp pushing for even 
tougher language, such as by dropping mention of a specific 
date.  A UK contact (strictly protect) involved in the 
negotiations told us Dec. 3 that the UK position is a 
negotiating ploy, and London would be fully satisfied with 
the current proposed language, since it means accession talks 
would only open on that date after another Council decision 
-- by consensus.  The UK does not, however, want the Dutch or 
others to know that.  Joining the UK in support of a tough 
line has been the Netherlands; Denmark, Sweden, Finland and 
Lithuania (\"all rock solid\"); Poland (\"so far\"); and Belgium 
(\"a bit wobbly\").  The Czech Republic and Portugal have only 
been willing to say that ICTY conditionality is important, 
but have not taken a clear position on Conclusion language. 
Slovenia\'s position is currently unclear to the British or 
Dutch.  In COWEB they supported the UK line, but the Brits 
now fear they may be willing to negotiate over ICTY language 
as they appear to be putting their highest priority on 
getting the Conclusions to include a reference to their 
bilateral border dispute with Croatia. 
 
4. (C) The Commission does not get a vote on the Council\'s 
decision, but sits in on all discussions.  Mia Asenius, who 
handles Croatia for new Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, 
told us that he is satisfied with giving a date provided that 
Croatia cooperates with ICTY.  The Dutch proposal, she said, 
\"could have been worse.\". 
 
5. (C) Another camp, led by Germany and Austria (despite the 
Austrians\' REF C claim they would support language setting a 
date but making cooperation with ICTY a condition for 
starting the negotiations), has been pushing to weaken the 
Dutch proposal.  They are joined in this effort by France, 
Italy, Spain, Ireland, Greece, Cyprus and Slovakia.  Hungary 
has been unclear, but appears inclined to go along with 
Austria and Germany.  Estonia and Latvia supported Germany at 
the Nov. 29 COWEB, and then were silent at the Dec. 1 COREPER. 
 
6. (C) Nonetheless, our contacts report that the current 
proposed language seems to be holding.  Dutch PermRep De 
Bruijn, summarizing the COREPER discussion, was reported to 
have said that they heard arguments coming from both sides, 
and so were inclined to stick with their original language. 
A Dutch redraft of the entire Conclusions for the Dec. 17 
summit is due to be circulated on Dec. 6, and expectations 
are the Croatia language will be unchanged (though our Dutch 
contact pointed out that the pen is being very closely held 
up in the Hague).  COREPER will debate the Dec. 6 draft again 
on December 8.  Both the UK and the Dutch would like to reach 
agreement on the Croatia text at that meeting, but are unsure 
of the chances. 
 
7. (C/NF) The major risk, from both the Dutch and British 
perspective, is what kinds of deals, potentially involving 
Conclusion language on Turkey, might be made if the issue 
gets pushed higher than COREPER.  And Berlin is reported to 
have already begun.  Chancellor Schroeder has been arguing 
the German view with Chirac, and on Dec. 3 spoke with Belgian 
PM Verhofstadt, and is calling around to several other 
capitals.   This German lobbying effort has left the UK 
worried that support from Belgium (despite a strong stand at 
the level of FM de Gucht) and Poland could go wobbly (our 
contacts even worry the UK might wobble if this language 
isn\'t locked in prior to the summit).  The Vatican has 
reportedly also weighed in, with a series of demarches to EU 
Member States arguing that the EU should not hold an entire 
country hostage to the fate of one man. 
 
8. (C) The Croatians, meanwhile, continue a furious round of 
diplomacy.  FM Zuzul met with Solana on Dec. 3, looking \"very 
nervous\", according to an EU official.  Zuzul argued the 
GoC\'s overall good record of cooperation with ICTY recently 
should not be ignored just because of the Gotovina case. 
Solana\'s response, we were told by his staff, was \"you have a 
problem, you know the rules, you have a couple of weeks.  We 
understand it may not be easy for you, but do your best to 
solve this.\" 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9. (C) We do not expect the EU will solve this issue on 
December 8.  If Schroeder is making calls, Berlin is unlikely 
to let the issue be resolved at PermRep-level.  The German 
lobbying effort is particularly worrying, and is reportedly 
based largely on arguing the unreliability of Carla del 
Ponte.  While we may share their doubts about del Ponte, 
Berlin is vulnerable in its arguments that the EU should 
disregard the judgment of a duly appointed, UN-authorized 
official under international law.  Member States such as 
Greece, Spain, Italy or Austria, who have never been strong 
advocates of conditionality, are likely beyond reach.  But we 
fear several other Member States just do not understand that 
between now and any date proposed for opening Croatia\'s 
negotiations (March 22 currently leads the betting) is the 
window of maximum leverage over the GoC.  As such, they are 
susceptible to Croatian and German arguments that there is 
nothing more Zagreb could be doing to catch the man. 
Whatever we could do to persuade doubters such as Hungary, 
Slovakia, Estonia or Latvia (and stiffen supporters such as 
Poland, Belgium, Portugal or the Czech Republic) that Croatia 
really can do more to meet its obligations would help. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23622","12/6/2004 6:05","04BRUSSELS5128","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 005128 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, CMGT, CVIS, KCRM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: JHA: MINISTERS REVIEW COUNTER-TERROR 
MEASURES 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
1.  The EU Council of Justice and Home Affairs 
Ministers (JHA Council) on December 2 agreed on a 
series of documents relating to the fight against 
terrorism in preparation for the December 17 
European Council.  These include a strategy against 
the financing of terrorism, a report on intelligence 
capacity, conclusions on prevention, preparedness 
and response to terrorist attacks, and an EU 
solidarity program on the consequences of terrorist 
threats and attacks.  In other justice issues, the 
Council agreed on the main body of a draft Decision 
on the exchange of information from national 
criminal records.  Ministers also concurred on a 
general approach for the exchange of information and 
cooperation concerning terrorist offences, and 
defined guidelines for a piece of EU legislation 
requiring telecom service providers to retain data 
defined in a common list.  Full text of Council 
conclusions has been transmitted to EUR/ERA and 
Embassy The Hague.  END SUMMARY. 
 
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION FROM CRIMINAL RECORDS 
--------------------------------------------- 
2.  The December 2 JHA Council agreed on the main 
provisions of a draft Decision on the exchange of 
information from criminal records.  The draft, 
tabled in reaction to a cross-border serial killer 
case that revealed failures in communication between 
French and Belgian authorities, requires each 
central authority of a Member State to inform 
without delay the central authorities of the other 
Member States of criminal convictions and subsequent 
measures in respect of nationals of those countries 
entered in their criminal records.  \"Furthermore, a 
central authority may request information from the 
criminal records of another Member State.  The reply 
shall be sent immediately and in any event within a 
period not exceeding ten working days from the 
receipt of the request, under certain conditions.\" 
The preamble and forms to be annexed to the draft 
Decision will be discussed at a later stage. 
 
3.  EU sources noted that criminal convictions in EU 
countries are recorded by using a variety of 
procedures in registers.  Exchange mechanisms do 
exist for the transmission of information between 
countries, e.g. under the 1959 European Convention 
on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters, but they 
fail to meet the requirements of cooperation in a 
frontier-free area.  Recent pedophilia cases 
highlighted the malfunctioning of these systems. 
Likewise, the fight against terrorism requires the 
quality of these exchanges to be improved quickly. 
 
TERRORISM: PREPARATION OF EU SUMMIT 
----------------------------------- 
4.  EU leaders on December 17 will adopt a number of 
strategies, prepared in response to mandates from 
the June 2004 European Council conclusions, 
including on combating the financing of terrorism as 
well as the protection of critical infrastructures. 
The leaders will discuss proposals on integrating 
the fight against terrorism into the EU\'s external 
relations policy, an assessment of CT provisions in 
EU agreements, and a \"Conceptual Framework\" on the 
contribution of ESDP to the fight against terrorism. 
Dutch Justice Minister Donner said the JHA Council 
agreed to forward to the leaders, through the 
channel of EU FMs (GAERC), a series of documents 
(not publicly available, unless otherwise indicated 
below with source of publication and ref. number): 
 
-A revised Action Plan on combating terrorism; 
 
-A strategy on the fight against the financing of 
 terrorism, to be reviewed by Ministers for the 
 Economy and Finance on December 7 and the GAERC on 
 December 13; 
 
-A report on intelligence capacity.  Dutch Interior 
 Minister Remkes told a press conference it was 
 \"vital\" for EU countries to discuss cooperation 
 between their intelligence agencies.  Remkes said 
 all delegations were \"convinced of the need to 
 work together on this.\"  The EU SitCen located in 
 the Council Secretariat would be \"expanded and 
 reinforced.\"  Ministers asked their 
 representatives at the EUROPOL management board to 
 agree at their next meeting on December 14 on an 
 exchange of letters with SG/HighRep Solana; 
 
-Conclusions on Prevention, Preparedness and 
 Response to Terrorist Attacks (in draft at 
 http://register.consilium.eu.int, doc #15232/04); 
 
-An EU solidarity program on the consequences of 
 the terrorist threats and attacks: a 
 revised/widened Chemical, Bacteriological, 
 Radiological and Nuclear program (idem, doc 
 #15480/04). 
 
5.  The Council also noted: 
 
- An interim report on the peer evaluation of 
 national anti-terrorism arrangements (not 
 available).  The 15 Member States evaluated 
 (former EU-15) will report by June 2005 on 
 measures taken with regard to the recommendations 
 of the report; 
 
-A document on the recruitment of terrorists (n/a). 
 
6. Council discussions focused on: 
 
a) Information sharing:  the Conclusions refer to 
the \"principle of availability\" highlighted in the 
new multiannual JHA program (\"The Hague program,\" 
see USEU BRUSSELS 4789 and USEU Brussels 4619), 
noting work underway on other proposals, including 
the Decision on the exchange of information and co- 
operation concerning terrorist offences (below). 
 
b) Combating the financing of terrorism:  the 
conclusions note the \"significant progress\" recorded 
on the third money laundering Directive and the 
Regulation on cash movements.  Action is also needed 
to meet other recommendations in the strategy, 
including with respect to the freezing of terrorist 
assets; 
 
c) Civil protection and critical infrastructure: 
the Member States, Commission and Council will have 
\"to enhance the quality of their risk assessment and 
analysis, to strengthen the political and 
operational preparedness and capability for 
consequence management, to increase learning, 
training and exercises as well as to examine 
questions of interoperability.\"  The Member States 
and Commission will \"contribute to the ongoing 
assessment of capabilities available at the European 
level and to obtain and share, on a restricted 
basis, information on relevant vaccines, sera and 
other medical resources, that might be made 
available in the event of a major terrorist attack\"; 
 
d) Recruitment and radicalization:  \"Action to 
combat terrorism cannot succeed in the longer term 
if no action is taken to try to limit recruitment 
into terrorism.\"   The Hague program calls on the 
Council, with the EU CT Coordinator, the Commission 
and Member State experts, to develop, by the end of 
2005, a long-term strategy to address the factors 
contributing to radicalization and recruitment for 
terrorist activities. 
 
7.  The Council conclusions as well as Coordinator 
de Vries and Commissioner Frattini in their public 
comments stressed the importance of implementation 
of measures agreed by the EU:  \"Member States still 
retain full responsibility for ensuring they have in 
place appropriate national structures and 
instruments to enable them to achieve the underlying 
objective: to combat terrorism effectively.\" 
 
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION ON TERRORIST OFFENCES 
--------------------------------------------- 
8.  The Council agreed on \"a general approach\" of a 
Decision on the exchange of information and 
cooperation concerning terrorist offences.  The 
draft is designed to reinforce a December 2002 
Decision concerning the implementation of specific 
measures for police and judicial cooperation to 
combat terrorism.  According to the draft, each 
Member State \"shall designate a specialized service 
within its police services or other law enforcement 
authorities that will have access to and collect all 
relevant information concerning and resulting from 
criminal investigations conducted by its law 
enforcement authorities with respect to terrorist 
offences, and send it to Europol.\"  Each Member 
State will also designate a national correspondent 
for terrorism matters or an appropriate judicial or 
other competent authority that will have access to 
and can collect all relevant information concerning 
prosecutions and convictions for terrorist offences, 
and send it to Eurojust, the EU body established in 
2002 to enhance the effectiveness of investigation 
and prosecution of serious cross-border and 
organized crime. 
 
RETENTION OF DATA BY TELECOM SERVICE PROVIDERS 
--------------------------------------------- - 
9.  The Council discussed the scope of a draft 
Framework Decision, tabled in light of the March 
2004 EU Declaration on combating terrorism, 
requiring providers of publicly available electronic 
communications services or networks to retain 
specified data to allow for the source, routing, 
destination, time, date and duration of 
communications to be established.  In its original 
form, the proposal appeared to be limited to data 
already processed and stored for billing, commercial 
and other legitimate purposes.  However, as noted in 
the Council conclusions, \"the approach would imply 
that the possibilities for access to data for law 
enforcement purposes depend on the technical and 
commercial setup of each individual service 
provider.\"  Some service providers, as Minister 
Donner noted, apply a \"flat rate system,\" implying 
that relevant data, processed for the purpose of 
providing the telecommunication concerned, is erased 
immediately after the communication is terminated. 
Donner said the Council therefore went for another 
option and tasked its preparatory bodies to work on 
a proposal requiring service providers to retain 
relevant data defined in a common list.  Donner said 
the proposal would bear in mind a requirement of 
\"proportionality\" of the measure in relation to 
costs, data protection and efficiency. 
 
EUROPEAN EVIDENCE WARRANT: PROGRESS REPORT 
------------------------------------------ 
10.  The Council noted a progress report concerning 
negotiations on a draft Framework Decision on the 
European Evidence Warrant (EEW) for obtaining 
objects, documents and data for use in proceedings 
in criminal matters.  The proposal was designed as a 
first step toward a single mutual recognition 
instrument that would in due course replace all 
existing mutual assistance regimes. 
 
MEASURES AGAINST SHIP-SOURCE POLLUTION 
-------------------------------------- 
11.  The Greek, Cypriot and Maltese delegations 
continued to block adoption of a draft Framework 
Decision to strengthen the criminal law framework 
for the enforcement of the law against ship-source 
pollution.  Donner said the Presidency would 
continue to work on a compromise solution with the 
hope of reaching agreement by the year\'s end. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23654","12/6/2004 14:17","04BRUSSELS5137","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS5057","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S INTRODUCTORY CALL ON EP U.S. 
SUBCOMMITTEE CHAIR 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 5057 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY:  On November 30, Ambassador Schnabel paid an 
introductory call on Jonathan Evans, the Chairman of the 
European Parliament (EP) Subcommittee on Relations with the 
U.S.  Evans suggested that an approach concentrating on the 
EU institutions in Brussels would be the most effective way 
for the U.S. to &mend fences8 with Europe.  Evans predicted 
that EU Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson would become the 
&transatlantic point man8 in the new European Commission. 
Under the right circumstances Evans, the leader of the UK 
Conservatives in the EP, could prove a capable U.S. 
Subcommittee Chairman.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
TARGET BRUSSELS TO MEND FENCES WITH EUROPE 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) Evans, who was elected Chairman of the EP,s 
&Delegation for Relations with the United States8 in 
September, took the opportunity afforded by the Ambassador,s 
call to outline his take on the best way for the U.S. to 
&mend fences with Europe.8  He said the U.S. approach 
should concentrate on the EU institutions in Brussels. 
Stressing that he, as a UK Conservative, was neither a 
believer in further EU integration nor a &multilateralist as 
opposed to a bilateralist,8 Evans explained that major 
visits by U.S. officials to EU member-state capitals that did 
not include discussions in Brussels would be perceived, 
rightly or wrongly, as exclusionary of EU member states that 
were not part of the itinerary.  Making Brussels a priority 
would be perceived as including all of Europe and would 
strengthen the hand of the majority of EU member states that 
favor keeping good relations with the U.S. at the forefront 
of the EU agenda.  In that context, Evans lauded President 
Bush,s plan to visit Brussels early next year. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
MANDELSON WANTS SPECIAL TRANSATLANTIC ROLE 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3. (C) Evans said he had met with new EU Trade Commissioner 
Peter Mandelson soon after he had become the UK 
Commissioner-designate.  Evans said he and Mandelson had long 
enjoyed a mutually respectful personal acquaintance despite 
their political rivalry in the UK.  Echoing what Mandelson 
himself had told the Ambassador (reftel), Evans reported that 
Mandelson was adamant about his intention to be the Barroso 
Commission,s point person on transatlantic relations. 
Considering Mandelson,s political and tactical skills, Evans 
assessed Mandelson,s chances a &very good8 of wresting 
center stage regarding relations with the U.S. from External 
Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner.  Mandelson,s 
principal challenge, Evans predicted, would be avoiding being 
labeled as &Blair,s man in Brussels.8 
 
----------------- 
BIO INFO ON EVANS 
----------------- 
 
4. (C) Evans, 54, represents Wales in the European 
Parliament.  He has been an MEP since 1999 and leader of the 
UK Conservatives in the EP since 2001.  As EP Tory leader, 
Evans played a key role in the election of Jim Nicholson to 
the post of Chairman of the EP Subcommittee on the U.S. 
(Nicholson, an Ulster Unionist, is a member of the UK Tory 
group in the EP.)  Evans worked hard behind the scenes to 
become Nicholson,s successor before stepping down as EP Tory 
leader at the end of this year.  A lawyer by trade, Evans was 
an MP in the House of Commons from 1992-97.  From 1992-94 he 
served as parliamentary private secretary in the UK Northern 
Ireland Office, and he often refers to his experience during 
those years as one of the likely targets of IRA terrorism. 
From 1994-95 Evans was Corporate Affairs Minister in the UK 
Department of Trade and Industry.  In 1997, he was appointed 
Conservative spokesman for Wales.  Evans is intelligent and 
articulate.  He is a dedicated transatlanticist, but often is 
quite sensitive about what he believes are unfair U.S. 
attitudes toward Europe and Europeans.  He says, for example, 
that as a former target of IRA terrorism &largely funded by 
sources in the U.S.8 he resents &Republican accusations 
that Europeans are soft on terrorism.8  Also, in 
conversations with U.S. officials he has expressed 
exasperation about the contrast he perceives between UK Prime 
Minister Blair,s closeness to President Bush and his 
(Evans,) belief that UK Conservative leader Michael Howard 
has been &frozen out of the White House.8 
 
5. (C) COMMENT:  In Evans, the EP has found a U.S. Delegation 
Chairman who is capable, intelligent and ambitious.  Whether 
his chairmanship will yield positive results will depend both 
on how able he proves in overcoming constraints placed on him 
by less transatlantically minded committee members, and on 
our success in leveraging his position to get results when we 
engage the EP on issues of interest to us.  END COMMENT. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23722","12/7/2004 16:39","04BRUSSELS5159","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04BRUSSELS5063","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005159 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/R 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/06/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, RS, PL, LH, NL, UK, GM, IT, FR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU ENLARGEMENT DRIVES GRADUAL HARDENING IN EU 
RUSSIA POLICY 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 5063 
 
     B. THE HAGUE 3094 
     C. WARSAW 5120 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF EMAZUR FOR REASONS 1.4 (B, D) 
 
1. (C) Summary: The November 25 EU-Russia summit reflected a 
shift in the EU,s approach to Russia toward a tougher, more 
disciplined policy, a process that began following what many 
Member States viewed as Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi\'s 
pandering to Russian President Putin at the 2003 summit.  The 
shift is likely to continue in response to the increased 
friction between Brussels and Moscow over Ukraine, other 
regional issues, and trends inside Russia.  Some EU officials 
question the EU\'s premise that it is possible to build a 
relationship with Russia based on shared fundamental values. 
Lastly, the Baltic and Central European countries that joined 
the EU last May argue that the EU at 25 should be a tougher 
negotiator with Moscow than it was at 15.  These various 
factors are likely to result in a gradual hardening of EU 
policy toward Russia rather than a dramatic change of 
approach  -- largely because major members will resist a 
tougher policy that they fear could damage their bilateral 
relations with Moscow.  End Summary 
 
New Members Want an Assertive EU Approach( 
-------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) The EU\'s enlargement in May brought in several 
Central European and Baltic states who share a strong 
interest in pursuing a tough Russia policy.  As they have 
begun to assert themselves within EU institutions, they have 
pushed for a greater EU focus and assertiveness toward 
Russia.  Their intense interest in Russia has led some 
veteran EU members to complain of a single-minded focus that 
puts Russia on the EU agenda \"day and night.\"  Diplomats from 
the new Member States tell us that they seek a more equitable 
EU-Russia relationship in which Russia delivers as much as 
the EU does.  These diplomats fault the EU for being too 
passive and undisciplined, allowing Moscow to drive the 
direction of the relationship. Instead, the Poles and others 
argue the EU should adopt a more consistent approach that 
would press Moscow to respect human rights and the rule of 
law, and create a transparent business climate.  They also 
question whether the EU recognizes and is able to take 
advantage of its leverage over Moscow, which includes 
providing markets for Russian resources and access to the 
Kaliningrad exclave. 
 
(But Hesitate To Drive The Policy 
----------------------------- 
 
3. (C) According to Czech Ambassador to the EU\'s Political 
and Security Committee (PSC) Jan Kohout and Polish First 
Secretary Cezary Bardzinski (protect both), the new Member 
 
SIPDIS 
States are concerned that voicing their opinions on Russia 
too loudly or often could undermine their credibility among 
the EU-15.  Instead, they prefer to seek alliances with the 
Nordics or the United Kingdom on Russia-related initiatives. 
This hesitation comes from the perceived need to master EU 
policy-making mechanisms, and the concern that some EU 15 
already perceive new members as \"hysterically\" anti-Russian. 
Nevertheless, Lithuanian PSC Ambassador Martikonis (protect) 
told us that Lithuania and some other new members are 
preparing to table more assertive proposals shortly, adding 
that he believed he was \"paid to change the EU,s approach to 
Russia.\" 
 
Some Veteran Member States Resist Change 
------------------------------- 
 
4. (C/NF) Nevertheless, new members have to confront France, 
Italy, and Germany, who will use their influence within the 
EU to moderate the speed and the extent of a shift.  Some EU 
diplomats in Brussels complain that Berlin, Rome, and Paris 
are more interested in maintaining strong bilateral ties with 
Russia than in pressing Moscow on human rights issues.  UK 
First Secretary Victoria Courtney (protect) acknowledged to 
us UK \"frustration\" with Chirac\'s and Schroeder\'s close 
bilateral relationships with Putin, saying London \"felt let 
down\" by their primary focus on the strategic partnership at 
the expense of other issues, such as human rights or 
democracy.  Additionally, Martikonis acknowledged he was 
concerned that Germany and France might be willing to 
compromise on points important to Lithuania, such as transit 
of goods between Kaliningrad and mainland Russia, to maintain 
good relations with Russia.  Bilateral relations, potential 
to undermine a tough common EU policy was also evident in the 
run up to the November 25 EU-Russia summit, when some Member 
States agreed with Moscow\'s argument that its recent 
ratification of the Kyoto and PCA treaties should be met with 
EU concessions to Russia, according to the Commission\'s 
Russia desk officer, Michael Miller (protect). 
5. (C) In fact, Germany and some other members do not see the 
need to change the EU\'s approach to Russia.  They view the 
new members as \"too sensitive and too focused\" on Russia - a 
stance that they claim will fade once the new members 
\"overcome their past,\" according to Simon.  Others consider 
the new members too confident in criticizing Russia since 
joining the EU, and dismiss them, as did Dutch Trade 
Counselor Kees Fraterman, as the \"little ones\" who enjoy 
standing up to Russia from within the EU. 
 
6. (C) Nevertheless, Member States, desire for close 
bilateral relations with Russia that allows Moscow to appeal 
to Berlin or Paris and circumvent EU positions it dislikes 
may have backfired.  EU officials insist that recent 
significant breaches of common EU policy have forced a more 
disciplined policy to prevent Russia from picking members off 
one at a time.  For example, Italian Prime Minister 
Berlusconi\'s statements at the 2003 EU-Russia summit in 
support of Putin led to the current EU 25 resolution that no 
partial agreement on the four common spaces be allowed at the 
November 25 EU-Russia summit, a policy that successfully 
prevented Russia from cherry-picking its favorite accords. 
 
EU Split Over Russia Unlikely 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
7. (C) Some new Member State diplomats warn that the debate 
between those who want to hold Russia accountable for its 
human rights violations and those who value a strategic 
partnership with Russia above other concerns could lead to a 
split within the EU.  They caution that Moscow seeks to 
discredit the new members as biased &trouble-makers8 unable 
to understand the overarching EU-Russia relationship. 
Indeed, RELEX Deputy Director General Michael Leigh admitted 
that the EU was vulnerable to Moscow\'s efforts to divide 
Member States, and told us that the Commission had to work 
hard to keep a harmonized policy in place. 
 
8. (C) Most veteran (and some new Member State) officials 
agree, however, that a split over Russia is unlikely. 
Instead, they argue that an evolutionary process will lead to 
a slightly more hard-nosed approach than at present. 
Moscow\'s recent unhelpful positions on such troubling issues 
as the Ukrainian election, the Katyn massacre, Warsaw 
uprising, transit of goods to Kaliningrad, or 
Russian-speaking minorities in Latvia and Estonia increase 
the anxiety of those new member states with an unhappy 
history with Russia, but they also help unify the EU around a 
tougher policy.  For example, Moscow\'s resistance to 
acknowledging that the EU has legitimate interests in 
Russia\'s \"near abroad\" only solidified EU consensus behind 
its new neighborhood policy. 
 
9. (C) Comment: By bringing in countries that advocate a 
tougher EU policy toward Russia, EU enlargement has 
contributed to the forces that were already working to harden 
EU positions*the recognition of the need for better policy 
discipline, and the negative trends in Russian democracy.  As 
a result, the shift is more pronounced than would be the case 
from the enlargement alone.  The dispute over the recent 
Ukrainian election has additionally highlighted competing 
European and Russian ideas about democracy, leading some to 
question whether the EU can build a relationship with Russia 
and Putin based on shared values. 
 
10. (C) Comment Continued: -Whatever influence the new 
members have, the EU policy is likely to evolve by consensus 
that will take into account the vested interests of some 
major Member States in maintaining a more accommodating 
policy toward Russia.  But to some of the new EU members, 
Russia is too important a neighbor to allow what they view as 
an ineffective EU policy to stand unchanged. 
 
McKinley 
"
"23788","12/8/2004 16:23","04BRUSSELS5186","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 005186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ECIN, RO, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ROMANIAN EU ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS GOING DOWN TO 
THE WIRE 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) The European Commission has recommended against 
closing the competition chapter of Romania\'s accession 
negotiations because of concerns over state subsidies.  No 
American companies are believed to be involved in any of the 
major cases of concern.  The EU might miss its self-imposed 
deadline of the end of 2004 for concluding negotiations.  If 
the talks drag too far into 2005, it could even mean delay of 
Romania\'s planned EU entry date of January 2007.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) We spoke with Dirk Lange, the European Commission\'s 
Head of Unit for Romania, on December 7 about the state of 
play in Romania\'s accession negotiations.  Lange said that it 
was still unclear whether Romania would be able to conclude 
successfully all of its negotiations for EU accession prior 
to the December 17 European Council meeting.  Negotiations 
between the GoR and the EU\'s Council and Commission continue 
\"nearly every day\", Lange said (another session is being held 
Dec. 8), and he has \"not given up hope that we can conclude 
by the end of the year.\" 
 
3. (C) Lange said that both remaining open chapters, justice 
and home affairs (JHA) and competition, were difficult.  On 
JHA, the Commission had recommended to EU Member States in 
the Council that Romania\'s most recent commitments on 
application of the EU\'s body of law (the \"acquis 
communitaire\") in this area was adequate and the chapter 
could be closed.  But the Council had yet to reach a final 
decision.  Competition was more difficult, and the 
Commission\'s most recent recommendation to the Council a 
couple of weeks ago stated this chapter was not yet ready for 
closure.  Lange explained that under candidate countries\' 
\"Europe Agreements\" with the EU, states such as Romania were 
already obligated to conform to EU law.  But the Commission 
needed to see evidence that Bucharest was correctly applying 
it, and these concerns were not yet met, particularly in the 
field of state aid or subsidies to companies.  Lange said a 
number of specific state aid cases were of concern, involving 
both EU and non-EU companies, but he was not aware of any 
that involved U.S. firms. 
 
4. (C) Lange told us that some Member States had disagreed 
with the Commission\'s recommendation not to conclude 
accession negotiations with Romania.  He did not name any, 
but media reporting indicate that at least France and Italy 
have been pushing to let Romania in.  In the end, the Council 
could override the Commission\'s objections and decide to 
close the competition chapter in any case (although this is 
made more difficult politically by the fact that competition 
policy is one of the areas where the Commission has the 
greatest authority within the EU).  He could not predict how 
events would unfold in the coming days, but was sure that 
even if the negotiations were finished this month, Romania 
would be subject to very close monitoring by the Commission 
all they way up to its planned accession, alongside Bulgaria, 
in January 2007.  (NOTE:  The Accession Treaty for Romania 
and Bulgaria -- which despite suggestions from the European 
Parliament is still planned to be a single treaty -- will 
include a clause stating that if the Commission finds a 
failure to meet accession obligations, and the Council 
agrees, either country\'s entry to the EU could be postponed 
by up to a year. END NOTE.)  Lange added, however, that even 
if negotiations stretched into 2005 there could still be time 
to prepare, sign and ratify an Accession Treaty prior to that 
entry date. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5. (SBU) Romanian diplomats in Brussels are putting a brave 
face on developments; expressing confidence they will finish 
negotiations prior to December 17.  But they are very 
disappointed it has come down so close to the wire.  While 
there is a strong desire among the EU-25 to finish \"the 
current round\" of EU expansion to 27 members this year and 
not drag the process out, many Member States also worry about 
setting any precedent for future negotiations (i.e., Turkey) 
if Romania is given too much benefit of the doubt in the 
final stages of its accession process. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23824","12/9/2004 12:24","04BRUSSELS5195","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 005195 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA AND NEA 
PLEASE PASS TO USAID FOR ANE AND PPC 
NSC FOR ABRAMS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EAID, ECON, MNUC, XF, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ENGAGING THE EU ON THE MIDDLE EAST IN 2005 
 
Classified By: CHARGE P. MICHAEL MCKINLEY; Reasons 1.4 (B,D) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (C) The Middle East remains a nexus of friction between 
the United States and the European Union.  Since 9/11, these 
differences have affected our ability to work together on 
Iraq, nuclear proliferation in Iran, Middle East Peace, and 
the promotion of broader reform in the region.    The irony 
is that on each of these four issues, the EU largely shares 
our vision of the desired end state:  an independent 
Palestine at peace with Israel; a stable, democratic Iraq; a 
non-nuclear Iran; and a Middle East region pursuing political 
and economic reform. 
 
2.  (C) This common ground has enabled us to coordinate 
successfully our policies in the region, but only on a 
case-by-case basis and with considerable effort on our part. 
All too often, we are disappointed to find Europe pursuing 
policies in the region that diverge from, conflict with, or 
undermine our approach.  These difficulties, however, should 
not obscure the changes in the landscape.  The Europeans are 
coming to realize, for example, that their eighteen months of 
engagement with Iran have at best won a window of respite 
from the tough decisions ahead regarding Iran\'s nuclear 
ambitions and its unhelpful role on terrorism and transition 
in Iraq.  With Arafat,s death, there are also new signs of 
realism within the EU on how best to engage, and indications 
they are hearing us about not rushing to final status 
discussions.  On Iraq, while it is unlikely there will be a 
consensus EU decision to be more forthcoming before January 
elections are concluded, they are looking more actively at 
steps they can take to be helpful (the Paris Club debt 
forgiveness being the most striking example to date).  The 
EU, while sensitive on protecting its investment in the 
Barcelona process, is also supporting the Forum for the 
Future.  Finally, the EU remains a significant player on the 
resource front, providing over $1 billion a year in 
assistance to the region.    The fact remains that when we 
are able to bring the EU along on policy, its resources and 
political capital can act as force-multipliers for us.  This 
cable examines what recent experience indicates we can and 
cannot expect the EU to do with us in the Middle East in the 
coming months.  End Summary. 
 
Iraq:  What the EU is doing 
--------------------------- 
3. (C)  The transatlantic differences that emerged over the 
U.S. intervention in Iraq also deeply divided the EU, and 
revealed in stark contrast the shortcomings of Europe\'s 
efforts to forge a common foreign policy.  The EU\'s inability 
to forge a consensus on use of force in Iraq was seen in 
Brussels as a humiliating chapter never to be repeated. 
Nevertheless, the EU\'s External Relations Commissioner Chris 
Patten and its High Representative for Foreign and Security 
Policy Javier Solana determined by the spring of 2003 that a 
stable, democratic Iraq was in the EU\'s security interest, 
and began quietly to work with member states to build a 
consensus to fund Iraq\'s reconstruction. 
 
4. (C) They have been remarkably successful.  In the summer 
of 2003, Patten committed the Commission to provide 200 
million euros for 2004 -- equal to its contributions in 
Afghanistan -- and at the Madrid donors\' conference EU member 
states added another $1.2 billion to this total.  The 
Commission is proposing another 200 million euros for 2005 as 
well.  Similarly, the Commission has consistently expressed 
strong support -- in public statements and with assistance 
money -- for the January 2006 Presidential elections. 
Commission spokeswoman Emma Udwin has made clear that the EC 
is not expecting \"perfect\" elections, but that the EC will 
make every effort to lend international legitimacy to the 
vote. 
 
5. (C) Solana persuaded EU member states to welcome the 
Interim Iraqi Goverment, and invited Prime Minister Allawi to 
meet with EU Foreign Ministers in October.  When the UN 
launched an appeal for funding for security forces to protect 
an expanded UN presence in Iraq, the EU quickly expressed its 
commitment to help.  When the Commission lawyers concluded 
that for legal reasons it could not fund military operations, 
the Dutch EU Presidency took on the burden of soliciting 
bilateral pledges from member states, receiving a total of 
some $12 million.  The next hurdle was how to transfer the 
funding, leading to protracted discussions with a UN 
reluctant to establish a trust fund for that purpose.  (The 
UN has now done so, although new problems have arisen 
regarding delays in withdrawals from the fund.) 
 
6. (C) The Europeans are looking at other ways that the EU 
can help support a successful outcome in Iraq that all their 
25 member states can support.  The Paris Club agreement on 
Iraqi debt forgiveness was a major step.  They have also 
committed themselves to support police and rule of law 
training.  And the Commission is preparing the ground for 
setting up a mission inside Iraq after the elections if the 
security situation allows it.  As follow-up to the recent 
Senior Level Consultative Group (SLCG) meeting with the EU, 
there was a recognized need for closer consultations with the 
US on how to engage on Iraq reconstruction. 
 
Iraq:  What the EU won\'t do in Iraq 
----------------------------------- 
7. (C)  As the EU has sought creative ways to support a 
stable and democratic Iraq, it has consistently staked out 
what for it constitute -- at least for now -- \"redlines.\" 
The EU cannot, for example, be expected to take any steps 
that members like France or Germany would interpret as 
legitimizing the use of force ex post facto.  Not only does 
this mean no EU boots on the ground in Iraq (as distinct from 
troops supplied by individual EU member states, it means that 
until an elected government is in office and the U.S. has a 
firm departure date for the bulk of its troops, every appeal 
we make to the EU for additional assistance will be suspected 
-- by some -- as an effort by the U.S. to obtain back-door 
endorsement for our intervention.  The EU\'s second consistent 
\"redline\" is that the Commission will not put staff inside 
Iraq until the security situation is stabilized.  Thus, the 
EU has declined to deploy election observers inside Iraq. 
Instead, it will mount a remote monitoring mission in Amman. 
Similarly, the Commission has held back on opening an office 
in Baghdad, coordinating its assistance from Amman instead. 
 
Peace Process: what the EU is doing 
----------------------------------- 
8.  (C)  The EU\'s Javier Solana has consistently stated that 
Middle East Peace is his and the EU\'s highest foreign policy 
priority (the Balkans is his other area of focus).  This 
issue remains very much at the forefront of every 
Commissioner working foreign affairs, and is a central 
concern in European Council meetings as well.   In part, this 
is due to the strong sense of priority EU member states 
collectively attach to this issue -- Solana\'s job, after all, 
is to look for areas where it is possible to forge common 
policies, and the Middle East fits the bill. 
 
9.  (C) The EU has put its money where its mouth is.  They 
have been a major donor to the Palestinian Authority, and 
were heavily engaged in sustaining the reform agenda in the 
PA -- a crucial factor in establishing and sustaining 
effective Palestinian governance.  Following Arafat\'s death, 
the EU has focused on supporting Presidential elections in 
January, and on the steps Israel should take to facilitate 
the vote.  The EU is also intensely interested in providing 
observers for the election, in response to a request from the 
PA, and consistent with EU support during the 1996 elections. 
 
10.  (C) More importantly, and after pressure from the United 
States, and after initial skepticism regarding Israel\'s Gaza 
disengagement plan, the EU is now firmly on board working 
with other donors to support a successful withdrawal.  The 
tactical shift is noticeable elsewhere.  When EU frustration 
with the lack of progress on the roadmap surged in the months 
prior to Arafat\'s death, Spain\'s FM Moratinos (former EU 
envoy to the peace process) and Germany\'s Fischer indicated 
they wanted to see a more active EU policy or would consider 
taking independent initiatives.  In reaction, Solana prepared 
a blueprint for renewed EU engagement.  The purpose, in the 
words of one EU official, was to reign in Spain and Germany 
and ensure that the EU maintained the integrity of Quartet 
coordination. 
 
11. (C) In each of these instances outlined above, the EU, 
and Solana in particular, has been prepared to coordinate its 
actions with the U.S.  The indications are that they view the 
proposed January 9 elections in the Palestinian territories 
as an opportunity to reengage in the peace process in a 
meaningful fashion, and seem receptive to our pitch on 
step-by-step application of the Roadmap, with a focus on 
elections, security, Gaza withdrawal, and the emergence of 
effective democratic Palestinian institutions before moving 
to final status questions. As we move into 2005, however, we 
will need to be wary of European freelancing; PM Blair\'s 
proposal for an international conference on the Middle East 
in particular will likely gain momentum as the UK takes over 
both the G-8 and EU presidencies next year. 
 
Peace Process:  What the EU won\'t do 
------------------------------------ 
12.  (C)  The tactical shift cannot mask the fact that the EU 
does not share the U.S. view of the conflict in key respects, 
and even Solana has not been content with what he perceives 
to be an assigned secondary role within the Quartet.  The EU 
looks to the U.S. to use its influence on Israel to 
kick-start implementation of the Roadmap, and has been deeply 
disappointed by the lack of progress these past four years. 
In EU minds, the asymmetric capabilities of the two parties 
confer different responsibilities on each.  The EU believes 
that Israel, with all the power of a state, bears the burden 
for taking the initiative to make peace.  Europeans see 
Israel\'s occupation of Palestinian territory -- and continued 
settlement expansion -- adding a legal and moral 
justification to their views.  As a result, the EU holds 
Israel to a higher standard than it does the Palestinians, 
and many believe the US is not applying enough pressure on 
Sharon to moderate Israeli policies.  They hold a much harder 
view on Israel\'s separation fence, and the implementation of 
the ICJ decision. 
 
13. (C) At the same time, there is no sense that the EU sees 
a corresponding obligation on itself, as proponent of the 
Palestinian cause, to compel the PA to take real steps to 
curb terrorist violence.  Instead, EU officials talk of the 
\"limited capacity\" of the PA, given Israeli actions against 
PA security forces and its tight grip on the territories. 
The main result of the position the EU has taken has been the 
loss of credibility with Israel as a potential mediator. 
Neither the EU\'s expectation that Israel should take the 
first conciliatory step, nor its readiness to explain the 
PA\'s inability to do so (or even to respond), are likely to 
change.  This does not mean the EU cannot be a constructive 
partner, but it does mean that we will always need to devote 
a certain amount of effort to keeping the EU on the 
reservation, and limiting the potential damage it can 
unintentionally cause merely by restating its perspective on 
the conflict. 
 
Iran:  Engagement vs. Isolation 
------------------------------- 
14.  (C)  The EU and the U.S. have common ground:  we share 
the conviction that Iran is pursuing a nuclear weapons 
program, we have both stated publicly a nuclear Iran is 
unacceptable, and we have successfully kept Iran\'s nuclear 
program in the public spotlight.  But, where we conclude that 
Iran will only respond to pressure and isolation, the EU is 
firmly committed to a policy of engagement. 
 
15. (C) In part, the EU pursues engagement so persistently 
because, lacking a military capability, it has no other 
viable alternative, as a senior EU official has admitted. 
When engagement fails, as it has for the EU with Iran during 
the past two years, the EU response is to offer \"more 
engagement.\" Hence the EU-3\'s recent initiative to provide 
sufficient \"carrots\" to entice Tehran to suspend uranium 
enrichment.  We view this as rewarding Iran for complying 
with commitments it has made and breached.  The EU sees it as 
an unfortunate but necessary compromise to keep open Iran\'s 
remaining channel for dialogue with the West, in the hope 
that the EU can influence the \"reform\" element inside Iran. 
 
16. (C) In this situation, our best ally in changing the EU 
view over time will probably prove to be Iran\'s own 
duplicity.  Sharing information that indicates 
Iran\'s response to the EU-3 is a tactical ploy, and not a 
strategic decision to forego pursuit of nuclear weapons, can 
help the EU draw its own conclusions about the 
ineffectiveness of engagement in this instance.  Whether the 
Europeans can be convinced to adopt tougher stances in the 
future is another question, but as Iranian intransigence 
becomes ever more obvious, it may be possible to move the EU 
away from blocking international sanctions in the future. 
 
Broader Middle East:  Reluctant Ally with Deep Pockets 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
17.  (C)  After initial hesitation, The U.S. and EU are now 
on the same track; our respective missions in the region are 
meeting to identify areas where we can work in parallel to 
promote political, economic and social reform in the region. 
Since early spring 2004, officials of EuroMed and the US 
Middle East Partnership Initiative have been pursuing a 
senior-level consultative process to improve information 
sharing and coordination of our respective reform efforts. 
We each provide about $1 billion annually to the region, and 
both the EU and U.S. have recently reviewed their assistance 
programs with an eye to making aid more conditional on 
progress on reform.  This linkage is explicit in the EU\'s new 
European Neighborhood and Partnership Initiative, where 
negotiated Action Plans provide EU incentives as specific 
reforms are enacted.  Clearly, there is potential for 
synergies that can help raise the profile of reformers in the 
region. 
 
18.  (C) Getting to this point with the EU, however, has not 
been easy.  The EU was skeptical of our BME approach from the 
start.  First, the EU questioned our decision to launch the 
initiative at high-profile G8 and U.S.-EU summits, fearing 
this would create the perception that we sought to impose 
reform on the region.  Next, the EU insisted that without 
progress on Middle East Peace, the initiative would appear 
insincere.  Third, given Europe\'s own historical baggage in 
the region, the EU was reluctant to have its programs 
identified with the U.S. at a time when they believe U.S. 
credibility in the region has fallen to record lows.  Fourth, 
the EU was concerned that we were proposing to create 
jointly-funded assistance programs, a concept that is a 
complete non-starter given the EU\'s complex assistance 
regulations and long budgeting cycle. 
 
19. (C) Finally, the EU was sensitive to having a U.S. 
initiative overshadow its ten-year efforts under the 
Barcelona Process to build relations and promote change with 
its Mediterranean partners.  In fact, the U.S. initiative 
opened a fresh wound among EU member states, who are 
privately divided over the effectiveness of the Barcelona 
Process.  Northern European countries view the program as 
completely ineffective; southern members see good value in a 
program that has bought stability and good relations with 
North Africa.  Only recently, the EU has grudgingly begun to 
acknowledge that, in contrast to the EU\'s Barcelona Process, 
the BME initiative has actually succeeded in putting the 
issue of reform front and center on the region\'s political 
agenda. 
 
20. (C) The Forum for the Future may indeed provide the 
launch of a new phase in US-EU cooperation on reform in the 
Middle East.  As we look beyond Rabat, keeping our sights 
focused on how we and the EU together can most effectively 
advance reforms, including by letting the EU take the lead on 
issues or in countries where it has a comparative advantage, 
will be critical to keeping the EU engaged with us. 
 
Comment 
------- 
21.  (C) In recent meetings by high-level officials in 
Brussels, the message from the new Commission is one of 
realistic engagement.  They will have to deal with the 
realities of national politics in member states, some of them 
with strong alternative agendas in the Middle East.  That 
said, there seems to be an opportunity for a revitalized 
dialogue with the EU that can become more operational in 
areas of key concern to the United States as the harsh and 
complex realities of the post 9/11 world sink in at new 
levels in Europe.    EU endorsement offers a legitimacy to 
U.S. initiatives in the region that no other country or 
institution can match.  When the U.S. and EU speak with a 
single voice, countries in the region will listen.  When the 
U.S. and the EU are divided, it is easy to play us off 
against each other and avoid taking the tough decisions 
needed for the region\'s long term stability and prosperity. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23846","12/9/2004 16:41","04BRUSSELS5212","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005212 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, TU, CY, AM, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT DEBATES TURKISH 
ACCESSION 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  On December 14, the European 
Parliament (EP) will present its non-binding but 
influential \"opinion\" whether or not the EU should 
open accession negotiations with Turkey.  The EP 
views will not have much influence on the European 
Council decision of the heads of states and 
governments, but will likely be cited by them in 
their own debate on December 17.  In particular, EU 
leaders could mine the final EP opinion for 
arguments and points to support their positions. 
End summary 
 
POSITIVE FIRST STEP IN DEBATE 
----------------------------- 
 
2. (U) In their draft report adopted on November 30 
by the Foreign Affairs committee, MEPs called for 
opening the accession negotiations with Turkey 
\"without undue delay.\"   Amendments tabled by some 
Christian-democrats, stating that the door should 
stay open for the negotiation process to end in a 
\"privileged partnership\" instead of formal 
accession, were rejected in committee. Some 
Christian-Democrats might retable amendments for the 
plenary vote on December 14.  Currently, a majority 
of MEPs appear to be in favor of opening 
negotiations in 2005 with Turkey\'s full EU 
membership as the objective by means of an \"open- 
ended process\". 
 
 
3. (SBU) The European Parliament (EP) has been, and 
remains the center of intense political debate on 
the opening of negotiations with Turkey.  Very tough 
of Turkey in its first draft, the report drafted by 
Dutch Christian Democrat Camiel Eurling, had been 
widely criticized in committee, with Liberal, 
Socialist and green MEPs qualifying its tone as 
\"brutal.\"  Hundreds of amendments tabled and adopted 
in committee made the final version much more 
positive towards Turkey\'s prospects for accession. 
A Turkish diplomat told us that the Turkish Mission 
had been very active in providing MEPs with 
documents including suggestions to make the report 
more acceptable to Ankara 
 
4. (SBU) In the foreign affairs committee debate, 
amendments stating that the negotiation process 
could be leading to a \"special partnership\" between 
Turkey and the EU instead of full membership were 
all rejected.  An EP staffer told us these 
amendments could be resubmitted by French and German 
Christian democrats who still strongly oppose 
Turkey\'s accession to the EU.  Current conventional 
wisdom is these amendments will fail on December 14. 
 
ARMENIA 
------- 
 
5. (SBU) Another delicate matter in the report 
involved the language on the Armenian issue.  The 
report, as adopted in the foreign affairs committee, 
mentions the word \"genocide\" once but amendments 
proposing Turkish acknowledgement of \"genocide\" as a 
prerequisite for accession were not adopted.  French 
MEPs have been most active in pushing this issue and 
it could comeback on December 14.  On this issue 
also, most political groups are split and a staffer 
from the socialist group told us that his group 
would not impose any \"party line.\" 
 
 
CYPRUS 
------ 
6. (SBU) Cyprus is difficult for the EP. The foreign 
affairs report contained relatively vague language 
saying that start of accession negotiations 
\"implies\" Turkish recognition of Cyprus.  The report 
however dropped the word \"occupying\" forces and 
simply calls for the \"early withdrawal of its 
(Turkey\'s) forces according to a specific 
timetable...\" How to handle Cyprus is likely to a 
point of debate during the plenary session. 
 
A TURKISH ASSESSMENT 
-------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) According to a Turkish diplomat following 
this debate in the EP, the heads of states may want 
to refer to it to give their final decision at the 
Eureopean Council the seal of \"democratic 
legitimacy.\" 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23849","12/9/2004 17:12","04BRUSSELS5215","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS5125|04BUDAPEST3181|04THEHAGUE3133|04VALLETTA1099","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 005215 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, HR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: NEGOTIATIONS CONTINUE ON TERMS FOR CROATIAN EU 
ACCESSION NEGOTIATIONS 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 5125 
     B. THE HAGUE 3133 
     C. BUDAPEST 3181 
     D. VALLETTA 1099 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
1. (C) The Dutch text on Croatia that will be presented to EU 
FMs at the GAERC on December 13 should be unchanged from 
their original proposal (ref B).  But Austria, now with 
support from Luxembourg, can be expected to push alternative 
language that gets ICTY conditionality the wrong way around. 
A key factor would be getting those Member States who have 
been non-commital, or waffling, to reaffirm the EU\'s 
commitment to conditionality.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) Luxembourg, wearing its hat as the incoming EU 
Presidency, on December 8 suggested to the EU Permanent 
Representatives Committee (COREPER) unhelpful amendments to 
the Dutch-proposed text for the December 17 European Council 
(EU Summit) Conclusions on Croatia.  Rather than the Dutch 
proposal, where the EU would set a date to begin EU accession 
negotiations with Croatia \"provided that full cooperation 
with ICTY has been confirmed by the Council\", the Luxembourg 
PermRep proposed to \"switch the key\" so that the EU would 
begin negotiations on the date fixed UNLESS the Council finds 
that Croatia is not fully cooperating with ICTY.  Luxembourg 
coupled these proposal with the announcement that they have 
already invited ICTY Prosecutor Carla del Ponte to attend the 
February 2005 GAERC, and therefore argued this would provide 
a reliable trigger for a Council decision, if required. 
 
3. (C) Member States favoring strict ICTY conditionality 
expressed some surprise, and annoyance, at the Luxemborg 
initiative.  They told us they had expected such a tactic 
from Austria and/or Germany, but were not pleased to see the 
incoming Presidency land so solidly in that camp. 
 
4. (C) COREPER briefly debated the Luxembourg proposal on 
December 9 during an extended and restricted COREPER session. 
 Sources told us the chair, Dutch Ambassador Tom De Bruijn 
opened the discussion saying there were \"bigger fish to fry\" 
(i.e., Turkey), and the Presidency had no intention revising 
the text further, and so would stick with its original text 
on Croatia.  The UK and others who have suggested not 
including a date in the Conclusions said they would desist, 
if the Presidency\'s approach was adopted.  Luxembourg, 
supported by Austria and Germany, however, raised their 
proposal, but there was no consensus.  The Dutch text, 
therefore, will be that presented to the GAERC on December 
13, and the Dutch are unlikely to invite further debate on it 
there (although at some point a date needs to be inserted). 
A UK source said, however, that most Member States expect the 
Austrians to raise the issue. 
 
5. (C) A Belgian contact told us the GOB very much hoped to 
reach consensus on the Croatia text at as low a level as 
possible.  FM de Gucht has taken a strong stance on ICTY 
conditionality after being personally persuaded by del Ponte 
that the Croatians were hood-winking the EU; but the Belgian 
position could weaken if the Croatia issue is debated fully 
at Heads level, where German and Austrian Chancellors 
Schroeder and Schuessel continue to campaign actively for 
weak conditionality.  Our British contact noted that, 
whatever might be agreed at among  Ambassadors or even FMs, 
there would always remain a good chance of an Austrian or 
German \"ambush\" at the Summit on December 17. 
 
6. (C) Assuming the Dutch will not be able to avoid any 
further re-opening of the text, the position taken by some of 
the uncommitted Member States will be important.  The UK, 
Sweden, Belgium, and Latvia are definitely among those 
clearly favoring conditionality.  Slovenia has been waffling, 
apparently as it evaluates how best to advance its own 
bilateral issues with Croatia.  But FM Rupel is almost 
certain to speak up, and at length, if the issue gets opened 
a the GAERC, and it would be helpful to know which way he 
will go.  A contact here also indicated they had heard Madrid 
was considering coming out in support of the Dutch text as 
the best way forward.  If FM Moratinos would do so at the 
GAERC it would give the conditionality camp a big boost.  In 
the other direction, we note that some other Member States 
such as Hungary and Malta (Refs C and D) are moving more 
solidly into group favoring an easing off on conditionality. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23852","12/9/2004 17:31","04BRUSSELS5216","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE258831","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 005216 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ETTC, KPAL, UP, CO, HR, CG, TU, RW, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COMMISSION AND COUNCIL SECRETARIAT RESPONSE ON 
GAERC DEMARCHE 
 
REF: A. STATE 258831 
 
     B. THE HAGUE 3219 
     C. USEU BRUSSELS 5215 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff. Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
1. (SBU) We reviewed REF A points with Judith Gebetsroithner 
of Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner\'s cabinet and Margarita 
Comamala of the Council Secretariat on December 7 and 8, 
respectively.  Neither had any specific comment or reaction 
on the Great Lakes, Middle East or Colombia (the latter of 
which will be an A point for approval of Conclusions without 
discussion at the General Affairs and External Relations 
Council meeting on Dec. 13), other than to say they 
appreciated the overall positive assessment of US-EU 
coordination in those areas. 
 
2. (SBU) On Ukraine, Gebetsroithner said the Action Plan for 
Ukraine under the European Neighborhood Policy should be 
approved by the Commission at its formal session on December 
9 as part of a package of several Action Plans.  The 
Commission hoped the full package would be endorsed by the 
GAERC on Dec. 13, but she thought some Member States might 
ask for more time to consider the texts.  In the Ukraine 
plan, the Commission would likely add a reference in its 
decision to approve noting that implementation of the Action 
Plan could only begin \"when circumstances allow\" (with the 
clear implication that this meant only when a new government 
was in place after elections).  Commenting specifically on EU 
support for the new round of elections, Gebetsroithner said 
the EU would find resources to support ODIHR\'s observation 
efforts, and was looking at how to provide more personnel for 
the mission.  She said she was optimistic that the EU would 
be able to meet ODIHR\'s requests in terms of numbers. 
 
3. (C) On Croatia, Gebetsroithner, an Austrian diplomat on 
loan to the Commission, noted that enlargement issues were 
not her boss\' responsibility.  But, like the Dutch (REF B), 
she saw little chance the final Conclusions would be agreed 
before the EU Summit on the December 17.  (For more details 
on negotiations over the Croatia text, see REF C.)  She 
commented that the Austrian government would need to respond 
to public opinion and come up with a result where both 
Croatia and Turkey were seen to be treated the same.  PolOff 
responded that the EU had laid out clear conditions for 
opening negotiations, and would be treating candidates 
equally by opening negotiations when, but only when, the 
countries met those conditions.  Gebetsroithner acknowledged 
this was consistent with the Commission\'s own line on these 
matters, but the public would only understand if both got a 
date or neither did. 
 
4. (C) On China, Comamala confirmed press reports that the 
French have been balking at a serious tightening of the Code 
of Conduct on Arms Exports.  Nonetheless, she said the EU\'s 
Political and Security Committee was scheduled \"soon\" 
(meaning before the end of December) to hold a debate on 
whether and how the EU could make the Code a \"legal 
instrument\" of the EU and therefore binding on Member States. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"23886","12/10/2004 9:58","04BRUSSELS5221","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04BRUSSELS4630|04BRUSSELS5070","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BRUSSELS 005221 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR E,EB,EUR/ERA,AF,NEA,PRM,S/CRS 
DEPT PASS MCC FOR MORFORD 
USAID FOR PPC,EGAT,AFR,ANE,GH,EE,LAC 
NSC FOR MCKIBBEN,STRONG,SIMON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ECON, PREF, PREL, EUN, UN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ENGAGING THE EU ON DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE IN 
2005: THE GLOBAL SCOPE OF U.S.-EU COOPERATION 
 
REF: (A) BRUSSELS 5070 (B) BRUSSELS 4630 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. The 25 EU member states have a GDP roughly 
equal to the United States, but spend twice as much on 
development assistance.  One fifth of EU assistance is 
funneled through the European Commission (EC), making the 
Commission the third largest single donor in the world and an 
important catalyst for other EU funding.  Although EC 
decision-making and budgeting processes are sluggish in 
adapting to changing needs, when we can articulate a 
long-term vision, as we have in Afghanistan and the Balkans, 
for example, the US and the EU can work to each other\'s 
strengths in structuring our assistance. 
 
2. (SBU) It is striking just how much US and EU development 
and humanitarian assistance priorities coincide.    The 
numbers speak for themselves: 200 million euros/year for 
Afghanistan; 320 million euros to Iraq over the last two 
years, with another 200 million slated for 2005; over 300 
million euros to Sudan/Darfur, and 250 million euros for the 
Palestinians this year (with another 20 million euros already 
set aside to support Gaza engagement). 
 
3. (SBU) As the world\'s two largest donors, the US and EU 
have enormous scope for cooperation and coordination on our 
respective development assistance programs globally.  As we 
look to address the next phase of challenges in Afghanistan, 
Iraq, and Darfur, or longer-term development in the Middle 
East, Africa, and Eurasia, the force-multiplier opportunities 
are there.  New EU Commissioner President Barroso is also 
much more attuned to development and assistance needs than 
his predecessor was.  Despite the political strains of recent 
years, development cooperation and coordination around the 
globe remains strong as this cable\'s survey demonstrates and 
critical to achieving our strategic policy objectives. 
(starting at paragraph 12).  End Summary 
 
Putting Assistance in Context 
------------------------ 
 
4. (SBU) The December 2003 European Security Strategy (\"A 
Secure Europe in a Better World\") closely mirrors the US 
National Security Strategy emphasis on Defense, Diplomacy and 
Development.  The strategy notes that \"as a union of 25 
states with over 450 million people producing a quarter of 
the world\'s Gross National Product (GNP). The European 
Union (EU) is inevitably a global player... (that) should be 
ready to share in the responsibility for global security  and 
in building a better world.\"  In fact, 2003 net Official 
Development Assistance (ODA) data from the OECD DAC reveal 
the EU member states disbursed $37.139 billion (compared to 
16.254 billion by the United States).  Nearly 
20 percent of EU ODA flows, or over $7 billion annually, are 
channeled through the European Commission.  Clearly, the EU 
and US working together represent the two largest donors 
globally. 
 
Cumbersome Decision-making 
------------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) Getting internal consensus within the EU on how to 
respond to development needs remains a time-consuming process 
and may well prove even more complex with 25 member states 
than it has been with 15.  However, when we can articulate a 
long-term vision of what we see as the end game, as we have 
in Afghanistan and the Balkans, for example, the US and the 
EU can work to each other\'s strengths in structuring our 
assistance. 
 
6.  (SBU) Within the EU there are clear patterns of 
Development Ministers\' views.  Most Northern Europe 
Development Ministers, with the notable exception of the 
current Dutch Minister, tend to take a more purist approach 
to development assistance.  The UK Development Minister in 
particular lambasts the EC for aid programs which he views as 
not consistent with a poverty reduction focus.  The Southern 
Europe Development Ministers, on the other hand, tend to take 
a quite different approach, consciously linking development 
assistance to foreign policy goals, which leads to a 
perceived skewing of assistance to Latin America based on 
other than development grounds.  The new member states are 
not significant donors, are still on a steep learning curve, 
and have yet to align themselves in one or the other camp. 
 
7.  (SBU) The EC\'s seven-year budget cycle also influences EU 
assistance.  The EC is in a better position to respond to 
long-standing crises than to major new initiatives for which 
they have not planned.  Similarly, while our interests 
largely coincide, in some instances they have different 
priorities -- as we are now seeing with the EU emphasis on 
the Great Lakes crisis.  One important factor to bear in mind 
as we encourage the EC to respond to our priorities is that 
the Community resources are part of a zero sum game.  When 
the EC agrees to fund something of interest to us, it will 
come at the expense of something else we might like them to 
fund. 
 
Institutional Reforms 
------------------------ 
 
8. (SBU) Under the previous Commission, a number of 
institutional reforms were put in place to enable the EC to 
be more agile in its response mechanism.  Those reforms 
included the establishment of a new Directorate General for 
European Aid Cooperation (DG AIDCO) for the implementation of 
development assistance policy, concurrent with a policy of 
\"deconcentration\" or devolution of staff to the field.  As a 
result, the 80 Delegations in the field managing development 
assistance have been strengthened, and now possess the 
technical and administrative capacity to implement programs 
and pay contractors directly.  Brussels headquarters 
therefore focuses more on policy and coordination, with 
significantly reduced technical capacity here. 
 
9. (SBU) As part of the preparations for the 2007 -2013 
Financial Perspectives, the Commission recently proposed a 
consolidation of funding instruments for external assistance 
from the current 90 \"funding instruments\" (budget lines) to 
just 6:  (a) an instrument for pre-accession assistance; (b) 
a European Neighborhood and Partnership instrument; (c) a 
Development Cooperation and Economic Cooperation instrument; 
(d) an instrument for stability; (e) an existing instrument 
for humanitarian assistance; and (f) an existing instrument 
for macro financial assistance.  The Commission is also 
seeking significant increases for these external assistance 
instruments. 
 
10. (SBU) The debate on the overall size of the EC\'s 
development budget will go on all next year.  Based on the 
recent debate over the 2005 budget, however, we saw the EU 
Finance Ministers defying the European Parliament and 
striking a deal on the 2005 budget (the first full-year 
budget for the EU-25) which limits the increase to 5.9% over 
2004.  The total EC budget of euro 106.3 billion (with less 
than 7 percent for foreign assistance) amounted to just over 
1% of GNI.  The six EU member states that are net 
contributors to the budget seek to likewise cap the 2007-13 
budget at 1% of GNI, rather than 1.24% of GNI proposed by the 
Commission. 
 
US-EU Cooperation Spans the Globe 
------------------------ 
 
11. (SBU) Meanwhile, the US and EC coordinate and cooperate 
closely on humanitarian assistance worldwide.  Over the past 
year the cooperation has included Afghanistan, Iraq, Liberia, 
Haiti, Palestinian Territories, Uganda, Sudan (including 
Darfur), Cote d\'Ivoire, Colombia, Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Burundi, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, Angola, Myanmar, 
Chechnya, Yemen, Tajikistan, Cambodia, Sierra Leone and 
assistance to the victims of the Bam earthquake in Iran. 
 
12. (SBU) US-EC Cooperation on key USG strategic priorities: 
 
A.  Afghanistan - From the beginning of the international 
engagement, the EC made a long term commitment to Afghanistan 
by pledging $1 billion over five years at the Tokyo 
Conference.  The European Commission and EU Presidency have 
been active co-chairs of the Donor Group.  The EC has 
exceeded its pledge and been responsive in mobilizing 
resources for police training and the recent elections.  We 
expect that commitment to continue.   The EC welcomes the new 
Afghan counter-narcotics plan and the strong backing the US 
is providing this effort. 
 
B.  Iraq - Despite differences within the EU over the 
approach to Iraq, the EC and EU member states pledged $1.4 
billion of assistance at the October 2003 Madrid Donors\' 
Conference.  The EC has fully disbursed the 2003 - 2004 funds 
($320 million) to the World Bank and UN Trust Funds.  Both 
the EC and the EU Presidency have been active participants in 
the Core Donor Group and are now preparing their 2005 package 
of euros 200 million (subject to European Parliament 
approval), with an emphasis on the upcoming elections, 
private sector development, trade, investment, public 
services, jobs, democracy and rule of law.  The major 
challenge facing the EC is how to disburse their program 
without an office in country.  The Commission argues that it 
has no mechanisms to provide protection for their offices, so 
they are attempting to run their program from Amman until 
such time as the security situation will allow them to 
re-locate. 
 
C.  Sudan - The EU shares our concerns over the horrific 
humanitarian disaster in Darfur, and has mobilized euros 
326.5 million of assistance, including support for the 
African Union peacekeeping efforts.  New Development 
Commissioner Louis Michel made his first foreign trip to 
Khartoum and Darfur November 25 - 27.  We expect continued 
strong support from the EC, as well as the EU Foreign 
Ministers and Development Ministers, in efforts to resolve 
the humanitarian crisis, and to produce a North-South peace 
agreement which will unleash significant development 
resources.  The US and EU already are in close policy 
coordination on Sudan. 
 
D.  Palestinian Authority - This year assistance to the 
Palestinians from the EC budget is set at around 250 million 
euros, including a package for the West Bank and Gaza for 
124.25 million euros. The assistance has two objectives: 
addressing urgent needs and contributing to the creation of a 
viable and democratic Palestinian state.  The EC is 
contributing 65 million euros to the Public Financial 
Management Reform Trust Fund established by the World Bank at 
the request of the Palestinian Authority with backing from 
the international donor community to continue improving 
management of public finances and the viability of 
Palestinian Authority institutions.  Following a recent 
request of the Council to the Commission to consider 
developing concrete measures to make a success of the 
disengagement from Gaza, a reserve for an amount of 20 
million euros has been set aside. This will be defined in due 
course subject to developments on the ground.  In addition, 
some 3 million euros have been set aside to support civil 
society initiatives in East Jerusalem with a view to 
strengthening institutions that are working on the 
improvement of living conditions in the area. This total 
package comes on top of around 128 million euros already 
earmarked through the following programs: 89 million euros 
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for 
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), (of which 8 
million euros from ECHO), 29 million euros for humanitarian 
aid through ECHO, around 10 million euros for food aid /food 
security through the World Food Program and NGOs and for the 
European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights 
(EIDHR). 
 
E.  Liberia - At the February Donors\' Conference in NY, the 
EC pledged $125 million for reconstruction and $75 million 
for humanitarian assistance.  Both the EC and Dutch EU 
Presidency report ongoing concerns with donor coordination in 
Monrovia. These concerns are discussed Ref A. 
 
F.   Haiti - The EC was the single largest donor of budget 
support at the July Donors\' Conference in Washington. 
Ongoing violence in the country is affecting the EC\'s ability 
to disburse funds in a timely fashion.  The EC also has funds 
reserved for rehabilitation programs which are now under way. 
 They are also moving ahead with a justice reform program 
which they consider a priority.  The EC plans to contribute 
euros 10 million for the elections if they take place. 
 
G.  Ethiopia  - The EC and EU member states are actively 
engaged in the G8 Famine Initiative in Ethiopia where we are 
jointly assisting the GOE get on an economic growth path, 
which will liberalize markets and get agricultural growth 
above 6% within the next three to four years.  The initiative 
includes a multi-donor sector wide program supporting a 
\"productive safety net\" which will stabilize rural incomes of 
the chronically food vulnerable and build productive assets 
of rural communities. 
 
H.  Georgia - The Donors\' Conference in Brussels saw a robust 
EC commitment of over 125 million euros of EC funds to 
Georgia over the period 2004-2006.  Taken together with 
humanitarian and other assistance, total European Community 
aid to Georgia for 2004-2006 amounts to 137 million euros. 
The EU broadened the European Neighborhood and Partnership 
policy to embrace Georgia in addition to the 14 other 
countries and Palestinian Authority which form the EU\'s new 
neighborhood. 
 
I.  Sri Lanka - The EC remains a strong donor Co-Chair having 
joined the US, the Norwegians and the Japanese in urging in 
the strongest possible terms a rapid resumption of the peace 
negotiations so that Sri Lanka can benefit from the 
generosity of the international community.  The EC has asked 
for the next Co-Chair meeting to be scheduled. 
J.  Broader Middle East and Mediterranean - Donor 
coordination on assistance programs in USAID presence 
countries with the EC and EU member state bilateral programs 
is already quite strong.  Recent instructions from State and 
Brussels to respective field missions in the region to meet 
on a quarterly basis should identify additional areas of 
potential cooperation and coordination on messages of support 
for reform agenda.  We were pleased to see the EC 
demonstrating leadership on the Forum for the Future by 
convening a technical level dialogue among key donors 
supporting the Literacy initiative.  The EC has indicated 
they would welcome follow up to the series of DVCs held in 
March -April in preparation for the drafting of the US-EU 
Summit statement on BMEM, particularly in the areas of 
vocational education and training for the labor market, small 
and medium enterprise development, support for independent 
media, support for youth, etc. 
 
K.  Broadening and deepening our coordination and cooperation 
in Africa - the EU Development Ministers recently called for 
a renewed focus on Africa as part of the effort to prepare 
for the MDG 5 Stocktaking event next September.  New 
Commissioner for Development Louis Michel has made it clear 
Africa will be his focus, given his long and abiding interest 
in the continent.  The US and EC already enjoy excellent 
cooperation on a range of issues in Africa, and it behooves 
us to actively engage in broadening and deepening those 
efforts including elections, agricultural technology, food 
security, economic growth.  In 2003 the EC also introduced 
the Africa Peace Facility (APF), funded out of European 
Development Funds at the 250 million euro level for three 
years to respond to emerging security needs linked to 
development.  This instrument was established in record time, 
demonstrating that where there is internal EU consensus they 
can move quickly to deliver.  The APF has been critical to 
mobilizing peacekeeping efforts in Darfur. 
 
L.  Cyprus - The EU is in the process of securing a Euros 259 
million aid and trade package to end the isolation of the 
Turkish Cypriot community.  Given Cyprus\' member state status 
in the EU, this has proven more complex than originally 
envisioned.  The EC has asked for consultations to ensure the 
respective efforts the EC and USG will fund are complementary 
and mutually reinforcing. 
 
M.  DPRK - The EC shares US concerns over monitoring of 
humanitarian assistance in North Korea.  Ref B provides 
further details 
 
N.  Food Security - Over the past two years we have made 
notable progress in our dialogue with the EC on food security 
and there is now a greater understanding of how each donor 
uses food aid when assisting countries to get on an economic 
growth path, as in the case of Ethiopia.  The EC remains 
skeptical about US food aid policies in the abstract. 
However, in the context of the Darfur humanitarian crisis, 
the EC encouraged EU member states to increase their food aid 
contributions.  The dialogue needs to be maintained with each 
donor playing to its strengths -- US food, EC cash to buy 
locally or regionally.  We also need to continue to work 
together on the economic impact of local purchase and needs 
assessments as this is the principal means upon which more 
credible response plans can be developed. 
 
O.  HIV/AIDS - The EU has made its support for The Global 
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFTAM) the 
principle vehicle for contributions from the EC and EU member 
states, pledging $1.5 billion as of June 2004.  EU member 
states also fund bilateral assistance programs for HIV/AIDS 
in many countries.  In Europe the perception is the USG is 
more focused on our bilateral PEPFAR initiative than on our 
support for the multilateral GFATM, despite US chairmanship 
of the GFATM.   Early engagement at Cabinet level with the EU 
in the new year on this issue would be helpful.  The last 
such visit to Brussels was carried out by HHS Secretary 
Thompson in 2003. 
 
P. Water  - The EC and EU member states are heavily engaged 
in water projects globally and recently initiated an EU Water 
Facility funded at the euro 1 billion level.   Opportunities 
for greater US-EU coordination exist, but would require a 
joint STATE-USAID team to come to Brussels for serious 
discussions. 
 
Conclusion 
------------------------ 
 
13. (SBU) As the world\'s two largest donors, the US and EU 
have enormous scope for cooperation and coordination on our 
respective development assistance programs globally.   While 
the focus of the donor community for the coming year will be 
in preparing for the September 2005 Millennium Development 
Goals Stocktaking event, we will continue to have numerous 
opportunities through the US-EU task forces and US -EU Senior 
Level Coordination Group (SLCG) Dialogue, US -EU Troika 
experts level consultations on Africa (COAFR), the Middle 
East (COMEM), South East Europe (COSEE), the Western Balkans 
(COWEB), Eastern Europe (COEST), Latin America (COLAT), and 
Asia (COASI), as well as the Humanitarian Assistance 
Strategic Partnership dialogue and other informal or ad hoc 
discussions to engage our interlocutors in the new Commission. 
 
MCKINLEY 
 
YY 
PRIORITY NSC WASHDC 
PRIORITY SECSTATE WASHDC 
 
Y 
 
DEPT FOR E 
EB 
EUR/ERA 
AF 
NEA 
PRM 
S/CRS: USAID FOR PPC 
EGAT 
AFR 
ANE 
GH 
DCHA 
EE 
LAC: PASS MCC FOR MORFORD: NSC FOR MCKIBBEN 
STRONG 
SIMON 
 
Y 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
SIPDIS 
"
"23918","12/10/2004 16:09","04BRUSSELS5226","Embassy Brussels","SECRET","04SARAJEVO3182|04SARAJEVO3197|04STATE257395|04STATE257497","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","S E C R E T BRUSSELS 005226 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, MARR, BK, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COUNCIL PERSPECTIVE ON BOSNIA REFORMS 
 
REF: A. STATE 257395 
     B. STATE 257497 
     C. SARAJEVO 3182 
     D. SARAJEVO 3197 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
1. (C) PolOff has discussed the texts of Secretary Powell\'s 
letters (REFS A and B) to High Rep Solana about 
Bosnia-Herzegovina with Stefan Lehne, Solana\'s key Balkan 
policy advisor.  Lehne said that Solana\'s understanding of 
the situation and way forward in Bosnia-Herzegovina was 
generally in line with the themes of the letters, but not 
quite as clear-cut as we had presented it. 
 
2. (C)  The EU agreed that both police and defense reform 
were needed, as suggested in ref B.  But from Lehne\'s 
perspective, the specifics of what needed to be done were 
clearest in the field of defense reform, which he noted was 
largely an issue for NATO, rather than the EU.  He said in 
this area his impression was that the \"details are all there, 
it is only a question of the pace.\"  But on police reform, 
while progress on this is clearly one of the EU\'s 16 
preconditions for beginning negotiations on a Stabilization 
and Association Agreement with B-H, it is not as clear that 
this must lead to a single structure.  (We note that Lehne\'s 
view is at odds with the EU position as described in REF D). 
The EU was \"cautiously positive\" regarding progress in this 
field, but the necessary final outcome of police reform \"is 
not completely defined.\" 
 
3. (S) Lehne also expressed some caution about ref A\'s 
reference to \"measures to target those in the Republika 
Srpska government who are most responsible for obstructing 
ICTY cooperation.\"  He did not argue that it was the wrong 
way to go, but said he was not sure that High Rep Ashdown was 
as intent on going after a broad swathe of SDS and PDP 
leadership as the US seemed to be suggesting. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
4. (S) Lehne, of course, does not have final say about what 
actions the EU might take against Republika Srpska officials 
-- such a decision would have to be taken by EU Member States 
in the Council.  But his reaction does not give us much 
optimism that the EU would be prepared to follow the US lead 
in imposing measures against a list of any length without a 
lot of heavy lifting from Ashdown\'s side. 
 
SCOTT 
"
"23996","12/13/2004 16:22","04BRUSSELS5255","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 005255 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR L/LEI, JUSTICE FOR OIA, PARIS FOR DOJ KEN 
HARRIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC, KCRM, KJUS, PO, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH THE PORTUGUESE ON THE EXTRADITION AND 
MLA PROTOCOLS 
 
 
  1.  On December 10, USEU Senior Counsel Mark Richard, 
Embassy Paris Justice Attache Ken Harris and USEU/NAS Frank 
Kerber attended a meeting arranged by Embassy Lisbon in an 
attempt to explore the possible options for resolving 
outstanding issues with respect to the conclusion of the 
Portuguese protocols to the EU-U.S. Mutual Legal Assistance 
and Extradition Conventions.  The meeting was with Ms. 
Mariana Sotto Maior and Mr. Nuno Pinheiro Torres of the 
Portuguese Justice Ministry.  Guy Stessens of the EU Council 
Secretariat also attended. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
      2.   The U.S. side opened the meeting by pointing out 
that during the course of the negotiations we have given 
Portugal more than any other EU Member State by way of 
concessions in an effort to accommodate their domestic needs, 
including the inclusion of the non-derogation clause as well 
as the provision for consultations if there is a dispute over 
the granting of extradition.  We were not attempting to 
modify the status quo with respect to either the death 
penalty or life imprisonment issue in any of the negotiations 
with respect to the issues of concern to Portugal.  They in 
turn should not seek to renegotiate the agreements to which 
they, along with their fellow Member States, had agreed over 
a year ago. 
 
      3.  To highlight this issue for their domestic purposes 
it was pointed out that they can assert that they are not 
opting to utilize the current death penalty article contained 
in the negotiated text, but were retaining their current 
position based on the fact that their constitutional 
limitations superseded the conclusion of the current 
bilateral instruments and that they believed that those 
provisions controlled the bilateral relationship on these 
points.  The U.S., of course, would continue to disagree with 
them on their legal conclusion, but it would take the issue 
away from the new conventions and just reflect that the 
status quo was being maintained. 
 
      4.  It was further pointed out that we continue to sign 
protocols with other Member Status, and the Portuguese 
acknowledged that this fact is putting pressure on them not 
to become an obstacle to getting these agreements ratified 
and in place.  We said we were prepared to meet with their 
Parliamentary bodies to explain the situation if they thought 
this would assist them in convincing them not to oppose the 
instruments.  The Portuguese said Parliament could not 
address this issue until probably March, and that one 
Parliamentary option is for them to submit the matter to the 
Constitutional Court for its opinion before forwarding it to 
the President for his approval. 
 
      5.  The two sides  agreed to proceed as follows:  a) 
We would begin immediately to try to resolve the minor 
outstanding administrative issues concerning the protocol 
that neither side thought posed major problems; and  b)  They 
would consult with the Minister of Justice and see if he 
endorses the approach suggested above.  If so, they would 
draft a proposed note reflective of that view for our 
consideration.  In any event, they will keep us advised of 
the position of the Minister. 
 
      6.  Comment:  Mr. Torres was clearly inclined to think 
creatively about the issues, in contrast to Ms. Sotto Maior 
who seemed fixed in her position that the communication 
transmitted to us last spring remained the position of 
Portugal.  End comment. 
 
     McKinley 
"
"23999","12/13/2004 17:10","04BRUSSELS5258","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MASS, EAID, CK, TU, HR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN COUNCIL DEC. 16-17:  HIGH STAKES, HIGH 
DRAMA 
 
REF: USEU TODAY 12/10/2004 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) As the EU heads into final preparations for its 
December 16-17 summit (European Council) meeting, a limited 
number of high stakes issues remain open for final agreement. 
 The main issue for heads of state and government will be 
Turkey, and possibly Croatia and the China arms embargo 
(although the latter two issues could be largely settled 
before the Summit begins).  Other less contentious issues 
include Bulgarian and Romanian accession, the Financial 
Framework for 2007-2013, combating terrorism, Ukraine, and 
the Middle East Peace Process, as well as transatlantic 
relations.  UN SYG Kofi Annan has also been invited to attend 
the Summit as a sign of the importance the EU places on the 
UN.  END SUMMARY. 
 
DEC. 16:  TURKEY AND OTHER ENLARGEMENT ISSUES 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) A Dutch contact told us on December 10 that the 
Presidency does not intend to circulate proposed language for 
the key bracketed portions of the Turkey section of the 
Conclusions until Thursday, December 16.  But the Dutch then 
hope to reach a decision on the full Enlargement section of 
the Conclusions, including the Turkey text, at the leaders\' 
restricted dinner session on December 16.  Based on initial 
readings of what EU FMs have agreed at the December 13 GAERC, 
it appears most other enlargement related issues are solved. 
Compromise language was reportedly reached today on Croatia 
stating that full cooperation with ICTY must be confirmed 
before negotiations begin, but not requiring such 
confirmation to come via another Council decision.  This 
means the only remaining decision is to set the actual date 
for beginning Croatia\'s negotiations.  Similarly, it appears 
the only issue to be settled for Romania and Bulgaria is the 
date on which they will sign their Accession Treaty 
(Romania\'s December 12 election results and opposition leader 
Basescu\'s surprise victory does not seem likely to cause any 
hiccups for Romania\'s accession.) 
 
DECEMBER 16: EU FMS\' DINNER 
--------------------------- 
 
3. (C) While the Heads are in their dinner discussing 
enlargement, EU FMs will be in a separate dinner session 
where they are expected to finish up language on Declarations 
regarding Ukraine and the Middle East Peace Process.  We do 
not have all the details on these texts, but do not expect 
any major surprises.  FMs will also have a discussion of the 
implementation of the EU\'s Security Strategy (drafted by High 
Rep Solana\'s staff and endorsed by leaders last fall) and its 
implications for transatlantic relations.  We presume, but 
cannot yet confirm, that this discussion will lead to some 
Conclusions or Declaration being issued, but it may be no 
more than the very general language included in para 54 of 
the draft already circulating informally in Brussels (EUR/ERA 
has a copy). 
 
4. (C) All other texts on external relations (Iran, Iraq, 
Afghanistan, European Neighborhood, et al) appear to already 
have been completed and do not hold major surprises.  The 
Iran language will likely be amended to note that the EU-3 
FMs (Barnier, Straw and Fischer) accompanied by High Rep 
Solana, met on December 13 in Brussels with Iranian officials 
to discuss the negotiation of the EU\'s Trade and Cooperation 
Agreement with Iran.  The Conclusion\'s discussion of 
\"effective multilateralism\" could also be amended to reflect 
the decision to invite UN SYG Kofi Annan to join the EU 
leaders the morning of December 17 for a brief session (our 
Dutch contact expected between 30 minutes and one hour). 
 
CHINA ARMS EMBARGO 
------------------ 
 
5. (C) At COREPER on December 9, France unexpectedly tabled a 
draft Declaration for the European Council on lifting the 
China arms embargo (REF A).  At the same time, Paris withdrew 
its objections to a formula for strengthening the EU Code of 
Conduct on arms exports that had been agreed by the other 
member states in October.  Coming just one day after the 
EU-China summit, at which the EU gave China a \"positive 
signal\" on the arms embargo but refrained from lifting it, 
the French draft seems designed to demonstrate Chirac\'s 
pro-China credentials and to make further progress on the 
issue before the end of the year.  Our Council Secretariat 
and member state contacts describe general frustration with 
this 11th-hour French effort, and did not think Paris will 
succeed in getting the embargo lifted at the EU Summit on 
December 17. 
 
6. (C) Two hurdles stand in the way of a quick (i.e. this 
week) decision to lift the embargo.  First, public attention 
to China\'s human rights record is high following the EU-China 
summit.  While EU leaders have not formally linked the arms 
embargo issue to human rights concerns, European publics and 
parliaments have.  Unless China makes gestures this week on 
these issues, lifting the embargo just one week after the 
EU-China summit would damage EU credibility by making it look 
as if the EU was rolling over for China while paying nothing 
more than lip service to human rights.  Second, EU leaders 
will be sensitive to the President\'s planned February visit 
to Europe, and may want to avoid taking a decision with 
negative and public consequences for transatlantic relations. 
 They are aware that the US is \"reaching out\" to Europe, and 
some member states will be wary of slapping the outstretched 
hand at such a delicate moment. 
 
7. C) Based on sketchy preliminary readouts from today\'s 
GAERC discussions, we understand that the Code of Conduct was 
not adopted at today\'s meeting, and that Foreign Ministers 
resisted France\'s call to lift the embargo this week. 
Instead, the Luxembourg Presidency is likely to pick up this 
issue with an aim to completing it before the summer hand-off 
to the UK Presidency. That said, the French can still press 
to bring this issue back onto the agenda at the summit on 
Dec. 16-17, although the chance of pressing this through to 
conclusion at this week\'s session appears to be unlikely. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"24189","12/16/2004 13:05","04BRUSSELS5302","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04BRUSSELS5258","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005302 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, UP, RS, PL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU COMMITTED TO SENDING A POSITIVE MESSAGE TO KIEV 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 5258 
 
     B. WARSAW 5290 
     C. KIEV 4927 
     D. MOSCOW 15312 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF EMAZUR FOR REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) The December 13 GAERC endorsed a European Neighborhood 
Policy \"Action Plan\" (AP) for EU-Ukraine cooperation, billing 
it as part of an effort to send a positive signal to Kiev. 
In fact, the AP\'s provisions remain unchanged from the draft 
which existed prior to the recent events, and offer little to 
Ukraine, especially on the big question of possible EU 
accession.  Member States, we are told, remain split along 
geographic lines regarding Ukrainian membership.  Those who 
support the idea are moving slowly to get opponents 
&accustomed to the thought8 of Ukraine in Europe.  The EU 
is pleased its recent efforts demonstrated EU willingness to 
act, even in the face of Russian opposition.  End Summary. 
 
Going the extra mile for Ukraine? 
-------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) The December 13 General Affairs and External Relations 
Council (GAERC) session endorsed the EU\'s Action Plan (AP) 
for Ukraine (along with several others) under the European 
Neighborhood Policy (ENP).  Council official Carl Hartzell 
told us that the GAERC understood the importance of sending a 
positive signal to Ukraine to reinforce the country,s 
democratic changes.  Hartzell said the GAERC also tasked the 
High Representative Javier Solana and External Relations 
Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner with preparing a proposal 
that would commit the EU to be more &forthcoming in setting 
an ambitious agenda.8  According to Hartzell, Solana and 
Ferrero-Waldner will probably present their ideas as soon as 
the next GAERC on January 31, 2005.  He suggested the 
February GAERC may decide on its adoption.  Hartzell noted 
that the EU,s &philosophy8 toward Ukraine remains 
unchanged: Ukraine must deliver on common values, such as 
commitment to democracy, human rights, and media freedom. 
What is different, he said, was that with a new Ukrainian 
president in office, the EU would be willing to set the AP 
provisions in motion.  Heads of State and Government at the 
European Council meeting on December 16-17 will issue brief 
Conclusions on Ukraine reflecting the GAERC discussions. 
 
No support for membership, for now 
---------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) The EU,s attitude regarding Ukraine,s EU accession 
likewise remains unmoved.  The Commission\'s Head of Unit for 
Political Affairs for Russia, Ukraine, Moldova, and Belarus 
Hilde Hardeman (protect) shared with us that on December 8 
the Permanent Representatives Committee (COREPER) President 
assessed Ukraine,s EU accession chances as having &no 
shadow of support.8  Hardeman and Hartzell separately 
dismissed Ferrero-Waldner,s statement that the EU is &not 
closing any doors8 as the RELEX Commissioner\'s personal 
opinion -- one that would not affect the EU,s final 
decision.  Hartzell added he would be \"extremely surprised8 
if the European Council raised the issue in the next few 
months.  Similarly, Polish First Secretary Cezary Bardzinski 
(protect) told us it would &take a miracle8 for the EU to 
offer Ukraine membership even in a long-term perspective.  At 
most, he said, in 2006 the EU might revise the Partnership 
and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) to include a &vague vision 
of potential membership.8 
 
4. (C) Explaining the EU stance, Hartzell argued that free 
and fair elections were an insufficient criterion for EU 
membership, pointing to Moldova,s free and fair elections 
that failed to qualify the country as a candidate.  Hartzell, 
however, acknowledged that free and fair elections in Ukraine 
would constitute a new circumstance that would require the EU 
to respond with a positive signal, which he was certain would 
be limited to a more generous assistance package. 
 
The EU satisfied with its approach 
---------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) The EU appears pleased with its recent efforts on 
behalf of Ukraine, such as the adoption of the Action Plan 
and Solana,s mediation.  Council Secretariat,s Carl 
Hallergard told us that the timing of the AP\'s endorsement 
was chosen to send a decisive signal of the EU,s support for 
the democratic process in Ukraine.  The endorsement 
demonstrated the EU,s willingness to push despite Russia,s 
refusal to engage on the EU neighborhood policy.  Hartzell 
acknowledged that the Council was satisfied with Solana,s 
role in &setting the rules of the game8 and &felt much 
better8 after the Rada approved what the EU viewed as the 
crucial issues -- the electoral law reform and the dismissal 
of the Central Electoral Commission (note: the Rada also 
passed constitutional amendments). 
6. (C) Nevertheless, EU officials and diplomats agree that 
the ball is in Ukraine,s court, which must demonstrate its 
long-term commitment to democracy and human rights.  For its 
part, the EU is now focused on providing approximately 3 
million euros funding and observers for the December 26 third 
election round.  There is political will to have as many 
observers as possible, according to Hallergard.  At the same 
time, Hartzell and Council Secretariat,s Annika Weidemann 
shared with us that the OSCE officials had told them that 
they might be unable to handle more than 1,000 observers for 
logistical reasons. 
 
Getting to a yes: a long-term perspective 
----------------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) The EU,s approach toward Ukraine will remain 
&neither yes nor no8 regarding the country,s candidacy, 
according to Bardzinski, partly because Member States are 
almost equally split along geographic lines in their attitude 
toward potential Ukrainian accession.  Bardzinski said 
Poland\'s views face &significant resistance8 from Germany, 
France, the Benelux, and the countries of the Mediterranean. 
He said that Poland would work on changing the opponents, 
current &allergic reaction8 to Ukrainian EU membership by 
getting them &accustomed to the thought8 that Ukraine 
belongs in Europe over the next several years.  Bardzinski 
told us that opponents feared Russia\'s reaction, and also 
worried about language creep in which a reference to 
potential long-term Ukrainian accession evolves into a 
surprise membership offer.  Nevertheless, Member States such 
as the Nordics, the Baltic states, and the Visegrad four 
insist the EU must act immediately to intensify cooperation 
with Ukraine beyond the Action Plan and refocus the EU\'s 
attention more eastward than it has done thus far. 
 
8. (C) European Commission,s Russia Desk Officer Michael 
Miller (protect) told us that Russian aggressive Cold War 
rhetoric on Ukraine would be difficult for Russia to reverse. 
 He noted that the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) 
was &extremely emotional and irrational8 about US 
assistance to Georgia, and linked the democratic developments 
in Tbilisi to the events in Ukraine as both US-funded and 
US-instigated.  Miller shared with us that the Russian MFA 
warned the EU that a potential split in Ukraine would be the 
West,s fault.  Miller noted that the Ukrainian election 
provided an opportunity for the US and the EU to work 
together on the shared goal of promoting democracy and human 
rights. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9. (C) Recent events in Ukraine have not altered the current 
EU policy toward Ukraine in any fundamental way.  The EU has 
offered to include the country in its &ring of friends8 -- 
and no more.  Mention of a distant accession appears to 
prompt an allergic reaction in some major Member States. 
They insist on keeping Ukraine in the ENP category -- 
effectively excluding it from eventual membership -- despite 
the push by some veteran and new members to move beyond the 
ENP,s Action Plan.  The possible election of opposition 
candidate Victor Yushchenko may force the EU to redefine its 
relationship and could increase pressure on the EU to 
consider the possibility of eventual EU membership.  EU 
advocates of Ukrainian accession have little leverage over 
the opponents, who already consider the EU overwhelmed by the 
last round of EU enlargement, and are struggling with their 
crucial decision on Turkey. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"24201","12/16/2004 15:07","04BRUSSELS5308","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","04BRUSSELS3892|04BRUSSELS4686","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 005308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/ERA AND EUR/RPM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROPEAN UNION DEFENSE POLICY: WHERE IS THE EU 
HEADED? 
 
REF: A. BRUSSELS 3892 B. BRUSSELS 4686 C. BRUSSELS 
 
     4730 D. BRUSSELS 4843 E. BRUSSELS 4937 F. 
     BRUSSELS 4960 
 
Classified By: USEU Political Military Officer Jeremy Brenner for reaso 
ns 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary. The November 22 announcement by the Foreign 
and Defense Ministers of the EU member states of pledges to 
establish 13 Battlegroups is the latest step toward the 
creation of an EU military capacity.  EU heads of state are 
committed to giving the EU an effective capacity in global 
security and crisis management.  There is nominal agreement 
on the need for improved military capabilities, and 
mechanisms are being created that would allow that to happen. 
There is less unanimity on the role these forces will play 
and how they will interact with NATO.  The readiness of 
European governments to spend the money needed to create an 
effective capacity remains the weakest link. End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
November 22 Declaration on Military Capabilities 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. (C/NF) The EU General Affairs and External Relations 
Council (GAERC) ministerial meeting brought together the 
Foreign and Defense Ministers of the 25 member states. The 
Defense Ministers convened in their capacity as the Steering 
Board for the European Defense Agency (EDA) (refs a and c). 
One of the major products of the ministerial was a 
Declaration on European Military Capabilities.  The November 
22 document establishes an Initial Operational Capability 
(IOC) for rapidly-deployable EU Battlegroups as of January 
2005. Full Operational Capability to field up to two 
concurrent Battlegroup-sized rapid reaction operations, 
including the ability to launch both operations nearly 
simultaneously, is set for 2007.  See septel for a full 
discussion of Battlegroups. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Could a Battlegroup Beat NRF to the Punch? 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3. (C) Two aspects of the GAERC conclusions were 
unanticipated. The first was an earlier Initial Operational 
Capability (IOC) of January 2005, rather than 2006 as 
originally proposed for the first Battlegroup. The British 
and French appear to be ready to provide capable existing 
national forces until multinational Battlegroups are 
established.  The January 2005 date coincides with that of 
the NATO NRF.  There are some EU member states who would be 
eager for an opportunity to demonstrate that an EU 
Battlegroup is able to deploy to a crisis area before the 
NRF.  The other unexpected announcement was that Cyprus will 
contribute a \"niche\" capability to a multinational 
Battlegroup. Participation by Cyprus in the Battlegroup 
project will further complicate efforts to have fruitful 
NATO-EU discussions.  The EU is likely to refuse to discuss 
Battlegroups with NATO without all the participating players 
present, given the continuing Turkey-Cyprus procedural 
blockage to NATO/EU dialogue (refs d and f). 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Assessing the Capabilities Commitments: 
Whose Standards Will Apply? 
---------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) The EU Ministers also declared that interoperability, 
deployability, and sustainability will be at the core of the 
Member States efforts to improve military capabilities.  The 
European Defense Agency (EDA) (ref a) has been tasked to 
assess and evaluate capabilities commitments against criteria 
to be agreed by Member States.  Given the preponderance of 
NATO members within the EU and the investments already made, 
it is expected that NATO standards will be adopted where they 
have been established. Where NATO standards have not yet been 
established, however, the EU may seek to define its own. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Setting the Foundation: The European Security Strategy 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
5. (U)  The December 2003 European Security Strategy (ESS) 
averred that the EU is \"inevitably\" a global player -- by 
virtue of its population (over 450 million people) and 
economic strength (producing one-quarter of the world\'s GNP). 
 Given the instruments at its disposal, the EU declared it 
\"should be ready to share in the responsibility for global 
security and in building a better world.\"  The ESS identifies 
five key threats the EU must be prepared to address: 
terrorism; proliferation of WMD; regional conflicts; state 
failure; and organized crime.  The ESS commits the EU to be 
\"more active, more coherent, and more capable\" in order to 
make a contribution to global security in keeping with its 
potential.  According to the Strategy, the EU should be able 
to sustain several operations simultaneously, involving both 
civilian and military capabilities 
 
------------------------------------- 
Laying the Bricks: Headline Goal 2010 
------------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) The Headline Goal 2010, endorsed by the EU Heads of 
State and Government on June 18 2004, is an attempt to set 
goalposts for achieving these lofty aims.  Member States 
committed themselves to be able, by 2010, to respond to the 
full spectrum of crisis management operations covered by the 
Treaty on the European Union.  These include humanitarian and 
rescue tasks, peacekeeping tasks, and tasks of combat forces 
in crisis management -- including peacemaking.  Under the 
rubric of the ESS, the heads of state included joint 
disarmament operations and support for third countries in 
combating terrorism as tasks the EU must be able to perform 
within six years. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Power Projection: Global Approach on Deployability 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
7. (U) The Global Approach on Deployability (GAD) was 
introduced in 2003 as part of the European Capability Action 
Plan (ECAP).  It is a central element of the Headline Goal of 
being able to deploy high readiness forces by 2007. In the 
November 22 declaration, the EU has committed itself to the 
\"complete development\" by 2007 of rapidly deployable 
battlegroups, (refs b and e ) and by 2008, to have available 
an aircraft carrier with its associated airwing and escorts. 
Project Groups within the European Capabilities Action Plan 
(ECAP) have addressed the recognized shortfalls and are 
providing solutions for airlift and sealift. GAD is 
predicated on the coordination of all strategic lift assets, 
mechanisms, and initiatives in support of EU-led operations, 
in particular for the EU Battlegroups. 
 
---------------------- 
What Does it All Mean? 
---------------------- 
 
8. (C) The European Union is ponderous, inefficient, and 
slow, but its evolution towards some sort of military role is 
inexorable.  The Heads of State of the Member States are 
determined to see the EU take on a more active global 
security role, in keeping with its economic and political 
influence.  They have set themselves the strategic goal, and 
are creating the mechanisms and institutions to bring it 
about.  While still embryonic and largely virtual, new EU 
military capabilities should begin to emerge over the next 
several years.  The EDA will be watching and evaluating to 
ensure that the pledges made by Member States are real, and 
that they represent actual useable capability.  However 
long-delayed and over-budget, airlift programs will probably 
come on line, as will transport helicopters, satellite 
communications and the Galileo program. Civilian/military 
planning will be established as of January 1 2005, with 
access to an operations center in 2006. Operation Althea in 
Bosnia will be a testing ground for new integration 
mechanisms to bring together the civilian and military 
instruments of the EU. 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (C) Agreeing on the need to address European military 
deficiencies, and to create the mechanisms to do the job, 
will prove to be the easy part of the EU\'s evolving security 
posture. Finding the resources to build usable capabilities 
will be far harder.  Even if the tools are in place and there 
is real military capability in hand, the Union will have to 
struggle with the difficult question of how and when to use 
it, and to what end.  There is a significant political bloc 
within the EU that is determined to make the EU a more 
effective partner to NATO and other international 
organizations. There are others, however, that look forward 
to building an autonomous capacity that can be employed in 
furtherance of EU interests and independent of the US or 
NATO. In no case would we expect the EU to deploy an 
operation that would directly harm US interests or 
objectives.  What is certain, however, is that institutions 
and mechanisms are being created and resources are being 
devoted according to an overall strategic plan that could 
soon begin to produce results -- even if meager.  We can 
neither ignore nor dismiss this process, but must be ready to 
engage if we hope to influence its direction and ensure that 
US interests also benefit from any emerging EU ability to 
project force. 
 
McKinley 
"
"24348","12/20/2004 14:36","04BRUSSELS5334","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 005334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (ADDED SIGNER) 
 
NSC FOR FRIED AND MCKIBBEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL, XF, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: DNSA HADLEY MEETING WITH EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
PRESIDENT MANUEL JOSE DURAO BARROSO, DECEMBER 2, 2004 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Kyle Scott.  Reason: 1.4 (B 
)(D) 
 
PARTICIPANTS: 
 
US:  DNSA Steven Hadley 
        Ambassador Schnabel 
        Elliott Abrams 
        Dan Fried 
        Paul Haenle 
        Mike McKinley, DCM 
        Kyle Scott (notetaker) 
 
EC:  Manuel Barroso, President of European Commission 
         Joao Vale de Almeida, Chief of Cabinet 
         Richard Wright, Director for North America, DG 
External Relations 
         Fernando Adnresen Guimaraes, Member of Cabinet (US 
Affairs) 
         Mrs. Francoise Le Bail, Chief Commission Spokesperson 
         Gunnar Wiegand, DG External Relations (US Affairs) 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Barroso said he looked forward to 
cooperation with the U.S., and has been heartened by 
President Bush, remarks of his intentions to reach out to 
Europe in his second term.  He pledged to work to ensure the 
President,s visit in February is a success.  Barroso,s 
goal, to build a Europe that can be America,s counterpart -- 
but not a counterweight.  Europeans want to put the 
disagreements over Iraq behind them.  Barroso urged seeking a 
positive agenda.  The two also discussed ways to move forward 
on the Middle East peace process and reform in the Broader 
Middle East, support for and timing of elections in Iraq, and 
the way forward on Ukraine.  DNSA Hadley emphasized the 
strategic importance of the EU,s December 17 decision on 
Turkey.  End Summary. 
 
Improving US-European Relations 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) DNSA Hadley presented Barroso a letter from President 
Bush expressing the President,s commitment to working 
closely with the new Commission on deepening America,s 
partnership with Europe.  Barroso said he fully supported the 
President,s view, had been heartened by the President,s 
remarks about reaching out to Europe, and welcomed his Nova 
Scotia speech on America,s commitment to positive 
multilateral engagement. 
 
3. (C) Hadley said the President,s remarks were sincere. 
The President believes the US and Europe have an opportunity 
to make progress on our common agenda, and that is why he 
committed to an early trip to Europe.  The President is 
convinced that the US and Europe operate best in the world if 
we act together; the trip offers an opportunity to strengthen 
our joint approach to common challenges.  Barroso said he 
looks forward to the visit, and hoped the President would 
find time to send a clear signal of America,s continuing 
commitment to European integration.  Meetings with NATO heads 
of state/government and with EU heads of state/government 
were important, but Barroso suggested a signal in favor of 
the Commission -- the only European Community institution -- 
would be welcome.  In so doing, he would be continuing the 
tradition of US statesmen who have consistently supported 
European integration. 
 
4. (C) Barroso said there is a debate in Europe about whether 
European institutions should be strengthened in order to 
create a counterweight to US power in the world.  Barroso 
said he believes this is unwise.  Europe should integrate to 
become a valuable counterpart to the United States, not a 
counterweight.  The fact is that Europe and the US share the 
same priorities: economic progress, reform in the Broader 
Middle East, a solution to the Israel-Palestinian conflict, 
commitment to non-proliferation and to counter terrorism, and 
increasingly must also address the issue of a more assertive 
Russia.  The US and Europe have been working together on all 
these issues, as they have so dramatically in recent days 
over the crisis in Ukraine. 
 
5. (C) Despite this cooperation, Barroso said there was a 
need to create more confidence in US-European relations. 
Public support is declining, largely as a consequence of the 
cleavages caused by the debates over Iraq.  This is not a 
clear US vs. Europe issue, he noted, because European public 
opinion has also been divided on what was the proper approach 
on Iraq.  There is broad agreement, however, that now is the 
time to put these disagreements behind us.  To do so, Barroso 
suggested the President,s visit would be the ideal 
opportunity to lay out a new, positive agenda.  Hadley 
supported this approach, noting that the President takes 
comfort in having a friend like Barroso at the helm of the 
European Commission. 
Arab-Israeli Conflict: 
-------------------------- 
 
6. (C) DNSA Hadley said the President believes there is an 
enormous opportunity to make progress in the Middle East, and 
wants to seize it.  Elections of a new Palestinian President 
will be the first key step.  The US and Europe need to work 
in tandem to support the elections process, but this will be 
only the first step.  The President is convinced there is no 
\"short-cut\" to peace.  After the elections, the new 
Palestinian democratic leadership will have to develop 
democratic institutions, improve control of the security 
situation, and prove that the Palestinian Authority can 
become a reliable partner for Israel in making peace before 
moving forward to Final Status Talks. 
 
7. (C) Barroso agreed that the opportunity was at hand, but 
suggested there was a sense of urgency coming from the 
region.  Regional leaders, such as Jordan, are begging the 
Commission to do something now.  The sooner we start, Barroso 
stated, the better.  Barroso noted that there is a perception 
in Europe, which he shares, that this unsolved issue is 
fueling terrorism; if Europe and the West are not seen as 
honest brokers in seeking a settlement, it offers Islamic 
extremists more fertile ground for their activities.  This 
can already be seen in Europe,s Muslim community.  In the 
short run, we should strive to provide financial and 
technical support to the Palestinians to make the elections a 
success and give them the capacity to manage their 
territories. 
 
Broader Middle East: 
-------------------------- 
 
8. (C) DNSA Hadley noted that, in addition to the Middle East 
peace process, there was a broader strategic opportunity to 
support reform in the Middle East.  This reform should not be 
forced or imposed from the outside, but we should be ready to 
support the voices from inside the region calling for freedom 
and democracy.  If we can help improve the lives of average 
citizens in this region, it will also make the US and Europe 
more secure.  He urged Barroso to look for common projects 
that Europe and the US could support.  Barroso pointed to the 
EU Barcelona Process, which is a long-term, multi-dimensional 
program that relies on Europe,s \"soft power approach\" to 
support reform, push for human rights progress, and 
consolidation of the rule of law.  He admitted that it had 
not been easy in this part of the world, but he shared the 
President,s commitment to freedom.  Europe also wants to 
support this reform process, he vowed. 
 
Iraq: 
------ 
 
9. (C) DNSA Hadley said that whatever our past disagreements, 
all now agree that it is important for Iraq to go well.  The 
consequences of success or failure are enormous for all.  The 
real question is how to ensure success.  He noted that 
although we have made some progress with Europe in moving 
ahead, Europe does not seem to share our sense of urgency. 
He asked for Barroso,s advice on how the current situation 
could be improved to achieve more European support.  Barroso 
said that in his confirmation hearing before the European 
Parliament, he had also stressed the need to forget the past 
and work for the future on Iraq.  This is vitally important 
for the EU; if Turkey joins, Iraq will become the Union,s 
immediate neighbor. 
 
10. (C) Europeans, Barroso suggested, will do what they can, 
but the nature of their contribution will differ from country 
to country: some will provide troops, others will offer debt 
forgiveness, or support for the UN,s security, or technical 
and financial assistance.  European leaders, he believes, 
understand the need for a common agenda with the US on Iraq. 
 
11. (C) In response to Barroso,s question about the election 
date, DNSA Hadley said the President,s position is firm in 
that the Iraqis should stick to the planned date of January30.  Our experience 
in Afghanistan showed us that calls to 
delay don,t gain us anything.  There is no reason to believe 
that delaying the elections will improve the security 
situation, and getting greater Iraqi commitment to running 
their own affairs can have a positive impact on the situation 
over time.  The preparations are going forward, and the UN is 
stepping up its activities in support.  The Independent 
Electoral Commission of Iraq is not calling for a delay.  The 
US is increasing its troop strength in Iraq during the 
election period.  In the end, he noted, it is the Iraqis who 
will make the final call on whether or not to delay the 
elections. 
Ukraine: 
---------- 
 
12. (C) DNSA Hadley welcomed the cooperation between the US 
and EU on the unfolding elections crisis in Ukraine, and 
praised the active diplomacy of Solana and the Polish and 
Lithuanian presidents in Kiev.  The key focus should remain 
on the democratic process; whatever the outcome of current 
negotiations, it must reflect the will of the Ukrainian 
people.  Hadley cautioned Russia should not view this in the 
context of US-EU versus Russia and that it will be important 
to keep the door open so that Russia can find a way to walk 
back from its current position.  In the end, Russia must be 
ready to accept a democratic outcome.  He also emphasized 
that if the US and EU,s diplomatic efforts yield a positive 
outcome, we will both have a stake in ensuring the continued 
successof Ukraine.  This may require resources to support the 
Ukrainian economy. 
 
13. (C) Barroso noted that the European Council would face a 
decision in the coming days about its Association Plan for 
Ukraine as part of its larger European Neighborhood Program. 
Given the uncertainties in Ukraine at the moment, the Council 
will have to decide whether or not to approve the program for 
Ukraine.  He predicted they would agree to approve the 
program, but make its implementation dependent on conditions 
on the ground in Ukraine.  If things turn out right, the 
Action Plan will provide quite generous carrots to Kiev: 
market access, technical assistance and development funds. 
It also includes a policy on visa access to EU Member States 
-- a key incentive to Ukraine, which has a mobile work force. 
 He pointed out that Ukrainians were now the largest foreign 
community in his native Portugal.  Thus, he said the EU had 
real leverage with what it is prepared to offer, but said the 
policy will be clear: the quality of Europe,s relations with 
Ukraine will depend on the quality of democracy in the 
country. 
 
Turkey: 
--------- 
 
14. (C) DNSA Hadley noted that the US had taken a low-key 
public approach on Turkey because we realize this is a very 
sensitive issue for Europe.  This quiet stance should not, 
however, be mistaken for a change in the US position or lack 
of interest in Europe,s decision on Turkish membership. 
Turkey needs to see a European vocation to continue on its 
reform track.  He emphasized that Turkey had made 
considerable progress in meeting EU requirements for 
membership and encouraged Barroso to ensure the bar is not 
raised for Turkey at the late stage.  Barroso responded that 
the Commission,s report clearly supports beginning accession 
negotiations with Turkey.  He believes it will be approved on 
December 17.  There are serious domestic problems in some 
member states, driven not only by xenophobia, but also by a 
strain of Euro-federalists who believe Turkish membership 
would change the very nature of Europe -- making it too big, 
too diverse, and including a country in which \"too much of it 
is not really in Europe.\"  Unlike previous enlargement 
debates, which were conducted mainly among European elites, 
the decision on Turkey is hotly debated by the European 
man-on-the-street.  The Commission favors Turkish accession; 
Barroso hoped a positive signal would emerge on December 17. 
SCHNABEL 
"
"24409","12/21/2004 11:56","04BRUSSELS5366","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005366 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR/PPD AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KPAO, XE, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EUROBAROMETER: PERCEPTIONS OF U.S. WORSENING 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  The latest Eurobarometer poll will gladden 
hearts in Brussels: a growing majority in Europe has a 
positive attitude about the EU and its institutions.  Still, 
weak support in the UK especially will give Eurocrats pause 
as Europe enters a year of referenda on the new Constitution. 
 The poll also indicates a continuation of the worrying 
trends revealed earlier in the fall by German Marshall Fund 
polling: fifty-eight percent of respondents said the U.S. 
plays a negative role in promoting world peace.  END SUMMARY. 
 
METHODOLOGY AND CONTEXT 
======================= 
 
2.  The European Commission,s twice-yearly Eurobarometer 
poll was conducted in October and November 2004, through 
roughly 1000 face-to-face interviews in each Member State. 
The poll also solicited opinions in the four candidate 
countries (Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Turkey) and 
Northern Cyprus.  In the period since last spring\'s poll, 
there has been an unusual level of political change in the 
European Union: the addition of ten countries to the EU, a 
new Commission and Parliamentary elections, and the adoption 
of a draft constitutional treaty. 
 
MORE POSITIVE ABOUT EU PARTICIPATION 
==================================== 
 
3.  In general, Europeans appear to feel more positive about 
their general well-being and their participation in the 
European Union. 
 
--  Fifty-six percent of respondents are pleased that their 
country is part of the EU, the highest percentage since 1995, 
and up 8% since six months ago.  However, this view is more 
commonly held among the &old8 Member States, while citizens 
of the new Member States seemed to feel it was too early to 
tell, with numbers of neutral answers being particularly 
high.  Residents of the United Kingdom were least pleased to 
be part of the European Union, with only 38% thinking the 
UK,s EU membership is a good thing. 
 
--  The number of people who believe their country has 
benefited from belonging to the EU is also higher than at any 
time in the last ten years ) at 53%.  This change seems to 
be due primarily to previously undecided people firming up 
their opinions, rather than those with a negative view 
changing their minds.  The most positive views on the 
benefits of EU membership were held in Ireland, Lithuania, 
Greece, Belgium and Luxembourg; the United Kingdom and Sweden 
are least positive about the benefits of EU membership. 
 
--  Fifty percent of those surveyed have a very positive or 
fairly positive image of the EU (a slight increase).  It 
appears familiarity might breed contempt: The country with 
the highest perception of the EU is not even a member yet; 
seventy-six percent of Romanians have a positive image of the 
EU.  Turkish citizens also had a positive perception of the 
EU (63%). 
 
--  Perceptions of European institutions were also up 
slightly.  Fifty-two percent of respondents said they trust 
the European Commission; fifty-seven percent trust the 
European Parliament. 
 
--  More than two-thirds of respondents (68%) support the 
concept of a European Constitution (up from 63% six months 
ago).  This is a response to a very general question, however 
(&Are you for or against a constitution for the European 
Union8), and should not necessarily be seen as support the 
for the current draft constitutional treaty. 
 
ENLARGEMENT 
=========== 
 
4.  More than half of the people interviewed in the EU 25 are 
in favor of further expansion in the coming years.  This is 
an increase of 16 points since the beginning of 2004, and 
includes a significant percentage of respondents who have 
changed their views from &against8 to &for.8  Indirectly, 
this may be a sign that respondents so far perceive the 
recent enlargement as a success.  There are a few interesting 
exceptions to the general rule: sixty-two percent of the 
citizens of Austria, which borders four new member states, 
are against further expansion.  Populations in Germany (57%), 
Luxembourg (54%), Finland (52%) and France (51%) are also 
against further expansion. 
 
5.  The Eurobarometer poll does not ask specific questions 
about Turkey.  However, debate over Turkey,s accession was 
particularly intense around the time the poll was conducted, 
and it is possible that the anti-expansion views of Germany, 
France and Austria may not be simply a vote against any 
further expansion, but may have something to do with possible 
Turkish accession in particular. 
 
COMMON FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY 
================================== 
 
6.  More Europeans are in favor of both a common 
defense/security policy and a common foreign policy, the poll 
found (respondents are questioned on the two policies 
separately).  Surprisingly, Europeans are more favorably 
disposed to the nascent defense cooperation among EU members 
than to the more firmly established foreign policy 
cooperation.  Seventy-eight percent said they are for a 
&common defense and security policy among EU member 
states,8 an increase of 5 points since the last poll six 
months ago, and the highest level of support seen in ten 
years.  Most of the increase in favorable responses came from 
undecided respondents who changed their opinions to favorable 
ones.  Also a surprise, support for a EU common defense and 
security policy is especially strong among countries that 
recently joined NATO (Poland and the Czech Republic, at 85% 
and 84% respectively). 
 
7.  There is also increased support for a common foreign 
policy, but to a lesser extent; sixty-nine percent of 
Europeans support this concept.  The United Kingdom was the 
only country to record a level of support below 50%. 
 
US ROLE IN WORLD: NOT HELPING 
============================= 
 
8.  The latest poll demonstrates that European perception of 
the United States continues to be increasingly negative.  The 
poll measured European opinion on U.S. and European roles in 
fostering world peace and combating terrorism.  Asked if the 
U.S. tends to play &a positive role or a negative role . . . 
regarding promoting peace in the world,8 fifty-eight percent 
of respondents said the U.S. played a negative role, with 
only 22% saying the U.S. plays a positive role.  Only 
thirty-nine percent of respondents felt the U.S. had played a 
positive role regarding &the fight against terrorism;8 
forty-two percent believed the U.S. had played a negative 
role. 
 
9.  Only three countries interviewed had a majority positive 
opinion on the role played by the U.S. to promote world 
peace: the Czech Republic, Lithuania, and Romania.  Opinions 
on the fight against terrorism are more divided, with a rift 
appearing between &old8 EU countries, which tend to have a 
more negative view, and the new member states, which are 
generally more positive. 
 
10.  European responses to these very focused questions are 
particularly worrisome in light of another recent poll 
conducted by AP-Ipsos.  The poll asked whether respondents 
had a favorable or unfavorable view of Americans.  In France 
and Germany, just over half of those surveyed said they had 
an unfavorable opinion; in Spain, just under half had an 
unfavorable view.  The AP-Ipsos results suggest that 
disapproval of specific American policies may now be spilling 
over into negative views of average Americans. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"24538","12/23/2004 11:30","04BRUSSELS5391","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04USEUBRUSSELS4964","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005391 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
STATE ALSO FOR EB FOR DAVID BROWN AND EUR/ERA FOR ED BROWN 
TREASURY FOR CHIP PONCY 
DOJ FOR SUZANNE HAYDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, EFIN, SMIG, PREF, SNAR, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT:  EU LEADERS ENDORSE REVISED ACTION PLAN OF COUNTER- 
TERROR MEASURES, NEW EU DRUGS STRATEGY 
 
REF: (A) USEU BRUSSELS 4789; (B) USEU BRUSSELS 4964 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  EU leaders at the December 16-17 European Council 
endorsed a revised EU Action Plan for the fight against 
terrorism and noted other contributions, including a 
strategy against terrorist financing that will continue to 
be a priority in 2005.  Other priorities next year will be 
the protection of critical infrastructure, civil protection 
and information exchange.  The leaders also endorsed the EU 
Drugs Strategy 2005-2012 and welcomed the establishment of 
common principles for the integration of migrants.  Full 
text of European Council conclusions is available from 
http://ue.eu.int.  END SUMMARY. 
 
COUNTER-TERRORISM 
----------------- 
 
2. Though the subject was hardly discussed, EU leaders in 
the conclusions of the December 16-17 European Council 
reiterated their \"unyielding determination to combat the 
continuing terrorist threat through a comprehensive and 
integrated approach\" as well as their \"conviction that, in 
order to be effective in the long run,\" the EU \"must address 
the root causes of terrorism.\" Leaders tasked the EU Council 
of Ministers \"to establish a long-term strategy and action 
plan\" on radicalization and recruitment by June 2005.\" 
 
3. The conclusions called for \"prompt implementation\" of CT 
measures in The Hague Program on Strengthening Freedom, 
Security and Justice (REF A), stressing the need to improve 
exchange of information among terrorism-related services. 
 
4. The European Council welcomed the revised EU Action Plan 
and additional progress reports by the HiRep and Commission, 
and said the next review would be due in June 2005. Leaders 
expect \"further concrete results\" in the months ahead on: 
 
-- LAW ENFORCEMENT COOPERATION, including through EUROPOL 
and the EU Police Chiefs Task Force, and by improved 
information exchange among Member States, exchanging data on 
lost and stolen passports with Interpol, and completing peer 
evaluations of national CT structures by Sept. 25, 2005; 
 
-- JUDICIAL COOPERATION, including exchange of information 
from criminal records; progress on retention of telecoms 
data, the European Evidence Warrant, and plans for a 
European (witness) Protection Program; 
 
-- BORDER AND DOCUMENT SECURITY, including the addition of 
biometrics to EU passports and standing-up the new European 
Border Agency by May 2005); 
 
-- INTELLIGENCE COOPERATION, including strengthening links 
between the EU Counter-Terrorism Group and the \"reinforced\" 
EU Situation Center; 
 
-- TERRORIST FINANCING, including by reaching agreement on 
controls for cash entering or leaving the EU and on the 
third Money Laundering Directive, and the creation of a best 
practices tool for implementing financial sanctions; the 
Commission was asked to submit \"proposals to prevent misuse 
of charitable organizations for the financing of terrorism,\" 
and Member States were urged to submit names to the EU 
terrorist sanctions list; 
 
-- CIVIL AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, including creation 
of a Solidarity Program for consequence management, further 
assessment of the capabilities that Member States could make 
available to the EU in the event of an attack, and creation 
of a critical infrastructure protection program (by the end 
of 2005); 
 
-- EXTERNAL RELATIONS, including implementation of the EU 
decision to add CT clauses in agreements with non-EU 
countries, implementation of the 2004 US-EU Summit 
Declaration and enhanced cooperation with non-EU countries 
through dialogue, assistance and regional cooperation. 
 
MORE WORK TO BE DONE 
-------------------- 
 
5.  The revised Action Plan shows that every Member State 
still has to implement one or more of the twelve legislative 
instruments highlighted in previous European Council 
conclusions.  These include three protocols to improve 
EUROPOL\'s powers to combat terrorism, and several other 
instruments that would make the EU more effective on 
terrorism financing (such as the Convention and the Protocol 
on mutual legal assistance). Several Member States have yet 
to implement the MLAT and extradition agreements with the 
U.S.  Two Framework Decisions (on confiscation of crime- 
related proceeds and protection against cyber attacks) have 
been the subject of a political agreement in the Council -- 
in December 2002 and February 2003, respectively -- but 
formal adoption has been delayed by parliamentary scrutiny 
reservations in Member States.  Several Member States have 
still to ratify some of the U.N. CT Conventions.  EU sources 
also recognize there is still important work to be done at 
European level to protect trans-border networks. 
 
EU DRUGS STRATEGY 2005-2012 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  The leaders endorsed the EU Drugs Strategy for 2005- 
2012, already adopted by the Council (REF B).  The 
conclusions tasked the Commission to submit a proposal for 
an Action Plan for implementation of the Strategy in 2005- 
2008, to be adopted by the Council early in 2005. 
 
INTEGRATION OF MIGRANTS 
----------------------- 
 
7.  The leaders welcomed the establishment of common basic 
principles for the integration of immigrants into EU Member 
States (REF B).  They also welcomed the November 9-11, 2005 
ministerial conference on integration policy in Groningen 
that paid special attention to the problem of youth exposed 
to radical influences. 
MCKINLEY 
"
"24542","12/23/2004 12:02","04BRUSSELS5392","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04PHNOMPENH1925|04STATE269580","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 005392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CB, KWMN, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA TRAFFICKING SCANDAL: EU RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. STATE 269580 
     B. PHNOM PENH 1925 
 
1. (SBU) We reviewed ref (A) points with Commission Cambodia 
desk officers Joao Ferreira and Tom Yorkie and urged the EU 
to continue pressing the RGC to take immediate action to 
locate and protect the missing women and girls.  We thanked 
them for the December 10 EU statement but said that more 
would likely be required in order to push the case through to 
a positive outcome.  They were encouraged to hear that we had 
made high level demarches on the issue and promised to pass 
our points to colleagues in Phnom Penh.  They were unaware of 
any further actions being planned by the EU (vice individual 
EU Member States), but agreed it would be useful for the US 
and EU to coordinate on the ground.  The UK Embassy 
represents the EU Presidency in Cambodia and issued the 
December 10 statement on behalf of the EU.  The European 
Commission also has a delegation in Phnom Penh that has been 
active on TIP issues.  The two together are able to represent 
the EU as a whole.  Yorkie promised to pass them our points 
and said both should be happy to coordinate with us. 
 
McKinley 
"
"24549","12/23/2004 12:48","04BRUSSELS5393","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04SARAJEVO3294|04STATE257497|04STATE267711|04STATE271449|04THEHAGUE3301|04USEUBRUSSELS5226","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/23/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EFIN, BK, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ENSURING A COORDINATED U.S.-EU MESSAGE IN BIH 
 
REF: A. STATE 271449 
     B. STATE 267711 
     C. STATE 257497 
     D. SARAJEVO 3294 
     E. USEU BRUSSELS 5226 
     F. THE HAGUE 3301 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) Our messages alerting the EU to Operation Balkan Vice 
measures (REFS B and C) apparently did not penetrate very far 
into the EU apparatus.  Although the EU and Solana\'s office 
have been supportive of the measures taken by High Rep 
Ashdown, and understand the steps taken by the US in support 
of OHR, failure to convey that message to their missions in 
B-H has led to grumbling from assorted EU officials in 
Sarajevo (REF D).  The necessary staff work for the EU to 
expand its own travel ban and asset freeze measures has not 
yet been done, however, and will probably have to await the 
Luxembourg Presidency to see what might be possible.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) PolOff discussed REF A points with the relevant EU 
officials available in Brussels this close to the Christmas 
holiday.  The EU is indeed hydra-headed.  To wit: 
 
3. (C/NF) Stefan Muller, of the Council\'s Balkan Task Force, 
told us Solana feels Ashdown did not keep him fully informed 
about what OHR was doing.  Solana was complaining about this 
as recently as Dec. 20.  This is, so far, an internal issue. 
Solana made a very good public statement in support of the 
OHR measures on Dec. 16.  (NOTE:  There is no reason Solana 
should feel suprised by the measures we announced.  We 
delivered REF B details to Solana\'s chief Balkans advisor 
Stefan Lehne the morning of Dec. 17, and know that he went 
directly from our meeting to a briefing of the assembled EU 
PolDirs on both the OHR and US measures. END NOTE.) 
 
4. (C) At the Commission, Mia Asenius of Enlargement 
Commissioner Rehn\'s staff (which also has responsibility for 
the Balkans) said the Commission definitely supports 
Ashdown\'s measures.  She said Commissioner Rehn met with B-H 
FM Ivanic during his visit immediately after the OHR measures 
were imposed only because Ivanic was still officially the FM 
at the time, and Rehn did not want to do anything that could 
provoke more of a political crisis.  Asenius noted there had 
been some grumbling in Rehn\'s meeting with assembled EU heads 
of missions about not having been informed of US measures. 
She added that some within the EU, including at the 
Commission, are nervous that reaction to the combined OHR and 
US measures could lead to the fall of the state-level 
government and new elections.  They worry this would further 
delay B-H\'s progress toward a Stabilization and Association 
Agreement, which for some within the EU is the highest 
priority. 
 
5. (C)  The Dutch chair (protect) of the EU\'s Western Balkans 
Working Group (COWEB) here in Brussels told us he was 
surprised at any flap about OHR\'s measures, as he had 
understood that, beyond Solana\'s own statement, an EU HOMs 
statement in Sarajevo supportive of Ashdown was supposed to 
have been teed up.  He said he would check with The Hague to 
see what might have happened to such a statement.  (We note 
REF F from The Hague also refers to a HOMs statement.) 
 
6. (C) Regarding EU travel bans/asset freezes, our Dutch 
contact told us nothing had been prepared within COWEB to 
expand the EU\'s travel ban list.  He said that in at least 
some past actions by OHR, such steps would have been underway 
in advance to make the EU\'s list conform with OHR\'s -- 
although not necessarily the US\'s.  If Ashdown has now added 
specific individuals to his list of ICTY obstructionists, 
there may be scope (but probably not until under the 
Luxembourg Presidency in January) for the EU to expand it\'s 
own travel ban list to cover them.  Asset freezes on these 
types of individuals, as we have seen time and again with the 
EU, are unlikely. 
 
7. (C) In all of the above conversations, PolOff has 
underlined to EU contacts that we had given the EU a heads up 
we were planning measures to support those we understood OHR 
was preparing; and it was vital that all of us should now 
stay on message in support of Ashdown\'s measures.  Even if 
the EU does not take similar steps to the US on travel bans 
and asset freezes against further individuals, our steps have 
usefully gotten the attention of people who have been 
blocking progress in the RS.  All of our contacts understood 
the message.  Given holiday absences, however, we cannot 
guarantee that Brussels will have any immediate success in 
better informing or curbing freelance commentary from various 
EU reps in Sarajevo. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"24557","12/23/2004 14:21","04BRUSSELS5396","Embassy Brussels","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 005396 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR T, NP, NEA/NGA AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/22/2014 
TAGS: KNNP, PARM, PREL, PINR, IR, IAEA, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/IRAN: WMD REP GIANNELLA READOUT ON TALKS, PATH 
AHEAD FOR EU3-IRAN DIALOGUE 
 
REF: A. LAIDLAW-TREMONT-PELZ E-MAILS 12/17/04-12/21/04 
 
     B. BERLIN 4190 
     C. LONDON 9265 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.4 (b)(d) 
 
1. (S) Summary: In a meeting to review the EU3,s efforts 
with Iran December 21, EU WMD Rep Annalisa Giannella said she 
was generally pleased with the process but questioned whether 
the EU-3 could achieve its goals without eventual US 
involvement.  She said that neither the December 13 
ministerial meeting nor the December 17 Nuclear Working Group 
meeting were substantive, although the latter served as a 
useful ice-breaker with Naseri, the new GOI representative to 
the Nuclear Group.  She also described the new roles created 
for EU staffers, including herself and Council DG Robert 
Cooper, now that the EU-3 had expanded to include HiRep 
Solana, and painted a picture of the schedule ahead.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
PLEASED WITH PROCESS BUT SKEPTICAL ON OUTCOME 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (S) WMD Rep Annalisa Giannella said she was pleased that 
the EU3-Iran dialogue had resulted in the suspension of 
Iranian enrichment activities, but wondered how long it could 
last, since neither the GOI nor the EU-3 1 (now including 
HiRep Solana) were willing to shift their red lines.  She 
said the EU-3\'s demand for the permanent cessation of all 
enrichment activities was non-negotiable, and that no other 
\"objective guarantee\" would suffice.  At the same time, she 
has never heard a single Iranian interlocutor even hint at 
the possibility of giving up the sacred \"right\" to develop 
and maintain a nuclear fuel cycle.  The talks are buying 
time, she said, but for how long?  She said that while the 
Iranians were talking with the Europeans, their sights were 
clearly set on Washington, and she doubted durable solutions 
could be found without US participation.  She also passed us 
a December 21 AFP article that quotes Iranian negotiator 
Moussavian as saying it was \"important\" for the EU and US to 
stay in consultation on Iran.  We reminded Giannella that the 
problem was not with the US but with Iran and its long 
history of broken promises.  Giannella agreed, but doubted 
whether the GOI would make a strategic decision come clean 
until the US was somehow involved in the dialogue. 
 
---------------------------- 
SOLANA AS ADVISOR AND BRIDGE 
---------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Giannella said that in general, HiRep Solana will 
attend any EU3 ministerial-level meetings with Iran and will 
serve as an advisor and bridge between the EU-3 and the 
EU-25.  Giannella (whose formal title is \"Personal 
Representative of the High Representative for WMD\") and 
Council DG Robert Cooper will represent Solana on the 
EU3-Iran Steering Committee.  External Relations Deputy DG 
Fernando Valenzuela and/or Mideast Director Christian Leffler 
will represent the Commission. 
 
4. (C) Giannella will also serve as Coordinator for the three 
EU3-Iran Working Groups.  The EU representatives to the 
Nuclear Working Group are Giannella staffers Dr. Stephan 
Klement and Jean-Claude Brunet.  Klement is a nuclear policy 
specialist who was with the IAEA before joining Giannella\'s 
office earlier this year.  Brunet is a security policy expert 
detailed to Giannella\'s office from the French MFA.  Brunet 
and Policy Unit Iran Advisor Bjorn Larrson are the 
representatives to the Political and Security Working Group. 
The Commission\'s Leffler will lead the Technology and 
Economic Development Working Group with participation from 
others in the Commission as appropriate.  We have very good 
working relationships with all of these people and consider 
them capable and cooperative. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
DECEMBER 13 MINISTERIAL AND WORKING GROUPS PLENARY 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
5. (S) Giannella\'s readout of the December 13 EU3-Iran 
ministerial meeting tracked closely with refs (B) and (C). 
Describing the event as a \"tete-a-tete\" between Rohani and 
the Europeans, she said Rohani rejected outright any hint 
that the \"objective guarantee\" being sought by the EU-3 could 
only be achieved by means of a total cessation of enrichment 
activities.  Instead, Iran insisted that its \"rights\" under 
the NPT could not be infringed.  Beyond such posturing, 
nothing of substance was discussed, she said. 
 
6. (S) Giannella said that during the introductory working 
groups plenary following the ministerial, the GOI delivered 
an oral list of the topics they wanted to discuss in each of 
the three working groups.  Reading from her notes, she said 
these were: 
 
Nuclear Group: 
  1. objective guarantees 
  2. peaceful applications, including: 
      a) nuclear fuel supplies (\"can\'t rely on tricky 
Russians\") 
      b) joint projects (not defined) 
 
Political and Security Group: 
  1. sustained partnership on regional issues 
  2. cooperation on counter-terrorism 
  3. security assurances (Note: we took this as code 
     for US engagement) 
  4. nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East 
  5. export controls 
  6. defense relations, including: 
      a) counter-narcotics 
      b) counter-terrorism 
      c) conventional defense cooperation 
 
Technology and Economic Development: 
  1. easing EU export restrictions 
  2. technical assistance 
  3. financial assistance 
  4. energy 
  5. trade liberalization 
 
7. (S) According to Giannella, the EU-3 did not respond to 
the list and the rest of the meeting was consumed by more 
Iranian posturing and unsubstantive discussions. 
 
--------------------------------- 
DECEMBER 17 NUCLEAR GROUP MEETING 
--------------------------------- 
 
8. Giannella\'s readout of the first meeting of the Nuclear 
Working Group in Geneva on December 17, which she attended, 
tracked almost verbatim with those provided by German, French 
and British officials (ref A).  She described the meeting as 
an \"ice-breaking\" session and said they did not discuss 
cessation or objective guarantees.  She echoed others in 
saying she was generally pleased with Naseri and thought him 
much more businesslike and reasonable than the \"theatrical\" 
Zefari. 
 
9. (S) Giannella said the EU-3 asked for a paper from the 
Iranians explaining their reasons for wanting a 6000-megawatt 
nuclear energy capacity by 2020 (which she thought 
unrealistic).  The GOI agreed to deliver the paper at the 
next Nuclear Group meeting scheduled for January 17 in 
Geneva.  The Iranians also said they needed a light water 
research reactor in order to produce medical isotopes and to 
train new engineers.  Giannella said the Iranians wanted to 
discuss restrictions on European exports and, incredibly, 
also asked for a tour of European nuclear energy facilities, 
but the EU-3 did not respond.  She commented that one of the 
most frustrating aspects of negotiating with the Iranians was 
that they always sought to maintain a facade of equality, as 
though they should be treated with the same trust and respect 
as any other \"responsible\" state.  Giannella said the 
Iranians also complained a lot about the Russians and said 
they needed a more reliable source of fuel that would not 
squeeze them for extra profit or political gain. 
 
-------------------- 
SCHEDULE OF MEETINGS 
-------------------- 
 
10. (S) Giannella expected the working groups to meet on a 
roughly monthly basis.  In principle they will convene in 
Geneva (or maybe Vienna) in order to create a neutral 
atmosphere and to ensure maximum participation on the 
European side.  The Steering Committee will meet quarterly; 
the first will convene in March in Tehran.  The Political and 
Security Working Group met for the first time December 21 in 
Geneva (we do not yet have a readout), and the Nuclear Group 
will next meet on January 17 in Geneva.  Before then, 
European experts will make a \"fact-finding\" visit to Iran to 
explore the research reactor sought by the GOI (Giannella 
Staffer Dr. Stephan Klement will participate for the 
Council).  Giannella did not know where things stood with the 
Technology and Economic Development group. 
 
McKinley 
"
"24682","12/28/2004 12:51","04BRUSSELS5408","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE273476","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 005408 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA; PLEASE PASS TO AID/OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, PREL, IN, CE, TH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: TFX001: INITIAL EC RESPONSE TO ASIAN TSUNAMI 
 
REF: STATE 273476 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  The European Commission has activated two 
emergency mechanisms to meet the immediate humanitarian 
assistance needs arising from the December 26 earthquake and 
tsunamis in the Indian Ocean.  The EU,s Community Mechanism 
 
SIPDIS 
Civil Protection Unit and Monitoring and Information Centre 
(MIC) have generated and coordinated in-kind contributions 
from ten member states, primarily for Sri Lanka.  Most of the 
contributions are in the form of medical teams and supplies. 
The Commission Directorate General (DG) for Humanitarian Aid 
(ECHO) immediately pledged 3 million Euros for the 
International Federation of the Red Cross (IFRC), to be 
followed by further funding decisions up to 30 million Euros 
for relief efforts and a comprehensive rehabilitation 
package.  An initial expedited funding decision to release 10 
million Euros to international organizations and NGO partners 
is expected by the end of the week.  The Dutch Presidency 
issued a statement December 27 expressing sorrow over the 
tragedy and promising further assistance.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  MIC:  After receiving news of the disaster on December 
26, the two-person team on duty at MIC began coordinating 
in-kind contributions from the civil protection units of 
approximately 10 member states, primarily for Sri Lanka.  The 
contributions have been funded by the following member 
states:  France (air hospital, water, search and rescue); 
Sweden (tents, medical relief); Greece (medical relief); 
Hungary (medical team/relief); Italy (medical team); Slovakia 
(medical team); Czech Republic, Malta and Bulgaria (tents, 
bottled water, blankets).  At this point MIC is suspending 
its efforts to solicit more contributions until it hears more 
from UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA) assessment teams in each country. 
 
3.  ECHO:  On December 26, Development Commissioner Louis 
Michel announced a pledge of 3 million Euros to fund ICRC 
humanitarian assistance efforts in South Asia. 
Characterizing the disaster as one of the world\'s worst 
natural disasters in many years, the Commissioner expressed 
no doubt that a further \"substantial sum8 of up to 30 
million euros would follow for relief and a &comprehensive 
rehabilitation package.8  At ECHO, the Head of Unit for 
Asia, Central and Latin America (who returned from vacation 
to deal with the disaster) told us that a 10 million Euro 
emergency decision is underway and will probably be out by 
the end of the week.  ECHO is waiting for the reports of the 
3-person assessment teams currently in Indonesia and Sri 
Lanka.  The reports are expected in the next day or two, at 
which time the decision can be approved.  An expedited 
procedure can be used for amounts up to 10 million, and the 
strategy is to get the funds out as soon as possible and then 
follow up with further decisions.  The funds will be released 
to international organizations and NGO partners based on 
needs assessments and funding requests. 
 
4.  PRESIDENCY:  On December 26, the Dutch Presidency issued 
a statement expressing shock and sorrow over the disaster. 
The statement mentioned the immediate responses of various 
member states, and said &the EU stands ready to assist in 
very way possible to alleviate the sad plight of the 
victims.8 
McKinley 
"
"24743","12/29/2004 16:20","04BRUSSELS5427","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005427 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR TASK FORCE 1 AND EUR/ERA; DEPARTMENT PLEASE 
PASS USAID/DCHA/OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, PREL, IN, CE, TH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: TFX001: EC ON DONOR COORDINATION AND ASSISTANCE TO 
TSUNAMI VICTIMS 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 5408 
 
1. (U) Summary: The EU will meet in Luxembourg on January 7 
to coordinate its response to the tsunami in Asia.  On the 
agenda is the advisability of an international donor 
conference.  Commissioner Louis Michel may visit Sri Lanka 
before this meeting to assess the situation.  The European 
Commission (EC) expects to make its second decision by the 
end of the week, making an additional 10 million euros 
available mostly for Sri Lanka and the Maldives.  Future 
decisions should favor Indonesia, although the EC is 
concerned about access to key affected areas in Aceh.  EC 
coordination for humanitarian assistance with the UN and the 
U.S. is good.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------- 
International Conference? 
------------------------- 
 
2. (U) On December 29, a Directorate General Development 
official confirmed to us the accuracy of press articles 
reporting that Commissioner Louis Michel may call for an 
international donor conference to discuss the tsunami 
response.  Michel will raise the need for such a conference 
with Development Ministers from EU Members States on January 
7 at an informal meeting called by the incoming-Luxembourg 
Presidency to take place in Luxembourg.  EU Ministers will 
also take stock of Member State responses and discuss ways to 
ensure a smooth transition between relief efforts in the 
affected areas and longer-term rehabilitation and 
reconstruction. 
 
3. (U) The official stated that Michel may/may travel to Sri 
Lanka on or about January 5, although no final decision has 
been made.   Although the EC would like to show its concern 
for the region by such a visit, they do not want to distract 
from the relief efforts by placing an undue burden on the Sri 
Lankan authorities.  Another option would be to wait until 
the initial response has been concluded before Michel visits. 
 
------------------------- 
Assistance 
------------------------- 
 
4. (U) ECHO told us that most of the EC,s pledge of 30 
million euros will go to Sri Lanka, Indonesia and the 
Maldives.  Although ECHO has evaluation teams currently in 
Sri Lanka and Indonesia, their reports are not expected to be 
completed before ECHO makes its next decision for tsunami 
relief.  Our interlocutor expressed concern that Indonesia 
had delayed access in the Aceh area and noted specific 
problems with access to the islands of Andaman and Nicobar. 
Regarding Thailand, the ECHO official said that EU Member 
States would be more active donors than the EC (in part, 
because so many European tourists were affected in that 
country).  The official also noted that Thailand has more of 
its own financial resources and is less dependent on 
international aid.  Regarding India, the official said that 
in the past it has not welcomed EC aid, and that India was 
assisting Sri Lanka and the Maldives. 
 
5. (U) An ECHO desk officer explained that the EC,s 
immediate humanitarian response of 30 million euros will be 
disbursed in tranches of up to 10 million euros each.  A 
decision on the first tranche of 10 million euros is expected 
before the end of the week and will focus primarily on Sri 
Lanka.  About ten to twelve pre-cleared implementing partners 
will be listed, of which seven or eight should be selected. 
To date, ECHO has received only one proposal, but has seen a 
number of concept papers.  UNICEF is expected to present a 
proposal for the Maldives.  ECHO said the EC plans to contact 
Indian authorities to ask whether assistance would be 
welcome. 
 
------------------------- 
Coordination 
------------------------- 
 
6. (U) The EC has not publicly reacted to Jan Egeland,s 
remark about \"stingy\" donors.  In general, ECHO has an 
excellent relationship with OCHA.  ECHO also cited good 
experience working with UNICEF in Sri Lanka.  Our 
interlocutor remarked that OCHA has been quite active and 
somewhat faster to react to the present crisis than to the 
July flooding in Bangladesh. 
 
7. (U) USEU is actively engaged in coordinating donor 
response with EC interlocutors.  ECHO has been particularly 
appreciative of the factual information published by 
USAID/OFDA, and this information will be used as they make 
future funding decisions.  The EC\'s Monitoring and 
Information Center has provided USEU with periodic updates, 
which have been forwarded via unclass email to the tsunami 
task force, EUR/ERA and USAID. 
 
McKINLEY 
"
"24889","1/4/2005 11:33","05BRUSSELS25","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS BRUSSELS 000025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS, PARM, ETTC, PREL, CH, EUN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: EU/ARMS EXPORTS/CHINA: 2003 REPORT SHOWS INCREASED 
LICENSE ISSUANCES 
 
REF: REIDHEAD-ERATH ET. AL. E-MAIL 12/21/04 
 
1.  On December 21 the EU released its 6th Annual Report on 
the Code of Conduct for arms exports, covering CY 2003.  The 
report, compiled each year by the COARM (conventional arms 
exports) working group of Member State licensing authorities, 
covers the value and quantity of export licenses issued for 
military equipment by EU governments.  Worldwide licenses 
granted by EU Member States in 2003 were valued at 28.3 
billion Euros (31,038 licenses issued; 360 licenses denied). 
For China (excluding Hong Kong and Macau), the EU issued 159 
licenses valued at 415.8 million Euros, with 43 denials. 
This is almost double the 209.8 million reported (by the 
EU-15) for 2002 and reflects an almost fourfold increase in 
average per-license value.  At the same time, EU Member 
States report only Euros 1.7 million worth of physical 
exports to China in 2003.  Top license issuers were France 
(96 licenses valued at Euros 171.5 million), Italy (3 
licenses valued at Euros 127 million) and the UK (40 licenses 
valued at Euros 112.5 million).  The Czech Republic and 
Germany approved much smaller amounts (Euros 3.6 million and 
Euros 1.1 million, respectively). 
 
2.  For the first time, the 2003 report disaggregates the 
license issuance data by equipment category in the EU Common 
Military List (but only for those Member States willing or 
able to supply such data).  The report is based on data 
volunteered by Member States and covers only equipment in the 
Wassenaar-derived EU Common Military List (EUML).  It does 
not cover brokering, transit and transshipment, licensing for 
overseas production, or intangible technology transfers, 
although these transactions are being considered for 
inclusion in a strengthened Code of Conduct slated for 
adoption during 2005.  The report does not include data from 
Lithuania, Estonia or Cyprus (which were unable or unwilling 
to provide it). 
 
3.  The 2003 COARM Report and EU Common Military List are 
available at 
http://www.ue.eu.int/cms3 fo/showPage.asp?id=408&lang=en 
 
McKinley 
"
"25081","1/7/2005 12:42","05BRUSSELS72","Embassy Brussels","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L BRUSSELS 000072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/07/2015 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, AS, JA, CA, EUN, UN, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: AUSTRALIANS SEEK COMMON POSITION WITH U.S.ON WCDR 
AND EU ADDITIONALITY 
 
REF: A. HUIZINGA-CHASE/LUCAS/PEAY E-MAILS 
 
     B. 01/06/05 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA FOR REASONS 1.4 B/D 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: We met with counterparts from the Australian 
Mission to the EU, at their request, to discuss EU 
additionality and the World Conference on Disaster Reduction 
(WCDR), to be held in Kobe January 18-22.  The Australians 
said Canberra was concerned, in the context of the tsunami 
disaster, about &perceptions that may arise if Australia 
were seen as letting a procedural concern8 such as 
additionality hinder the Kobe conference,s mobilization of 
support for those affected by the tsunami. END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) In their January 7 meeting with Poloff, Alison Burrows 
(protect), Minister, and Catherine Dobbin (protect), Third 
Secretary, said the Australian position on additionality 
 
SIPDIS 
remained broadly in agreement with the U.S.  They said that 
Australia was developing a specific stance on the status and 
rights of the European Commission at WCDR, and asked for U.S. 
views.  We told them that the USG,s general views on EU 
additionality, conveyed to the Australians in New York and 
elsewhere, had not changed.  However, we noted USG thinking 
on WCDR is fluid (ref).  We stressed that the U.S. welcomes 
the European Commission,s (EC) active participation at WCDR, 
and added that the EU had not yet responded to our December 
2004 questions on WCDR. 
 
3. (C) Burrows replied that Australia had posed specific 
questions to the EU on WCDR, and was awaiting a response. 
She said that contacts with Japanese officials had given her 
the impression that Japan &was sitting on its hands8 
regarding EU additionality and WCDR, not wanting disputes 
over additionality to cloud the Kobe conference.  Burrows and 
Dobbin, who were asked to speak to us by their Foreign 
Ministry, said Australia would prefer to come to a &common 
position8 on EC participation at WCDR with like-minded 
countries such as the U.S., Japan and Canada.  They said they 
would keep us abreast of developments regarding Australian 
policy, and asked that we do the same. 
 
MCKINLEY 
"
"25232","1/11/2005 15:18","05BRUSSELS114","Embassy Brussels","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 000114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, PGOV, PHUM, ZL, XH, XF, XI, EUN, ETRO, USEU BRUSSELS 
SUBJECT: ACTION PLANS FOR THE EU NEIGHBORHOOD: DO THEY 
MATTER? 
 
(U) This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Please handle 
accordingly. 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  In recent weeks, the European Union 
announced with great fanfare seven \"Neighborhood Action 
Plans\" -- one step in the process of defining and 
developing the EU\'s relationships with the countries in its 
\"Neighborhood\" that at this point seem unlikely to become 
membership candidates.  The Action Plans are agreed areas for 
political and economic engagement that will bring partner 
countries closer to EU norms.  While the Action Plans do not, 
in 
and of themselves, create binding obligations on either 
party, they are seen as a step forward in creating stronger 
ties between the EU and its neighbors.  END SUMMARY. 
 
CONCEPT AND HISTORY 
=================== 
 
2.  (U) For much of its history, the EU has been able to 
influence neighboring states by wielding the carrot of EU 
membership.  In 2003, former External Relations 
Commissioner Chris Patten noted &the promise of EU 
membership8 was &the Union,s most successful foreign 
policy 
instrument.8 But with the most recent enlargement, and 
Croatia, Turkey, and perhaps other Balkans states all 
waiting in the wings, many in the EU believe that the Union 
is reaching the limits of membership expansion.  Patten 
noted that the EU now needed &new ways8 to shape the 
neighboring countries that were unlikely to be EU 
candidates. 
 
3.  (U) In 2003, the EU devised the European Neighborhood 
Policy (ENP) to support the Common Foreign and Security 
Policy,s (CFSP,s) strategic objective of building security 
around the EU,s borders.  The ENP aims to encourage 
democracy, the rule of law, and market economies through 
engagement, but does not promise eventual EU membership. 
According to former Enlargement Commissioner Gunter 
Verheugen, the Union wants to give those neighboring 
countries that respect common values (such as human rights 
and sustainable development) a &real stake in the enlarged 
EU.8  To implement the ENP, the EU has negotiated with 
seven of its neighbors an \"Action Plan\" (AP) -- a lengthy 
customized list of goals and priorities defining progress 
over three to five years.  The APs seek a comprehensive 
approach in creating &a ring of friends8 to avoid a new 
dividing line in Europe, according to former President of 
the Commission Romano Prodi and External Relations 
Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner. 
 
4.  (SBU) Originally, the ENP was designed to engage the EU, 
s new neighbors to the east: *Russia, Ukraine, Moldova, and 
Belarus.  The APs were intended to be highly conditional, 
tying* 
progress on specific economic and political reforms with 
specific EU commitment and funding.  As the EU 
developed the ENP, however, it has changed dramatically. 
First, Russia balked at being considered merely as a 
country on the EU,s periphery, and has insisted the EU 
develop a separate &partnership8 with Moscow.  Next, the 
EU, 
s southern members lobbied successfully to expand the ENP 
to include the EU,s Mediterranean partners of the Barcelona 
process.  Finally, as the first tranches of APs were 
negotiated, both the partner countries and the EU were 
reluctant to impose the strict conditionality originally 
envisioned.  As a result, the Action Plans are rather vague. 
 
NOT A PATH TO MEMBERSHIP 
======================== 
 
5.  (SBU) Since the policy,s inception, EU officials 
stressed that the ENP was not an enlargement policy.  The 
emphasis on the &neighborhood8 as distinct from potential 
membership implies that a country that is considered a & 
neighbor8 is likely to remain an outsider.  The Commission 
simply offers that the fulfillment of AP priorities may 
lead to a &new privileged partnership.8  Although the 
neighborhood policy raises the unresolved question of where 
Europe,s limits are, EU leaders seem unlikely to address 
that question before the Union digests the May 2004 EU 
enlargement, the largest in its history, the probable 2007 
accession of Bulgaria, Romania, and the likely eventual 
accession of Turkey and the former Yugoslav republics. 
6.  (SBU) The negotiations over Ukraine\'s Action Plan 
illustrated the limits of the EU\'s willingness to deal with 
the issue of potential membership for neighbors.  According 
to a Ukrainian official, Ukraine pushed hard during the 
negotiations for more concrete language on membership.  But 
they counted themselves fortunate to achieve the following 
nebulous sentence:  \"Consideration will be given to the 
possibility of a new enhanced agreement, whose scope will 
be defined in the light of the fulfillment of the 
objectives of this Action Plan and of the overall evolution 
of EU-Ukraine relations.  The advisability of any new 
contractual arrangements will be considered in due time.\" 
In short, Ukraine wanted the AP to open the door to EU 
membership; the EU offered somewhat lesser formula that 
does not slam the door shut.  As a senior EU official 
recently noted, Ukraine\'s Action Plan is an enlargement 
program without the word enlargement; if Ukraine does 
everything in the plan, enlargement negotiations would take 
only \"ten minutes.\"  (Comment.  Assuming, of course, that the 
EU had made the political decision to extend membership to 
Ukraine -- which it has not.  End Comment.) 
 
CURRENT ACTION PLANS 
==================== 
 
7.  (U) In December 2004, the Commission adopted and the 
Council endorsed the first Action Plans for Moldova, 
Ukraine, Morocco, Tunisia, Jordan, Israel, and the 
Palestinian Authority.  The APs then passed to the relevant 
Association or Cooperation Council for approval.  In 
Ukraine,s case, the Commission recommended that the 
EU-Ukraine Cooperation Council approve the AP only after & 
developments in Ukraine make it possible8 -- a condition 
that included holding a free and fair presidential election 
rerun on December 26, 2004.  According to Ferrero-Waldner, 
the Commission plans to conclude APs for Egypt, Lebanon, 
Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia in 2005. 
 
8. (U) Although based on common elements, the EU 
differentiated the Action Plans, depending on the specific 
issues of mutual importance to the EU and the other party. 
For example, the Action Plan with Israel calls for 
\"progress toward a comprehensive settlement of the Middle 
East conflicts\" and non-proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction, while the strategies in Ukraine\'s plan include 
strengthening democracy and ensuring a free press. 
 
WHAT\'S IN IT FOR NEIGHBORS? 
=========================== 
 
9.  (U) The Action Plans do not, in and of themselves, 
offer the neighbors dramatic new benefits.  While they 
reference other agreements to which the EU and a given 
neighbor may be party, and discuss potential areas of 
cooperation, they do not include promises of funding or 
other legally binding commitments.  But they engage the EU 
politically in helping its partners to help themselves, by 
obliging the neighbors to reform their systems in exchange 
for an EU promise of deeper integration.  The benefit to 
the neighboring countries is the potential for long-term 
opportunities for mutual growth and improved relations with 
the EU.  Neighbors may expect that, over time, the 
Neighborhood Policy will lead to concrete benefits such as 
more favorable trade conditions, eased travel restrictions, 
and cultural and scientific exchanges. 
 
10.  (SBU) Rather than committing new funding, in the Action 
Plans the EU commits political will to the &new privileged 
partnership,8 leaving its general &philosophy8 toward the 
neighboring countries unchanged, according to a Council 
official.  The APs largely call on each 
partner to fulfill its previous commitments to the EU and 
the international community, such as the Association 
Agreement, the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, or 
United Nations treaties.  In some cases, EU policies 
counter US policies, such as the requirement that the 
partners sign and ratify the International Criminal Court 
Treaty or the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, 
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel 
Mines and Their Destruction. 
 
11.  (U) There is potential, albeit indirect, for the 
Action Plans to result in new funding for the EU,s 
neighbors.  As part of a broad plan to simplify EU 
assistance, a European Neighborhood and Partnership 
Initiative (ENPI) is being set up as one of four main EU 
funding mechanisms.  It is unclear how large this mechanism 
will be, and the commission has explicitly avoided making any 
firm commitment for new funding in the seven Action Plans 
already negotiated, but implicit in the ENPI is the concept 
that neighbors who make progress in implementing their 
Action Plans will be encouraged with additional EU 
assistance. 
 
12.  (SBU) COMMENT:  The goals listed in the Action Plans 
are optimistic and ambitious, while corresponding 
guarantees and safeguards seem few.  A Commission official 
working on relations with 
Russia, Ukraine, Moldova, and Belarus, told us that the 
implementation 
of the Action Plans depends on the political will of the 
parties, rather than on specific funding mechanisms.  If 
the EU remains committed to the neighborhood policy -- and 
if the neighbors cooperate -- the Action Plans may become 
an important step in securing stable relationships between 
the EU and the nations, which border it.  END COMMENT. 
 
13.  (U) More information about the European Neighborhood 
Policy can be found at: 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/world/enp/. 
 
Schnabel 
c 
"