
"2391","1/16/2002 17:01","02MAPUTO76","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","R 161701Z JAN 02
FM AMEMBASSY MAPUTO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8594
INFO SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000076 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, PTER, SADC, MZ 
SUBJECT: SADC DECLARATION ON TERRORISM 
 
FOLLOWING IS THE SADC DECLARATION ON TERRORISM ADOPTED 
ON AT THE BLANTYRE EXTRAORDINARY SUMMIT ON JANUARY 14. 
THE DECLARATION IS TO BE SIGNED BY HEADS OF STATE OR 
GOVERNMENT AT THE NEXT SADC SUMMIT IN FEBRUARY. 
 
BEGIN TEXT 
 
WE, THE HEADS OF STATE OR GOVERNMENT OF 
 
THE REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA 
THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA 
THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO 
THE KINGDOM OF LESOTHO 
THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI 
THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS 
THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
THE REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA 
THE REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES 
THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 
THE KINGDOM OF SWAZILAND 
THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA 
THE REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA 
THE REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE 
 
CONCERNED WITH NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE, SOVEREIGNTY AND 
TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY AS WELL AS THE SOCIAL AND 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND WITH THE STABILITY AND 
SECURITY OF ALL SADC MEMBER STATES; 
 
CONSCIOUS THAT HARMONIOUS COOPERATION IN THE AFRICAN 
CONTINENT AND IN THE REGION IN PARTICULAR, BASED ON 
THE PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE THE AFRICAN UNION CAN ONLY 
BE ACHIEVED IN CONDITIONS OF PEACE AND IN A CLIMATE O 
POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC STABILITY; 
 
CONSIDERING THAT THREATS AND ACTS OF TERRORISM IN THE 
REGION, THE AFRICAN CONTINENT AND THE WORLD HAVE 
PROMPTED THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO STRENGTHEN THE 
MECHANISMS FOR PREVENTING AND COMBATING ALL FORMS OF 
TERRORISM; 
 
CONSIDERING FURTHER THAT TERRORISM CONSTITUTES AN 
IMPEDIMENT TO THE FULL ENJOYMENT OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 
AND FREEDOMS OF HUMANKIND; 
 
CONSCIOUS OF THE IMPERATIVE NEED TO PROTECT HUMAN 
RIGHTS AND INDIVIDUAL LIBERTIES IN CONFORMITY WITH THE 
PRINCIPLES ENSHRINED IN INTERNATIONAL LEGAL 
INSTRUMENTS, IN PARTICULAR THE RIGHT TO LIFE; 
 
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT RESOLUTIONS 55/158 OR UN GENERAL 
ASSEMBLY AND 1269 (1999) AND 1373 (2001) OF THE UN 
SECURITY COUNCIL THAT QUALIFY ACTS OF TERRORISM AS A 
THREAT TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY AND WHICH 
URGE MEMBER STATES TO STRENGTHEN COOPERATION BETWEEN 
THE UN AND REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS FOR THE PREVENTION 
OF TERRORISM IN ALL ITS FORMS AND MANIFESTATIONS; 
 
CONSIDERING THE OAU CONVENTION ON THE PREVENTION AND 
COMBATING OF TERRORISM, ADOPTED AT THE ALGIERS SUMMIT 
ON 14TH JULY, 1999; 
 
CONDEMN ALL ACTS OF TERRORISM WHEREVER THEY OCCUR AND, 
THEREFORE, UNDERTAKE TO: 
 
1.  ACCEDE OR RATIFY INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS ON 
COMBATING TERRORISM, ADOPTED BY THE OAU AND THE UNITED 
NATIONS AND INCORPORATE THEM INTO DOMESTIC LAWS; 
 
2.  FIGHT WITH ALL MEANS AT OUR DISPOSAL ALL FORMS OF 
TERRORISM THAT ENDANGER THE LIVES OF INNOCENT 
CIVILIANS, DISRUPT REGIONAL SECURITY, STABILITY AND 
THE CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER OF STATES; 
 
3.  COOPERATE AT ALL LEVELS IN THE EXCHANGE OF 
INFORMATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF PERSONS, 
INSTITUTIONS AND NETWORKS ASSOCIATED WITH TERRORISM; 
 
4.  URGE MEMBER STATES TO CREATE, STRENGTHEN AND 
HARMONIZE LEGAL INSTRUMENTS FOR THE PROSECUTION OF 
GROUPS OR INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED IN TERRORISM; 
 
5.  PREVENT SADC MEMBER STATES FROM BEING USED AS 
BASES OR SUPPORT CENTERS FOR GROUPS OR INDIVIDUALS 
INVOLVED IN TERRORIST ACTIVITIES; 
 
6. APPEAL TO COOPERATING PARTNERS FOR FINANCIAL, 
TECHNICAL, AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
TO SADC MEMBER STATES TO ENABLE THEM TO EFFECTIVELY 
COMBAT TERRORISM. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, WE THE HEADS OF THE STATE OR 
GOVERNMENT, OR OUR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES, 
HAVE SIGNED THIS DECLARATION. 
 
DONE AT BLANTYRE ON THIS 14TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2002, IN 
THREE (3) ORIGINALS, IN THE ENGLISH, FRENCH, AND 
PORTUGUESE LANGUAGES, ALL TEXTS BEING EQUALLY 
AUTHENTIC. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
WILKINSON 
"
"9540","7/21/2003 8:58","03MAPUTO1007","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 MAPUTO 001007 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/FO, AF/S, AF/RSA 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, EINV, MZ, HIV/AIDS/PEPFAR 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S END-OF-TOUR REPORT 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Sharon P. Wilkinson, for reasons 1.5 (b) and 
(d) 
 
1. (U) Summary. Bilateral political and economic relations 
between the U.S. and Mozambique have improved and deepened. 
At a political level, bilateral cooperation is excellent, 
with Washington acknowledging the impressive transition to 
democracy and the GRM willing to cooperate with the U.S., for 
example on Article 98. The Mozambican profile will rise with 
the assumption of the AU Presidency in July. On the economic 
front, Mozambique is one of the continent\'s best performers, 
albeit from a low base, with the U.S. now poised to take a 
larger role in trade and investment. The recent \"B\" 
sovereign credit rating and OPIC engagement enhance the 
potential. The country remains dependent on donor support, 
where the U.S. takes a leading role. Reduction of absolute 
poverty is the priority, and our efforts are focused on 
economic growth, limiting the effects of HIV/AIDS and other 
diseases, and strengthening governance. The U.S. has also 
successfully led the effort to address the landmine problem. 
Corruption is one of the greatest threats to continued 
progress on the economic and political fronts. The GRM has 
taken encouraging action to address the problem, and the U.S. 
actively supports these efforts with inter-agency assistance. 
Key areas where we need to maintain focus are corruption, 
HIV/AIDS, further consolidation of democracy, education and 
counter terrorism. 
 
2. (C) Summary continued. 2003 municipal and 2004 national 
elections when President Chissano will step down will change 
the political landscape. RENAMO will have at least moderate 
success in the municipal elections, assuming governing 
responsibilities for the first time; the party is not well 
prepared for this eventuality. The 2004 races are too 
distant to predict, however, both Presidential candidates 
face significant hurdles. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza 
has credible experience, but must address negative public 
association in the perceptions of past corruption and tough 
policies during the Samora Machel administration. Voters may 
also make the emotional decision that after 30 years of 
FRELIMO rule, it is time for a change. The perennial 
opposition leader and Presidential candidate, RENAMO Afonso 
Dhlakama, lacks credibility, experience, and financing. 
Likely third-party candidate Raul Domingos will not win but 
could be the swing vote. Regardless of the outcome, the U.S. 
will have no difficulty in maintaining the positive 
engagement with the government and people of Mozambique that 
we have enjoyed to date. End summary. 
 
POLITICAL RELATIONS 
=================== 
3. (U) Political relations between the U.S. and Mozambique 
improved and deepened over the last three years. The U.S. 
has appropriately acknowledged President Chissano\'s vision 
and personal efforts which have been instrumental in the 
transition to a stable multi-party, free-market oriented 
democracy. The GRM greatly values this recognition and 
high-level attention from Washington, including last year\'s 
Southern African Mini Summit and President Bush\'s 
participation with President Chissano in last month\'s 
Corporate Council on Africa Washington Summit. Examples of 
the GRM\'s commitment to our bilateral relationship include 
our recent conclusion of an Article 98 Agreement and GRM 
ratification of all 12 UN counter-terrorism conventions. 
 
4. (SBU) On the regional stage, Mozambique has played an 
increasingly visible role. Maputo has just successfully 
hosted the second African Union (AU) Summit and President 
Chissano assumed the AU Presidency for the next year. We 
expect the GRM to expand on the active role played during its 
chairmanship of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defense and 
Security, where Chissano and FM Simao placed Mozambique at 
the center of diplomatic efforts in Zimbabwe, Burundi, DROC, 
and the Comoros. The AU Presidency will be an ideal forum 
for President Chissano to bolster his already high stature as 
one of the continent\'s elder statesman, before retiring from 
office in 2004. We expect Chissano will be a forceful 
advocate for NEPAD with its inherent focus on good 
governance, peer review, and African solutions for African 
problems. He is unlikely to speak out publicly against 
President Mugabe\'s policies, leaving that to President Mbeki 
and President Obasanjo. 
 
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND INVESTMENT 
=================================== 
5. (U) The economy grew at 8 percent in 2002 and is poised 
to remain between seven and ten percent over the next few 
years. Inflation fell from over 20 percent in 2001 to nine 
percent in 2003 due to a tightening of monetary policy and 
the gradual recovery from the devastating 2000 floods. This 
growth, the result of sustained reforms and sound 
macroeconomic management, as mandated by the IMF and World 
Bank, have made Mozambique a viable destination for foreign 
direct investment (FDI), particularly in sectors exploiting 
the country\'s vast but largely untapped natural resources. 
Confirmation of this positive picture is the \"B/B \" credit 
rating assigned to Mozambique by Fitch Ratings in July 2003 
 
6. (U) Mozambique receives substantial FDI, but, so far, 
the U.S. has not been one of the major players. (By 2001 
revenues, Mobil Oil is the 12th largest firm in country, 
Coca-Cola 13th, with four others in the top 100.) This 
situation is set to change. OPIC is providing nearly $30 
million for a U.S.-led consortium rehabilitation of the port 
and rail facilities and acquisition of the concessions to run 
the operations in the Nacala Corridor, a crucial 
transportation route linking Northern Mozambique, Malawi, and 
Zambia. The efficient operation of the route should engender 
substantial investments in areas such as mining and 
agriculture. OPIC is also involved in a major eco-tourism 
project; eco-tourism is an industry set to boom in Mozambique 
and it is a USAID focus area for export-led growth and job 
creation. A U.S. construction firm has been contracted to 
build a $200million mineral sands project in Nampula 
province and a U.S./Norwegian partnership just signed an 
agreement to prospect for natural gas in Sofala province. 
Several other U.S. investments are also in the pipeline. 
 
7. (U) Mozambique has had moderate success in taking 
advantage of AGOA. In 2002, 750,000 garments were exported, 
up from a base of none the year before. Last month, the 
first-ever exports of top-quality Mozambican prawns arrived 
in the U.S. We recently learned of new legislative 
initiatives to remove import duties for certain categories of 
components for products made in Mozambique. 
 
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE AND DONOR PARTNERS 
========================================= 
8. (U) Donor partners fund approximately 60 percent of the 
national budget through either direct budget support or 
through programs and projects designed to supplement 
GRM-provided services. About 23 bilateral donors and a 
string of smaller partners contribute to the disbursed aid 
funds. In addition, 25 multilateral agencies and up to 150 
international NGOs/PVOs offer grants, loans, or technical 
assistance. 
 
9. (U) USAID and the other donor partners do not operate in 
a vacuum in Mozambique. There is a clear trend among donors 
in Mozambique to move toward harmonized forms of aid, whether 
through budget support or through pooling and sector-wide 
approaches. Donor funding for 2002 included budget support 
($100 million); sector and pooled support ($100 million) and 
other projects ($500 million). Apart from pooling funding 
and technical assistance, organized dialogue between donors 
and between government and donors illustrates another form of 
harmonization and coordination. USAID is an integral part of 
this process. With our donor partners, we are encouraging a 
greater focus on corruption, and support for conditionality 
of assistance in return for policy reform. 
 
10. (U) As the role of USAID has expanded over the last 
nearly 20 years, our strategies have been fine-tuned. 
USAID\'s Country Strategic Plan from 1996 to present focused 
on increasing rural incomes, making government accountable to 
citizens, improving health, and creating a better business 
environment. The new strategic plan for 2004-2010 will build 
on this experience to create broad-based, rapid economic 
growth sustained through expanded capacities and 
opportunities. The five strategic objects that will be 
utilized to achieve this are increasing rural economic 
growth, focusing on labor intensive exports, helping local 
government become more democratic, improving health services 
for children and reproductive health, and finally working 
towards behavior changes which will result in preventing new 
cases of HIV/AIDS while also caring for those already 
suffering from this disease. With this central and strategic 
objectives in mind, USAID stays true to its support of the 
GRM PARPA (Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty) 
as each objective contributes to at least one of the PARPA\'s 
priorities. 
 
11. (SBU) The GRM is, of course, anxiously awaiting 
appropriation of the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) 
funds. We fully expect Mozambique to qualify; failure to do 
so would be a major blow, given the country\'s impressive and 
sustained policy strides of the last ten years. 
 
HIV/AIDS AND HEALTH 
=================== 
12. (SBU) The Mozambican Government has been an outspoken 
advocate in the battle against HIV/AIDS, led by Prime 
Minister Mocumbi who heads the National AIDS Council. 
(Comment. A European trained physician, Mocumbi last year 
ran a strong but ultimately unsuccessful campaign for the 
World Health Organization Director Generalship. It is an 
open secret that Mocumbi, at ease in the international arena, 
is interested in exploring outside job possibilities and 
could well end up elsewhere in the international health 
field. End Comment.) The GRM is committed to forceful 
action and outspoken advocacy as essential to contain and 
diminish the infection rate, which is currently 12 percent. 
 
13. (U) The U.S. is actively engaged in the health sector, 
both through growing USG programs as well as private 
organizations, including the Gates Foundation, Clinton 
Foundation, and numerous NGOs. USAID direct assistance has 
provided technical assistance, training, and commodities to 
improve the public health system and enable key Mozambican 
organizations to lead HIV/AIDS prevention. This assistance 
has been successful in shifting health service delivery from 
international to local institutions, including a revitalized 
Ministry of Health (MOH). Similarly, CDC has enjoyed success 
in its dealings with the MOH in the implementation of 
surveillance of HIV, voluntary counseling and testing (VCT), 
and planning, monitoring and evaluation of HIV/AIDS 
activities. In calendar year 2004, the CDC Global AIDS 
Program (GAP) will begin support to the MOH in the 
implementation of prevention of mother-to-child transmission 
activities, including the treatment of AIDS patients. The 
Department of Labor is funding $900,000 to address HIV/AIDS 
in the workplace and Peace Corps works actively in HIV 
prevention through classroom instruction and other outreach 
programs. In calendar year 2004 they will welcome the first 
group of volunteers in the health sector. For all the 
efforts and success needs remain high and Mozambique is 
poised and eager to participate in President Bush\'s $15 
million Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. 
 
DEMINING 
======== 
14. (U) Landmines, both from the colonial struggle and the 
civil war, have taken an enormous toll on Mozambique, both 
economically and socially. The USG, first through DOD ($11.5 
million) and for the last 3-4 years primarily through PM/HDP 
($10.5 million), has been one of the leading donors helping 
the GRM to demine. We have supported numerous demining 
projects implemented by RONCO, based in Beira, Sofala 
province. Support has also included capacity-building of the 
National Demining Institute (IND) and the Mozambican Armed 
Forces (FADM) Demining Brigade in the form of training and 
equipment. This year, at the request of the GRM, RONCO 
completed demining the Sena rail line, a once flourishing 
transportation route linking Dondo (near Beira port) to the 
Malawi border, which now can be refurbished. This year our 
focus shifted from the central provinces to the north, with 
$2.5 million in PM/HDP funds going to clear Portuguese-laid 
minefields along the border with Tanzania. After more than 
ten years of effort, Mozambique is approaching, but not yet 
at, the point where the high-impact mine problem will have 
been sufficiently overcome. Though we expect funding levels 
for Mozambican demining to decrease due to the obvious need 
to deal with new mine hotspots like Afghanistan, Iraq and 
Angola, we need to stay the course to ensure the completion 
of this task, essential for Mozambican development. 
 
15. (U) We are particularly pleased with the work of the 
Department of State-funded Quick Reaction Demining Force 
(QRDF), also operated by RONCO; we have worked actively to 
publicize its successes. QRDF teams, with virtually all 
Mozambican deminers, have been successfully deployed to 
Sudan, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, and, now, Iraq. While not 
deployed, QRDF teams have completed high-priority tasks 
inside Mozambique, such as recent power line demining work 
that was requested by the Governor of Sofala province. The 
effectiveness of the Mozambican teams in challenging 
international environments is on source of pride for 
Mozambique and an example of our bilateral cooperation. 
 
ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS 
======================= 
16. (SBU) Corruption is pervasive in Mozambique. It not 
only hampers development of trade and investment, but has a 
nexus with money-laundering and trafficking in narcotics and 
persons. A 2001 survey, funded by USAID and carried out by 
the local civil society organization, ETICA, showed that 66 
percent of respondents had paid or been solicited for a bribe 
by a public official in the prior six-month period. This 
had never been done before in Mozambique, and was a useful 
tool for opening public discussion of corruption. Conflicts 
of interest for senior public officials are common, where 
they use public office to benefit private business interests. 
Prosecutions for corruption-related offenses are still rare. 
The assassinations of investigative journalist Carlos 
Cardoso and bank official Antonio Siba-Siba Macuacua, both 
linked to corruption at failed banks in which the government 
exercised significant control, have galvanized public opinion 
against corruption. 
 
17. (U) The appointment of a new Attorney General, Joaquim 
Madeira, a former Supreme Court Justice, signaled a 
noticeably stronger official stance against corruption. 
Madeira shocked the political establishment in his 2001 
parliamentary address, promising to take strong action 
against corruption. He fired members of his own staff, 
forced the removal of judges, and created a specialized 
anti-corruption unit to pursue corruption cases. With USAID, 
INL and other funding, we have actively supported this unit, 
renovating offices, donating equipment, and providing 
extensive training, FBI courses and OPDAT advisor visits. 
This unit is an increasingly important anti-corruption 
player. Its resources are dwarfed by the scale of the 
problem, and we plan continued and expanded support for it. 
In addition to the work with the anti-corruption unit, we 
have built a constructive relationship with the National 
Police Academy (ACIPOL), supported by INL funds, where we 
expect that enhancing law enforcement capacity, beginning 
with fresh recruits, will in the long run strengthen 
anti-corruption efforts. A measure of success is the request 
for training from the Director of Customs, one of the most 
corrupt organizations in Mozambique. 
 
18. (C) The highly publicized Cardoso trial, which many 
thought would never happen, was a watershed in the fight 
against corruption, but it was only an initial step. Those 
implicated in ordering the assassination, including President 
Chissano\'s son, have yet to be brought to justice. Other 
high-profile cases are also pending. Perception of 
widespread corruption among the political elite in Maputo is 
one of the areas where FRELIMO is most vulnerable heading 
into upcoming elections. RENAMO and the smaller opposition 
parties harp constantly on corruption, but many sanguine 
observers believe that, if in power, RENAMO would also be 
plagued by corruption. 
 
THE POLITICAL FUTURE 
==================== 
19. (C) Municipal elections, scheduled to be held in 
November 2003, will mark a new phase in Mozambican democracy 
when, for the first time, some RENAMO candidates should find 
themselves in governance positions. No scientific polling 
exists in Mozambique, but based on our own up-country travel 
and 1999 election results, we expect RENAMO to win 
approximately 15 of the 33 races. FRELIMO should retain all 
10 municipalities in the three southern provinces and most in 
the traditional northern strongholds of Cabo Delgado as well 
as Niassa. However, RENAMO should have a strong showing in 
the central provinces of Sofala, Manica, Zambezia, and Tete, 
as well as the five municipalities in Nampula. Though 
municipalities do not yet play a large political or economic 
role in a still very centralized Mozambique, RENAMO gaining 
at least some power will have the symbolic importance of 
shattering the myth of FRELIMO invincibility. 
20. (C) To some extent, the municipal election outcomes 
will be harbingers of the December 2004 national elections. 
While we believe the 2004 elections are FRELIMO\'s to lose, we 
are not yet ready to call the winner. With only one year 
between the contests, a particularly strong showing by RENAMO 
in the municipal contests, perhaps a better than expected 
showing in the north and central and/or a win in a 
traditionally FRELIMO stronghold in the south, would be a 
strong indicator of Mozambicans\' desire for change at a 
national level. Conversely, FRELIMO holding RENAMO to ten or 
fewer municipalities in their traditional central strongholds 
would bode well for FRELIMO\'s chances in 2004. 
 
PARTY LEADERSHIP 
================ 
21. (C) FRELIMO Secretary General and Presidential 
candidate Armando Guebuza is known as a decisive, capable 
leader. He has impressive government credentials as a former 
Minister of Interior, Minister of Transportation, and 
parliamentary leader. He has been one of FRELIMO\'s most 
forceful backers of free market structural reforms and in the 
90s became one of the country\'s wealthiest and most 
successful businessmen. However, Guebuza faces several 
electoral challenges. Foremost are the rumors of corruption, 
both from shenanigans during the privatization of government 
companies as well alleged involvement in other illicit 
activities. We expect Guebuza will make cracking down on 
corruption a top campaign priority to counter this image. He 
has already given indications of this in public and private 
gatherings. Though engaging on a personal level, Guebuza is 
less charismatic than Chissano. Also, regional equities may 
work against him. Though born in Nampula to a northern Makua 
mother, Guebuza is much more closely associated with the 
south, having a southern father and having been raised in 
Maputo. The perception in the central and northern regions 
is that the south has received the lion\'s share of 
development resources, and another southerner (like Chissano 
and Machel) would only continue this pattern. 
 
22. (C) RENAMO leader Afonso Dhlakama also faces 
challenges. First, there is a credibility issue, as both he 
and his party lack any governing experience. Also, RENAMO 
lacks the financial resources to wage an effective campaign. 
FRELIMO controls the government apparatus and patronage which 
it will fully use to its advantage. RENAMO has yet to 
articulate an election strategy or platform. After more than 
ten years in Maputo, Dhlakama has earned an image of 
perennial opposition leader, living the life of leisure in 
Maputo, increasingly out of touch with his rural base in the 
central region. Nevertheless, he has enormous name 
recognition and will draw support not only from diehard 
RENAMO backers, but also from disenchanted FRELIMO members 
and, potentially, new voters. 
 
23. (C) A huge unknown for the 2004 presidential and 
legislative contest is what role former RENAMO number two 
Raul Domingos will play. Domingos, on track with what he has 
told us over the last year, is on his way to forming his own 
political party. Still a member of the National Assembly, 
Domingos remains in the public spotlight, and he has been 
traveling extensively throughout the country. Based on our 
travels, the presence of the NGO Domingos founded, IPADE, 
particularly in Tete and Manica provinces, has been notable. 
However, IPADE is very weak or non-existent in other parts of 
the country. How much support Domingos and his party would 
have at a national level is unclear, but we do not seeing him 
getting more than 5-10 percent of the vote. A Domingos 
candidacy is likely to play a spoiler function. Though 
Domingos could conceivably take some votes from FRELIMO 
members unhappy with corruption and other problems, Dhlakama 
is the more likely victim of a Domingos run. Dhlakama\'s 
autocratic style and perceived distancing from his rural, 
grassroots support could cost him votes. Also, an ethnic 
split is conceivable, with Senas abandoning Ndau Dhlakama for 
fellow Sena Domingos. The source of Domingos\' funding, for 
IPADE and his future party, is unclear. RENAMO leadership 
and media outlets have insinuated that FRELIMO is backing 
Domingos in order to split the opposition, a charge not 
without some plausibility. 
 
PLAYERS IN A GUEBUZA OR DHLAKAMA ADMINISTRATION 
============================================= == 
24. (C) Regardless of who wins in 2004, most of the 
interlocutors Washington and the Mission have come to know 
well will change. Under Guebuza, we would expect to see most 
Chissano-appointed ministers gone, certainly Prime Minister 
Mocumbi, Foreign Minister Simao, Finance Minister Diogo, 
Transport Minister Salomao, Health Minister Songane and 
Agriculture Minister Muteia, and possibly Industry and 
Commerce Minister Morgado. Possible holdovers are Mineral 
Resources and Energy Minister Langa and Defense Minister Dai, 
Guebuza\'s brother-in-law, though with different portfolios. 
Prominent governors from Sofala, Nampula, and Cabo Delgado 
could also turn up as ministers. 
 
25. (C) Though they are unlikely to take a cabinet or 
otherwise public position, influential FRELIMO members will 
continue to play crucial policy roles behind the scenes. 
First on this list is President Chissano, who will remain 
head of FRELIMO. Other major players in FRELIMO\'s central 
committee, including Alberto Chipande and Rafael Maguni 
(respectively Ministers of Defense and Information under 
Samora Machel), will likewise continue behind the scenes. 
Another major player, and a potential 2009 Presidential 
candidate, is Graca Machel, Samora Machel\'s widow and the 
current wife of Nelson Mandela. 
 
26. (C) A Dhlakama victory would bring many challenges for 
RENAMO. One of the first would be coming up with capable, if 
not experienced, personalities for key positions. Dhlakama\'s 
autocratic style has driven out major players such as 
Domingos and former RENAMO Secretary General Joaquim Vaz. 
Dhlakama has continually given us the encouraging message 
that technocratic-level public workers would be retained. 
But the sheer number of political-level appointments required 
- Minister, Vice Minister, National Directors at 22 
ministries, governors, and Ambassadors - dwarfs such 
assurances. In their meeting following his May 2003 U.S. 
visit, Dhlakama told the Ambassador that a committee of 44 
individuals already existed, drawn from business and 
academia. Presumably, political appointees would be drawn 
from this group. RENAMO\'s relationship with its Electoral 
Union (UE) coalition partners remains fractious. However, 
ultimately we would expect to see small party leaders, many 
of whom provide the intellectual backbone of the opposition, 
take on important portfolios. Attorney Maximo Dias of MONAMO 
and engineer Lutero Simango of PCN fall into this category. 
We would expect no current FRELIMO ministers to participate 
in a Dhlakama administration in any way. 
 
27. (C) Should RENAMO win in 2004, an orderly political 
transition would demonstrate the solidity of Mozambican 
democracy, specifically FRELIMO\'s commitment to it. A 
graceful loss would confirm its own self-proclaimed 
commitment to democracy and peace. While a RENAMO win might 
be a good democracy story, it would certainly make for 
difficult times in Mozambique. On policy, RENAMO would 
likely continue the positive reforms of FRELIMO and perhaps 
move closer to U.S. position in other areas (e.g., allowing 
land ownership, support for the U.S. in Iraq, a harder line 
on Mugabe, etc.). However, the expected disarray of a 
Dhlakama administration, at least initially, would require 
not only patience but significant additional support. 
Implementation of our myriad assistance programs would be 
extremely challenging, especially if FRELIMO-aligned 
technocrats were replaced with less experienced or 
unqualified RENAMO functionaries. 
 
WHAT THE USG SHOULD FOCUS ON 
============================ 
28. (U) The FY-05 MPP lays out the Mission\'s overall key 
objectives. There are several areas in particular the USG 
should concentrate its efforts. One is elevating the policy 
dialogue on corruption. Failure to win this battle could 
derail all the other important economic reforms Mozambique 
has implemented, and reduce foreign investment incentives 
needed to generate economic growth. For significant poverty 
reduction, Mozambique must reduce red tape and other 
barriers. Continued USG support for the HIV/AIDS battle is 
crucial to staunch, then reverse, the ravages of the 
pandemic. Finally, though Mozambique has been a model for 
the transition to democracy, we should not lose sight of just 
how young the democracy is. Beyond just election monitoring, 
we should continue efforts to consolidate the gains made. A 
foreseeable need is governance training for new RENAMO 
leaders. 
 
WHAT WE SHOULD FOCUS ON IF WE HAD EXTRA $$$ 
=========================================== 
29. (C) Needs in Mozambique are enormous, but there are two 
areas where additional resources could mostly usefully be 
applied. The first area is counter-terrorism. The GRM is 
fully cooperative at the political level, and the Mission 
actively engages with police, military, banking, and 
diplomatic contacts. We fully participate in training 
opportunities such as ILEA. However, major resources are 
needed to help the GRM address the many weaknesses that 
include a large Muslim population that is extremely poor and 
vulnerable to outside influence, notoriously porous borders 
with all its neighbors, a 1500-mile unpatrolled coastline for 
which the GRM has zero monitoring capacity, and a severely 
limited response ability in the event of a terrorist attack. 
The GRM\'s heavy dependence upon South Africa and the Indian 
navy for security during the AU Summit bore witness to these 
weaknesses. 
 
30. (U) The second is education, which, though part of 
Peace Corps\' stock and trade, has not been a major focus of 
the USG. The lack of human capacity is a serious limiting 
factor we consistently encounter in all sectors. Many 
Mozambicans, in and out of government, are well-trained, 
English-speaking and competent, but that expertise is 
extremely thin. While we have successfully cultivated 
Mozambican institutions of higher education through linkages, 
Fulbright, etc., there remain innumerable opportunities for 
meaningful assistance in secondary and university education, 
in addition to girls\' education at the primary level. 
WILKINSON 
"
"12368","11/25/2003 8:08","03MAPUTO1652","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE306486","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 001652 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/EX, CA/EX, AF/S, OIG/ISP, M/FSI/SPAS, CA/VO, 
CA/FPP, CA/OCS 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RCO BACA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT, CVIS, CASC, KFRD, ASIG, AFSI, MZ 
SUBJECT: CONSULAR NARRATIVE FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: STATE 306486 
 
The following are Embassy Maputo\'s responses to the 
questions posed in REFTEL. 
A)Consular Section Chief: James H. Potts 
ETD: 08/04 (to Pol/Econ section) 
Telephone: 258 1 492797, ext 3434 
Email: pottsjh@state.gov 
Deputy Section Consular Chief: none 
Back-up Consular Officer: Elizabeth E. Jaffee 
Email: jaffeeee@state.gov 
Consular Section Fax number: 258 1 490448 
IVG:887 
B) Do you have sufficient staff to meet consular MPP 
objectives? 
Yes. The Consular Section currently consists of one Vice 
Consul, one Foreign Service National and one part-time 
Consular Assistant. Back-up Consular Officers at post and 
the Regional Consular Officer in Johannesburg provide 
critical advice and backstopping assistance. This is 
adequate staffing to meet our objectives. 
C) Do you have sufficient space to meet consular MPP 
objectives? 
Space is inadequate. We can still meet MPP objectives, but 
in a less-than-efficient manner. There is only one window 
for all NIV, ACS and cashier functions, causing delays in 
processing visas and providing services to American 
citizens. In addition, the copy machine, desks, sight lines 
and fire escape lanes are less than adequate because there 
is no other feasible way to situate them within the confines 
of the office space. 
In 2002, Post made an OBO request for a second consular 
window in recent years. This year, however, we are 
discontinuing that request because it does not appear 
structurally feasible within the confines of our current 
building. We are not currently considering relocation of 
the Consular section to another office space. Post is in 
the process of locating sites for a new Embassy, in which 
the Consular section would be larger than it is at present. 
D) Describe any management practices that post has 
instituted in the past year. Are these management practices 
effective? Also, please list any management practices that 
have been discontinued in the past year, citing reasons for 
their termination. 
Post has continued our basic management practices. NIV 
interviews take place by appointment every Tuesday and 
Thursday morning. The Consular FSN conducts the screening 
process while the Consular Assistant enters data; the Vice 
Consul conducts interviews later in the morning. Our 
appointment, fee collection, and record keeping systems work 
well. We maintain an on-site MRV fee collection system, and 
are not planning an off-site move at this time. We do not 
use a call center, given our relatively low NIV application 
rate. 
We carry out a full range of American Citizen Services. One 
small change in ACS: we are now providing additional 
passport pages by mail, waiving personal appearances for 
American citizens known to the Embassy. This system has 
been adopted since many Amcits in country live far from 
Maputo, transportation is expensive, and DHL/Fed Ex services 
are increasingly available and safe. 
E) Please advise whether and why post might benefit from a 
Consular Management Assistance Team (CMAT) visit. If a CMAT 
visited you post, please summarize any benefits and what 
steps, if any, could be taken to further enhance the 
productivity of CMAT visits. 
While staff is familiar with basic management practices, a 
CMAT visit would help us troubleshoot specific weaknesses, 
such as control of older inventory. We could also learn more 
about new Department initiatives, such as off-site fee 
collection. Such a visit would be particularly helpful in 
late 2004 when a new Consular Assistant will be hired to 
replace the one leaving June 2004. 
F) Do you have the equipment you need to meet consular MPP 
objectives? 
Basic consular supplies and equipment at post are sufficient 
to meet objectives. 
G) How would you rate your consular section\'s satisfaction 
with automated consular systems? How do your rate the 
training of post personnel both within the consular section 
and in Management/IM on the use and support of consular 
systems? What types of assistance would you need from the 
next training and refresher teams coming from the consular 
systems division to assist consular system users? Please 
also comment on the quality of assistance provided by the Ca 
Overseas Help Desk. 
Consular section is very unsatisfied with the effectiveness 
and reliability of our automated consular systems, 
particularly the NIV and ACRS applications. We lose several 
work hours per person per week due to recurrent equipment 
failures. Staff is well versed in the use of consular 
systems, although training is always welcome. IM personnel 
in the Embassy do their best to assist but are not able to 
prevent recurring system crashes and other errors. IM 
personnel do not have the comprehensive training required to 
debug consular applications. 
From November 12-24, 2003, a team from the Orkand Group will 
be visiting post, at which time much of our pre-existing 
equipment will be reinstalled, along with several new 
applications. Hopefully this will rectify many of our 
equipment problems. Biometric and photo-digitized passport 
equipment will also be installed. During this visit, we 
will require biometrics training, and we also ask that both 
IM and Consular staff receive system maintenance training. 
H) Some posts have recently begun scanning 2-D barcodes to 
input DS-156 information into consular systems. Please 
comment on post\'s experience with this program. 
We expect to begin scanning 2-D barcodes after the Orkand 
Team finishes installing equipment this November. Until 
now, post has no experience with the program. 
I) What aspects of your ACS work are the most demanding? 
The American community in Mozambique is spread throughout 
the country in areas where transportation to/from the 
capital is poor, and communication is unreliable. Amcits 
are often difficult to reach, and we would have a difficult 
time responding quickly in case of an actual emergency 
outside Southern Mozambique. 
Thankfully, 2003 has been relatively free of consular 
emergencies. In late 2002, however, there were two 
shootings of Americans in Maputo within a three-week period 
- one of them fatal. Also, many more petty crimes were 
committed against Amcits in Northern and Central Mozambique 
during late 2002/early 2003. Crime levels have fallen since 
then, but complaints against local immigration officials and 
police are still very common. We spend a significant amount 
of staff time intervening with relevant officials in order 
to ensure that Americans are issued proper visas, permits, 
certificates, etc. 
In addition, we have a growing number of pending cases of 
Americans hoping to adopt Mozambican children, all of them 
complicated for various reasons. 
J) Please describe any initiatives post has undertaken to 
better provide assistance for victims of violent crime and 
their impact on your workload. 
In 2003, we have not experienced any reported violent crime 
against American citizens that resulted in serious physical 
injuries or financial destitution. After two Americans were 
shot in Maputo in late 2002, the Ambassador hosted town hall 
meetings to address the concerns of the American community. 
We have since expanded our warden system network and 
communication with police in outlying areas of the country, 
in order to better reach potential victims in those areas. 
DCM, RSO and Consul met with American businesses, schools 
and charitable groups to review counter-terrorism awareness. 
K) What aspects of your NIV work are most demanding? 
Third country nationals - particularly South Asians, Cubans, 
and other Africans - make up a significant portion of our 
NIV caseload, and are generally much more difficult to 
evaluate than Mozambican applicants. 
L) Describe the impact that post-9/11 changes in NIV 
processing, such as special processing requirements, SEVIS, 
etc. have had on your workflow, including the amount of time 
it takes to conduct an interview. 
Perhaps 25% of our applicants require some form of special 
processing. None of these procedures, from SAOs to SEVIS, 
slow down the interview process considerably. The SAO 
process does hinder workflow, however, since response to SAO 
requests is often very slow, usually arriving after the 
applicant\'s original purpose for travel has already past. 
This obligates us to re-open each case upon arrival of the 
clearance cable, which takes time. 
M) Describe the impact that changes in Personal Appearance 
Waiver (PAW) rules have had on your NIV operations. 
The rule changes have had a limited effect. In practice, we 
still request personal appearances for all applicants except 
A-1 applicants, most A-2 applicants, and certain G 
applicants known to the Embassy. In particular, we have 
grown stricter about requiring interviews from many A-2 
applicants. This is because nearly anyone vaguely 
associated with the Mozambican government or the United 
Nations can acquire a valid diplomatic note in Mozambique, 
but many of these applicants are not traveling on official 
business and should be subject to examination on 214(b) 
grounds. 
N) For posts that have already implemented collection of two 
index fingerprints for visa applicants, please comment on 
your experience thus far with the program. 
N/A. Biometric installation will take place in late 
November 2003. 
O) What aspects of your IV work are the most demanding? 
Post does not adjudicate immigrant visas but we do accept 
petitions, on average two or three per month. We keep in 
close contact with the IV team in Johannesburg in order to 
ensure that each case is handled effectively. 
P) If applicable, please describe the impact of the DV 
program on your workload. 
N/A 
Q) What percentage of your NIV and IV applicants are third 
country nationals (TCNs)? From what countries are they? Do 
they speak a different language than post\'s designated 
language? If so, how do you communicate with them. 
20% of NIV applicants in 2003 are from TNCs, up from 14% in 
2002. Significantly, 27% of all B1/B2 applicants are from 
TNCs. The largest numbers of applicants come from India, 
Pakistan, South Africa, Nigeria, Brazil, and Cuba. Several 
other African countries are also represented, including DR 
Congo, Angola, Cape Verde, and Guinea. All applicants 
except those from Cuba and francophone Africa have a 
respectable command of English. The Cuban applicants 
generally speak Portuguese, and, in any case, the Vice 
Consul also speaks fluent Spanish. In a couple of cases 
this year, we had applicants from Congo/Guinea with 
insufficient Portuguese or English. In these cases, back-up 
Consular Officer Elizabeth Jaffee, who speaks French, 
conducts the interview. 
R) What percentage of your NIV and IV applicants require 
special namecheck processing? 
Approximately 6% of applicants would require special 
processing, almost all of whom hail from Pakistan or Cuba. 
However, the majority of these applicants do not meet the 
214(b) threshold, so no additional processing is requested 
in these cases. 
S) If applicable, discuss how your post has been affected, 
or expects to be affected, by the new passport application 
procedures required under the Overseas Photo-digitized 
passports program (OPDP), which began worldwide deployment 
in September 2003. 
This application will be installed in late November 2003. 
We expect the new technology to help us reduce the timeframe 
from date of application to receipt of passport by up to 5 
days. (Current time frame is 11-20 days.) We also 
anticipate that the new system will result in a slight 
reduction in workload for our FSN and Consular Assistant. 
T) Describe the general level and kind of fraud encountered 
at post in ACS, NIV, IV/DV or other work and activities to 
combat the fraud, including use of investigation resources, 
tracking systems, electronic tools, liaison and information 
sharing. Has post conducted a validation study? If so, 
what was learned from the study? What is the staffing of 
your fraud prevention unit and who manages the unit? Are 
you satisfied with the level of fraud prevention training 
for officers and FSNs? If not, what do you believe you need 
to support your efforts in this area? 
NIV fraud is not a grave problem at post; visa fraud in 
Mozambique tends to be targeted at entering South Africa 
rather than the United States. We have seen some recent 
indications of attempted NIV fraud among the Pakistani and 
Indian communities, however. On a related note, we see many 
third-country national NIV applicants who have entered 
Mozambique on visas that appear fraudulent. (The Mozambican 
consulate in Karachi has been recently charged with selling 
visas to Mozambique, reinforcing our suspicions.) We do not 
see a high incidence of fraudulent birth certificates, 
marriage certificates, etc. The false documents that we do 
see tend to be so poorly made that they do not indicate any 
organized fraud attempt. 
Consular section investigates fraud by maintaining relations 
with government officials, journalists, and consular 
officials from other embassies. Also, the Consular 
Assistant conducts a validation study in which he makes 
phone calls each month to approved NIV applicants who we 
deem medium-low risk 214(b) cases, upon their scheduled 
return to Mozambique. From this system, we have been able 
to better identify NIV fraud patterns with regard to 
particular countries and organizations. 
We are generally satisfied with our level of fraud 
prevention training. We could, however, use additional 
assistance with regard to investigation resources and 
tracking systems. 
U) Describe country conditions that affect your ability to 
provide consular services (infrastructure, fraud, political 
setting, etc.). 
The size of the country and the lack of adequate 
infrastructure (communications and roads) outside of the 
capital are challenges to providing emergency and non- 
emergency services to American citizens. The Consular 
Section is frequently asked to intervene with local 
government agencies to help Americans obtain necessary 
documentation (e.g., residency permits, drivers licenses). 
The police force is poorly paid and equipped, and complaints 
against corrupt police, immigration, and customs officials 
are particularly common among Americans in Northern and 
Central Mozambique. 
V) Describe any other issue not raised in the preceding 
questions that you believe to be significant to the consular 
section\'s effectiveness in handling its responsibilities. 
None. 
LA LIME 
"
"12769","12/17/2003 15:55","03MAPUTO558","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03MAPUTOMZ060803ZAPR4","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000558 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S, INL/AAE 
DOJ FOR OPDAT AND ICITAP 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PGOV, PREL, ASEC, PHSA, KPAO, MZ, KNAR, SANR 
SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER ENGAGED ON COUNTER-TERRORISM 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO MZ 060803Z APR 04 
 
B. MAPUTO MZ 171555Z DEC 03 
 
1. (U) Summary: In an April 19 meeting with the Ambassador, 
Interior Minister Almerino Manhenje described his plans to 
travel to Texas for a counter-terrorism conference the week 
of May 3. In addition, Manhenje described his goals of 
reducing vulnerability to terrorism, drug trafficking, 
trafficking in persons, and other contraband, as well as 
money laundering and terrorist financing. He demonstrated an 
awareness of the problems faced by the GRM in these areas and 
described the government\'s interest in USG and other donor 
assistance in increasing border and port security. The 
Ambassador thanked the Minister for the cooperation of his 
staff in coordinating our INL assistance to the Mozambican 
Police Academy and recent assessment visits by DOJ ICITAP 
officials to plan further assistance. End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On April 19, the Ambassador called on Interior 
Minister Manhenje, accompanied by RSO and Econ/Poloff 
(notetaker); the minister was accompanied by his 
International Relations Assistant Joachim Bule. Manhenje 
opened the meeting by describing his invitation from Sam 
Houston State University to be one of 28 participants in a 
counter terrorism conference in early May. He will be 
accompanied by the Vice Rector of the Mozambican Police 
Academy (ACIPOL), who met the Sam Houston faculty member at 
ILEA training in Roswell, NM in February 2003. Public 
Diplomacy funds brought the professor to Maputo in September 
2003 for speakers program events and the invitation to the 
conference results from this new institutional linkage. 
 
3. (SBU) In the remainder of the meeting, Manhenje provided 
his assessment of the challenges faced by his ministry in the 
areas of counter-terrorism and border security. He 
acknowledged the weaknesses of his Criminal Investigation 
Police (PIC) and mentioned the current efforts to implement 
judicial reform, which would create a Judicial Police on the 
Portuguese model. He envisions such a new entity would 
complement the PIC with more highly trained, professional 
investigators. (Note: the PIC is widely viewed as highly 
corrupt and ineffective. End Note.) Manhenje referred to 
Mozambique\'s activities as the current chair of SARPCCO, the 
Southern Africa Regional Police Chiefs Cooperation 
Organization. He recognized the problems faced by the GRM in 
trying to combat transborder crime and the growing role of 
Mozambique as a transit country for narcotics, especially 
cocaine originating in Brazil destined for South Africa. 
 
4. (SBU) The minister also referred to a request made by 
Mozambican Customs to the USG for equipment to give 
Mozambique the capacity to examine containers at the major 
ports (Maputo, Beira, and Nacala) and the principal border 
crossings with South Africa, Zimbabwe, Malawi, and Zambia. 
Mozambique has no capacity to patrol its maritime border, 
with an unprotected coastline twice the length of California 
(ref A). He is eager for the border police to receive any 
training that is available from USG agencies and also would 
welcome any assistance to improve GRM capacity to track money 
laundering. He noted the demographic factor of the large 
number of Muslim businesses in the northern provinces 
involved in importing goods for sale in Mozambique and the 
difficulty his ministry faces in knowing the real names of 
account holders and merchants bringing goods through customs 
(ref B). He also confirmed reports of large numbers of 
undocumented Pakistani aliens and the more recent trend of 
Somali refugees entering or transiting Mozambique. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: Minister Manhenje is clearly aware of the 
challenges the GRM faces and highly interested in further USG 
assistance. He comes across as well-informed, charming and 
an intelligent politician, and has proven capable of 
withstanding criticism in his tenure at Interior. He is one 
of the younger generation of cabinet heavyweights, and 
appears to be adept at internal party power maneuvering. His 
cooperative attitude with the USG seems sincere and his staff 
has developed good working relations with post and with other 
international donors. 
LA LIME 
"
"12787","12/18/2003 10:59","03MAPUTO1752","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE324347|03STATE328024","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001752 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR INL, AF/S, AF/RSA 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
DEA FOR OILS AND OFFICE OF DIVERSION CONTROL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, EFIN, KCRM, PTER, PGOV, MZ, KCOR, Coastal Security 
SUBJECT: 2003-2004 INCSR SUBMISSION - MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: A) STATE 324347 
B) STATE 328024 
1. Per ref A, below is post\'s submission for 2003-2004 
INCSR: 
 
I. Summary 
Mozambique is a transit country for illegal drugs (hashish, 
herbal cannabis, cocaine, mandrax (methaqualone), and 
heroin) consumed in Europe and South Africa. Some hashish 
shipments passing through Mozambique find their way to the 
United States and Canada. The country\'s porous borders, 
poorly policed seacoast, and inadequately trained and 
equipped law enforcement agencies facilitate transshipment 
of narcotics to South Africa. Drug production is limited to 
herbal cannabis cultivation and mandrax laboratories. 
Available evidence suggests significant use of herbal 
cannabis and limited consumption of \"club drugs\"(Ecstasy, 
etc.), prescription medicines, and heroin among the urban 
elite. The Mozambican government recognizes drug use and 
drug trafficking as serious problems, but has limited 
resources to address these issues. Cooperation programs with 
the UNODC and bilateral donors have attempted to improve 
training of drug control officials and provide better 
interdiction and laboratory equipment. Corruption in the 
police and judiciary significantly hampers counternarcotics 
efforts. Mozambique is a party to the 1998 UN Drug 
Convention. 
 
II. Status of Country 
Mozambique is not a significant producer of illegal drugs. 
Herbal cannabis for local consumption is produced throughout 
the country, particularly in Tete, Nampula, and Cabo Delgado 
provinces. Limited amounts are exported to neighboring 
countries, particularly South Africa. Some factories 
producing mandrax for the South African market were raided 
and closed down in 1995, 2000 and 2002. Mozambique\'s role 
has grown rapidly as a drug-transit country. Southwest Asian 
producers ship cannabis resin (hashish) and synthetic drugs 
through Mozambique to Europe and South Africa. Limited 
quantities of these shipments may also reach the United 
States and Canada. Reports from the Mozambican Office for 
the Prevention and Fight Against Drugs (GCPCD) indicate that 
heroin and other opiate derivatives shipped through 
Mozambique originate in Southeast Asia. Increasing amounts 
of cocaine from Colombia and Brazil transit Portugal and 
Angola or Mozambique (all Portuguese speaking countries) on 
their way to South Africa. International flights from Lisbon 
to Maputo and from Dar es Salaam to Pemba provide a conduit 
for smuggling into South Africa. With the assistance of the 
South African police, numerous arrests were made in 2003 of 
drug couriers originating in Brazil, who transit Mozambique 
from Portugal on route to Johannesburg or continue through 
Johannesburg to Maputo to take advantage of the relatively 
lax controls disembarking in Maputo. Mozambique is not a 
producer of precursor chemicals. 
 
III. Country Actions Against Drugs in 2003 
Accomplishments. Mozambique\'s accomplishments in meeting its 
goals under the 1988 UN Drug Convention remain limited. 
Government resources devoted to the counternarcotics effort 
are meager, and only limited donor funds are available. 
Mozambique is cooperating with the UNODC through two 
assistance projects designed to increase law enforcement 
capacity and border control. Local law enforcement agents in 
some provinces have destroyed cannabis crops. In 1995, 2000, 
and 2002, Mozambique cooperated with South Africa in raiding 
Mandrax factories near Maputo. Mozambican officials also 
seized assets connected with the production of mandrax, but 
not assets related to profits derived from drug sales. The 
Mozambican government carries out drug education programs in 
local schools in cooperation with bilateral and multilateral 
donors as part of its demand reduction efforts. 
Law Enforcement Efforts. Mozambique\'s drug unit, which 
operates in Maputo and reports to the Chief of the Criminal 
Investigation Police, received refresher training in drug 
interdiction techniques as part of a UNODC program in 2001 
and 2002. Under this program, 20 officers were hired and 
trained to staff drug units. Drug detection equipment was 
installed at border posts, ports, and airports. Customs 
officers at Maputo airport and seaport have received drug 
interdiction training under a UNODC program. The UNODC is 
working with customs agents at land borders as part of a 
program with Mozambique, South Africa, and Swaziland. 
Publicized seizures in 2003 include: 
- The seizure of heroin being smuggled from Brazil via 
Lisbon by two couriers at Maputo Mavalane International 
Airport in October and November and the arrest in South 
Africa in December of a Tanzanian national identified by the 
couriers. 
- The seizure by customs officials of 9.3 kilos of cocaine 
found in the baggage of a passenger arriving at Mavalane 
Airport in December. 
- The detention of three senior police officers in 
Inhambane province for trafficking in hashish and marijuana 
in November 2003. The drugs were seized from a Pakistani 
national in 2001. 
- The seizure of 75 kilos of a chemical used in the 
manufacture of mandrax found in a parked car on a busy 
street in Maputo in November. 
- The arrest of a Tanzanian national in May at Mavalane 
Airport smuggling 2 kilograms of cocaine in his stomach. 
Mozambique has not received requests for the extradition of 
drug-related suspects. 
Corruption. Corruption is pervasive in Mozambique. 
Mozambique has not prosecuted government officials for 
corruption relating to the production, processing, or 
shipment of narcotic and psychotropic drugs or controlled 
substances, nor has it prosecuted any individual for 
discouraging the investigation or prosecution of such acts. 
Agreements and Treaties. Mozambique is a party to the 1988 
UN Drug Convention, the 1961 UN Single Convention on 
Narcotic Drugs, as amended by the 1972 Protocol, and the 
1971 UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Mozambique 
has signed, but has not yet ratified, the UN Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime. 
Cultivation/Production. Cannabis is cultivated in Nampula, 
Zambezia, Niassa, Cabo Delgado, Tete, Manica, and Sofala 
provinces. The Mozambican government has no estimates on 
crop size. Intercropping is reportedly common. 
Drug Flow/Transit. Assessments of drugs transiting 
Mozambique are based upon limited seizure data and 
observations of local and UNODC officials. Mozambique 
increasingly serves as a transit country for hashish, 
cannabis resin, heroin, and Mandrax originating in Southwest 
Asia, owing to its vast, unpatrolled coastline, lack of 
resources for interdiction and sea, air, and land borders, 
and growing transportation links with neighboring countries. 
Drugs destined for the South African and European markets 
arrive in Mozambique by small ship, especially in the 
coastal areas of the northern provinces, including islands 
off Cabo Delgado and Nampula. The Maputo corridor border 
crossing at Ressano Garcia/Lebombo is an important transit 
point. Hashish and heroin are also shipped on to Europe, and 
there is evidence that some hashish may reach Canada and the 
United States, but not in significant quantities. Arrests in 
Brazil, Mozambique and South Africa indicate cocaine is 
being shipped by drug couriers from Colombia and Brazil to 
Mozambique through Lisbon for onward shipment to South 
Africa and East Asia. In addition, there is anecdotal 
evidence that Nigerian and Tanzanian cocaine traffickers 
have targeted Mozambique as a gateway to the South African 
and European markets. 
Domestic Programs (Demand Reduction). The primary drugs of 
abuse are alcohol and herbal cannabis. Heroin, cocaine, and 
\"club drug\" usage and prescription drug abuse are also 
reported among Mozambique\'s urban elite. The GCPCD has 
developed a drug education program for use in schools. It 
has provided the material to a number of local NGOs for use 
in their drug education programs. The Maputo GCPCD office 
conducted an education program aimed at youth in 2001. The 
program included plays and lectures in schools, churches, 
and other places where youth gather. The Sofala provincial 
GCPCD office has created a community volunteer educational 
program. Funds were not available in 2003 for continuation 
of these education programs beyond major cities. Drug abuse 
and treatment options are scarce. The GCPCD is seeking donor 
assistance in creating three regional treatment centers in 
Maputo, Beira, and Nampula. 
 
IV. U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
THE USG SENDS MOZAMBICAN LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS AND 
PROSECUTORS TO REGIONAL TRAINING PROGRAMS THROUGH THE 
INTERNATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT ACADEMY (ILEA) FOR AFRICA IN 
BOTSWANA. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS HAVE ALSO RECEIVED 
TRAINING AT ILEA NEW MEXICO. 
THE BUREAU FOR INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 
AFFAIRS PROVIDED SUPPORT TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL\'S ANTI- 
CORRUPTION UNIT AND THE POLICE SCIENCES ACADEMY (ACIPOL). 
THE FUNDS PROVIDE FOR TRAINING, SPECIALIZED COURSE 
INSTRUCTION, INSTRUCTOR DEVELOPMENT, AND CURRICULUM 
DEVELOPMENT FOR ACIPOL. THE ANTI-CORRUPTION UNIT, WHICH 
BEGAN OPERATIONS IN NOVEMBER 2002, HAS RECEIVED SPECIALIZED 
TRAINING AND ADVISOR VISITS THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT OF 
JUSTICE OPDAT PROGRAM, AS WELL AS RENOVATION OF THEIR OFFICE 
FACILITY, IT EQUIPMENT, AND OFFICE FURNITURE, FUNDED BY AID. 
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ICITAP PROGRAM PROVIDES A MEDIUM- 
TERM ADVISOR TO ACIPOL TO COORDINATE THESE ACTIVITIES. 
The Department of Defense has assisted the Mozambican navy 
to develop a plan for improved coastal surveillance 
activities, and is providing training to Mozambican military 
personnel. However, the USG cannot provide the Mozambican 
navy with resources for coastal patrol capacity until the 
Mozambican parliament establishes a codified system of 
maritime law. 
HANKINS 
"
"12788","12/18/2003 11:02","03MAPUTO1755","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE324347","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001755 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR INL, AF/S, AF/RSA 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, KCRM, PTER, SNAR, PGOV, MZ, KCOR 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE INCSR PART II SUBMISSION - MONEY 
LAUNDERING AND FINANCIAL CRIMES 
 
REF: A) STATE 324347 
 
B) STATE 328024 
 
1. Per ref A, below is post\'s submission for 2003-2004 
INCSR, Part II: 
Mozambique is not a regional financial center. Money 
laundering in Mozambique is related to bank fraud and 
corruption. Lax oversight and weak banking regulations make 
Mozambique\'s financial institutions vulnerable to money 
laundering. The proceeds of stolen vehicles sales, narcotics- 
trafficking, prostitution, trafficking in persons, arms 
trafficking, and contraband smuggling are laundered through 
Mozambique\'s financial institutions. Mozambique\'s non-bank 
financial sector, primarily comprised of exchange houses, is 
considered highly susceptible to money laundering. 
IN OCTOBER 2003, A MAJOR MAPUTO EXCHANGE HOUSE, UNICAMBIOS, 
WAS ORDERED CLOSED BY THE FINANCE MINISTER AT THE 
RECOMMENDATION OF THE CENTRAL BANK OF MOZAMBIQUE. THE 
CONVICTION OF SIX DEFENDANTS ON THE CARDOSO MURDER TRAIL IN 
JANUARY 2003 AND THE OPENING OF THE RELATED BCM BANK FRAUD 
TRAIL IN DECEMBER 2003 HAVE GREATLY INCREASED PUBLIC 
AWARENESS OF CORRUPTION AND FINANCIAL CRIMES. THE MURDER OF 
JOURNALIST CARLOS CARDOSO IN 2000 WAS DUE TO HIS 
INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE 1996 BCM BANK FRAUD AND THE 
DEFENDANTS IN BOTH TRAILS HAVE IMPLICATED BANKING OFFICIALS 
IN ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES INVOLVING LARGE AMOUNT OF CASH. 
Mozambique\'s National Assembly passed an anti-money 
laundering law in December 2001, which was ratified by the 
Council of Ministers on February 5, 2002. As of the end of 
2003, however, implementing regulations had not been 
promulgated. The law extends the crime of money laundering 
to encompass predicate offenses beyond narcotics-trafficking 
to most other serious crimes. The law also allows for asset 
seizure and forfeiture and requires financial institutions 
to verify the identity of their customers, keep transaction 
records for at least 15 years, and report suspicious 
transactions. The law protects employees of financial 
institutions who cooperate with money laundering 
investigations and exempts such cooperation from bank and 
professional secrecy rules. The law also contains \"banker 
negligence\" provisions, which hold individual bankers 
responsible for money laundering. 
Bankers have the right to refuse service to anyone who 
refuses to identify the beneficiary of an account. Judicial 
authorities are given the right to request account 
information from financial institutions and to gain access 
to computer records from banks, individuals, and companies 
that are suspicious. Judicial authorities also have the 
right to authorize the tapping of phone conversations as 
part of financial investigations. 
IN OCTOBER 2003, THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY PASSED THE ANTI- 
CORRUPTION LAW. THE LEGISLATION AIMS TO FIGHT CORRUPTION IN 
GOVERNMENT OFFICES, AND ALSO IN HOSPITALS, SCHOOLS, AND THE 
POLICE. THE LAW PROVIDES MORE PROTECTION FOR WHISTLE-BLOWERS 
AND MODIFIES A KEY PROVISION ON REQUESTS FOR PERMITS. THE 
LAW COVERS OFFICIALS WORKING FOR GOVERNMENT ENTITIES, 
PUBLICLY-OWNED COMPANIES, AND PRIVATE COMPANIES WITH STATE 
CONTRACTS OR THE STATE AS THE MAJORITY SHAREHOLDER. THE 
MAXIMUM SENTENCE FOR SOLICITING BRIBES IS NOW RAISED TO 
EIGHT YEARS. AUDITORS WILL BE OBLIGED TO REPORT SIGNS OF 
CORRUPT PRACTICES TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL\'S ANTI-CORRUPTION 
UNIT, OR FACE A FINE OF UP TO $84,000. 
The government\'s inter-ministerial working group dealing 
with money laundering, terrorist finance, and other 
financial crimes was reorganized in the last quarter of 
2003. Its leadership has been shifted from the Interior 
Ministry to the Central Bank, and also includes 
participation by the Ministries of Finance, Foreign Affairs, 
and Justice. 
Customs regulations require those entering or leaving the 
country with foreign currency or negotiable instruments in 
amounts greater than $5,000 to file a report with Customs. 
Taking local currency out of the country is prohibited. 
The Government of Mozambique (GOM) has the authority to 
freeze and seize assets related to terrorist financing. The 
GOM has circulated the list of terrorist individuals and 
entities designated by the UN 1267 Sanctions Committee, as 
well as the list of Specially Designated Global Terrorists 
designated by the United States pursuant to E.O. 13224. 
Mozambique is a member of the Eastern and Southern Africa 
Anti-Money Laundering Group, a FATF-style regional body. 
Mozambique ratified the UN International Convention for the 
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism in January 2003. 
Mozambique is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention. It has 
signed, but not yet ratified, the UN Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime, which entered into force in 
September 2003. 
Mozambique should implement its anti-money laundering law, 
establish a Financial Intelligence Unit, and criminalize 
terrorist financing. 
HANKINS 
"
"13040","1/6/2004 5:18","04MAPUTO13","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
AIDAC 
PLEASE PASS USAID FOR AFR/SA, DCHA/OFDA, DCHA/FFP 
ROME FOR FODAG, NAIROBI FOR OFDA/ARO, NSC/WASH DC 
FOR JDWORKEN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, Natural Disasters 
SUBJECT: USAID/DCHA/OFDA ASSESSMENT VISIT TO 
MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: NONE 
 
Summary: 
USAID/OFDA Disaster Response and Mitigation Division 
Director and USAID/OFDA Principal Regional Advisor 
for Southern Africa visited Mozambique from 10 - 12 
December to meet with Embassy and USAID staff, UN 
agencies, NGO partners, and Government (GRM) 
disaster management officials to review the drought 
and food security situation affecting selected 
provinces in the south and center of the country. 
The team traveled to Gaza Province to observe food 
aid distributions and other programs in progress. 
The GRM developed a Contingency Plan that was put 
into place in 2002/03 in response to drought 
conditions, and this plan has been updated for the 
2003/04 season to respond to drought, floods, and 
cyclones, should any, or all, of these occur. The 
current drought and food security situation, while 
serious, seems to the OFDA team to be under control 
through a combination of food aid assistance through 
UN World Food Program (WFP), supported in large part 
by USAID Food For Peace (USAID/FFP), relevant UN 
agencies, a handful of other donors, a group of 
international and national NGOs, and GRM funds 
reprogrammed from the regular budget. Given a poor 
start to the 2003/04 crop season, USAID/Mozambique 
and USAID/OFDA will continue to monitor the 
situation to determine if additional humanitarian 
assistance, particularly non-food aid, is required. 
Extended Drought in the South and Center 
Mozambique is one of the six countries included in 
the UN\'s Regional Consolidated Appeal for Southern 
Africa in response to the complex food security 
crisis affecting the region. Drought and food 
insecurity has affected more than 40 districts in 
the provinces of Maputo, Gaza, and Inhambane in the 
southern part of the country, and Tete, Manica and 
Sofala provinces in the central region, resulting in 
two years of failed crop seasons. In some areas, 
these conditions followed several significant 
floods, the largest being in 2000 and 2001, 
resulting in up to three or four successive years of 
poor harvests. USAID/FFP was one of the first food 
aid donors to respond, this noted by GRM officials, 
and remains a significant contributor to WFP\'s 
emergency food aid program. Food aid distributions 
to drought-affected communities, combined with 
supplemental feeding to women and children, have 
largely stabilized the food intake situation, 
preventing the nutritional status from deteriorating 
to crisis levels. In anticipation of a near normal 
2003/04 crop season, GRM reprogrammed funds from its 
agricultural development budget to fund the (a) 
distribution/sale of seeds and agricultural inputs 
to affected communities through seed fairs; (b) 
multiplication of drought tolerant improved 
varieties of cassava and sweet potatoes, and (c) 
rehabilitation of small scale irrigation sites, 
linked to treadle pumps. 
Contingency Planning for 2003/04 
The team attended a presentation chaired by the 
Foreign Minister and the GRM disaster management 
office, the Instituto Nacional de Gestao das 
Calamidades (INGC), where the results of actions 
taken in 2002/03 were presented and the revised 
Contingency Plan for 2003/04 was outlined. The 
Contingency Plan takes account of the three primary 
natural hazards in Mozambique, droughts, floods, and 
tropical cyclones, and sets forth actions to be 
taken in the event that any, or all, of these occur. 
The GRM\'s first response will be to realign existing 
budget resources to provide assistance. Depending 
on the size and scope of the disaster, the GRM will 
then look to locally-based UN and NGO partners for 
assistance, before requesting aid from the 
international donor community. In the event of a 
large-scale disaster, or multiple disasters, it is 
likely that donor resources will be needed to 
complement GRM funds. The efforts being undertaken 
by the GRM to plan for recurrent natural disasters 
are widely appreciated by the UN and donor community 
and serve as the basis for further assistance, as 
required. 
Mitigation Programs underway 
The team traveled to Gaza Province, along with staff 
from WFP and UNICEF, and were hosted by Samaritan\'s 
Purse (SPIR), a U.S. PVO working with drought- 
affected communities. SPIR serves as an 
Implementing Partner for WFP and UNICEF managing 
food distribution activities. Food distribution is 
largely undertaken through community-identified 
food-for-work (FFW) programs, and the team visited 
three activities underway. Under the technical 
management of the District Department of 
Agriculture, one community is developing a 
multiplication/propagation center where improved 
cassava and sweet potatoes are being intensively 
grown under irrigation. This center is producing 
planting materials that will be distributed to 
neighboring communities, serving to provide a more 
diverse, and drought-tolerant crop suited to farms 
in drought prone areas. Additional 
multiplication/propagation centers are being 
developed throughout the area. Community labor is 
compensated through food aid provided by WFP through 
SPIR. 
In response to recurrent flooding, one community was 
constructing a causeway across a low, swampy area 
that periodically floods, cutting off their fields 
from access to the main rood and market. Upon 
completion, this causeway should serve to keep 
access open during most normal periods of seasonal 
flooding. The team was impressed with the extent 
and quality of the construction and the high degree 
of participation of women in the project. Another 
FFW project involved the reconstruction of the 
central town market, destroyed during the 2000 
floods. The market is being reconstructed on an 
elevated foundation that will enable it to remain 
open during occasional periods of local seasonal 
flooding. 
Poor water quality is an ongoing problem in the 
region visited, and particularly acute in a period 
of greatly diminished uncontaminated sources from 
which to draw, with many people obtaining their 
water from unprotected wells and rivers. In 
response to this immediate problem, SPIR is 
producing and promoting an innovative, low-cost and 
highly effective bio-sand filtration system designed 
for home use. The team visited the fabrication 
facility and was briefed on the design and operation 
of the system and visited a home where the system 
was in use. The system is low-cost and can be 
maintained by the household, and eliminates most of 
the common contaminants found in surface water. The 
team felt that this low-cost, high-impact system 
warranted further study to determine potential for 
propagation/dissemination and its possible use in 
other emergency programs. 
As water for both consumption and agriculture has 
proven to be a critical immediate problem for rural 
families affected by this drought in Mozambique, 
several NGO partners (World Vision, CARE, SPIR, and 
Save the Children) are developing plans and seeking 
funding for a variety of water interventions, 
including the repair of broken borehole pumps, 
improvement of shallow wells, small-scale irrigation 
systems. These interventions, if undertaken, will 
provide essential potable water that complements 
food distribution, alleviates the current threat of 
water-borne intestinal diseases - particularly to 
young children, and serves to mitigate the impact of 
future droughts and improve food security and health 
status in the affected communities. 
Conclusions 
The OFDA team generally felt that the current 
drought situation, while significant, was under 
control and being managed well by a combination of 
GOM, UN, NGO, and donor resources. The food aid 
program is having significant impact in maintaining 
the health and nutritional status of drought- 
affected communities. USAID/Mozambique, related UN 
agencies and involved NGOs in the field argue that 
more can and should be done to alleviate suffering, 
with particular mention of water needs. The current 
2003/04 crop season requires ongoing monitoring, as 
rains during the first half of the season (October - 
December) have been late and insufficient. Crop 
stress was observed during the visit, and should the 
rains continue to be erratic, insufficient, and 
poorly timed, it is likely that crop production, 
especially maize, will be significantly reduced. 
USAID/Mozambique and OFDA Southern Africa Regional 
Office will monitor of effectiveness of coping 
strategies and current relief activities. A further 
assessment of the situation will be necessary if the 
2003/04 season is negatively impacted. The sparse 
rainfall pattern seen thus far in the growing season 
is extremely worrisome for several districts that 
have suffered through complete crop losses for the 
past three or four years. Further humanitarian 
assistance - including the need for non-food aid -- 
is probable unless the drought breaks in the next 
few weeks. 
HANKINS 
"
"13111","1/8/2004 14:39","04MAPUTO30","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO1757","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000030 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
USDOC FOR JDIEMOND 
JOHANNESBURG FOR BNUELING 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: DECEMBER MONTHLY ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: MAPUTO 01757 
 
------------------- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
------------------- 
1. (U) In December, KPMG Mozambique announced the \"Top 100 
Businesses in Mozambique\" for 2002. The list was topped by 
Mozal, the large South African-owned aluminum smelter, 
generating the highest revenues for a firm in-country 
(foreign or nationally-owned) in 2002. Six US companies 
ranked in the Top 100. In descending order of generated 
revenue, these companies include: Coca-Cola, Mobil, Mobeira 
(owned by US corporation Seaboard), Avis Rent-a-Car, Colgate- 
Palmolive, and KPMG (REFTEL). 
 
2. (SBU) The three consortia bidding on the Sena railway 
tender, Rites and Icon (India), Yenwin and CIRC (China), and 
the Beira Corridor Company (Zimbabwe/South Africa), should 
expect an award in the beginning of 2004. Contacts from the 
Zambeze River Valley Authority indicate that the award will 
most likely go to the Chinese consortium, as it was valued 
as the most affordable bid. CFM, the Mozambican Ports and 
Railways Company, has made its recommendation to the 
Economic Council of Ministers and the decision now sits with 
the GRM. The company awarded this contract will be 
responsible for rehabilitating the Sena Line (destroyed 
during the civil war) that travels from the lucrative 
Moatize coalmines to the port of Beira. (COMMENT: At the 
same time, there is a US company interested in launching a 
feasibility study on the Zambeze River to explore an 
alternative to exporting coal from Moatize to the coast via 
rail. The US firm visited Mozambique in December and met 
with various stakeholders, including the GRM. Despite new 
economic arguments, rehabilitation of the Sena line seems to 
be a political decision and it does not seem likely the GRM 
will endorse the barging option. However, in discussions 
with the World Bank, this organization has indicated they 
will not finance any project that is not economically sound, 
possibly leading the GRM to reconsider a barge option. END 
COMMENT). 
 
---------------- 
MACROECONOMICS 
---------------- 
3. (U) As reported by the daily newspaper, \"Noticias\", the 
Prime Minister told the Parliament that the GRM is planning 
on eight percent growth in the country\'s GDP for 2004. 
Introducing the country\'s Economic and Social Plan for the 
year, he predicted growth in all sectors of the economy, 
with mining and manufacturing being the highest-growth 
sectors. The only sector where growth will most likely be 
negative is in construction. This is a result of the 
completion of two gigantic projects in 2003, phase 2 of 
MOZAL and the natural gas pipeline constructed by SASOL. As 
for the 2003 estimates, the PM Mocumbi said GDP had grown by 
about seven percent. Inflation figures rounded out at eleven 
percent for the year, considerably higher than the GRM had 
hoped. Much of this inflation is attributed to the higher 
prices consumers have to pay for South African goods with a 
strongly valued rand. 
 
4. (U) The Governor of the Central Bank gave his review of 
the 2003 economy and forecasts for 2004. He noted that 
Mozambique\'s economy remains heavily dependent on imports, 
notably food products from South Africa. The Bank\'s 
estimates indicate that the inflation rate will be above 
10.8% for 2003. Like the PM, the Governor attributes the 
higher inflation in 2003 to the strengthening of the rand 
(and the economy\'s dependence on South African products), as 
well as to a decline in the supply of goods due to the 
drought and an increase in tariffs for water, electricity, 
and telephones. For 2004,the Bank forecasts an \"8 percent 
economic growth and a 9 percent inflation rate\". 
Accordingly, it estimates a 16 percent increase in monetary 
expansion and a 12 percent increase in credit to the 
economy. 
 
-------------------- 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
-------------------- 
5. (U) Vodacom officially launched cellular services in 
Mozambique in December, opening the industry to competition 
for the first time. Until now, government-owned Mcel served 
as the sole cellular service provider. Vodacom plans an 
initial investment of $260 million in Mozambique. As a guest 
speaker at the formal launching ceremony, President Chissano 
highlighted the importance of rapid access to information. 
The introduction of an additional cellular service provider 
should reduce transaction costs, increase the quality of 
cellular products and services, expand the network of 
communications, and allow more choices for the consumer. 
Chissano welcomed further cellular companies interested in 
entering the Mozambican market, saying the country would 
keep its doors open to increased competition and investment. 
In its opening phase of operations, Vodacom Mozambique will 
cover six locations: Maputo/Matola, Xai-Xai, Bilene, Nampula 
and the roads from Maputo to Swaziland and Maputo to South 
Africa. For the first time, customers will be able to pre- 
pay for roaming, allowing use of their cell phones from 
South Africa to Mozambique. Vodacom Mozambique Executive 
Director announced that Vodacom would capture 45% of the 
Mozambican market in less than three years. Quoted by a 
local news source, he believes that the quality of customer 
care and efficiency of network service provided by Vodacom 
will attract the target audience. Vodacom also operates in 
South Africa, Lesotho, Tanzania, and the DRC. Mcel is 
fighting the competition by offering perks for current 
customers, including a number of free text messages and 
better contract deals, and has begun lowering international 
rates. It is estimated that Mcel has 400,000 clients, 
saturating the market. Vodacom has undertaken an aggressive 
promotional campaign, including advertising and opening of 
new stores. 
 
---------- 
AVIATION 
---------- 
6. (U) The Mozambican Aeronautics Company (IAM), 
responsible for the repair and maintenance of planes, has 
declared bankruptcy, citing the lack of a local market for 
its services. Seventy percent of IAM\'s shares are held by 
the Portuguese group OGMA, while the Mozambican light 
aircraft company, TTA, holds the remaining thirty percent. 
Speaking to the press, a lawyer for the firm noted, \"During 
the last two to three years we did not repair a single 
plane.\" He went on to say that most planes operating in 
Mozambique are repaired in South Africa. 
 
--------- 
ENERGY 
--------- 
7. (U) The African Development Fund (ADF) approved a $12.9 
million loan and a grant of $2.81 million to finance an 
Energy Access Reform Program in Mozambique. This program 
plans to expand the electric network, specifically to rural 
areas. With the participation of the private sector, the 
program will provide electricity to 400,000 people by 2007; 
300 schools and health centers in the project area would 
have access to solar energy. The program also includes a 
reform of the electric power sector, installation of 
electrification systems, promotion of renewable sources of 
energy, and auditing services. These projects will be 
financed by the ADF, the World Bank, World Fund for the 
Environment, Nordic Development Fund, and the GRM at a total 
cost of approximately $80 million. 
 
------- 
LABOR 
------- 
8. (SBU) The Economic and Social Council of Ministers 
passed a new labor decree this month that will fare worse 
for employment of foreign labor. Private sector groups have 
argued that the new decree will hamper investment by keeping 
restrictive labor policies in place. After eighteen months 
of solid negotiation and weekly meetings with private sector 
employers, the Ministry of Labor reneged on its promise to 
create a decree allowing for 10% of a firm\'s workforce to be 
contracted internationally. Private sector organizations are 
furious about the passage of this decree and are making 
pleas to the Prime Minister not to sign the legislation. If 
endorsed by the PM, the labor decree could stifle the 
private sector\'s ability to contract skilled labor and bring 
in the necessary technological know-how to operate modern 
firms. As the situation stands, there is a dearth of 
technically qualified workers locally and firms must be able 
to have the flexibility to choose a percentage of their 
workforce based on varying skill levels. Private sector 
organizations are pleading with the GRM to scrap the new 
decree and leave the 1999 decree in place, despite that 
decree\'s many shortcomings. (Comment: As of January 8, 
2004, the PM had not endorsed the decree. Private sector 
umbrella group CTA is currently engaged in negotiations with 
the Ministers of Labor, Planning & Finance, and Industry & 
Commerce to modify the decree and make it friendlier to the 
business community. End comment.) 
 
9. (U) Luisa Diogo, Minister of Planning and Finance, 
announced that the government is doing its \"utmost\" to 
ensure that all state employees receive their monthly wages 
on time, according to the Mozambican News Agency, AIM. Diogo 
said her Ministry has tried to identify reasons for recent 
delays in payments to public sector employees. According to 
the Ministry, reasons ranged from theft of wages, to 
\"irresponsible\" behavior, to the absence of banks. This 
month, the 100 year old system of using \"bank titles\" to pay 
out wages was replaced with direct, computerized payments 
from the Ministry of Finance to the beneficiary 
institutions. Diogo admitted there have been some \"hiccups\" 
with implementing the new system, but that things should run 
smoothly starting with payment of December wages. 
 
-------------- 
OIL AND GAS 
-------------- 
10. (U) The oil terminal at the Port of Beira is operating 
far below its level of capacity, reports the local 
newspaper, \"O Autarca\". The terminal is prepared to receive 
large ships with up to 50,000 tons of oil, but there is a 
critical problem of blocked access to the channel due to 
heavy sedimentation and the need for further dredging. 
Currently, the port can only receive ships with a maximum of 
30,000 tons of oil. Constructed in 1994, the Beira Port Oil 
Terminal is considered one of the most modern in the 
Southern African Region. CFM, the Mozambican Ports and 
Railways Company that manages the port, earns $1.8 for every 
cubic meter of oil brought into port. This year, 1,000,000 
tons was planned. However, according to numbers released in 
September, the port had only achieved the importation of 52% 
of this planned amount. The discrepancy in figures may be 
due to the inability of ships to enter Beira with large 
amounts of petroleum as intended. 
HANKINS 
"
"13315","1/16/2004 8:14","04MAPUTO70","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04MAPUTO1902|04MAPUTO2248|04SECSTATE346405","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000070 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR 
JOHANNESBURG FOR FCS - JVANRENSBURG, WCENTER 
DURBAN ALSO FOR FCS - JKUEHNER, LKOHRS, AELLARY 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, BTIO, EINV, ETRD, ABUD, MZ, Commerce, BFIF 
SUBJECT: 2003 BFIF CLOSE OUT 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 346405 B. MAPUTO 02248 C. MAPUTO 01902 
 
1. SUMMARY: Post wishes to thank the Department for providing 
2003 BFIF funding in the amount of $7,000. Post was able to 
travel to several provinces, visiting with various U.S. 
businesses, commercial associations, and local entrepreneurs 
to support U.S. commercial activities and encourage further 
U.S. investment in Mozambique. We believe our programming has 
been successful and would like to continue to have such 
extensive commercial outreach and attract greater U.S. 
investment in-country in 2004. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------ 
COMMERCIAL VISITS TO THE PROVINCES 
------------------------------------ 
2. Econ/Pol officer and Commercial FSN visited the provinces 
of Sofala and Manica, starting in Mozambique\'s second largest 
city of Beira. Beira is a significant port town for 
Mozambique and the Beira Development Corridor, running 
east-west from Harare to Beira, allows for a large amount of 
trade to transit through Mozambique from Zimbabwe and Malawi. 
Facilitating many of Mozambique\'s business ventures outside 
of the capital city of Maputo, Beira is an important national 
commercial center. On a visit to Mobeira, a flour-milling 
factory privatized in 1996 and owned by the U.S. corporation 
Seaboard, Director Antonio Lopes described the stiff 
competition currently challenging the firm\'s operations. 
Mobeira imports wheat from the U.S. and Europe and exports 
primarily to Malawi and other regional markets. Although the 
market for flour has doubled in the last seven years, 
bringing further profits, Mobeira has faced numerous 
difficulties with the GRM in receiving its entitled VAT 
repayment. Non-payment of VAT reimbursement by the GRM is a 
sensitive and critical issue facing several firms and donors 
working in-country that are exempted from the tax. Post has 
been working with the Ministry of Planning and Finance to see 
that the VAT is repaid to U.S. businesses and donors. In 
November and December of 2003, Mobeira did receive VAT 
reimbursements from the GRM and follow-on payments seem 
likely. Pushing such financial issues with the GRM to help 
U.S. commercial interests in-country will ensure that U.S. 
businesses stay in operation and can successfully compete 
against other producers. 
 
3. Also in Beira, Econ/Poloff and Commercial FSN visited the 
Sofala Commercial and Industrial Association (ACIS), working 
to represent the interests of 27 firms operating in the 
province of Sofala. U.S. firms such as Coca-Cola and Mobeira 
participate as members. The only garment and textile factory 
in Mozambique currently exporting under AGOA, Belita 
(Mauritian-owned), is also represented by ACIS. ACIS is a 
very active and dynamic organization in Sofala, disseminating 
critical commercial and labor news to members and 
non-members, providing advice to prospective investors, and 
establishing task forces to work with the GRM on commercial 
issues. The organization is valuable in its analysis and 
dissemination of information on current and considered GRM 
commercial and labor law. By maintaining regular contact with 
ACIS, Post is kept up-to-date on issues affecting the 
business community in the provinces. Post looks to pursue 
commercial programs with ACIS, such as investment-related 
seminars that may attract further U.S. investment in the 
central provinces or inform businesses how to take advantage 
of incentive programs such as AGOA. 
 
4. The same trip featured a visit to Chimoio and Manica, 
cities located in the Manica Province. Due to its moderate 
climate, Manica is a rich province for agriculture and the 
American NGO, Technoserve, is very active in providing 
training programs to local producers and finding export 
markets for Mozambican fruit and vegetables. On this visit, 
Econ/Poloff and Commercial FSN met with Technoserve 
representatives to discuss the local agricultural sector and 
markets for export. Also in Chimoio, Econ/Poloff and 
Commercial FSN had the opportunity to discuss agricultural 
export issues with Joao Ferrao, manager of a new agricultural 
consulting firm and former director of the Chimoio 
Agricultural Institute (the oldest and most prestigious 
agricultural institution in Mozambique). Mr. Ferrao is keen 
to AGOA issues and participated in Post\'s 2002 AGOA roadshows 
(reftel C), well-attended in the Manica area. Each year, Mr. 
Ferrao coordinates a Chimoio Agricultural Trade Fair, 
showcasing agricultural equipment and supplies for a variety 
of sources (primarily South African equipment). Post 
discussed the plausibility of having U.S. firms showcase U.S. 
products and equipment at the fair, and Mr. Ferrao was very 
accepting of the idea. Although Manica is not the most 
convenient location for U.S. sellers, Post may be able to 
send product brochures and information to participate in this 
event. 
 
5. The trip to Manica concluded with a visit to the Coca-Cola 
bottling factory, a Zimbabwean-owned flower plantation, 
Vilmar, (the first in Mozambique), and tobacco and paprika 
farms owned and managed by Zimbabwean farmers. Coca-Cola is 
a very successful company in Mozambique and continues to 
raise product output and revenue. They have instituted a new 
system of management nationally, organizing into 
mini-business revenue teams, responsible for activities such 
as production, marketing, and distribution. This new method 
of management has also been successful for Coca-Cola 
Mozambique, raising efficiency and contributing to employee 
morale through individual and group incentives/awards. There 
is strong agreement that the flower sector in Mozambique 
could take off soon in the Manica province. Vilmar has 
recorded great success in growing and selling roses. Most 
roses are driven to Harare and flown to the European market 
for sale. More flower plantations are springing up in the 
area, and the capacity of Mozambique to produce this product 
will lead to more investors. Econ/Poloff and Commercial FSN 
spoke with two Zimbabwean farmers about current land and loan 
issues they face with the GRM. Many Zimbabweans in the area 
are looking for a way to secure loans to increase tobacco 
planting and production. They seek help from U.S. financial 
institutions to tackle these issues. 
 
6. Visits by Econ/poloff and Commercial FSN to several cities 
in the Northern provinces of Nampula and Niassa provided an 
opportunity to promote AGOA, describe post\'s commercial 
programs in Mozambique, develop key contacts in the local 
business community, and learn about opportunities for US 
companies in these provinces. In Niassa, Mozambique\'s least 
developed and most isolated province, Econ/poloff and 
Commercial FSN held a multi-sectoral business roundtable with 
local private sector leaders on Niassa\'s investment climate 
and opportunities for investment. A number of potential 
opportunities were identified in areas ranging from tourism 
to agriculture. A meeting with Nakosso, the Niassa Business 
Centre, a private organization that promotes and facilitates 
foreign investment in the province, has resulted in a number 
of new contacts and follow-up activities. Through this 
initial contact with Nakosso, post is now working with the 
local partner of a US company on a project to export 
macadamia nuts to the United States. The US partners plan to 
visit Mozambique in March 2004. Initial discussions have also 
been held with Nakosso on a digital video conference to be 
organized by post on promoting exports of Mozambican 
handicrafts under AGOA. A visit to the port of Nacala in 
Nampula province focused on export opportunities related to 
the Nacala Corridor, which includes an integrated rail and 
port system linking Malawi, Zambia and Mozambique. This 
project is being undertaken by a US-led consortium and is 
funded by OPIC. In the city of Nampula, meetings were held 
with Technoserve and local producers of paprika and cashews. 
Mozambique\'s once thriving cashew industry has only recently 
begun to recover from years of decline following the 1995 
liberalization of the sector. Principal export markets 
include the Netherlands, South Africa and the United States. 
Paprika producers were particularly interested in learning 
about AGOA. As a result of one meeting, post has been working 
with a paprika producer who is interested in exporting to the 
US market. 
 
------------------------------ 
Other BFIF-related activities 
------------------------------ 
7. Post has continuous communication with FCS Johannesburg 
and FCS Durban. Most recently, FCS has worked with post on 
three issues: delivering Gold Key Services, planning U.S. 
business participation in a March 2004 Water Africa 
Exhibition, and an investigation into a U.S. business 
delivering U.S. exports to Mozambican clients. In September 
2004, Post actively communicated with FCS Durban to provide 
Gold Key Service to a U.S. company located in Houston, Texas, 
A-1 Rags. Post and FCS communicated with the Houston Export 
Assistance Center to provide the client with contacts of 
second-hand clothing buyers in Maputo and Nampula. In March 
2004, Mozambique will host the Water Africa 2004 Sub-Sahara 
International Exhibition. Post is working with FCS Durban and 
USDOC Washington to bring U.S. participation to the event 
through the production and distribution of informational 
brochures. The Fair will be held at FACIM in Maputo (a trade 
show location). Post\'s goal, along with FCS, is to achieve 
participation of over thirty U.S. firms working in water 
treatment, irrigation, ground and surface water development, 
urban drainage, and consulting services by soliciting product 
and service information and distributing it at this year\'s 
Water trade show. This will open the Mozambican and South 
African market to become familiar with and enlist the use of 
U.S. products in this sector. Thirdly, Post handled a 
commercial inquiry made by a Mozambican consulting firm, 
Kianda by contacting FCS Johannesburg. Kianda is working with 
a U.S. firm called \"Caravans International\", but there has 
been some confusion as to product payment, delivery of 
products, and communication. FCS Johannesburg assisted Post 
by contacting the Export Assistance Center in Minneapolis, 
that in turn, did much research related to the U.S. firm and 
its international business operations. Post was able to 
provide Kianda with information valuable to its business 
operations and provided options for going forward in working 
with Caravans International. 
 
8. Kodak and the Bank of New York are examples of two U.S. 
firms who visited Post with commercial inquiries in the fall 
of 2003. Post, through use of it\'s new Commercial Library 
(2003), was able to provide the firms with important country 
information on economics, finance, investment, and politics. 
Post also provides all clients with commercial inquires a 
copy of the 2003 Country Commercial Guide. Econ/poloffs 
attended KPMG\'s Annual \"Top 100 Businesses in Mozambique\" for 
2003 and noted that six U.S. businesses were present on the 
list: Coca-Cola, Mobil, Mobeira, Avis-Rent-a-Car, Colgate 
Palmolive, and KPMG Mozambique. This annual study presents 
the top revenue-earners in Mozambique, as identified by 
survey. Econ/Poloff also attended the second annual 
Commonwealth Mozambique Investment Conference. The conference 
featured speakers from business and the GRM on aquaculture, 
finance, tourism, transportation, agriculture, and 
information technology. Very few U.S. investors attended the 
conference, and Post would like to find new ways to get U.S 
investors involved. Similarly, at this year\'s annual Maputo 
trade fair, FACIM, there was not a U.S. business Pavilion and 
U.S. participation will be more highly encouraged in 2004. 
 
------------- 
EXPENDITURES 
------------- 
9. Post was allocated $7,000 and financial expenditures 
totaled $8,064.71. The entire budge was allocated to travel 
and per diem. The internal cost of travel in Mozambique is 
very high with plane tickets to the North of the country 
costing the equivalent of full fare rates to Europe from 
South Africa. Post made a concerted effort to remain fiscally 
prudent and double-up programming where possible. 
 
--------- 
COMMENT 
--------- 
10. The BFIF funding for 2003 was very successful. Post was 
able to provide considerable commercial outreach to U.S. 
business operating in-country. Additionally, Post was able to 
expand its knowledge of the local business community and 
identify further areas for U.S. investment and export sales. 
Valuable commercial and economic information was provided to 
U.S. firms looking to enter the Mozambican market and 
Mozambican firms looking to work with U.S. businesses in the 
U.S. Several informative conferences were attended and 
business contacts were expanded. Mozambique is a difficult 
and remote market for U.S. businesses to penetrate, but with 
continued expanded outreach and the ability to advertise U.S. 
goods and incentive programs like AGOA, success is at hand. 
Post appreciates this opportunity and looks forward to the 
possibility of working with BFIF again in 2004. 
LA LIME 
"
"13371","1/20/2004 10:39","04MAPUTO83","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","03MAPUTO1530|03MAPUTO1532","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 MAPUTO 000083 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS, INL/AAE 
JUSTICE FOR OPDAT AND ICITAP 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KCOR, KCRM, EAID, MZ 
SUBJECT: CORRUPTION IN MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: A. 03 MAPUTO 1530 
B. 03 MAPUTO 1532 
Classified By: Amb. Helen La Lime, reasons 1.4 b and d 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Any discussion of Mozambique\'s political 
and economic development needs to take into account 
corruption. The steady decade-long progress since the end of 
the civil war could be slowed or even reversed if corruption 
is not checked. Senior Mozambicans in fact cite corruption 
as the greatest single impediment to future development. 
Corruption is not an easy topic to analyze. By their nature 
the worse forms of corruption are hidden from view. Corrupt 
practices occur at all levels of society to the point that 
many practices are considered \"normal.\" U.S. ideas of 
conflict-of-interest do not exist here resulting in some 
politicians who have greatly enriched themselves through 
government positions seeing themselves as legitimate 
champions against corruption. The Mozambicans say the right 
things about corruption. They have also taken serious 
efforts to lay the institutional and legal framework to 
attack the problem. The fundamental question, however, is 
whether in a country where none is without sin the 
Mozambicans really mean what they say. This cable, which 
represents a mission-wide effort, surveys GRM efforts to 
combat corruption and USG assistance in those efforts, 
placing the issue in Mozambican and regional context, and 
identifying criticisms we have encountered from our 
interlocutors. Elections scheduled for December could prove 
to be a watershed in current and future GRM efforts. End 
summary. 
 
Everybody Recognizes the Problem 
-------------------------------- 
2. (SBU) Mozambique is losing its image as the darling of the 
donor community as the corruption issue takes a more central 
role. After eleven years of peace, reconciliation, and rapid 
economic growth, the shine of Mozambique\'s (and the donor 
community\'s) success story is beginning to tarnish. Concern 
is growing among donors that corruption is not being 
adequately addressed by the country\'s leadership. Corruption 
is the biggest campaign issue for the opposition as 
Mozambique approaches presidential elections in 2004; indeed, 
the ruling party candidate is also forced to play a political 
dance of condemning corruption in government while distancing 
himself from the very party structure that has resulted in 
corruption. Businesses cite corruption (particularly petty 
corruption) as the biggest hindrance to investment. Polls of 
Mozambican citizens of all economic strata cite corruption in 
one form or another as a constant in day-to-day life. 
Despite the formation of a special unit in the Attorney 
General\'s office and numerous public statements by key 
figures in the GRM and FRELIMO, a concerted effort has been 
slow to gain momentum. Positive developments have been the 
creation of the Anti-Corruption Unit, passage of new 
legislation, the GRM public sector reform, and improvement in 
public finances; these can be considered first steps in 
combating corruption. One watershed event, especially in 
terms of pubic perception, was the Carlos Cardoso murder 
trial, which led to the sentencing in January 2003 of six 
involved in killing the crusading anti-corruption journalist. 
The entire populace followed the trial closely and were 
taken aback (though not surprised) by testimony that detailed 
the world of criminal corruption in Mozambique. The trial 
might not have happened if it were not for pressure on the 
GRM from the Nordics. 
 
Then and Now 
------------ 
3. (SBU) The days of Samora Machel: Concerning corruption, 
much of the population looks back nostalgically to the early 
independence period and the Presidency of Samora Machel from 
1975-1986. Stories abound of Machel\'s intolerance for 
corruption and his public shaming and sacking of officials 
found to be corrupt. At that time, idealism and enthusiasm 
for FRELIMO policies was sincere in most quarters of the 
population. It is common to hear \"this wouldn\'t have 
happened under Samora\" when allegations of corruption are 
discussed. The yearning for \"the good old days\" under Machel 
ignores the fact that money wasn\'t worth stealing because 
there was nothing to buy in shops and food shortages were 
common. Only government officials and diplomats had access 
to hard-currency shops actually supplied with goods. The 
grinding civil war, compounded by drought, brought enormous 
suffering to most Mozambicans. Machel was, however, an 
undeniably charismatic and popular leader and his personal 
example of a humble lifestyle can be juxtaposed with the 
lavish fortunes of many current and former government 
officials who enriched themselves during privatization. 
 
4. (U) The Down Side of Economic Development: Mozambique 
has enjoyed growth rates of more than 8% for the last decade, 
albeit from a very low base. Before the 1992 Rome Peace 
Accords, the country was torn by destructive civil war and 
the neighboring South African economy was isolated under 
anti-aparteid sanctions. Visitors to Maputo who have not 
seen the capital for years are astounded at the level of 
construction and development. In addition to private foreign 
investment and large donor-financed infrastructure projects, 
numerous luxury villas have recently sprung up in Maputo\'s 
more upscale neighborhoods. Deteriorated buildings from the 
Portuguese era are either being renovated or replaced with 
modern structures. Many state enterprises and parastatal 
companies have been fully or partially privatized. 
High-ranking FRELIMO party members are generally thought to 
have benefited from the privatization program, in which 
previously nationalized companies were sold off under a less 
than transparent bidding process. With large investments 
from South Africa, United Kingdom, and Portugal, the Maputo 
Corridor has produced a dynamic economic environment and 
increased opportunities for corruption. A growing pie and 
weak institutions opened the door for corruption, and the 
former revolutionary leaders were the first in line as 
newly-converted free marketers. 
 
The Three Forms of Mozambican Corruption 
-------------------------------------------- 
5. (C) Criminal Corruption: The most serious, and perhaps 
most unsettling, type of corruption in Mozambique involves 
potential involvement with organized crime by government 
officials. Even if guilty of acts of omission rather than 
commission, the tolerance of activities such as trafficking 
in drugs and stolen vehicles, contraband smuggling, 
trafficking in persons, and money laundering are seen as the 
worst forms of corruption, along with outright pilferage. 
Those involved in shady dealings do not shrink from 
contracting for the murder of potential witnesses to thwart 
prosecution. The collusion of low level officials with 
transborder crime provides a conducive environment for 
international crime. The role of the country as a transit 
point for narcotics, aliens, and stolen goods has grown 
rapidly in the last five years. The murders of investigative 
journalist Carlos Cardoso in 2000 and of bank auditor 
Siba-Siba Macuacua in 2001 demonstrate the ruthlessness of 
criminals involved in this type of corruption. Additionally, 
the Assistant Attorney General heading up the UAC was the 
victim of an assassination attempt in late 2002. 
 
6. (SBU) Corrupted Elites and \"Legal\" Corruption: This type 
of corruption has become more prevalent and, to some extent, 
has become socially accepted in the Mozambican context, 
despite public disdain for government officials widely seen 
as increasingly corrupt. It is expected that ministers will 
have a Mercedes and a large home and family members, friends 
and associates of those in high positions expect to also 
benefit, and pressure any relative with access to resources. 
Considering low government salaries, even for ministers, 
fringe benefits, such as free housing or the use of a car are 
an accepted fact of life. Even anti-corruption advocates 
like prominent members of the NGO Etica have profited from 
positions such as university dean or former parliamentary 
committee chairman. LINK, the domestic NGO consortium, noted 
that less than twenty percent of their members meet their 
transparency criteria. Not only NGO\'s budget decisions are 
unduly controlled by their leaders. RENAMO leader Afonso 
Dhlakama is not known for his transparent handling of the 
main opposition party\'s finances. There are signs, however, 
that the public has become less accepting of business as 
usual. For example, after the government confirmed on 
January 16 that President Chissano will be provided the use 
of a new two million dollar home upon leaving office, as 
provided by a 1992 law, media reaction included public debate 
questioning the appropriateness of building a mansion at 
great expense when so many other pressing needs exist. 
 
7. (U) In discussions with contacts and among mission staff, 
the trend of sophisticated corruption was identified. 
Individuals involved in corruption exhibit sufficient 
subtlety to avoid the appearance of outright theft and 
embezzlement. It is considered normal to take advantage of 
position to garner kickbacks for oneself and family members. 
In addition, the privileged elite, with their access to or 
influence within government, can peddle influence to enrich 
themselves, while still remaining technically within the law, 
since no conflict of interest rules exist. A 1992 law 
permitted government ministers to have business interests in 
their areas of oversight, enabling many to get in on the 
ground floor of private sector activity. While the new 
anti-corruption law requires high-ranking officials to 
declare their assets, this information will remain archived 
and out of the reach of the public. Most government 
officials have profited from privatization, most notably 
former Transport and Communication Minister Guebuza. The 
fact that government officials can enrich themselves without 
technically breaking the law, compounded by cultural 
expectations, makes it possible for officials to publicly 
rail against corruption with a straight face. They can 
define corruption to solely include collusion with organized 
crime or petty everyday extortion, conveniently leaving out 
their own actions. 
 
8. (U) Petty Corruption: As opposed to high-level corruption 
aimed at personal enrichment, most day-to-day corruption can 
be described as \"subsistence corruption.\" Civil servants, 
police, teachers, and health care workers receive extremely 
low pay. Often, government employees do not even receive 
their salaries on time. Considering the high number of 
points in the overly-bureaucratic state where a bribe can be 
demanded, it is commonplace to pay small \"fees\" to expedite 
paperwork, such as that for mandatory identity cards or 
permits. The lingering cultural effects of Portuguese 
colonial bureaucracy and previous dependence on the state 
during Marxism-Leninism make transactions with corrupt 
low-level officials frequent, exacerbating the problem. 
Small-scale extortion in this \"household sector\" 
disproportionately burdens the poorest Mozambicans. This 
type of corruption is endemic and is prevalent in the police 
(in particular the extortionate traffic police), health 
clinics (where payment is often demanded for free services), 
and schools. In the 2001 Corruption Survey published by 
Etica Mocambique, 34 percent of respondents had been asked 
for money in the health care service, and 25 percent by 
police or teachers. Only fifteen percent had any trust in 
the police, and between 80 and 90 percent believed that 
judges, police, and customs officials, along with teachers 
and health workers, demand bribes. In the schools, low-payed 
teachers often demand cash, or even bags of rice, for posting 
student exam results. Unfortunately, this situation also 
leads to some teachers demanding sexual favors from students 
for good or passing grades. 
 
Saying all the right things 
--------------------------- 
9. (U) Public statements by the President, Prime Minister, 
and FRELIMO Secretary General all indicate a desire on the 
part of FRELIMO to show progress in the fight against 
corruption. A key aspect of the GRM\'s anti-corruption 
campaign has been the high-profile launch of an 
Anti-Corruption Unit (UAC) within the Attorney General\'s 
Office. It has become a centerpiece of GRM efforts. 
Attorney General Joaquim Madeira shook up the political 
establishment shortly after coming into office in 2001 by 
announcing his intention to combat corruption, starting in 
his own office, which was rife with corrupt prosecutors. The 
UAC has had some successes in arrests of provincial level 
officials engaging in corruption, but has also faced 
challenges in staffing and resources. After moving slowly in 
hiring and training staff (with USG training assistance), 
they are preparing to expand their efforts. Speaking on the 
occasion of the UAC\'s one-year report, PM Pascoal Mocumbi 
encouraged the unit to continue making progress and exhorted 
them to \"show us the faces\" of the corrupt. President 
Chissano has repeatedly linked combating corruption with the 
GRM centerpiece Strategic Plan for the Reduction of Absolute 
Poverty (PARPA). Secretary General Guebuza, in his early 
campaigning for 2004 (under the official auspices of the 2003 
municipal election campaign) has promised to crack down on 
corruption in the public sector, causing some unease among 
his fellow Frelimistas as to how far he is willing to go. 
 
GRM efforts to combat corruption 
-------------------------------- 
10. (SBU) The Anti-corruption Unit: The UAC began 
operations in November 2002. During their first year, 116 
denunciations were received by the unit, 26 anonymously, with 
11 resulting in charges and 3 cases reaching trial, but still 
no convictions. The unit\'s Maputo office covers the entire 
country; regional offices in Beira and Nampula opened in 
December 2003. Major accomplishments of the UAC to date 
include the selection and training of core staff. In Maputo, 
there are currently only five prosecutors and one 
investigator, with prosecutors selected and being trained for 
the regional offices. The painstaking staff screening 
process has had the personal involvement of Attorney General 
Madeira and has resulted in selection of a professional, 
dedicated staff with an excellent public reputation for being 
uncorrupted. AG Madeira informed us in early January that 
the Council of Ministers approved a budget that included more 
funds than he had asked for, and includes salary incentives 
for the UAC. This is one key test of political will to 
support Madeira and the UAC. The UAC enjoys such public 
confidence that denunciations and complaints involving 
complex crimes not directly related to corruption are brought 
by citizens to the UAC, in light of their reputation for 
responsiveness. This situation, however, prevents the unit 
from focusing on cases that require their attention, by 
diverting their limited staff and resources to evaluating and 
forwarding on cases that should be dealt with elsewhere. The 
fact that the population does not trust the police or any 
other entity as much as the UAC is gratifying, but distracts 
the prosecutors from investigating higher priority cases. 
The few successes that the unit can point to involves 
time-consuming embezzlement cases in Sofala and Cabo Delgado 
provinces. 
 
11. (SBU) The growing backlog and the UAC\'s isolation within 
the judicial sector translate into the lack of successful 
prosecutions. Many of the cases investigated by the unit\'s 
prosecutors have been shelved or dismissed by judges for 
alleged lack of convincing evidence. With the UAC seen as an 
elite group and the Attorney General publicly criticizing the 
Investigative Police (PIC), the animosity of the police is an 
impediment to the UAC. In light of the Attorney General\'s 
moves to create a judicial police (PJ) to investigate complex 
crimes due to the widespread perception that the PIC is 
highly corrupt, police investigators are less than helpful. 
With the discussion of the accomplishments and challenges of 
the first year, the UAC laid out its goals for the next five 
years. These include construction of permanent offices in 
Maputo, Beira, and Nampula (vs. rented space), staffing 
levels of ten prosecutors and five investigators for each 
office, hiring of accountants, auditors, and other technical 
experts and support staff, development of an efficient 
case-tracking system, procurement of investigative equipment, 
and improved coordination with other GRM agencies. The UAC 
cannot fight corruption on its own, it needs to be part of a 
multi-level effort involving different sectors of the 
government, including each ministry. 
 
12. (U) Public Sector Reform: The GRM is undertaking a 
comprehensive reform of public services, with the goal of a 
creating more efficient and less corrupt environment for 
economic development. An inter-ministerial working group has 
approved a good governance program with the goal of improving 
each ministry\'s internal controls and reforming public sector 
hiring, salaries and advancement, to modernize the public 
service and prevent corruption. In November 2003, the Prime 
Minister officially launched an national survey, based on 
World Bank Institute standards, to identify the extent of 
corruption in government services. 
 
13. (SBU) Finance Ministry Inspector General\'s Office: 
Minister of Planning and Finance Luisa Diogo has received 
high marks for the donor community and IFIs for her attempts 
to develop more accountability in the GRM budget. A key 
potential ally of the UAC is the MPF\'s Inspectorate General 
for Finance (IGF). The IGF has powers to audit all 
government entities, including the Presidency, and to make 
unannounced inspections, which have uncovered cases of fraud 
in provincial administration. They have a staff of 100, and 
regional offices in Beira and Nampula. They chair the 
Coordinating Council of Inspectorates, comprising around 
twenty ministerial internal inspection units. The Ministry 
of State Administration\'s inspection unit supervises civil 
servants throughout the public sectors, but only has three 
inspectors. 
 
14. (U) Anti-corruption law: The National Assembly passed 
the new Anti-Corruption Law in November 2003 (reftel B). The 
law is seen as a good first step, in particular concerning 
increased protection for whistle-blowers and higher fines for 
official found guilty of corrupt practices. However, the law 
lacks teeth in other areas, and if the anti-money laundering 
legislation passed two years ago is any indication, it will 
be some time before implementing regulations are promulgated. 
The legislation provides for the formation of a Central 
Office for Combating Corruption (GCCC) with broad powers, 
chaired by the Attorney General, which will more than likely 
be a re-named UAC. 
? 
15. (SBU) The Cardoso and BCM Trials: The Cardoso murder 
trial, which ended in January 2003, and the ongoing BCM bank 
fraud trial, which began in December 2003, have helped to 
improve the image of the beleaguered judiciary. The 
conviction and long sentencing of six organized crime figures 
for the murder of investigative journalist Carlos Cardoso 
prompted several newspapers to name the judge presiding over 
the cases as \"man of the year.\" The trial was broadcast live 
and was followed with great interest. The judge currently 
leading the trial of the 14 million dollar BCM fraud case has 
not won over the public, but a successful completion of the 
case would further strengthen the image of the court system. 
The courts and judiciary are also seen as highly corrupt, 
with only the poor ending up facing trial. Most people 
believe that judges can be bought, putting those with enough 
money above the law. The Portuguese-based legal system 
invests broad discretion in judges to dismiss cases before 
the trial stage. 
 
Para os Ingleses ver? 
--------------------- 
16. (SBU) In recent discussions, prominent civil society 
figures, business consultants and government officials told 
Ambassador and other embassy officers that GRM 
anti-corruption efforts are not sufficiently far-reaching, 
and often can be described as efforts to simply present the 
appearance that something is being done, \"for the English to 
see.\" The most commonly heard complaints involve the 
argument that the creation of the Attorney General\'s 
Anti-Corruption Unit (UAC) is merely for show and they will 
not be given resources or the required room to maneuver to go 
after high-level government corruption. Beyond being called 
a \"Potemkin\" operation, the UAC is considered a convenient 
way for other government departments to deflect any 
responsibility for fighting corruption, by simply stating 
that the UAC is the appropriate entity to do so, despite 
their small and inexperienced staff that is quickly becoming 
deluged with cases. The UAC has now been operating for one 
year and is beginning to increase their capacity. Despite 
their courage and dedication and the sound progress made to 
date, they face a daunting task. 
 
USG Assistance in the Fight Against Corruption 
--------------------------------------------- - 
18. (U) The Anti-Corruption Unit: USAID support pays for 
rental of the UAC\'s office space and provision of all office 
equipment, computers, and vehicles. INL has funded three 
trips of OPDAT short-term advisors to assist the UAC in 
developing skills and tracking cases. PD funds have arranged 
for the OPDAT advisor to return with his SEC supervisor in a 
speakers program and permitted travel of seven UAC staff to 
the U.S. Two groups of seven prosecutors participated in the 
six-week ILEA Botswana LEED Program in January 2002 and 
October 2003. Training was also conducted in Maputo in June 
2002 and June 2003 involving experts from OPDAT, FBI, and 
Treasury. 
 
19. (U) Police Sciences Academy (ACIPOL): INL funding has 
provided an intermittent long-term ICITAP advisor to assist 
ACIPOL in management and curriculum development and to 
coordinate specialized training courses that have been 
conducted at ACIPOL by ICITAP law enforcement experts. 
Courses have included crime scene response, investigative 
skills, criminal data base management, investigation of 
sexual crimes, and problem based learning instructor 
development. INL funds are also paying for improved 
facilities at the academy and an assessment of developing a 
training forensics lab. 
 
20. (U) Post is using PD funds to bring experts to train 
Mozambican customs, utilizing Speaker Program participants, 
as it did in September 2003 with a series of lectures on 
police ethics. 
 
21. (U) Border Security Assistance: Post has requested FY04 
INL funds for training of customs, immigration and border 
police and for necessary equipment. DAO is also working with 
the GRM to complete prerequisites for receipt of EDA coast 
guard cutters or other craft for coastal patrol. The 
Mozambican Navy currently has no capacity to secure its long 
sea border or to prevent illegal exploitation of its 
fisheries. 
 
22. (U) Etica and civil society: USAID funded the 
ground-breaking Corruption Survey conducted by Etica 
Mocambique in 2001. G-11 donors, including AID, are funding 
the planned Etica media campaign to raise public awareness 
about corruption and citizens rights. Etica is also working 
with the UAC to open reporting centers in all ten provincial 
capitals with toll-free hotlines for reporting corruption. 
These centers will play an ombudsman role and help the UAC 
with case intake. USAID mission DG program is also 
formulating its strategy to promote \"corruption free zones\" 
at the municipal level as part of its planned support for 
eight newly-elected local governments. 
 
Do Donors Promote Corruption? 
----------------------------- 
23. (SBU) British-based journalist Joseph Hanlon wrote in 
2002 that the donors promote corruption in Mozambique. Many 
prominent civil society figures, among them Abdul Carimo, the 
President of the NGO \"Etica Mocambique,\" agree with certain 
aspects of his argument, and were disillusioned to see the 
GRM receive from donors more money that it asked for at the 
September 2003 World Bank Consultative Group meetings in 
Paris. These critics see the donors as afraid to tarnish one 
of their few success stories on the continent and blames the 
donor community for accepting only talk from the GRM, without 
demanding concrete action and progress against corruption. 
These watchdogs admit that they are also part of the 
privileged elite and live comfortable lives, in part 
benefiting from donor largesse in Mozambique. Themselves 
well-connected, educated elites in close-knit Maputo circles, 
they also recognize the limits of civil society and the 
reluctance of the press and NGOs to jeopardize their 
situation. Fear of retribution, since the Cardoso murder, 
also plays a part. However, in addition to funding good 
governance efforts, donor countries should receive credit for 
pressuring the GRM to move forward in combating corruption. 
Nordic countries, in particular, applied strong pressure for 
the Cardoso murder trial to finally take place. The Swiss 
Ambassador has also publicly spoken out against corruption, 
provoking a sensitive reaction from senior FRELIMO officials. 
In his annual address to Parliament in early 2003, the 
Attorney General noted particularly the support received from 
USAID following the assassination attempt on the head of the 
UAC. Internal public accounting has improved in response to 
demands from the donor community and many earnest officials, 
such as Finance Minister Diogo and former Justice Minister 
Aly Douto (now a FRELIMO deputy and key committee chair) have 
used this pressure to achieve first results in the fight 
against corruption. 
 
After 2004? 
----------- 
24. (C) Uncertainty surrounding Guebuza: With the end of 
the Chissano government less than one year away, speculation 
is rife that current high-level GRM officials will partake in 
a \"feeding frenzy\" to sufficiently pad their nests before 
leaving office. Candidate Guebuza has repeatedly vowed to 
tackle corruption. Guebuza also happens to be one of 
Mozambique\'s wealthiest businessmen. It is widely believed 
that he did very well for himself during privatizations while 
FRELIMO parliamentary leader and also earlier as Minister of 
Transport. Interlocutors have made comparisons between 
Guebuza\'s handling of his son\'s minor legal troubles (he 
actually went to jail for a short period in a dispute 
involving a land deal) and the more well-known case of 
President Chissano\'s son Nympine. Since Nympine\'s 
unconvincing and arrogant testimony in the Cardoso murder 
trial, he has actually been heckled in public resulting from 
perceptions that he was involved in the bank fraud and the 
murder, but remains certain he will not face justice. Some 
informed observers feel that Guebuza did not make the same 
efforts to shield his son from damage, perhaps indicating his 
intention to allow party colleagues and cronies to be 
punished for corrupt activities when and if they are 
revealed. Conversely, Guebuza is among those senior FRELIMO 
officials who have applied pressure on Attorney General 
Madeira to move slowly in pursuing certain cases. 
 
25. (SBU) A possible RENAMO upset?: In the now unlikely 
event of a RENAMO victory, most commentators predict that 
corruption would be even worse. Hungry for power since the 
1992 General Peace Accord, RENAMO has failed in two elections 
to gain power, and if the November municipal elections are 
indicative, they are not sufficiently organized to win in 
2004. Considering the lack of transparency in party leader 
Afonso Dhlakama\'s policy and personnel decisions, public 
opinion holds that RENAMO is mainly interested in power to 
enrich themselves and their long-suffering supporters. 
 
Comment 
------- 
26. (SBU) While the UAC faces many challenges, public 
opinion is beginning to mobilize and many, if not all, 
current government officials recognize the negative effects 
of growing corruption not only to their image and 
re-electability, but also upon foreign investment and 
continued donor support. With over half of the GRM budget 
based on either direct or indirect donor support, the 
impatience of many European donors, combined with USG 
pressure on MCA criteria, has the potential to turn the tide. 
The planned Etica campaign may contribute to a greater 
awareness of ethical standards and civic ideals on the part 
of citizens. The factor of the 2004 elections and the 
imminent changes in the GRM leadership may also play a role. 
Enlightened GRM officials have indicated that they wish to do 
more to prevent future corruption, while confiding that it 
will prove difficult to go after those who have already 
benefited from corrupt dealings. Without at least one 
high-profile success on the part of the UAC, the climate of 
impunity will not be shaken. Things may get worse before 
they get better, if senior officials who assume they will 
lose their job in the new government decide to cash in on 
their positions while they can. 
 
27. (C) Comment continued: Attorney General Madeira has 
admitted to us that he faces pressure from senior FRELIMO 
members to back off certain cases involving high level 
officials. He has received telephone calls from Guebuza and 
FRELIMO Secretary General Tome pointedly inquiring into the 
status of particular cases and has been visited by Supreme 
Court Chief Justice Mangaze on numerous occasions. He has 
apparently been instructed to keep a tighter rein on the 
younger and more unpredictable Assistant AG Isabel Rupia, who 
leads the UAC. It is often rumored that she will soon be 
replaced in her position by Assistant AG Rafael Sebastiao, 
who exhibits the same caution as Madeira. It is not clear if 
the attempt on her life in December was meant to succeed, or 
merely to send her a message to back off. Some commentators 
see the UAC as an \"escape valve\" cleverly used by the GRM to 
shift focus away from individual ministries\' deliberate lack 
of internal controls. While the UAC runs the risk of 
becoming swamped, the largest impediment to successfully 
prosecuting corruption is stalling by the courts. The 
judiciary has disproportionate responsibility for the 
inability of the GRM to bring the corrupt to justice. 
 
28. (SBU) The negative effects on investment, from the added 
costs and frustrations of doing business, will do great harm 
to continued economic development if corruption is not 
reduced. Corruption also has wider implications relating to 
grand corruption, organized crime, porous borders, and their 
possible nexus with terrorist financing. Senior GRM 
officials have publicly stated that corruption is a serious 
constraint on development. They are also very aware that 
Mozambique\'s efforts on corruption will be evaluated in light 
of such programs as MCA and NEPAD. In the last year, we have 
seen some glimmers of hope in the fight against corruption. 
Mozambique must now move more energetically beyond the 
rhetoric and planning to implementation of ambitious, 
visible, well-targeted actions, which span all sectors of 
government and which, over time, will reverse the current 
trend and foster a culture where good governance and 
accountability are the norm. End Comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"13372","1/20/2004 10:40","04MAPUTO84","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE347748|04MAPUTO70","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 000084 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR EB/CBA, AF/EPS, AF/S 
JOHANNESBURG FOR FCS 
DURBAN FOR FCS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, BTIO, EINV, ETRD, ABUD, MZ, BFIF, Commerce 
SUBJECT: FY O4 BFIF PROPOSAL 
 
REF: (A) 03 STATE 347748 (B) MAPUTO 70 
 
1. Post requests funding in the amount of $30,322 under the 
Business Facilitation Incentive Fund (BFIF) for FY 04. 
 
2. In order of priority, we propose the following projects 
for FY04: 
A. Commercial Outreach, Market Development, and Export 
Promotion. Proposed Funding Level: $15,322 
Twice the size of California, Mozambique has ten provinces 
and a capital city located in the southernmost province. 
Maputo is far-removed from commercial and political activity 
in a majority of the country, but dominates in attracting 
foreign investment, entrepreneurs, and relies heavily on 
access to the South African market. Because of its large 
size, poor infrastructure, remote location from U.S. and 
European markets, and commercial and labor codes that are 
slow to reform, Mozambique has a long road ahead in 
attracting significant foreign investment and achieving 
regional competitiveness. However, the business community is 
in constant communication with the GRM in order to reform 
the business environment by creating more investment- 
friendly policies and promoting competition. Firms currently 
operating in Mozambique are in need of home country support 
and outreach. Communication between firms, the GRM, and the 
diplomatic community is critical to improvement of the 
business climate and to ensure that fair treatment of firms 
is achieved. Additionally, Post outreach to commercial 
associations, entrepreneurs, agricultural institutes and 
organizations, fishing associations, and industry is 
critical to introducing U.S. products and programs to an 
audience generally uninformed about U.S. opportunities and 
the U.S. market. 
Post travel to the provinces will focus on visiting U.S. 
businesses in operation and offering continued support on 
GRM relations and financial repayment of the VAT. 
Additionally, econ/poloffs will take the opportunity to meet 
with farmers, businessmen, entrepreneurs, academics, and 
commercial associations to discuss U.S. export opportunities 
and incentive programs such as AGOA. Discussions will focus 
on how Mozambique can specifically benefit from AGOA in the 
textile/garment and handicraft sector and how specific 
sectors such as agriculture, construction, and aquaculture 
may benefit from U.S. technology and market offerings. 
Furthermore, Post would greatly benefit from consultations 
at the regional FCS office in Johannesburg and USAID\'s 
Southern Africa Global Competitiveness Hub in Gaborone. Post 
works closely with FCS on various issues out of Durban and 
Johannesburg such as joint research for commercial 
inquiries, Gold Key Service requests, and local trade shows 
and exhibitions. Additionally, Post works with Mozambique\'s 
USAID private sector development team in weekly meetings, 
focusing on issues such as labor, business registration, tax 
administration, and import/export regulations and tariffs. 
The opportunity to meet with officers in regional support 
offices, shadow their work, and establish greater contact is 
invaluable to Embassy Maputo and its operations, since it is 
not home to a FCS office. Post would gain greater insight 
on commercial resources and contacts, allowing for more 
effective U.S. product promotion and program efforts in 
Mozambique. 
Commercial outreach, market development, and export 
promotion is in line with Post\'s FY 2005 MPP Economic Growth 
and Development Goal. Communication and establishment of 
commercial contacts in-country will \"promote trade openness 
and exports to the region, the US, and the world\" (Strategy 
1). Additionally, Post\'s increased knowledge of U.S. 
commercial resources, physical and virtual, will lead to 
effective management of commercial inquiries, forging a 
valuable relationship with Post and the Regional FCS, TDA, 
and USAID Competitiveness Offices (Tactic 7). Key 
performance indicators will be the rise in AGOA and other 
U.S.-assisted exports to the U.S. and bilateral business-to- 
business contacts established by the econ/commercial 
section. 
Post recommends the following commercial outreach travel: 
Sofala/Manica/Tete Provincial Travel will include the 
following site visits: 
-Port of Beira, Mozambique\'s most active port 
-Commercial Association of Sofala (ACIS); represents 27 
businesses operating in Sofala, 2 of which are U.S. 
businesses 
-Mobeira - flour-producing mill owned by the U.S. 
corporation Seaboard 
-Belita - currently the only textile and garment factory 
operating under AGOA 
-Agricultural Institute of Chimoio 
-Coca-Cola Bottling Factory, Chimoio 
-Vilmar Rose Plantation 
-Pescamar Fishing Association 
-Moatize coal mines 
-Zambeze River Valley Authority 
-Cahora Bassa Hydroelectric Company 
-Technoserve - American agricultural NGO 
Total for Econ/Poloff and Commercial FSN - $3220 
Transportation: $1000 ($500/person) 
Per diem: $1320 ($110/day, 6 days) 
Conference Room Rental: $900 ($300/site) 
Zambezia/Nampula/Cabo Delgado/Niassa Provincial Travel will 
include the following site visits: 
-Nakosso Business Center 
- Tenga, Ltd - Mozambique\'s first macadamia nut farm; 
involves U.S. investors from CA 
-Port of Nacala 
-Technoserve - American agricultural NGO 
-Kenmare Resources (Moma Heavy Sands Project) 
-Business Centers Inc., Nampula (US-investor owned and 
managed) 
-Miranda Cashews - working successfully to produce and 
export cashews with help from Technoserve 
-Cuamba University 
-Indian Ocean Aquaculture - large shrimp farm project with 
U.S. investment 
Total for Econ/Poloff and Commercial FSN - $4980 
Transportation: $1800 ($900/person) 
Per diem: $1980 ($110/day, 9 days) 
Conference Room Rental: $1200 ($300/site) 
Inhambane/Gaza/Maputo Provincial Travel will include the 
following site visits: 
-Port of Maputo 
-MOZAL Aluminum Smelter - Mozambique\'s largest revenue- 
earning firm 
-SASOL natural gas pipeline 
-US-Mozambican Chamber of Commerce 
-Center for Investment Promotion (CPI) 
-Export Promotion Center (IPEX) 
-Association of Business Confederations (CTA) 
-Vilankulos Wildlife Sanctuary, Lighthouse Lodge (U.S. 
investment) 
-Eduardo Mondlane University 
-CITRUM - Mozambican citrus-producing company 
Total for Econ/Poloff and Commercial FSN - $2300 
Transportation: $300 ($150/person) 
Per diem: $1100 ($110/day, 5 days) 
Conference Room Rental: $900 ($300/site) 
Post recommends the following training/consultation travel: 
Consultations at FCS and TDA Johannesburg - $2976 
Bi-annual travel for two Econ/Poloffs and the Commercial FSN 
to Johannesburg: Round-trip airfare $1800 (six trips) and 
per diem $1176 (six two-day trips). 
Consultations at Southern Africa Global Competitiveness Hub 
in Gaborone, Botswana - $1,856 
Travel for one Econ/Poloff and the Commercial FSN to 
Gaborone: Round-trip airfare $1130 (two trips) and per diem 
$726 (two three-day trips) 
Post anticipates that this travel will produce critical 
results for U.S. investment in-country and commercial 
resource knowledge at Post. The rising number of commercial 
inquiries Post receives and the increase of U.S. business 
investment in Mozambique will measure commercial outreach. 
Similarly, a rise in U.S. exports to Mozambique will signify 
successful commercial work. An increase in the number of 
local firms exporting under AGOA to the U.S. will also be a 
quantifiable goal. Post travel to regional FCS, TDA, and 
USAID competitiveness offices will improve Econ/Poloff and 
Commercial FSN\'s knowledge of commercial resources, enabling 
Post to deal more effectively and efficiently with 
commercial inquiries. Performance metrics may include the 
increased number of coordinated activities between FCS, TDA, 
and Export Assistance Centers (EACs) and Post in FY04. 
B. Key Investment Issues Seminar in partnership with 
Mozambique-U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Proposed Funding 
Level: $7000 
A country in the midst of economic reform and development, 
Mozambique has several issues that it must face in order to 
increase foreign investment and increase regional economic 
competitiveness. The following issues must be addressed by 
the GRM: timeliness of business registration, tax 
administration and VAT repayments to exempted firms and 
donors, hiring of foreign labor, lack of available credit, 
and land ownership. The private sector, donor communities, 
and commercial associations engage in continuous dialogue 
with the GRM to encourage the GRM to adopt more investment- 
friendly policies and open up its markets to outside 
investment. The GRM is slowly taking steps to see that 
reform is made, but the current and prospective investment 
community must be kept informed on such key issues affecting 
business operations and market access. 
Post proposes that a \"Key Investment Issues Seminar\" be 
coordinated with the Mozambique-U.S. Chamber of Commerce to 
bring to light current business and investment issues. 
Currently, Post works closely with the Chamber of Commerce 
and is establishing joint programs with the Chamber on 
investment, health, and education. Members of the Chamber 
are influential players in the local business community and 
can bring their expertise in working in the Mozambique 
commercial and labor systems to the table. Participants 
would include potential and current investors, donors, 
commercial and labor associations, and government 
representatives. 
Exact figure costs are not yet available, but our best 
estimate for Post expenditure is $7000 for conference room 
facilities and promotional materials. The Chamber may have 
some funding available for this project, but is not able to 
carry the event alone without USG help. 
Post may measure project impact by progress achieved in 
lessening the time it takes to register a business in 
Mozambique and the increased willingness to liberalize labor 
and commercial regulations. However, since movement requires 
a dialogue between the GRM and the private sector, the GRM 
must be ready and willing to implement liberal reform 
changes. Due to the nature of such political processes 
(especially in third world countries), achieving success in 
this area will take time. Regardless, reform in these areas 
must be achieved for Mozambique to open its markets to U.S. 
investors who would be willing to come in and operate, 
promoting and selling U.S. products. 
Hosting a Key Investment Issues Seminar in coordination with 
the Mozambique-U.S. Chamber of Commerce is in line with 
Post\'s FY 2005 MPP Economic Growth and Development Goal. 
Specifically, it will encourage \"improvement in the business 
and investment climates\" (Strategy 2). A performance 
indicator would be the amount of \"red tape\" eradication 
achieved. 
C. USDOC Catalog Show in Beira - Proposed Funding Level: 
$8000 
In order to promote U.S. products and market opportunities 
in Mozambique\'s second largest commercial center, Post 
proposes a DOC catalog show in the central Province of 
Sofala, the city of Beira. Beira is home to Mozambique\'s 
most active port and sees significant transit trade with 
Zimbabwe and Malawi. The central provinces rely heavily on 
the Beira development corridor that consists of railway and 
road transportation from Harare to Beira. Commercial 
activity along the corridor is vital to the survival of the 
central provinces. 
Post believes that the business community, investors, 
producers, and suppliers would greatly benefit from a 
catalog show showcasing available U.S. agricultural, 
technical, and industrial products. Since most of the trade 
fairs and catalog events take place in the capital city of 
Maputo, often the Beira community is excluded from 
participation because of the distance and cost of travel to 
attend such events. An active commercial association, ACIS, 
is working in Sofala to support businesses operating in that 
area. Organizing in 2000, ACIS represents the interests of 
27 businesses working in Sofala and is keen to investment 
and commercial-related programming. Post can rely on the 
expertise and strong participation of ACIS in the catalog 
show, as they represent two U.S. firms already established 
and working in the Sofala Province. 
Exact figure costs are not yet available, but our best 
estimate for Post expenditure is $8000 for space rental, 
promotional materials, and Pol/econoff and Commercial FSN 
travel to Beira. 
Program success may be measured by the dollar increase of 
U.S. exports as a result of increased U.S. product awareness 
in Mozambique\'s second largest commercial hub. Additionally, 
Post will make valuable business contacts by administering 
the catalog show and will likely receive many more inquiries 
regarding contact with U.S. firms for U.S. equipment and 
business partnerships. 
Presenting a USDOC Catalog Show is in line with Post\'s FY 
2005 MPP Economic Growth and Development Goal. Such a 
program will \"promote trade openness and exports to the 
region, the U.S., and the world\" (Strategy 1). In 
particular, a catolog show would showcase U.S. companies 
looking to invest (Tactic 7). Performance indicators would 
be the dollar increase of U.S. investment in Mozambique. 
 
3. POC for the above-mentioned activities is Econ/Poloff 
Loren Dent. She may be reached at 258-1-492-797, ext. 3422 
and at dentln@state.gov 
La Lime 
"
"13409","1/21/2004 10:52","04MAPUTO99","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000099 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KHIV, MZ, EUN, HIV/AIDS/PEPFAR 
SUBJECT: Mocumbi - His days are numbered, it would seem 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: At a Press conference held in Maputo January 
20, Prime Minister Pascoal Mocumbi indicated that he will accept 
a position as the High Level Representative of a European Union 
Health Initiative. While he did not state when he would be 
leaving his current position, it appears that it could be as 
early as February/March. End summary 
 
2. (U) At the invite of the European Union, the Ambassador 
attended a January 20 press conference which featured Prime 
Minister Mocumbi. Purpose of the encounter with the Press was to 
provide the media with information on the \"European Developing 
Countries Clinical Trials Partnership - EDCTP\" an initiative in 
which Prime Minister Mocumbi has been invited to serve as the 
High Level Representative. 
 
3. (U) The initiative was featured as a bold undertaking , a 
long term partnership between Europe and developing countries to 
develop new medicines and vaccines to address the three largest 
health threats to development: HIV/AIDS, Malaria and 
Tuberculosis. Fifteen European countries are participating in 
the coordinating committee. The EU plans to provide 200 million 
Euros in support for the project. The EDCTP will seek to 
coordinate research efforts and information flow among the 
various African and European scientific communities. The 
initiative also envisions paying stipends to encourage African 
researchers and scientists who have departed Africa to return. 
While still in its earliest stages, the EDCTP will set up two 
secretariats: one in the Netherlands, the other in Africa. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
4. (SBU) Avoiding responding directly to questions concerning 
his future role in the initiative, Mocumbi\'s comments focused on 
the importance of the program and its potential for Africa and 
for Mozambique. He side-stepped questions from the press 
regarding whether he would be leaving his position as prime 
minister soon, by saying that the timing of his participation in 
the project is still unclear as the initiative is in its early 
stages. His role is first to serve a Prime Minister of 
Mozambique, he said, and the decision is not his to make, but 
President Chissano\'s. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: This press conference appears to set the stage 
for an imminent departure by Mocumbi. Maputo is rife with rumors 
regarding who will succeed him. We have heard that Finance 
Minister Louisa Diogo is the top candidate. It is widely held 
that Diogo would only hold the job until a new cabinet would be 
formed following the expected election victory of Armando 
Guebuza. Guebuza is expected to select a close ally to serve as 
PM, possible former Information Minister Teodato Hunguane. 
Rumors have circulated in the past months regarding Mocumbi\'s 
imminent departure for Europe, and he put them off. The Dutch 
Ambassador thought Mocumbi would be leaving sooner rather than 
later. She mentioned that the EDCTP hopes to have its 
secretariat launched in February. If that is so, and if 
 
SIPDIS 
Mocumbi\'s role is a critical one, it would seem that he would 
have to be free to assume his new duties soon. What is missing 
in all of this is a statement from the Presidency concerning 
Mocumbi and his successor. Mocumbi, for his part, put off 
answering a question regarding how he would enjoy living in 
Holland by saying he would prefer to defer comment until he has 
had the opportunity to live there a while and to experience the 
climate. 
LA LIME 
"
"13463","1/23/2004 8:56","04MAPUTO112","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000112 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS, KFRD, MZ, KCOR, KCRM 
SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION & VISA FRAUD IN AND OUT OF MOZAMBIQUE 
 
 
1. (U) Summary: Visa fraud in Mozambique continues to be 
less prevalent than the otherwise high level of corruption 
throughout the country would suggest. New anti-fraud 
investigation and validation studies at post indicate, 
however, that attempted non-immigrant visa fraud among third 
country nationals is a growing problem, specifically among 
the South Asian, West African and Cuban communities. Visa 
fraud among emigrants to Mozambique and South Africa is also 
on the rise, creating secondary effects at our visa window. 
Post has, in response, altered its visa issuance practices 
for certain third country national groups, and maintains a 
watchful eye for further illegal immigration trends in 
Mozambique. 
 
2. (U) US Embassy Maputo experiences relatively low levels 
of visa fraud at the consular window, particularly among 
Mozambican applicants. Mozambicans within the United States 
number less than 5,000 - the closest thing resembling a 
Mozambican community can be found in New York/New Jersey - 
and only a few nationals see non-immigrant visas as a ticket 
to emigrate illegally to the U.S. To verify this 
assumption, post conducted unofficial validation studies in 
late 2003 on 50 of that year\'s Mozambican B1 and J1 visa 
recipients who we considered to be high flight risk 
candidates. Of these, 47 are confirmed returnees and only 
one is a confirmed overstay - at least a 94% returnee rate. 
 
3. (U) Mozambicans who wish to emigrate in search of 
economic opportunity almost always target South Africa, 
occasionally Portugal. The South African High Commission 
consequently has a visa fraud problem very similar to what 
U.S. Embassies see throughout much of Latin America and West 
Africa, including false passports, residency documents, 
identity cards, letters from employers, and bank account 
statements. Much of the traffic place takes place in full 
view of their gates. We see no signs of organized NIV 
document fraud at our embassy, though we do see the 
occasional false residency document or bank account 
statement. 
 
4. (U) The high rate of return and relatively low levels 
of fraud among Mozambican NIV applicants contrast with 
patterns detected among third-country national applicants. 
Unofficial validation studies at post in 2003 have verified 
the return of 5 of our last 20 approved Cuban NIV applicants 
scheduled to return in the past year, 12 of 20 West Africans 
(Nigeria 6/7, Guinea 2/7), and 13 of 20 Pakistanis. Based 
on these results, post has become much more stringent on 
issuing NIVs to Cubans, who formerly had a relatively high 
approval rate based on the fact that most applicants were 
doctors or engineers with long-term residency in the 
country. 
 
5. (U) (It should be stressed that prior to this 
validation study, Post already had a long history of NIV 
approval rates below 50% for West African applicants and, 
post 9-11, the NIV approval rate for South Asians also had 
fallen into the 35% range. Due to our already-low approval 
rates, it was necessary to conduct our validation study on 
all third-country applicants who had returned in the past 12- 
16 months in order to have a viable sample size. Since our 
timeframe for contacting returned TCN NIV applicants is much 
longer than we used for Mozambican NIV applicants, it likely 
increases and somewhat exaggerates the rate of non-response 
among TCNs.) 
 
6. (SBU) At the same time that Post has confirmed a high 
rate of non-return among third-country applicants, it has 
detected increased signs of organized immigration fraud by 
third-country nationals within Mozambique. Since November 
2003, Post has been approached three times by members of a 
group of recent Indian and Pakistani immigrants to South 
Africa/Mozambique, inquiring about the possibility of 
acquiring U.S. non-immigrant visas for the group, which 
numbers at least 33 strong. Background checks on the 
handful of passports secured from our sources indicate that 
the applicants received NIVs for South Africa or Mozambique 
from Mumbai and Karachi. Many have applied for NIVs to the 
U.S. in the past and been turned down. The leader of the 
group has been identified as Hanifo Shiraz (sp?), a 
Pakistani exporter-importer with residency in Nampula, 
Mozambique and business interests in Pretoria. Mr. Shiraz 
has been tied to the drug trade by various sources, but his 
name does not show up on INK, and our knowledge of him is 
limited. 
 
7. (SBU) We became aware of this potential NIV fraud ring 
at the same time that a Beira-based newspaper, Zambeze, ran 
an article detailing NIV fraud at the Mozambican Consulate 
in Karachi. According to the author, the Mozambican consul, 
Abdul Kalid Tawab, by some accounts a Pakistani national and 
by others a Mozambican of Pakistani descent, had been 
detained for selling non-immigrant visas at a rate of $500- 
$800 per visa, presumably on every visa issued. The Karachi 
Consulate typically issues about 400 visas per month. No 
names of the offending officials were listed, and subsequent 
Embassy contact with the newspaper was unable to unearth any 
further information. Contacts within the Mozambican 
Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Immigration confirmed that 
visa fraud had been a problem in Karachi, probably for a few 
years, but insisted the level was greatly exaggerated, and 
said that the offending official had been removed. 
Immigration officials at the Maputo airport insist that they 
have turned away many travelers with false visas from 
Karachi, but offered no proof. 
 
8. (SBU) Over the past two years, the South Asian 
(especially Pakistani) community has grown considerably in 
Mozambique. The Director of Immigration indicated to us 
that his offices have been receiving up to 500 new Pakistani 
applicants for residency per month over the past several 
months. (He did not know the specific number.) Nampula 
city has seen a particularly large spike; local officials 
estimate that the Pakistani community has doubled in 
population in the past 2-3 years. The city has also become 
a hub for African immigrants from a wide range of countries, 
particularly Nigeria. New South Asian residents generally 
enter the country through Maputo airport and then migrate to 
Nampula. Land routes from Malawi and Tanzania have been 
noted as the most common means of illegal entry for 
Africans. In addition, post has noticed that the Nampula 
Immigration office has become increasingly corrupt, issuing 
improper visas and residency documents to South Asians and 
West Africans at a price (and also forcing Americans to pay 
bribes for their residency documents). Some of these TCNs 
have appeared at our visa window in recent months, and much 
of the relatively limited NIV fraud found in Mozambique 
originates from the Nampula area. 
 
9. (SBU) Many of these TCNs are content to live and work 
in Mozambique, and Indians and Pakistanis are particularly 
active in trading a wide range of goods. They have also 
made inroads into the money exchange and banking sphere in 
Nampula. Others are looking to move onward. The South 
African High Commission in Maputo estimates that NIV 
applications from Pakistanis and Indians have grown by about 
10% in each of the past two years. Applications from third- 
country Africans have risen at a slower rate. 
 
10. (SBU) Larger numbers of South Asians and West Africans 
(and Mozambicans) bypass the visa route to South Africa 
altogether, traveling illegally by land. Many pass straight 
through the border at Ressano Garcia-Komatipoort in vans, 
via smugglers who may be South African, Mozambican, or, in 
some instances, recent South Asian immigrants tied to Mr. 
Shiraz or others. The typical fee involves 500R to 800R to 
the smugglers, with some of that money paid to border 
guards. (The International Office for Migration reports 
that traffickers in women and children will pay 150R to 
border guards in order to allow a group of Mozambican women 
to crawl under a fence 2-3 kilometers away from the border. 
Bribes to drive a group straight through the border run much 
higher. This same price range probably holds for smuggling 
of South Asians.) The Swaziland border at Naamacha is 
equally porous for those wishing to cross in vans, and 
perhaps easier to cross on foot, but requires a second 
crossing into South Africa, and is therefore less favored. 
Other more creative methods of entry have been noted, such 
as driving to the beaches of Ponta do Ouro, and crossing to 
South Africa by foot. It is very likely that South Africa 
is the end destination for the vast majority of these 
desperate migrants; very few appear to have the financing or 
the inclination to attempt a jump to the United States. 
 
11. (U) The patterns of migration from Mozambique to South 
Africa resemble those used by traffickers in women and 
children, with an apparently lesser emphasis on Ponta do 
Ouro as a migration point. It should be pointed out, 
however, that we have no indication that South Asian and 
West African immigrants have been the perpetrators or 
victims of trafficking in women and children. In addition, 
post has not seen any evidence that intending illegal 
immigrants from South Asia, West Africa, or Cuba have 
engaged in any anti-American activities, per se. The worst 
that can be said is that the leaders of the illegal 
immigration rings are allegedly involved in the drug trade 
and other forms of contraband. 
 
12. (U) Post continues to be vigilant of intending NIV 
fraud, especially as our percentage of NIV applicants from 
TCNs continues to rise, from 20% in 2002 to 28% in 2003 - 
with an especially high percentage in the later months of 
the year. (This spike is due in part to the Department\'s 
decision in April 2003 to extend the validity of Mozambican 
visas from three-month, single-entry visas to one-year, 
multiple-entry, which has stopped the growth rate in 
Mozambican NIV applications.) We have already taken 
measures to significantly curtail NIV issuance to TCNs, and 
to nearly prohibit issuance of NIVs to any third country 
national that has not proven long-term residency within the 
country. Finally, post has made strengthening of 
Mozambique\'s border security a mission-wide priority, which 
will be reflected as one of the top goals within our Mission 
Performance Plan. 
LA LIME 
"
"13663","2/2/2004 9:46","04MAPUTO148","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04MAPUTO83|04SECSTATE16100","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000148 
 
SIPDIS 
AF/S AND AF/EPS 
E FOR ANNE PENCE, EB/IFD/OIA FOR MARTHA KELLEY OR TIM HAUSER 
INL/C FOR DAVID LUNA OR JOHN BRANDOLINO 
YAOUNDE FOR MALABO JIM PANOS 
BRUSSELS FOR USEU 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ECON, EINV, ETRD, PGOV, MZ, KCOR 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE AS PILOT COUNTRY FOR EVIAN 
ANTICORRUPTION/TRANSPARENCY INITIATIVE 
 
REF: A. A) SECSTATE 16100 
B. B) MAPUTO 83 
 
1. Post welcomes the opportunity for consideration as a 
candidate pilot country under the Evian 
Anti-corruption/Transparency initiative and submits results 
of initial internal discussions below. The GRM has 
demonstrated a commitment to combating corruption and has 
worked closely with the IMF and the donor community to 
improve transparency in public financial management and 
government budgeting and procurement. Inclusion as a 
non-extractive pilot country would prove a useful and welcome 
augmentation of GRM efforts already getting underway. The 
GRM has been responsive to donors and IFIs to concentrate on 
these issues and understands their importance for 
consideration under MCA and NEPAD criteria, as well as to 
Mozambique\'s continued political and economic development. 
Direct budget support constitutes over 50 percent of the GRM 
budget. On the corruption front, some substantive first 
steps have been taken (reftel B), including the formation of 
the Attorney General\'s Anti-Corruption Unit in November 2002, 
mainly with USG support. USAID mission has followed closely 
the GRM-IMF strategy for improved financial accountability. 
 
2. The GRM Technical Unit for the Reform of Public Financial 
Management (UTRAFE) is now in the second year of 
implementation of its action and budget plan, named SISTAFE 
(Public Financial Administration System). UTRAFE and the 
Technical Unit for Public Sector Reform (UTRESP) are integral 
elements of the GRM\'s Strategic Plan for the Reduction of 
Absolute Poverty (PARPA). PARPA is the centerpiece of the 
GRM government budget and includes elements aimed at raising 
health and education spending above the levels dictated by 
MCA criteria. Awareness is high among GRM officials of the 
adverse effects on foreign investment caused by excessive 
bureaucracy and the corruption climate. The Finance Ministry 
and UTRAFE are moving from intent to implementation. 
 
3. The overall objectives of SISTAFE, as established in 
October 2002, are as follows: 1) to establish and harmonize 
rules and procedures for programming, execution, control, and 
evaluation of public financial resources; 2) to develop 
subsystems that produce timely and reliable information about 
the budget execution and asset management in all state 
organs; 3) to establish, implement and maintain an accounting 
system controlling budget execution and asset acquisition; 
and 4) to establish, implement, and maintain an effective and 
internationally accepted internal control and audit system. 
The tender for roll-out and operation of all systems is 
scheduled for April 2004 and implementation of the asset 
management system is expected in the second half of the year, 
with general roll-out to all government sectors and 
municipalities in 2005, and state enterprises in 2006. 
 
4. As part of the USAID six-year strategy, Democracy and 
Governance efforts will include a focus on four to five 
municipalities to provide USG assistance in increasing 
capacity for good governance, transparency, and sound 
financial management, with the target of supporting GRM 
decentralization efforts. While we recognize more details of 
the Pilot Country Initiative have yet to be developed, we 
already see a potential for a pilot program that could work 
in a few key municipalities to help Mozambique develop the 
best implementation mechanism for SISTAFE and also complement 
our six-year development strategy. 
 
5. Inclusion of Mozambique as an Evian pilot country would 
build upon assistance already provided or planned, upon 
pressure and encouragement from other donors, and upon the 
SISTAFE program with the IMF. 
LA LIME 
"
"13739","2/5/2004 10:30","04MAPUTO167","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000167 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT PLS PASS AFEPS/A. BROOKS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, MZ, SSH 
SUBJECT: SELF-HELP PROGRAM - INTERIM PROJECT REPORT FOR FY 
2003 
 
1. SUMMARY: This cable represents the FY03 interim report 
for the Ambassador\'s Special Self-Help Program in 
Mozambique. The financial status of all programs from 2003, 
including the amount of money granted, spent, and the 
balance, as well as an update on the final disposition of 
funds, is provided. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
SSH Projects 2003 
----------------- 
2. All SSH projects from 2003 should make their final 
payments by September 2004 (a year from when FY 2003 SSH 
projects were signed). In several cases, money has not been 
dispersed because no project invoices have been received. 
Post recently contacted associations and project sponsors 
through phone calls, encouraging them to initiate and finish 
projects so that a timely closeout of FY03 funds will be 
achieved. Post also intends to visit projects, where 
possible, inspect final results, and report success stories. 
SSH 03-656-001 - Escola Secundaria da Namaacha 
Amount Obligated: $ 7,000 
Disbursed Amount: $ 4,475 
Balance: $ 2,252 
Location: Namaacha district, Maputo Province 
Status: The project is active. Construction materials worth 
$4,475 have been purchased. Remaining amount will be 
obligated for the purchase of library equipment. 
SSH 03-656-002 - Centro de Aconselhamento Juvenil do IAC - 
Association of Volunteers at IAC Against HIV/AIDS of Manica 
Province 
Amount Obligated: $ 2,300 
Disbursed Amount: $ 0.00 
Balance: $ 2,300 
Location: Gondola district, Manica Province 
Status: Currently, the project is inactive. The project 
director informed Post that the delay in submitting proforma 
invoices was due to lack of students to participate in 
project implementation. Just recently, this administrative 
aspect of the project was solved and we are expecting 
proforma invoices soon. 
SSH 03-656-003 - Escola Secundaria Novo Destino 
Escola Secundaria Novo Destino of Inhambane Province 
Amount obligated: $ 4,000 
Disbursed amount: $0.00 
Balance: $ 4,000 
Location: Salela Village, Inhambane Province 
Status: Currently, the project is inactive. The project 
director informed Post that the delay in submitting proforma 
invoices was due to delay on authorization of land use. 
SSH 03-656-004 - Projecto Complementar \"Corte Costura\" 
Comunidade Mocambicana de Ajuda (CMA) of Maputo Province 
Amount obligated: $ 3,750 
Disbursed amount: $ 3,735 
Balance: $15 
Location: Bairro Alto Mae, Maputo Province 
Status: The project is completed and de-obligation of the 
remaining amount will be requested. 
SSH 03-656-005 - United in Poverty Eradication 
Missao de Sao Tiago Maior of Zambezia Province 
Amount obligated: $ 7,950 
Disbursed amount: $ 7,941.18 
Balance: $8.82 
Location: Namarroi District, Zambezia Province 
Status: The project is completed and de-obligation of 
remaining amount will be requested. 
SSH 03-656-006 - Water Pump Rehabilitation 
Conselho Municipal de Chimoio of Manica Province 
Amount obligated: $ 4,250 
Disbursed amount: $ 0.00 
Balance: $ 4,250 
Location: Manica, Chimoio Province 
Status: Currently, the project is inactive. The project 
director informed Post that they are looking for a quotation 
that is within the project budget. 
SSH 03-656-007 - Reparacao de Cisterna Consular 
Lar Sao Francisco Xavier of Nampula Province 
Amount obligated: $ 9,000 
Disbursed amount: $ 2,962.72 
Balance: $ 6,037.28 
Location: Ilha de Mocambique village, Nampula Province 
Status: The project is active and we are expecting to 
receive more proforma invoices to spend the remaining 
amount. 
SSH 03-656-008 - Potable Water and Improved Latrines for 
Gorongosa 
Christ the King Mission of Gorongosa of Sofala Province 
Amount obligated: $ 4,600 
Disbursed amount: $ 4,600 
Balance: $0.00 
Location: Gorongosa District, Sofala Province 
Status: The project is completed. 
SSH 03-656-009 - Community Library 
Escola Secundaria Herois Mocambicanos de Moatiza of Tete 
Province 
Amount obligated: $ 8,000 
Disbursed amount: $7,624.49 
Balance: $375.51 
Location: Moatiza District, Tete Province 
Status: The project is near completion. 
SSH 03-656-010 - Magoanine Women\'s Training Center 
AMUJOVIC of Maputo Province 
Amount obligated: $ 8,000 
Disbursed amount: $0.00 
Balance: $8,000 
Location: Magoanine District, Maputo Province 
Status: Currently, the project is inactive. We are waiting 
project quotations. 
SSH 03-656-011 - Classrooms Construction 
Escola Secundaria 1 de Maio of Inhambane Province 
Amount obligated: $ 9,150 
Disbursed amount: $ 0.00 
Balance: $ 9,150 
Location: Chicuque District, Inhambane Province 
Status: The project will soon be implemented. 
SSH 03-656-012 - Expansion of a Poultry Building 
AVIMAS 
Amount obligated: $ 2,800 
Disbursed amount: $ 2,800 
Balance: $ (9.00) 
Location: Maputo District, Maputo Province 
Status: The project is completed and de-obligation of the 
remaining amount will be requested. 
"
"13740","2/5/2004 11:02","04MAPUTO168","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04State333935","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000168 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS AS INFO: SOUTH AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT 
COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE 
DRL FOR JENNIFER PEKKINEN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, ELAB, KDEM, KPAO, KSEP, MZ, Democracy, DHRF 
SUBJECT: Mozambique: Supporting Human Rights and Democracy 
 
REF: State 333935 
 
1. Mozambique\'s constitutional government, headed by 
President Joaquim Chissano, held its second general 
multiparty elections in 1999. President Chissano was 
elected in generally free and fair elections. Chissano and 
the leadership of FRELIMO, which have ruled the country 
since independence in 1975, dominate policymaking and 
implementation. Mozambique\'s second municipal elections, 
held on November 19 2003,, were generally free and fair and 
occurred without violence. FRELIMO dominated the November 
elections, winning 28 out of the country\'s 33 
municipalities. Presidential elections will be held in 2004. 
The Government\'s human rights record remained poor; although 
there were some improvements in several areas, serious 
problems remained. Police continued to commit numerous 
abuses, including unlawful killings, beatings in custody, 
and arbitrary arrests and detentions. Prison conditions 
remained extremely harsh and life threatening. Despite 
efforts to clear long-standing case backlogs, prison 
overcrowding was widespread and lengthy pretrial detention 
was common. The courts were dominated by the executive 
branch, lacked adequate resources, were chronically 
understaffed, and largely ineffectual. Corruption continued 
to be a problem in the public and private sectors. Domestic 
violence against women, as well as widespread discrimination 
against women in employment and property rights, remained 
significant problems. There were confirmed reports that 
women and children were trafficked to South Africa. 
 
2. US efforts to support human rights and democracy in 
Mozambique have focused on strengthening key institutions, 
enhancing civil society, and addressing corruption at all 
levels. The Embassy has been actively engaged in increasing 
the professionalism of the police and reforming the 
judiciary. US officials have routinely engaged religious and 
business leaders, domestic civil society groups and 
government officials on human rights concerns, including 
trafficking in persons, HIV/AIDS, and corruption. 
 
3. To foster a more professional police force and reduce 
human rights abuses among the police, the Embassy used INL 
funding for an intermittent long-term International Criminal 
Investigative Training Program (ICITAP) advisor to assist 
Mozambique\'s Police Sciences Academy (ACIPOL) in management 
and curriculum development and to coordinate specialized 
training courses. INL funds are also paying for improved 
facilities. As a result of US and other international 
assistance, ACIPOL will graduate its first group of students 
in 2004. INL funded key police officials and officials from 
the Attorney General\'s office to participate in courses at 
the International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in Roswell, 
New Mexico and the regional ILEA academy in Botswana. PA 
utilized Speaker Program participants to hold a series of 
lectures on police ethics. 
 
4. Recognizing that corruption is a principal impediment to 
Mozambique\'s economic development and democratic 
consolidation, USAID used DA and ESF funds to improve the 
country\'s judicial system and more effectively address 
corruption. USAID has actively supported the Anti-Corruption 
Unit (UAC), including paying rental of UAC\'s office space 
and provision of equipment, computers and vehicles. INL 
funded three trips of Department of Justice/Overseas 
Prosecutorial Development, Assistance and Training(OPDAT) 
short-term advisors to assist the UAC in developing skills 
and tracking cases. Training was also conducted in Maputo 
involving experts from OPDAT, FBI, and Treasury. An indirect 
result of US assistance and attention to corruption was the 
passage by the National Assembly of the long-awaited Anti- 
Corruption Law, which aims to fight corruption in government 
offices, hospitals, schools, and the police. USAID also 
continued use to DA funds to raise public awareness about 
corruption and citizens rights through assistance to a local 
NGO on a planned media campaign. This NGO is also working 
with the UAC to open reporting centers in all ten provincial 
capitals with toll-free hotlines for reporting corruption. 
 
5. The Embassy, through an inter-agency agreement with the 
Department of Labor, is working to improve industrial 
relations in Mozambique. Activities have included training 
programs that have been furnished by the US Federal 
Mediation & Conciliation Service (FMCS), covering mediation 
techniques as well as techniques for collaborative labor 
relations. In September, a 4-Day Train-the-Trainer Course 
was held with several trainers and 30 student participants 
from unions, management and government. 
The Department of Labor is also funding a US NGO to raise 
awareness of HIV/AIDS in the workplace and reduce 
discrimination. 
 
6. Especially relevant due to the 2003 municipal elections 
and 2004 national elections, US government efforts in 
promoting democracy continued to be quite strong. USAID has 
used DA and ESF funds to support both international and 
local NGOs. With the assistance of US funding, an 
international organization provided observers, carried out a 
parallel vote tabulation in partnership with Mozambican non- 
governmental organizations, and monitored the post-election 
process. The group found that Mozambique\'s second municipal 
elections were well conducted and peaceful, with no major 
problems likely to affect the results. The Embassy used both 
Democracy and Human Rights Funds (DHRF) and USAID funds to 
support seminars for civil society on civic education. 
Embassy officials actively participated with the UNDP and 
other diplomatic missions in the coordination of 
international observers for the November 19 municipal 
elections and Embassy staff served as observers in key 
municipalities during the elections. The Embassy has also 
actively engaged officials from smaller political parties. 
 
7. Mozambique is a country of origin for trafficked women 
and children and there is growing attention among government 
and civil society to the problem. US officials are working 
with NGOs and government officials to develop more effective 
mechanisms to address trafficking and better coordinate 
existing efforts. This year, several DHRF grants were 
awarded for activities that focus specifically on 
trafficking and women\'s issues, including training seminars 
for police and immigration officials. 
 
8. The Mission also sent various community members and 
Mozambique government officials on International Visitor 
Programs in 2003, including in the areas of democracy, civic 
education, and HIV/AIDS awareness. 
 
9. Addendum. For 2003, funding for democracy and human 
rights projects of over $100,000 included: 
1. INL - $250,000 for Police Sciences Academy (ACIPOL). 
2. INL - $275,000 for Anti-Corruption Unit (UAC). 
3. USAID (ESF) - $500,000 for elections activities. 
4. USAID (DA) - $550,000 for anti-corruption activities. 
5. DOL - $300,000 to improve labor relations. 
6. DOL - $900,000 (multi-year) for various projects to 
address HIV/AIDS in the workplace. 
LA LIME 
"
"13800","2/9/2004 5:41","04MAPUTO173","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE14421","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000173 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/RSA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, PREL, PHUM, PGOV, ECON, MZ, DHRF 
SUBJECT: DHRF SOLICITATION FOR FY2004 
 
REF: STATE 14421 
 
1. Post appreciates receiving FY2003 DHRF funding in the 
amount of $70,000. These funds are critical to raising 
awareness of human rights concerns and supporting civil 
society play a more active role in Mozambique\'s democratic 
consolidation. A status report for FY2002/2003 funds will be 
sent septel. For FY 2004, post requests an increase of 
$30,000, for total FY2004 funding of $100,000. Increased 
funding would focus on the following three areas described 
below. 
 
2. A - Elections. In late 2004, Mozambique will hold it\'s 
third multi-party presidential elections since independence 
in 1975. The current constitutionally-elected president, 
Joaquim Chissano, will step down after having served two 
terms. Chissano and the leadership of FRELIMO dominate 
policy-making and implementation. Mozambique\'s second 
municipal elections were held on November 19. FRELIMO 
dominated the elections, winning 28 out of the country\'s 33 
municipalities. Voter turn-out during the November elections 
was low, with less than 28% of registered voters 
participating. The principal opposition party, RENAMO, lacks 
technical and financial resources; independent and 
small-party candidates play an insignificant role. Though the 
November municipal elections were generally well administered 
and described as free and fair by international and local 
observers, a number of outstanding issues will need to be 
addressed before the 2004 presidential elections. In 
particular, the National Assembly must promulgate a new 
electoral law and discrepancies in the voter registration 
lists used in the November elections must be addressed. 
Priority areas for DHRF funding could include civil education 
and outreach for voters and parties, and expanded local 
election observation. 
 
3. B- Gender Equality. After years of discussion and months 
of parliamentary debate, a new Family Law was passed by the 
National Assembly in December. The new law replaces large 
portions of the colonial-era Civic Code and brings the law in 
line with equality provisions in the constitution. Primary 
provisions of the new law include raising the marriage age to 
18 for both sexes; eliminating the provision that husbands 
are de facto \"head of family\"; and legalizing civil, 
religious and co-habitant based marriages. While the new law 
is an important step forward in protecting and promoting 
women\'s rights in Mozambique, domestic violence and 
widespread discrimination against women in the workplace and 
with regard to property rights remain significant problems. 
Key to the effective implementation of the new law will be 
educating Mozambicans about the law\'s provisions. The 
Ministry of Women and Social Action Coordination does not 
have adequate technical or financial resources to undertake 
an education campaign about the law. DHRF grants could be 
used to undertake a media and education campaign about the 
law\'s provisions. 
 
4. C- Trafficking in Persons. Mozambique serves as a country 
of origin for trafficked women and children. South Africa 
serves as the principal receiving country. Poverty, a history 
of child migration, weak border controls, and traditional 
cultural practices are all factors contributing to 
trafficking. Over the past year, there has been increased 
attention in the press and among government officials to the 
problem of trafficking in persons in Mozambique. President 
Chissano acknowledged the reality of trafficking in persons 
during his New Year\'s Day address, and the Attorney General 
is currently investigating allegations of trafficking in 
children (in the context of organ trafficking) in Nampula 
province. In September, the government launched a program of 
consultation with civil society on how to enhance the 
country\'s child protection policies, including trafficking in 
children. Mozambique does not have anti-trafficking 
legislation, though trafficking can be addressed under other 
laws. Additional efforts have included the \"Campaign Against 
Trafficking in Children,\" launched in 2001, which is aimed at 
raising awareness of the issue. Post is currently supporting 
several anti-trafficking or related projects through DHRF, 
including a series of technical seminars for immigration 
officials. Increased DHRF funding could expand on existing 
programs by providing greater geographic coverage of programs. 
LA LIME 
"
"13830","2/10/2004 7:45","04MAPUTO180","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 MAPUTO 000180 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
USDOC FOR AHILLIGAS 
JOHANNESBURG FOR LABOR OFFICER - BNUELING, FCS -- 
JVANRENSBURG,WCENTER 
DURBAN FOR FCS - JKUEHNER, LKOHRS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest, Coastal Security 
SUBJECT: JANUARY MONTHLY ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified - Protect Accordingly 
 
------------------- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
------------------- 
(U) The private consortium managing the port of Maputo, 
Maputo Port Development Company (MPDC), announced the 
completion of initial dredging on port access to the Maputo 
channel. The channel\'s depth has been restored to 9.4 meters 
and its minimum width to 100 meters. Business contact and 
Port Director of Operations described the dredging as \"an 
important milestone\" for port development. Larger vessels 
can now navigate the channel by day and night through the 
tidal cycle. Maputo Port is under a 15-year concession 
agreement, which began in April 2003. Of Mozambique\'s three 
port cities, Maputo and Beira require constant dredging to 
accommodate vessels in the 30,000 to 50,000 ton range, 
whereas Nacala is a natural deepwater port capable of 
handling Cape Class vessels (up to 180,000 tons). Other MPDC 
priorities include: restoration of the port\'s capacity, 
coupled with the introduction of new tugs and improved 
pilotage equipment, and considerable investment in shore- 
side handling of equipment. (COMMENT: By end-March 2004, 
Mozambique\'s three ports should be largely under private 
operation, with Maputo and Nacala completely in private 
hands (all terminals, dredging and piloting) and Beira under 
a mixed arrangement, with the port and rail parastatal, CFM, 
remaining responsible for some terminals and most common 
services. The port of Nacala is the only one that has not 
formally been handed over to a private consortium, with 
final agreement reportedly pending agreement by the Malawi 
members of the private consortium to the terms of the OPIC 
supported financial arrangements. The GRM, through CFM, 
still maintains ownership of all ports, however concession 
agreements and the accompanying finance agreements will 
bring needed investment and upgrades to the port system. 
Developing the ports and increasing port capacity is vital 
to continued upgrades along the Maputo, Beira, and Nacala 
development corridors, which account for most of 
Mozambique\'s transit and regional trade, and which are 
supposed to serve as economic development poles attracting 
new investment in agriculture, mining, and labor-intensive 
industry. END COMMENT). 
(U) Lusa (Portuguese news agency) reports that Vodacom, the 
second cellular phone company to operate in Mozambique, 
invested 456 million euros in Mozambique in 2003, which is 
more than half the total foreign investment approved in- 
country last year. According to Lusa, the GRM approved 673 
million euros of foreign investment in 2003 (Investment 
Promotion Center statistics). Vodacom began operating in 
Mozambique in December 2003 and launched strong campaigns in 
three key southern cities. South Africa\'s Telekom controls 
Vodacom, and Britain\'s Vodafone owns 35% of the company\'s 
shares. 
(U) Coca-Cola Mozambique is under investigation for 
allegedly producing and supplying poor quality products to 
the Mozambican market. Coca-Cola samples have been provided 
to the Ministry of Health for further analysis. The 
investigation is being carried out quietly, and while local 
Coca-Cola executives continue to emphasize the integrity and 
high quality of their product, the GRM stated that the 
laboratory would have the final say in the validity of such 
allegations. 
(SBU) CFM and other business contacts indicate that the GRM 
has submitted the offers of two of the four consortia 
bidding on the Sena railway tender, Rites and Icon (India) 
and Yenwin and CIRC (China), to the World Bank for 
consideration. The GRM is counting on the World Bank to 
provide $85 million in financing for Sena Line 
rehabilitation, yet a formal financing decision will be made 
by the World Bank only after an award is given and the GRM 
formally requests that the Bank finance the deal. Prior to 
independence, the Sena line transported about two thirds of 
Malawi\'s total rail traffic, coal from Moatize and sugar 
from areas along the Zambeze River. The Malawi traffic now 
goes through Nacala or by truck through Beira or Durban (the 
rail link is closed in Malawi and the concessionaire of the 
Nacala line has no incentive to divert traffic from Nacala 
to Beira); the cane fields have been replanted and are 
producing behind a punitive surtax on sugar imports, and the 
coal mines requires complete reconstruction. (COMMENT: 
During the October 2003 review of the World Bank\'s Country 
Assistance Strategy for Mozambique, the USED expressed 
reservations over the economic rationale for financing of 
the line except as part of a coal development project, 
arguing that it should be developed, if at all, as a private 
investment linked to the coal mines. Since then, American 
Commercial Lines, International (ACLI) has expressed a 
strong interest in dredging and operating barges on the 
Zambeze River in order to transport coal and possibly sugar 
to the coast. However, ACLI has met with some resistance 
from the GRM and the Zambeze River Valley Authority in 
gaining permission to conduct a river survey to see if this 
option is viable (because it is seen as a threat to donor 
financing of the Sena Line). The Prime Minister described 
rehabilitation of the Sena Line as one of Mozambique\'s top 
four priorities for 2004. A third option for transport of 
Moatize coal to port is by building a 200 km connection to 
the Nacala line in Malawi and thence to Nacala\'s deepwater 
port, where Cape Class 150,000 ton vessels can be 
accommodated. The Nacala line could well be the most 
economically favorable. Once the GRM selects a railway 
bidder, the World Bank plans to very quickly submit the 
project for a final Executive decision. While ACLI argues 
that barging is a cheaper alternative to transporting the 
coal , the Sena Line clearly has greater political support 
and, is also, apparently, the preference of Bank technical 
staff. The Mission will elaborate on the project for the 
USED prior to the World Bank Executive Review. END 
COMMENT). 
 
---------------- 
MACROECONOMICS 
---------------- 
(SBU) According to the Global Competitiveness Report 2003- 
2004, Mozambique ranked 93/102 on Growth Competitiveness and 
87/95 on Business Competitiveness for 2003. The Report is 
produced by the World Economic Forum annually and attempts 
to measure a country\'s \"competitiveness\" relative to other 
countries by quantifying key economic growth determinants 
such as technology achievement, quality of institutions, and 
macroeconomic stability requirements. (COMMENT: Such 
rankings reflect the GRM\'s lack of initiative to reform 
certain core investment-inhibiting laws and regulations, 
such as the commercial code, labor law, and business 
registration process. Current investors are frustrated with 
the lack of commercial and labor flexibility that exists, 
and the unfriendly investment environment turns away many 
potential investors that decide to invest elsewhere in the 
region. The GRM\'s slow reform of crucial policies place it 
significantly behind the rest of the region in terms of 
attracting foreign investment. For instance, Botswana, South 
Africa, Mauritius, Namibia, Tanzania, Malawi, Kenya and 
Zambia all rank above Mozambique in both the growth and 
business competitiveness categories for 2003. END COMMENT). 
(U) Opening up the 28th session of the Central Bank\'s (Banco 
de Mocambique or BM) Consultative Council, the bank\'s 
governor stated the goals and challenges that lie ahead for 
Mozambique\'s financial sector in 2004: financial 
stabilization and adoption of international accounting and 
auditing standards and procedures. The governor insisted 
that his banking institution would provide a framework that 
encourages the extension of financial services to rural 
communities. BM will become more involved in the licensing, 
contracting, and registration of private external debt, 
improving the national system of payments. For the last 
three years, BM has undergone management restructuring and 
information technology improvements. According to the 
governor, \"Maintenance of national currency stabilization 
confronts growing difficulties in economies like ours 
(Mozambique\'s), where financial markets are less developed 
and institutions fragile. Because of this, it is essential 
that monetary policy instruments are continually revised and 
perfected.\" Mozambique registered 7% GDP growth in 2003 and 
an average inflation rate of nearly 14%. 
 
---------- 
AVIATION 
---------- 
(SBU) Executives from Delta Airlines recently visited Maputo 
to discuss Delta\'s interest in establishing a codeshare on 
South African Airways\' Maputo-Johannesburg flights. Delta 
already has an alliance with South African Airways to 
provide a broad network of airline service between the 
United States and Africa. The codeshare would allow Delta to 
sell and promote Mozambique as a destination to its US 
customers and would target Maputo passengers whose origin or 
destination is the United States. All commercial air 
traffic between the United States and Mozambique goes via 
Portugal or South Africa. 
 
------------- 
AGRICULTURE 
------------- 
(U) Tenga, Ltd., the South African macadamia nut producers, 
planted their first 10 hectares of macadamia trees (4,000 
trees) in the Niassa Province in December 2003. The 
macadamia investment in Mozambique is a first for the 
industry, and US investors in California are involved in the 
Mozambique Tenga investment. The Governor of the Niassa 
Province inaugurated the tree-planting ceremony and local 
community business and religious leaders attended, blessing 
the crops and acknowledging the launch of a new product for 
Mozambique. Tenga has significant experience planting and 
processing macadamias in South Africa, and recently became 
involved in operations in Mozambique. To date, they have 
successfully obtained land and local buy-in, constructed 
roads, obtained vehicles, and planted the first crop. The 
first trees will mature in 5 years. In the meantime, Tenga 
will continue to improve infrastructure around the farm, 
build a nursery, develop an irrigation system for crops, and 
look for local producers willing to partner in macadamia 
production. US investors plan to visit Mozambique and the 
macadamia plantation in June 2004. 
(U) Indian Ocean Aquaculture, a recent group operating in 
Pemba with US involvement, grows and exports aquacultured 
shrimp to the world market. The firm is looking to export 
its first shipment of shrimp to the US in June, and is 
currently exploring FDA regulations for this transaction. 
(U) Sugar smuggling from Zimbabwe to Mozambique continues to 
be a big problem along the border, according to Mozambican 
customs officials in Manica Province. The same sources 
indicate that several commodities are smuggled from Zimbabwe 
into Mozambique, but sugar is the most highly smuggled 
product because it can be acquired in Zimbabwe at a very low 
price ($0.13/kg) and sold in Mozambique at $0.60/kg. 
Mozambique has instituted controls at the border through the 
\"Frontier Guard\", but this institution lacks personnel and 
material. Border demarcation markings and barbed-wire fence 
along the border have been torn down in several places, 
allowing for smuggling to flourish. Fueling the problem is 
Zimbabwe\'s current financial crisis, in which the highly 
devalued Zim dollar makes currency trading easy and buying 
products in Zimbabwe (like sugar) very cheap. Mozambican 
sugar producers are very concerned about this illegal 
activity, as $300 million has been spent to revitalize the 
sugar plantations and factories in Mozambique and cheap 
Zimbabwean sugar is flooding the domestic market. In 2000- 
2001, the problem was graver, as smugglers set up informal 
warehouses at the border and ferried contraband sugar 
across. In recent years, the GRM has had some success in 
reducing sugar smuggling, but, they say, more must be done. 
According to the daily news source, Noticias, four 
Mozambican sugar mills are now open and expected to produce 
270,000 tons of sugar this year, a significant increase on 
2003 production. The press estimates that in 2006, when more 
factories are up and running, total sugar production will 
reach 325,000 tons/year. (COMMENT: Mozambican sugar is 
highly protected, benefiting from a 100% to 200% surcharge, 
which falls mainly on the food processing industry and the 
poor. While the industry argues that eventually production 
costs will be competitive with the lowest cost producers in 
the world, they are currently not a low-cost producer in an 
industry where prices (except on quota purchases) are in any 
case below the lowest production cost. The heavy protection 
of the sugar industry has also placed enormous pressure on 
Mozambique\'s customs agency; engendering both an increase in 
corruption, with widespread reports of customs agents 
directly involved in the illegal trade, and draconian 
enforcement measures. END COMMENT). 
(U) Soy production will increase in Mozambique this year, 
due to a Norwegian program to buy up to 40,000 tons per year 
of Mozambican (non-GM) soy, as well as Brazilian investment 
in the soy industry. The GRM extended a partnership 
invitation to foreign firms and will benefit from the 
Brazilians\' experience and knowledge in this sector. The 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development announced that 
a 400-hectare experimental soy farm would be opened in 
February in the province of Sofala. 
(U) According to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the 
agricultural sector in Nampula Province is diversifying and 
growing. In 2003, the province grew and exported 9,000 tons 
of sesame seeds to Japan (CARE, the global humanitarian 
organization and NGO, is the main force in promoting sesame 
seed culture in Nampula). The GRM also projected increased 
exports from Nampula to South Africa of other agricultural 
products, such as banana, honey, cassava, peanuts, beans, 
and ginger. 
(U) Tobacco production is seen by the GRM as a success story 
for the FY03-04 agricultural campaign. This year, 37,330 
tons of tobacco were produced, representing an increase of 
63.5% from FY02. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development stated that this product is having better-than- 
expected results due a flood of small farmers (and to a 
lesser extent laborers on larger farms) entering into 
tobacco production. The number of producers rose from an 
estimate 30,000 in 1997/1998 to 110,000 in 2003. 
 
------- 
LABOR 
------- 
(SBU) The Prime Minister signed a new decree (regulation) 
covering the use of expatriate labor into effect this month 
that failed to meet private sector expectations for much 
greater leeway in the hiring of foreign workers. Although 
the decree made some improvements (e.g. short-term contracts 
of up to 180 days are considerably easier), the new decree 
keeps restrictive labor policies in place, hampering foreign 
investment in the opinion of private sector representatives 
and donor groups. After eighteen months of negotiation and 
weekly meetings with private sector employers, the Ministry 
of Labor reneged on its promise to allow for up to 10% of a 
firm\'s workforce to be contracted internationally, and 
continues to require approval of each position on a job-by- 
job basis. The private sector issued a press release 
stating their position on the decree. At the same time, the 
Development Partners Group (DPG, consisting of the heads of 
mission of all major donors to Mozambique) is preparing a 
letter to the Prime Minister to express regret and concern 
over the legislation, highlighting the importance of 
attracting foreign investment via labor and commercial 
legislation reform. The GRM will begin the process of 
revising its labor law in 2004, and the DPG has signaled its 
concern that forward progress must be made in liberalizing 
procedures if Mozambique is to attract employment-generating 
investment. 
 
------------ 
Oil and Gas 
------------ 
(U) This month, the GRM announced a decrease in the price of 
unleaded fuel in order to encourage consumption. For the 
past few months, gas prices in Mozambique have been on the 
rise, leading to numerous consumer complaints and lowered 
usage. The GRM reduced the fuel oil price by 8.9%, leaded 
gas by 4%, and unleaded gas by 8.8%. 
 
-------- 
WATER 
-------- 
(U) March 17-19th, Mozambique will host the Water Africa 
2004 Sub-Sahara Exhibition in Maputo. This exhibition will 
showcase South African, British, Zimbabwean, Italian, and 
American companies\' products and services in the water, 
mining, and, construction sectors. Approximately twenty- 
eight US firms (all involved in the water sector) have 
provided company materials and brochures to be presented at 
the Exhibition. Material will be displayed at a US booth and 
USDOC will send a representative from Durban FCS to assist 
in responding to participants\' questions. The representative 
will also maintain a list of local interested parties and 
forward contact information to participating US firms. 
(COMMENT: This show is a great opportunity for US firms to 
showcase their equipment and services in the Mozambican and 
African markets. Ace Event Management, a British events- 
planning firm, is managing the Exhibition and offered 
complimentary space for all US firms wanting to participate. 
Embassy Maputo is working with USDOC and, in particular, 
Durban FCS, to encourage companies to participate. END 
COMMENT). 
LA LIME 
"
"13931","2/13/2004 8:27","04MAPUTO197","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000197 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-CR,S/ES-O,AF/S AND AF/RSA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC, PREL, SL, IV, LI, MZ, ECOWAS, Peacekeeping 
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM PRESIDENT CHISSANO 
 
On February 12, post received the following letter 
from the Office of the Presidency for President Bush. 
We will forward the hard copy to AF/S via pouch. 
Text of President Chissano\'s letter: 
Dear Mr. President, 
I wish to thank you for your assistance to ECOWAS and 
Africa in general in the operations for the 
restoration of peace in Liberia. I also wish, on 
behalf of Africa, to thank your Government and the 
people of the United States of America. Without your 
support, the suffering of the Liberian people would 
have lasted longer. 
West African soldiers and policemen have contributed 
immensely to the maintenance of peace and security in 
that sub-region and are right now committed to the 
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement in 
Cote d\'Ivoire. 
The UN Secretary General recently issued a report 
that, among other things, recommended the UN Security 
Council approval for additional troops to boost the 
current ECOWAS forces in Cote d\'Ivoire up to a total 
number of 6,240. 
I kindly request your personal support to this 
proposal in order to help the UN Secretary General 
Report go through the UN Security Council. The 
conflict in Cote d\'Ivoire, as you know, is likely to 
have a spill over effect to neighbouring Liberia and 
Sierra Leone. The bloodletting in Liberia has been 
controlled, and all the parties are presently going 
through the process of disarmament, demobilization and 
reinsertion. No efforts, therefore, shall be spared 
to ensure that total peace is restored in Cote 
d\'Ivoire. Otherwise, Liberia could be exposed to 
possible resumption of hostilities among the warring 
parties, who could easily move across the permeable 
borders at will. 
Please help Africa to elicit support from the 
leadership of the US Congress for this very important 
regional and sub-regional peace initiative. 
Please accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my 
highest consideration and esteem. 
Joaquim Alberto Chissano 
President of the Republic of Mozambique 
And Chairman of the African Union 
La Lime 
"
"13933","2/13/2004 8:45","04MAPUTO198","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE19342","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000198 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT PLS PASS AF/S, AF/EPS - ABROOKS 
USAID/AFR/DP 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, MZ, SSH 
SUBJECT: FY-2004 SPECIAL SELF-HELP FUNDING REQUEST 
 
REF: STATE 19342 
 
1. This cable contains a funding request for FY2004 
for Embassy Maputo Ambassador\'s Special Self-Help Fund. 
The Self-Help Coordinator is Economic/Political Officer 
Loren Dent. The Assistant Coordinator is 
Economic/Commercial Assistant Elizabeth Filipe. 
 
2. Mozambique has achieved rapid economic growth, 
registering an 8-10% increase in GDP per year, and a 
successful transition to democratic national and local 
elections within 12 years of the end of a devastating 
civil war. These achievements deem Mozambique an African 
success story, economically and politically. However, a 
sharp dichotomy exists, as economic and political growth 
has not translated into increased opportunities or 
standards of living for the rural and urban poor. Seventy 
percent of the population lives in poverty, and the 
country is still considered one of the world\'s poorest. 
Rural per capita income is estimated at $70/year in the 
central and northern provinces. Mozambique ranks 170/175 
on the 2003 UN Human Development Index and the HIV/AIDS 
rate continues to rise, with the national prevalence rate 
at 13.6%. The development corridors, which handle 
Mozambique\'s transit and national trade, register 
HIV/AIDS rates as high as 26.5%. If Mozambique is to 
truly succeed, the GRM must pay more attention to 
development needs and provision of basic goods (health, 
education, water) to its people, especially in rural 
areas. 
 
3. The Special Self-Help Fund is critical to the 
Mission\'s effectiveness in encouraging the GRM to invest 
in its people and the advancement of their well-being. 
Last year, the Mission was able to designate funding to 
twelve projects, spread across seven of ten provinces. 
Funds are being used to build schools, purchase library 
equipment, counsel youth on the risks of contracting 
HIV/AIDS, improve latrine facilities and access to 
potable drinking water, and expand agricultural 
facilities. Projects are sustainable and benefit 
communities. Investments in education, health, 
sanitation, and agricultural capacity have brought groups 
together, creating critical linkages and supplying 
communities with vital resources. The Mission\'s ability 
to play a role in development and be on the front lines 
of poverty alleviation for the rural and urban poor makes 
a statement to the GRM and positively portrays the USG\'s 
role in Mozambique. 
 
4. In 2004, the Mission is keen to use self-help projects 
to support the GRM\'s poverty reduction strategy (PARPA), 
approved by the Mozambican Council of Ministers in April 
2001. PARPA is the GRM\'s top national priority through 
2005 and identifies six priority areas for action: 
health, education, infrastructure, agriculture and rural 
development, governance, and macroeconomic and financial 
policies. There are ample opportunities for the USG to 
make an impact in several communities in the fight 
against poverty eradication in support of this timely and 
critical effort. The Mission Program Plan for FY 2006 
states strategy 3 for Economic Growth and Development, 
\"Support the GRM\'s Action Plan for the Reduction of 
Absolute Poverty (PARPA) by delivering development 
assistance to rural areas\", making PARPA a focus for the 
USG. Additionally, aligning self-help projects with GRM 
priorities will strengthen bilateral relations. 
 
5. ACTION REQUEST: We request $90,000 in funding for the 
Special Self-Help Fund for 2004. The focal areas will 
include but are not limited to: 
- Health: The USG is committed to working with the 
GRM, NGOs, and other donors to fight the spread of 
HIV/AIDS in Mozambique. Additionally, local communities 
are in desperate need of health posts that offer services 
and medicine to alleviate and treat illnesses such as 
cholera, malaria, and tuberculosis. According to the 
World Bank Country Assistance Strategy, some 59% of 
Mozambicans in the more rural north have to walk an hour 
to reach a health clinic (34% in the more urban south). 
- Access to potable drinking water: On E/P up-country 
travel, municipal government representatives and 
community residents always site the lack of clean 
drinking water as a major local issue. The quality of 
water available and the distance it takes to walk to a 
well site is a critical social concern. The World Bank 
reports that only one in three rural people have access 
to a protected water source (and only one in forty have 
electricity). 
- Agricultural capacity-building: Rural communities 
must survive off of agricultural production. Communities 
need access to agricultural resources and technical 
training to successfully produce for their families. The 
hope is that resources and training will improve quality 
of life and encourage farmers to produce and sell, 
creating small and sustainable business operations. 
According to the World Bank Report, most Mozambican 
farmers live on fewer than three hectares of land and 
only about one in ten is able to sell surplus produce. 
- Education: Building educational facilities and 
providing resources is a top priority for the Self-Help 
Program. Children and young people in villages attend 
classes outside and have no pencils or paper. Investment 
in human capital is critical to the nation\'s development 
and must be addressed. The World Bank estimates that 
seventy-two percent of rural Mozambicans are illiterate. 
 
6. Strengthening the Mission\'s Self-Help Program is 
essential if the USG is serious about contributing to the 
welfare of Mozambicans. Local awareness about the self- 
help process has increased, leading to a steady rise in 
the number of excellent ideas for project implementation 
and applications received. A funding increase will permit 
the Mission to accomplish community objectives and 
support the GRM\'s poverty reduction action plan. 
Strengthening the Self-Help Program is a clear way to 
show USG support for an African nation that has potential 
to be a well-rounded success story economically, 
politically, and socially. 
La Lime 
"
"13995","2/17/2004 6:53","04MAPUTO204","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE14279","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000204 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR S/CT, INL/AAE, AF/S, AF/RSA 
ADDIS FOR GALINDO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, KCRM, SENV, PREL, MZ, Coastal Security 
SUBJECT: CTAG MEETING IN MAPUTO 
 
REF: STATE 14279 
 
1. Summary: On February 5, DCM hosted our first CTAG 
meeting (per reftel request) with counterparts from Spain, 
Portugal, Russia, France, Italy, Switzerland, UK, Germany, 
European Commission, and Ireland (representing EU troika). 
Participants concurred that improved maritime security for 
Mozambique\'s vulnerable coastline was a top priority and 
agreed to coordinate efforts of the USG, France, Portugal, 
and the EC to provide coastal patrol capacity. Other areas 
of mutual concern discussed include financial oversight, 
trafficking of drugs and people, money laundering, and 
corruption. End summary. 
 
2. USG assistance: The GRM has acceded to all twelve UN 
Counter-Terrorism conventions. The USG has offered to 
assist the Mozambican MFA in preparations for hosting a 2004 
National Counter-Terrorism Conference in Maputo on 
implementation of UN Counter-Terrorism conventions. Post 
sent Ministry of Finance and Central Bank of Mozambique 
officials to USG training provided at ILEA Botswana. Post 
provides updated terrorist assets control lists to 
appropriate GRM officials. 
 
3. USG assistance (continued): Post provided computer 
equipment to airport authorities for lookout database. 
Officials from Customs, Police, Ministry of interior, 
Immigration, and Finance Ministry attended Counter-terrorism 
seminar in Gaborone, Botswana. USG provided FBI training 
for prosecutors at Mozambique\'s Judicial Training Center 
including anti-money laundering components. OPDAT 
intermittent advisor to Mozambican Police Academy has spent 
six months in Maputo for curriculum development and 
specialized course coordination (including visits by ten USG- 
funded trainers). DOD conducted Maputo airport survey. USG 
provided counter-terrorism training to SISE (GRM security 
service). DOD Maritime Officers Course provided to 
Mozambican Navy and international law course for MFA, MOD, 
Interior and Justice Ministries, both with goal of 
establishing maritime patrol capacity (provision of EDA 
patrol craft and IMET crew training). 
 
4. USG (continued): Post will seek equipment requested by 
Mozambican customs for container inspection in ports of 
Maputo, Beira, and Nacala. Post has requested DHS fraud 
prevention training for immigration and airline officials in 
Maputo and Ressano Garcia (land border post with South 
Africa). 
 
5. None of the CTAG participants indicated direct programs; 
however, nearly all indicated programs to build government 
capacity in areas directly related to CT capabilities. 
6. United Kingdom: The British High Commission has 
provided training in bank auditing and financial systems and 
currently is conducting a large project with Mozambican 
Customs, implemented by Crown Agents. Technical support is 
scheduled to last to 2005. While British concerns 
regarding counter-terrorism focus on Kenya, Tanzania, and 
South Africa, the BHC has made the case to London that 
Mozambique is an important part of the jigsaw. 
 
7. France: The French DCM stated that they see the coast 
as the key and are addressing this specific vulnerability. 
They have argued to Paris for increasing naval capacity hpe 
to provide one or two small patrol boats to the GRM in 2004, 
the target date of 2003 not having been met. They plan 
future joint naval exercises and had two GRM Navy personnel 
on their frigate during a January 2004 port visit to Maputo. 
In 2001, France also provided support to the Mozambican 
police lab. 
 
8. European Commission: The EC provided some customs 
training to the GRM, but has focused on assisting GRM public 
sector reform, judicial reform, and increased budget 
accountability. They provide direct financial support to 
the Ministry of fisheries for monitoring the coastline 
(including funding surveillance flight hours). Approximately 
two million euros are provided annually for assistance 
related to fisheries. Included in the program is technical 
support for development of a maritime code. 
 
9. Portugal: Portugal is the driving force behind CPLP 
joint military exercises, with an emphasis in training for 
PKOs and staff command and control. They provide support to 
the GRM Military Academy in Nampula and are also assisting 
with development of the maritime code. Portuguese law 
instructors are rotated at the Police Academy to provide a 
constant presence of two during the academic year. 
 
10. Italy: Italy has supported the police anti-drug unit 
with vehicles, equipment, and training, and has funded a 
UNODC regional program to combat transnational drug 
trafficking. Funding for both projects ended in 2003. 
 
11. Russia: Stressed the need to focus on the police, 
immigration, and borders. Their embassy security officer 
called Mozambique a paradise for terrorists and stated that 
SISE is not sufficiently organized to address the problem. 
No watchlist database exists and Interior and Foreign 
ministries have no plan to create one. Russia has invited 
the Interior minister to Moscow, but he keeps postponing the 
trip (Note: Minister Manhenje is fluent in Russian and 
trained as a MIG pilot. End Note.) Mozambican have received 
some training from Spetznaz. Russia\'s doors are open for 
further cooperation with Interior, MFA, and SISE, but it 
seems that they are frustrated with the GRM\'s lukewarm 
interest. 
 
12. Comment: The clear message from meeting was the need to 
coordinate our efforts to get the GRM to adopt a model 
maritime code and prepare themselves to utilize coastal 
patrol boats. All participants agreed that weak land 
borders, ineffective and corrupt police and judicial 
officials, absent coastal patrol capacity, and poor 
coordination between GRM entities all contribute to an 
environment conducive to organized crime and terrorists. 
Post and many other donors (including the Nordics, who were 
not invited to the meeting) are focused on corruption and 
transparency issues, especially considering their linkage to 
transnational crime, alien smuggling, money laundering, and 
possible terrorist financing. The EC and others also 
express concern regarding weak security in ports and along 
the coast contributing to illegal fishing and export of 
precious hardwood timbers, both with severe environmental 
repercussions. 
LA LIME 
"
"14055","2/18/2004 15:48","04MAPUTO220","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000220 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, MZ 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT CHISSANO APPOINTS NEW MOZAMBICAN PRIME 
MINISTER 
 
 
1. (U) On Tuesday, February 17, President Chissano formally 
announced the appointment of Luisa Diogo, the current 
Minister of Planning and Finance, as Prime Minister. The 
announcement of a new PM was expected, as former PM Pascoal 
Mocumbi had already announced his intention to leave his GRM 
post early (before the October 2004 national elections) to 
serve as High Commissioner of a new European Commission 
health body, the Europe-Developing Countries Clinical Trial 
Partnership (EDCTP). Mocumbi was relieved of his PM duties 
and Diogo installed on the same day. Diogo also retains her 
position as Minister of Planning and Finance. 
 
2. (SBU) The choice of Diogo to serve as PM does not come as 
a complete surprise -- Diogo and Minister of Transport and 
Communications Tomas Salomao had been widely seen as the two 
most likely candidates to replace Mocumbi. She is the first 
woman in Mozambique to be appointed PM and is from the 
western province of Tete, as opposed to the other major GRM 
leaders that hail from the FRELIMO-heavy south. Diogo is a 
sharp leader and a tough manager in her position as Minister 
of Planning and Finance. She is currently one of three female 
ministers serving in the GRM. Unlike the two previous PMs, 
Diogo is not a member of the FRELIMO Political Commission, 
the most powerful FRELIMO body; however, she is a member of 
the larger FRELIMO Central Committee. She has sought out and 
established critical international relationships with donors 
and lending organizations. Her astute knowledge of the Paris 
Club process has been key to her prominent position in the 
GRM, given Mozambique\'s dependence on external budget 
support. Diogo studied economics at Maputo\'s most prestigious 
university, Eduardo Mondlane, and went on to receive a 
Masters degree in Economics from the University of London in 
1992. She began working in the Ministry of Planning and 
Finance in 1980, making her way up to Department Head, 
National Budget Director, and Deputy Minister. Diogo was 
promoted to Minister by President Chissano after the 1999 
national elections. In the early 90\'s, Diogo spent two years 
working for the World Bank as a Program Officer in 
Mozambique. Diogo is the founding force behind the GRM\'s 
Poverty Reduction Strategy (PARPA), approved by the Council 
of Ministers in April 2001. This strategy, which emphasizes 
economic growth through investment in human capital and 
productive infrastructure and institutional reform to improve 
the private sector investment climate, is a high priority for 
the GRM and will continue to be through 2005. President 
Chissano has communicated that Diogo will retain her position 
as Minister of Planning and Finance and fulfill new PM duties 
simultaneously. 
 
3. (U) Radio de Mocambique reported the following additional 
candidates were also considered for PM: Minister of 
Transportation Tomas Salomao (short-listed with Diogo), 
FRELIMO Parliamentary bench leader Manuel Tome, former 
Minister of State Administration Oscar Monteiro, and Governor 
of Cabo Delgado Province Jose Pacheco. 
 
4. (SBU) COMMENT: The appointment of Diogo to PM arguably 
makes her the most powerful woman in Mozambique. She is 
nationally and internationally respected in her position as 
Minister of Planning and Finance and has close ties with the 
donor community. Diogo\'s appointment serves various purposes 
and is timely for the FRELIMO-ruling GRM. With the country\'s 
third national elections set for late 2004, Chissano played 
his card at installing the country\'s first female PM in 
history and choosing a candidate from the country\'s central 
region. FRELIMO is hoping to make a statement with this 
appointment; the FRELIMO party is responsive to women around 
the country and to all regions, the south, central, and 
north. Post believes that Diogo will not do much to change 
the tide of Mozambique\'s political, economic, or social 
fabric in the ten months in which she serves as PM. Chissano 
is stepping down in the 2004 elections, and the new 
Mozambican president, whether he be FRELIMO or RENAMO, is 
expected to revamp the cabinet and appoint new ministers. 
Diogo may or may not be chosen to take part in the new GRM. 
END COMMENT. 
LA LIME 
"
"14109","2/20/2004 7:18","04MAPUTO235","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000235 
 
SIPDIS 
USDOC FOR 3131/ANESA/KBRENNAN/JMATHESON/MSTAUNTON 
USDOC FOR 3140/ITA/CS/ODO/AFRICA TEAM 
USDOC FOR 4510/ITA/MAC/OA/JDIEMOND 
USDOC FOR 6320/ITA/TD/OFF TELECOMM 
DEPT FOR AF/S, AF/EPS, EB/CPS, AND EB/CBA 
DEPT PLS PASS AID/AFR/SA AND G/EGAD/BD 
DEPT PLS PASS EXIM BANK, TDA, AND OPIC 
JOHANNESBURG FOR FCS SCO - WCENTER, JVANRENSBURG 
DURBAN ALSO FOR FCS - JKUEHNER, LKOHRS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, MZ, Commerce 
SUBJECT: RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT IN CABO DELGADO 
PROVINCE - PHASE II: INVITATION TO BID 
 
 
1. 787/04/T002 
2. 02/19/04 
3. LDENT 
4. 787 MOZAMBIQUE 
5. - 
6A. REPLY TO: 
6B. Electricidade de Mocambique (EDM) 
Direccao de Electrificacao e Projectos 
Av. Filipe Saumel Magaia, 368 
Maputo, Mozambique 
Tel: 258 1 322-071/2 
or 
PB Power 
12 Burnside Island 
410 Jan Smuts Avenue 
Craighall 
Johannesburg, South Africa 
Tel: 0027 22 787 4141 
 
----------------------------- 
Trade Opportunity Information 
----------------------------- 
7. Electricidade de Mocambique (EDM) has been granted a 
loan from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in 
Africa (BADEA) towards the cost of Phase II of the Rural 
Electrification Project in Cabo Delgado Province. The 
intention is that proceeds from this loan will be 
applied to eligible payments under a Turnkey Contract. 
The contract calls for the construction of one 110/33 kV 
substation, one 33/11 kV substation (and associated work 
in Metoro and Montepuez), new 33 kV transmission lines 
(approximately 275Km in length), and low voltage 
reticulation of selected towns and villages. 
EDM invites sealed Tenders from companies or joint 
ventures that can undertake and have suitable experience 
in the design, topographical and geological studies, 
manufacture, supply, delivery to site, erection, 
commissioning, provision of a defects, and liability 
period of twelve (12) calendar months for the above 
mentioned works. Bidders may obtain further information 
and inspect the bidding documents from the office of the 
Employer or the Engineer at the address mentioned on 
item 6B beginning on February 16th, 2004. 
 
------------ 
Services 
------------ 
8. A complete set of bidding documents in English may 
be purchased by the interested bidders upon payment of a 
nonrefundable fee of USD 1,500.00. The documents will 
be available any working day February 16th to March 5th, 
2004. Tenders or their official representatives are 
required to attend a compulsory Pre-tender Clarification 
Meeting and Site Inspection Visit from March 8th to 
March 10th, 2004. The Tenders or their official 
representatives will be required to provide proof of 
purchase of the Tender Documents prior to being allowed 
to attend the Pre-tender Clarification Meeting and Site 
Inspect Visit. Preference will be given to Arab, 
African or mixed Arab-african companies if the price 
difference does not exceed 10 percent of firms who have 
submitted a compliant Technical Proposal. 
 
9. Tenders will be delivered to the EDM office at the 
address above mentioned, a receipt acknowledging 
delivery must be obtained at or before 12 hours 
(Mozambican time) on April 19th, 2004. Bids will be 
opened publicly at 15 hours (Mozambican time) on April 
19th, 2004 in the EDM Office in Maputo. A maximum of two 
representatives per tenderer will be allowed to attend 
the opening. 
 
10. For more information on this or other trade and 
investment matters in Mozambique, please contact: 
Economic/Political Officer Loren Dent, or 
Economic/Commercial Assistant Elizabeth Filipe 
Economic/Political Section 
U.S. Embassy - Maputo 2330 
Department of State 
Washington, DC 20521-2330 
Tel.: 258-1-49-27-97 or 
Fax: 258-1-49-01-14 
E-mail: commercial@state.gov or 
Embassy website: www.usembassy-maputo.gov.mz 
LA LIME 
"
"14274","2/25/2004 14:54","04MAPUTO267","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE33230","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000267 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MZ, ESF, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: Mozambique: Request for FY 2004 ESF funding 
 
REF: STATE 33230 
 
1. Summary: Post requests USD 700,000 for support for 
transparency of the 2004 National Elections. This election 
support will build on successful observation and parallel 
vote tabulation coordinated by Carter Center in The November 
2003 municipal elections. End Summary. 
 
2. Mozambique\'s third Presidential and legislative 
elections must be held by December 2004. The December 1999 
elections were marred by lack of transparency in the 
official tabulation process. As a result, opposition parties 
did not accept the election results, leading to political 
tensions and violence, and ultimately to the death of more 
than hundred people in November 2000. Ensuring the fairness 
and transparency of the 2004 elections is of vital concern 
for political stability and development of democracy in 
Mozambique, a central MPP goal. 
 
3. ESF funding used in the 2003 local elections, through 
support to Carter Center and a consortium of local civil 
society organizations, yielded positive results. The 
presence of US-funded civil society election observers 
helped prevent electoral officials from carrying out 
documented electoral fraud in the second largest city, which 
was won by the main opposition party. The USG-funded 
parallel vote tabulation (PVT) exercise also helped right a 
mis-tabulated result in another municipality, giving the 
opposition a fifth mayoral position. Post believes that 
assisting Mozambican civil society to setup and run an 
effective election observation and PVT exercise will be a 
crucial contribution to the transparency of the process. 
 
4. Costs associated with technical assistance to set up the 
observation and PVT methodology, database, and analysis for 
the 2004 national elections are already covered by a grant 
to the Carter Center with FY 2003 ESF funding. Post requests 
USD 700,000 for the field implementation of the observation 
and PVT exercise by local organizations, to be obligated and 
managed by USAID and implemented by Mozambican partners. 
 
5. This funding would finance the recruitment, training, 
and deployment of a total of 930 observers who will monitor 
the electoral process and conduct a PVT. Besides the 
manpower, PVT costs include communication costs to transmit 
by telephone or fax collected election results from selected 
polling stations to an operations center in Maputo. 
Specifically, 500 short-term domestic observers will be 
recruited and trained throughout the country to observe the 
electoral campaign period and the voting; 30 medium-term 
domestic observers will be deployed in political hotspots 
throughout the country to monitor election-related disputes 
and conflicts four months before the election date; and an 
additional 400 observers will join the short-term observers 
on voting day to help cover 900 sampled polling stations (10 
percent of the total) around the country to collect the 
results from the tally sheets posted outside the polling 
stations to conduct the PVT. 
LA LIME 
"
"14275","2/25/2004 15:03","04MAPUTO269","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE23970","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000269 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT PASS TO USTR 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, MZ, AGOA 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: INPUT FOR PRESIDENT\'S REPORT ON AGOA 
 
REF: A. STATE 023970 
 
B. MAPUTO 01697 
C. MAPUTO 01452 
D. MAPUTO 01406 
 
1. AGOA Trade and Investment: Mozambique has had limited 
success in expanding trade and investment under AGOA, though 
there remains strong potential to increase exports in several 
key sectors. Two apparel companies, Mauritian-owned BELITA 
and Pakistani-owned OMAR, exported apparel products to the 
United States under AGOA during 2003, though OMAR recently 
closed its operations (ref B). Apparel exports consisted 
principally of knitted t-shirts under the FUBU and Cherokee 
(Target) labels. Despite the closure of OMAR, which resulted 
in the loss of over 350 jobs, apparel exports and jobs are 
likely to increase significantly in the next few years due to 
a recent investment by the Aga Kahn Foundation. This 
investment includes the rehabilitation of a 12,000 square 
meter factory located outside of the capital city of Maputo, 
and is expected to result in the creation of 2,000 jobs. The 
Foundation is the process of sourcing equipment for the 
plant. Several of Mozambique\'s six textile mills could 
potentially be revitalized. As none of the mills is currently 
operating at any significant level of operation, all textiles 
for use in apparel assembly factories are currently imported. 
A key concern for existing and potential investors in the 
apparel sector is the scheduled expiration of the third 
country textile provisions in September 2004. Post has been 
working closely with several fish processing facilities to 
promote the export of non-industrially caught prawns to the 
United States. The first shipment of prawns was exported to 
the United States in June and increased exports are expected. 
 
2. Market-Based Economy/Reduction of Trade Barriers: 
Mozambique continues to be one of the most dynamic and 
fastest-growing economies in sub-Saharan Africa, albeit from 
a low base. The Government of Mozambique (GRM) has encouraged 
foreign direct investment (FDI). Mozambique has privatized 
over 1200 mostly smaller companies and 37 large enterprises 
since the privatization program began 10 years ago. Foreign 
investors have participated in Mozambique\'s privatization 
program without impediment. Only 11 large state-owned or 
operated companies remain, including the national airline, 
telephone, electricity, insurance, oil and gas exploration, 
port and rail, airports, water supply, and fuel distribution 
companies. In July, Mozambique was assigned an international 
credit rating of B/B by Fitch Ratings, reflecting 
Mozambique\'s positive track record on economic reforms, 
political stability, strong economic growth, openness to FDI, 
and expanding exports. There were no claims of expropriation 
by U.S. firms in 2003. Mozambique remains cooperative on 
intellectual property rights protection. Mozambique is a 
signatory to the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) Trade Protocol, which calls for the elimination of 
tariff and non-tariff barriers between the signatory states 
over a 12-year period. Launched in September 2000, tariff 
reductions began in July 2001. 
 
3. Poverty Reduction: Mozambique faces enormous development 
challenges. The country also lacks infrastructure, power, and 
clean water for most of its citizens. The Government has 
placed its Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty (PARPA) 
at the head of its policy agenda. PARPA emphasizes six areas 
as the key reducers of absolute poverty: education; health; 
basic infrastructure; agriculture and rural development; good 
governance; and macroeconomic and financial management. 
Indicative of the huge challenges Mozambique will face for 
decades to come is the modest PARPA goal to reduce from 70 
percent to 50 percent the level of absolute poverty by 2010. 
The donor community, led by the US, funds approximately 60 
percent of the national budget, though the HIPC and Enhanced 
HIPC (Heavily Indebted Poor Countries) debt relief programs 
have permitted increased budgetary support to alleviate 
poverty. 
 
4. Democratic Consolidation/Rule of Law/Anti-Corruption: 
Mozambique has made significant progress in the consolidation 
of democracy since the signing of the 1992 Peace Accords that 
ended sixteen years of civil war. In late 2004, Mozambique 
will hold it\'s third multi-party presidential elections since 
independence in 1975. The current constitutionally-elected 
president, Joaquim Chissano, will step down after having 
served two terms. Chissano and the leadership of FRELIMO 
dominate policy-making and implementation. On November 19, 
2003, Mozambique held municipal elections which were 
considered generally free and fair. However, many 
institutions, such as the judiciary and the police, remain 
weak. Corruption remains a problem in both the public and 
private sectors. In recognition of this, the GRM\'s Attorney 
General established an Anti-Corruption Unit, which has 
received funding from USAID and the Department. In addition, 
in October, the National Assembly passed the Anti-Corruption 
Law, which aims to curb corruption in government offices, the 
police force, hospitals and the schools. The Department has 
also funded Mozambique\'s Police Sciences Academy in an effort 
to improve the performance and professionalism of the police 
force. Mozambique is an increasingly important partner on 
regional security issues and in the war against terrorism and 
organized crime. 
 
5. Human Rights/Workers Rights/Labor: Mozambique does not 
engage in gross violations of internationally recognized 
human rights, though there remains room for improvement and 
abuses do exist. The Constitution provides that all workers 
are free to join or refrain from joining a trade union, and 
workers enjoy these rights in practice. Labor unions, created 
during the socialist years, remain weak and lack resources. 
Total membership among Mozambique\'s thirteen unions is less 
than 200,000, concentrated in Maputo and a few other urban 
areas, and much of the labor force is engaged in small-scale 
agriculture. There were a number of work actions in 2003. 
Child labor remains a problem. One positive development 
during 2003 was the GRM\'s ratification of ILO Convention 182 
on the Worst Forms of Child Labor. 
 
6. Trade Capacity-Building Efforts/AGOA Outreach: USAID is 
currently implementing a variety of trade capacity-building 
efforts in Mozambique under its Strategic Objective of 
Enabling Environment for Growth. These initiatives focus on 
overcoming constraints to investment and trade through 
technical assistance and institutional support. In 2003, the 
Embassy began a series of digital video conferences (DVC) on 
expanding exports under AGOA in key sectors. The first DVC 
focused on the apparel/textile industry and included the 
participation of Mozambican government officials and apparel 
sector representatives and US business associations. A second 
DVC is planned for April on the handicrafts sector. The 
Embassy also continues to engage Ministry of Industry and 
Trade Officials on addressing constraints to trade and 
investment in key sectors. 
LA LIME 
"
"14354","2/27/2004 8:57","04MAPUTO274","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO148|04STATE16100|04STATE33364","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000274 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR E:APENCE, EB/IFD/OIA:MKELLY AND JHAUSER,INL/C:DLUNA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ECON, EINV, ETRD, PGOV, MZ, KCOR 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN PARTICIPATION IN EVIAN G-8 TRANSPARENCY 
PILOT -- INTERIM RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. STATE 33364 
B. MAPUTO 148 (NOTAL) 
C. STATE 16100 
Sensitive But Unclassified -- Protect Accordingly 
 
1. (U) Initial Mozambican government reaction to the 
Transparency Pilot Program, including the need for an 
explicit commitment at the outset to high transparency 
standards over time support, has been very positive. Further 
GRM consultations will be undertaken before we receive a 
formal response. 
 
2. (U) Ambassador presented REFTEL A demarche February 27 
to Ministry of Planning and Finance Permanent Secretary 
Victor Borges and explained the belief that this initiative 
could support the Mozambican government\'s substantial work in 
building a transparent financial management system. Borge\'s 
stressed the government\'s commitment to transparency as one 
of the key elements in public sector reform. He indicated he 
would discuss the demarche documents within the ministry and 
with other ministries, including those working on public 
sector reform, but made an initial statement the Mozambican 
Government would be very open to the initiative. Post will 
report further when the Government has had the chance to 
discuss the initiative internally. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment: With the appointment last week of 
Minister of Planning and Finance Luisa Diogo as Prime 
Minister, the Transparency Pilot initiative should be very 
well received. Diogo, who retains the Finance portfolio in 
addition to the Prime Ministership, has been the driving 
force behind the creation of a transparent financial 
management system. With only a short mandate as Prime 
Minister before general elections at the end of the year, 
this initiative can provide her a deliverable in an area 
where she is deeply committed. End Comment 
LA LIME 
"
"14460","3/2/2004 14:53","04MAPUTO284","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE7869","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 000284 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR G/TIP; G; DRL; PRM; IWI; AF/RSA 
DEPT PASS TO USAID 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, ELAB, KCRM, KFRD, KWMN, PHUM, PREF, SMIG, MZ, Trafficking in Persons 
SUBJECT: 2003 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: STATE 007869 
 
1. (SBU) OVERVIEW. 
A- Mozambique is a country of origin for internationally 
trafficked women and children. Trafficking is also believed 
to occur within the country. There are no reliable numbers 
available on the extent of the problem. Poverty, a history of 
child migration, cultural/religious practices, and weak 
border controls are all factors contributing to trafficking. 
Local NGOs and international organizations such as IOM, Terre 
des Hommes, and UNICEF are the principal sources of 
information on trafficking. Children, both boys and girls, 
and women are the principal victims of trafficking. During 
2003, there was increased attention in the local press and 
among government officials to the problem of trafficking in 
persons in Mozambique. Several reports, including a May 2003 
study by the International Organization on Migration (IOM) on 
trafficking in women and children for sexual exploitation in 
Southern Africa and a South African Broadcasting Corporation 
(SABC) program \"Special Assignment\" provided important 
documentary evidence of specific cases of trafficking in 
Mozambique. Allegations of trafficking appeared regularly in 
the Mozambican press. In early 2004, the Attorney General\'s 
office undertook an investigation in northern Mozambique 
(Nampula) over allegations of trafficking in human body parts 
and child disappearances. A preliminary report released in 
February found no evidence of organ trafficking. During his 
New Year\'s address, President Chissano referred to reports of 
alleged cases of trafficking in children. 
B- Research by both IOM and Terre des Hommes indicate that 
South Africa is the principal receiving country for 
trafficked persons from Mozambique. Victims come from all 
regions of the country and internal migration is common. 
C- Until recently, allegations of trafficking were most 
pronounced in the southern region of Mozambique. However, 
during 2003, there were allegations of trafficking in the 
central province of Manica and the northern province of 
Nampula. The case under investigation by the Attorney 
General\'s office in Nampula focused on allegations against a 
foreign couple by a locally-resident Brazilian nun. The 
initial allegations may have been motivated by a dispute over 
land; no evidence has been found to substantiate the 
allegations against the foreign couple. 
D- Several studies, including the report prepared in May 2003 
by IOM, and various studies by NGOs were conducted during the 
year. These studies have provided important documentary and 
anecdotal evidence of trafficking activities. According to 
the IOM study, approximately 1,000 Mozambican women and 
children are trafficked to South Africa every year. To date, 
there has not been a broad survey of trafficking and official 
statistics on trafficking do not exist. Mozambican NGOs 
working on trafficking in persons are planning a meeting for 
early 2004 to coordinate efforts on this issue. 
E- Not applicable. 
F- Populations targeted include children from the northern 
and central part of Mozambique and women and girls from the 
southern part of the country. Victims may work as both sex 
workers and non-sex workers. Victims are often promised 
better jobs in South Africa. Once there, they are threatened 
with their legal status and forced to work for little or no 
pay. Local NGOs have also reported that children have been 
targeted for the sale of their organs for use in religious or 
traditional practices. According to the IOM report, 
Mozambican women are also sold to brothels in South Africa or 
as concubines or \"wives\" to mine workers. Recruitment may be 
either passive or aggressive and victims may know their 
traffickers. 
G- Political will appears to exist and trafficking is 
acknowledged as a problem at the highest levels of the 
government. As noted above, President Chissano has expressed 
his concern over reports of alleged cases of trafficking in 
children. Another important indication of the government\'s 
acknowledgment of the problem was the Attorney General\'s 
investigation into allegations of trafficking in Nampula 
earlier this year. The government has continued to 
participate in the multi-sectoral Campaign against 
Trafficking in Children. In September, the government in 
conjunction with several NGOs launched a program to enhance 
children protection laws, including the development of 
legislation covering trafficking in children. 
H- There is no evidence that government authorities actively 
facilitate or condone trafficking. However, corruption is a 
problem among police and customs officials and NGOs believe 
that customs officials are likely to be bribed by 
traffickers. No government officials have been accused, 
investigated, etc. of trafficking. 
I - Limited financial and technical resources and weak 
institutions, including the police and judiciary, are 
constraints to the government\'s ability to address 
trafficking. Corruption among police and immigration 
officials is a problem due to underfunding and lack of 
professionalism. In addition, there is limited research and 
statistical information on trafficking. Mozambique is heavily 
dependent on the international donor community for budget 
support and does not have its own funds to combat trafficking. 
J- There are no publicly released assessments by the 
government of anti-trafficking efforts. However, the GRM is 
part of SARPCO, a forum for cooperation between police forces 
in the region. Trafficking in persons is addressed 
regionally through this forum. NGOs actively monitor and 
report on government efforts. 
K - Prostitution is illegal in Mozambique. However, 
activities of prostitutes, brothel owners, clients, and pimps 
are not criminalized. There are reports that police harass 
and abuse prostitutes, principally to extort money. 
L - Not applicable. 
 
2. (SBU) PREVENTION. 
A- The government acknowledges that trafficking is a problem. 
See above (parts A and C). 
B- Principal ministries/agencies involved in anti-trafficking 
efforts are the Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of 
Justice, Ministry of Women and Social Action Coordination and 
the Attorney General\'s Office. All participate in the 
Campaign against Trafficking in Children. 
C- The Campaign against Trafficking in Children consists of 
NGOs, international organizations, and government 
representatives. Since the kickoff in 2001, it has conducted 
activities such as public awareness, training of journalists, 
workshops for children, and training of police officers. The 
press actively reports on trafficking issues, both in general 
and related to trafficking in organs. The government has 
actively responded to allegations in the press through 
investigations and public statements. One recent example was 
the investigation by the Attorney General\'s office in 
Nampula. 
D- The government has a number of programs aimed at 
supporting the position of women and children in Mozambican 
society that are coordinated through the Ministry of Women 
and Social Action Coordination, though these programs 
generally do not focus on anti-trafficking. Programs 
implemented through the Campaign are often focused on 
vulnerable groups such as women and children. 
E - The government\'s ability to support prevention programs 
is limited due to a lack of financial and technical resources. 
F - Coordination and information sharing among government, 
NGOs and international organizations could be improved. A 
representative from the local NGO FECIV is currently seconded 
to the Ministry of the Interior to work on trafficking 
issues. 
G- Border controls remain weak and inadequate. There is no 
formal monitoring of borders for evidence of trafficking and 
illegal migration from Mozambique to South Africa has 
historically been a problem. 
H- There is a mechanism for coordination and communications 
between various government agencies on drug trafficking. The 
government does not have a formal task force on trafficking 
in persons, though there is an ad hoc inter-ministerial 
committee. 
I- The government works with INTERPOL on criminal matters, 
though there have been no specific cases on trafficking from 
Mozambique addressed through this mechanism to date. 
J - The government does not have a national plan of action on 
trafficking, though inter-ministerial groups do exist and 
they are involved in the Campaign against Trafficking in 
Children. 
K- Several ministries are involved in anti-trafficking 
programs, including the Ministry of Interior, Ministry of 
Justice, and the Ministry of Women and Social Action 
Coordination. 
 
3. (SBU) INVESTIGATIONS/PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS. 
A- Specific anti-trafficking legislation does not currently 
exist. The Ministry of Justice, in conjunction with the 
Ministry of Women and Social Action Coordination and civil 
society are in the process of developing new legislation on 
child protection, including anti-trafficking legislation for 
children. Depending on the case, traffickers can be 
prosecuted using laws on sexual assault, rape, abduction, and 
child abuse. 
B- Not applicable. 
C- Penalties for rape or sexual assault range from 8-12 
years. 
D- The government has not prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers due to the lack of a trafficking law. As noted 
above, traffickers can be prosecuted under other laws. In 
2003, two individuals were detained in Manica province 
following evidence of trafficking for the purported sale of 
human organs. These individuals were charged with mutilation 
of a minor and are currently awaiting trial. 
E - NGOs and anecdotal evidence suggest that traffickers 
represent diverse groups ranging from child trafficking 
syndicates to individuals who may also be involved in migrant 
smuggling. Traffickers include Chinese, Russian, Mozambican 
and South African citizens. It is reported that employment 
agencies are fronting for traffickers in the south of the 
country. 
F - The government is increasingly investigating cases of 
trafficking. Recently, the Attorney General\'s office 
investigated a case of alleged trafficking in organs and 
child disappearances in Nampula. As noted above, this case 
initially targeted a foreign couple; no evidence was found 
that linked the couple to trafficking activities. The 
government has had difficulty investigating trafficking cases 
due to lack of knowledge about trafficking, as well as a lack 
of investigative capacity, including trained police officers 
and adequate investigatory equipment. 
G - Training for police officers has been conducted by NGOs. 
Pilot police stations have been established in 3 provincial 
capitals with special officers who have been trained on 
dealing with victims of trafficking. 
H - The Government cooperates through SARPCO on various types 
of crime, but details on specific investigations are 
unavailable. 
I- The government can extradite persons who are charged with 
trafficking in other countries. No extradition requests 
related to trafficking have been requested to date. The law 
does not specifically refer to the extradition of its own 
nationals. 
K - There has been no evidence of government officials being 
involved in trafficking. 
L - The government ratified ILO Conventions 182 and 29 in 
July 2003. Mozambique has not signed nor ratified the 
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, and Child 
Pornography, nor the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and 
Punish Trafficking in Persons. 
? 
4. (SBU) PROTECTION/ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
A - The Ministry of Women and Social Action Coordination 
staffs hospitals in all provinces to deal with victims of 
trafficking. Personnel provide short-term assistance to the 
victims, but many in the provinces do not have adequate 
funding to provide more long-term assistance, such as 
housing. 3 pilot police stations in Pemba, Nampula, and 
Lichinga recently were established to train police to deal 
specifically with child victims of trafficking. There are no 
statistics on victims served at such facilities. 
B - The government does not provide funding to NGOs. Most 
NGOs received funding from international donors. 
C - There is no such process in Mozambique yet. 
D - There has been no evidence that victims of trafficking in 
Mozambique have been mistreated by authorities. 
E - Victims may file civil suits and seek legal action 
against traffickers. However, victims generally lack adequate 
funds and/or are intimated about taking legal action. 
F - Government is limited in its ability to provide 
protection to victims and witnesses in any criminal case. 
G - Most training for police officers has come from NGOs, not 
the government. Personnel working for the Ministry of Women 
and Social Action Coordination have limited training on 
dealing with victims of trafficking. The government does not 
provide training to its embassies/consulates on trafficking. 
H - The government, through the Ministry of Women and Social 
Action Coordination, provides short-term support for 
trafficking victims, but is unable to provide much due to 
lack of funding. As noted above, several police stations have 
developed special units to deal with child victims of 
trafficking. Severely limited resources is the principal 
constraint in providing expanded assistance. 
I - The Campaign against Trafficking in Children is in the 
process of establishing a victim assistance center at the 
border post of Ressano Garcia for repatriated child victims 
of trafficking. 
 
5. (U) Post point of contact for G/TIP is Elizabeth Jaffee, 
Economic/Political Officer. 
Telephone: (258) 1 492797 
Fax: (258) 1 490114 
Email: jaffeeee@state.gov 
 
6. (U) Econ/Poloff spent approximately 14 hours preparing 
this report. 
LA LIME 
"
"14541","3/4/2004 9:05","04MAPUTO293","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000293 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 129958: N/A 
TAGS: ABLD, MZ, NEC 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES NEC WITH FOREIGN 
MINISTER 
 
REF: 03 MAPUTO 1746 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. Despite the confusion and 
potential loss of the Four Seasons site as a potential 
NEC, Post received assurances from the Foreign Minister 
that this was a top priority for the MFA. Post 
expressed its continuing interest in part of the Four 
Seasons site, or potentially FACIM, and reiterated that 
time is running out. Post awaits the findings of a 
newly-created working group on this issue. End 
summary. 
 
2. (SBU) The Ambassador, A/MgmtOff, and Post attorney 
Sam Levy met with Foreign Minister Simao and MFA desk 
officer Eduardo Mutorropa on March 3 regarding ongoing 
efforts to obtain a suitable NEC site. (In a February 
27 meeting, Tourism Minister Sumbana, whose Ministry 
controls the site, told post that the Four Seasons site 
was not available as it had been sold last year to a 
concessionaire formed by SOTUR and IMOBCI. Post 
believes final legal arrangements are progressing 
though not yet complete; however, Tourism apparently is 
sticking with its decision to sell to the 
concessionaire.) The Ambassador expressed deep concern 
to Simao about the apparent loss of the Four Seasons 
site for the NEC. She urged the GRM to reconsider its 
pending deal with SOTUR and instead push for the land 
to be partitioned, giving the USG four hectares and 
leaving the other two for other suitable commercial 
development. We reiterated that this and other likely 
delays could result in the project being cancelled, and 
requested that the MFA be an advocate on behalf of Post 
needs and the sole interlocutor within the GRM. 
 
3. (SBU) The Foreign Minister explained that when he 
had been looking at property for the new convention 
center he was told the Four Seasons site was available. 
He was unaware at the previous meeting with Post 
(reftel) that the site had been \"sold\". Upon receiving 
a report about Post\'s meeting from the Ministry of 
Tourism, he had created a working group to determine 
the best course of action. That working group, under 
the direction of MFA, was holding its first meeting 
concurrently. Simao reported that he would make this 
issue a \"high priority\" and that he had a \"vested 
interested in seeing that the U.S. gets that property.\" 
Above the Ministerial level, he said there were two 
more levels of appeal -- the Prime Minister and the 
President. 
 
4. (SBU) Noting the need for and the cost of 
demolition, Simao said SOTUR would have a hard time 
financing their project. (Note: SOTUR\'s plans as shown 
to Post last year involve rehabilitating the existing 
24-story structure.) Though the GRM working group is 
searching for a solution that be \"win/win\" in which 
both the USG and SOTUR could get access the site, Simao 
suggested that Post might eventually be asked to 
consider negotiating directly with SOTUR. Mutorropa 
commented that the agreement SOTUR has with the GRM 
would only permit tourist development, which would make 
it difficult for SOTUR to negotiate with us on the 
property without obtaining additional time-consuming 
paper work and waivers from the government. Based on 
recent contact Post attorney has had with SOTUR, we are 
not convinced they would in fact be interested in 
negotiating with the USG. Simao said that the site 
seemed cursed, as five previous attempts to develop it 
had all fallen through. 
 
5. (SBU) As a second option, the Ambassador raised the 
possibility of securing a portion of FACIM for the NEC. 
Despite an initial response that FACIM was \"not 
possible,\" Simao later conceded he would look at the 
possibility of relocating the trade exhibition site 
elsewhere, providing four hectares for the USG, and 
using the remainder for the planned \"Ministry row.\" 
 
6. (SBU) Simao, aware of the urgency of the issue, 
promised to get back to us \"soon.\" Post will follow up 
with the Foreign Minister over the course of the next 
two weeks, during which we recommend not pursuing new 
sites with the GRM. 
LA LIME 
"
"14543","3/4/2004 9:06","04MAPUTO294","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04MAPUTO1114|04MAPUTO269|04STATE26964","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000294 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/EPS DKRZYDA; AF/S 
USDOC FOR AHILLIGAS 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR CHAMILTON AND WJACKSON 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, KTEX, EINV, PREL, MZ, AGOA 
SUBJECT: AGOA III: TEXTILE AND APPAREL PRODUCTION 
CAPABILITIES IN MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: A. STATE 026964 
B. MAPUTO 00269 
C. MAPUTO 01114 
 
1. Overview: Mozambique\'s once thriving and highly 
heterogeneous textile and garment industry experienced steady 
and significant decline throughout the early 1990s. At its 
peak, the industry was comprised of 45 facilities, including 
19 textile and 26 garment factories, producing a wide range 
of products. None of Mozambique\'s six existing textile 
facilities are currently operating at more than minimal 
capacity. A number of legal issues, including outstanding 
severance pay for former employees, shareholder/ownership 
disputes, limited capital, bureaucracy, and inflexible labor 
laws are all challenges to revitalizing Mozambique\'s textile 
industry. While garment exports under AGOA have been limited, 
with only one garment company currently exporting under AGOA, 
there is great growth potential and a major new investment is 
scheduled to come on-line in the next year (Ref B). All 
fabric used in garment operations is currently imported. 
Despite the potential revitalization of several existing 
textile operations, garment operations are likely to rely on 
imported fabric in the near-term. As noted in Ref C, host 
government officials and local industry representatives have 
stressed the importance of extension of third-country 
provisions beyond September 2004 if Mozambique is to take 
advantage of AGOA. 
 
2. Textile Production Facilities. Mozambique\'s six existing 
textile production facilities are: Texlom, Riopele, 
Texafrica, Textil de Mocuba, Texmoque, and Texmanta. Two of 
the six facilities are currently being used or have been 
targeted for use in other commercial activities. 
Specifically, Texlom will be the site for a new garment 
assembly operation; Texmanta is currently being used for a 
shrimp processing project. Textil de Mocuba, once envisioned 
as the largest textile mill in Africa, has never operated. 
As noted above, none is currently operating at any 
significant level. The remaining three facilities-- Riopele, 
Texafrica, Texmoque-- could potentially be revitalized. All 
facilities contain a variety of machinery that, depending on 
current condition and product line, could potentially be used 
if any of the facilities were to be revitalized. 
A - Machinery/Technology: Spinning, circular knitting, 
bleaching, carding, dyeing, combining, mercerizing, winding 
and sewing thread machines, looms. Most machines date from 
the late 1970s/early 1980s, though a number of looms were 
also purchased in the early 1990s. 
B- Products: Cotton yarn, sisal cords, folkloric and other 
clothing fabrics, blankets. 
C- Employment: During peak operations, the larger of the 
three facilities together employed over 4,000 workers. A 
number of outstanding labor issues remain at the facilities. 
D- Inputs: Locally-produced cotton and imported (European) 
polyester/viscose. The largest facility, Texafrica used 
local cotton exclusively. 
 
3. Apparel Production Facilities: Mauritian-owned Belita is 
currently the only garment facility operating in Mozambique. 
It exports to the United States (under AGOA), Europe and 
South Africa. It currently employs approximately 500 workers. 
All fabric is imported, principally from Mauritius. Its 
product-line is comprised mostly of t-shirts. Two other 
facilities have closed within the past two years. Together, 
these facilities employed over 700 workers. As noted above, a 
major new garment facility is expected to come on-line within 
the next year. Machines are currently being sourced. 
 
4. The target markets for finished products have 
traditionally been discount stores (e.g., Target) in the 
United States, South Africa and Europe. 
 
5. USAID recently contracted a report on Mozambique\'s 
textile/apparel facilities which includes an inventory of 
machinery/technology at the facilities cited above. This 
report is currently in draft form and will be completed 
shortly. 
LA LIME 
"
"14545","3/4/2004 9:07","04MAPUTO295","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03MAPUTO1765","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000295 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR AF/S 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, MZ, National Assembly 
SUBJECT: PARLIAMENT OPENS FOR 2004 
 
REF: A. A. 03 MAPUTO 1765 
 
B. B. 03 MAPUTO 1604 
C. C. MAPUTO 220 
D. D. MAPUTO 083 
 
1. (U) On March 1, the GRM opened its 10th session of 
Parliament, during which President Chissano is expected to 
make his final address to the body before stepping down at 
the end of the year. At the same time, the 2004 
presidential-hopefuls, Afonso Dhlakama (RENAMO) and Armando 
Guebuza (FRELIMO), took to the roads and held press 
conferences on hot Mozambican political topics: Dhlakama on 
the growing issue of trafficking in persons, Guebuza on the 
need to attract more foreign investment (REF A, B). These 
events signaled the start of the 2004 political year in 
Mozambique, one that will measure the maturity and success of 
Mozambican democracy, as the two major political parties will 
compete in national elections, a new president will be named, 
and a new GRM instated. Also noteworthy in 2004 was the 
appointment of a new Prime Minister, Luisa Diogo, current 
Minister of Planning and Finance, to the remainder of 
Chissano\'s term (managing both positions) (Ref C). 
 
2. (U) Eduardo Mulembwe, President of the Parliament, opened 
the session by announcing 22 agenda items that Parliament 
will discuss in 2004. Hot items include: question and answer 
sessions with the GRM, a report by the Social Action 
Committee on resettlement of flood victims, a report on the 
revision of the Constitution, revision of the Anti-Corruption 
Law (many deputies feel the law should be tougher), revision 
of the electoral law (more specifically, how it handles vote 
tabulation), and a draft law on tourism and 
telecommunications. 
 
3. (U) Parliamentary party leaders followed Mulembwe, taking 
the floor to discuss pertinent, sensitive issues such as the 
BCM fraud case, trafficking in persons/organs, economic 
growth and development, and revision of the 2004 electoral 
legislation. Manual Tome, Head of the FRELIMO parliamentary 
bench, applauded the success of FRELIMO in improving 
conditions for economic growth, citing the most recent GDP 
growth rate of 7% (2003). Tome heralded national expansion of 
the power grid, water supply, and the health and education 
systems as major FRELIMO successes. On the judicial front, 
Tome praised the BCM trial, calling the process \"objective\" 
and a booster to the credibility of the Mozambican judicial 
system (REF D). 
 
4.(SBU) Countering FRELIMO\'s self-praise, Ossufo Quitine, 
RENAMO parliamentary bench leader, remarked that the 
five-year mandate of the FRELIMO government was marked by 
\"disastrous economic and financial decisions,\" resulting in 
the bankruptcy of many businesses and increased unemployment. 
RENAMO harshly criticized the handling of the BCM trial, 
calling its proceedings a \"farce.\" Finally, RENAMO focused 
heavily on revision of the electoral law to include an extra 
layer of vote tabulation at the district level. RENAMO 
believes that a more thorough vote tabulation process will 
allow for greater transparency in the 2004 national elections 
(to be held sometime between October-December). (COMMENT: 
While this if feasible and potentially valuable for the sake 
of transparency, it will make the tabulation process more 
cumbersome and bureaucratic. RENAMO\'s request to add layers 
to the process continues the opposition party\'s theme of 
being cheated out of votes during the electoral process by 
FRELIMO during the transport of votes from the district to 
the provincial capitals. END COMMENT). 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT: The current session is likely to be a 
noteworthy if not particularly productive one on the 
legislative front. President Chissano will give his last 
annual address to the Parliament, as will Attorney-General 
Joaquim Madeira. Madeira\'s speech is likely to feature a 
thorough cross-examination by RENAMO deputies on whether the 
Attorney General\'s Office will make the decision to prosecute 
Nympine Chissano, the President\'s son, implicated during last 
year\'s trial of those found guilty in the 2000 murder of the 
famous journalist Carlos Cardoso. President Chissano\'s last 
parliamentary session has several important issues to address 
in the 10 months ahead, with corruption and electoral law 
reform of significant interest. Because this is an election 
year, drastic policy changes or legal revisions are not 
expected. The biggest GRM issue to watch for will be how the 
2004 elections are conducted and how the outcome of those 
elections will change the political, economic, and social 
landscape of Mozambique. END COMMENT. 
LA LIME 
"
"14880","3/12/2004 8:56","04MAPUTO338","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000338 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/C, AF/RSA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, PREF, CG, XA, ZF, MZ, SF, UG, BY, Peacekeeping, UN 
SUBJECT: SYGSR SWING BRIEFS ON CHISSANO MEETING 
 
 
1. On March 8, Secretary General\'s Special Representative 
Ambassador William Swing called on Ambassador to brief on his 
meeting in Maputo with President Chissano and the current 
situation of the MONUC in DRC with sixteen months until the 
planned June 2005 elections. 
 
2. Ambassador Swing told us that in his meeting with 
Chissano, he described MONUC\'s dramatic, but incomplete, 
progress and laid out the difficult, but not insurmountable 
problems they face. He discussed the different options and 
estimated price tags for the elections next year, depending 
on the timing of local, provincial, and national polls (and 
the possibility of conducting them simultaneously). Turning 
to demobilization, Amb. Swing detailed successes, but also 
the fact that forty to fifty thousand combatants remain to be 
sent back, as well roughly one thousand each from Uganda, 
Burundi, and the Interhambwe. 
 
3. Amb. Swing found Chissano gracious and engaged, and 
described their meeting as friendly and productive. He 
thanked Chissano for his role in chairing the recent meeting 
in South Africa and made four points. First, he encouraged 
Chissano to visit Congo. Swing noted the importance of 
Chissano\'s visit not only as current President of the AU, but 
also as the African national leader with the most relevant 
experience for Congo coming from transition from civil war to 
political stability. Chissano said that he wants to schedule 
a substantive three to four day visit, rather than just an 
airport meeting. Second, Swing asked Chissano to join the SG 
in making a strong appeal to Uganda and Rwanda to drastically 
reduce the supply of arms, while MONUC concentrates on 
reducing demand. Third, he requested that the GRM send a 
diplomat to represent Mozambique in Kinshasa, (Swing went as 
far as to offer logistical support to the Mozambican 
Ambassador and suggested the South Africans might let him 
work from their mission). Fourth, he expressed the hope that 
Chissano would participate in a ceremony to mark the one-year 
anniversary of the Congolese All-Parties Agreement in South 
Africa, in an effort to reinforce for the Congolese partners 
the progress that has been made. 
LA LIME 
"
"14884","3/12/2004 10:12","04MAPUTO340","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000340 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
USDOC FOR AHILLIGAS 
JOHANNESBURG FOR LABOR OFFICER - BNUELING, FCS - 
JVANRENSBURG, WCENTER 
DURBAN FOR FCS - JKUEHNER, LKOHRS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY MONTHLY ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: 
MOZAMBIQUE (CORRECTED COPY) 
 
------------------------------------ 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
------------------------------------ 
1. (U) In a meeting with Mozambique country director and marketing 
manager for South Africa\'s Vodacom, Econ/Poloffs learned that the 
firm has already captured 12-13% of the national cell phone market. 
Vodacom began operating in Mozambique in December 2003 and 
launched strong campaigns in three key southern cities. Their only 
competitor is mCel, the nationally owned cell phone provider, which 
enjoyed control over the market prior to Vodacom\'s entry. Vodacom 
uses primarily Motorola telecom equipment, hence, there is a US trade 
interest in Vodacom\'s success. 
 
2. (U) Considered a Mozambican mega-project, the SASOL pipeline, 
built to transport natural gas from the province of Inhambane to South 
Africa, embarked on its first gas transfer to South Africa in February. 
The natural gas project was launched in May 2003 and total investment 
by SASOL is valued at 1.3 billion dollars. The South African firm, 
SASOL, has rights to explore the gas reserves for the next 25 years. 
News sources indicate that the project could generate up to a billion 
dollars in revenue for Mozambique during this time. SASOL has a 
Community Development Fund that will invest in the construction 
of secondary schools in the Inhambane province, modeled on MOZAL\'s 
Community Trust. 
 
3. (U) Local news sources report that the Portuguese Government has 
agreed, in principle, to sell some or all of its shares in 
Hidroelectrica Cahora Bassa (HCB). The visit of Portuguese Prime 
Minister Durao Barroso in late May will reportedly include discussion 
and resolution of this long-simmering Portuguese-Mozambican issue. 
Currently, the firm is 82% owned by the Portuguese Government, with 
the remaining portion belonging to the Government of Mozambique (GRM). 
The announcement of a willingness to negotiate a sale came at a 
meeting in Lisbon of the Permanent Joint Commission (PJC), including 
Mozambique, Portugal, and South Africa. The primary intent of this 
meeting was to discuss Cahora Bassa electricity tariffs. Speaking 
with Cahora Bassa contacts in Maputo, HCB also held negotiations in 
Johannesburg this month to discuss sale of HCB shares to South 
African partners. Neither of these negotiations - over tariffs and 
ownership - has yet come to a conclusion. 
 
--------------------------------- 
MACROECONOMICS 
--------------------------------- 
4. (U) The GRM negotiated its external debt cancellation with 
non-Paris Club members in February. China signed the cancellation 
of 90 percent of commercial debt owed to it by Mozambique (total 
debt was equivalent to USD 7 million). According to the Central 
Bank (Banco de Mocambique - BM), the GRM rescheduled its Kuwait 
Fund debt, and technical negotiations are under way with India 
to cancel GRM debt of USD 4 million. 
 
5. (U) The USG\'s work on trade liberalization in Mozambique bore 
fruit in late February, as Mozambique become the first country 
to be admitted to the Integrated Framework for Trade-Related 
Technical Assistance for Least Developed Countries (the \"IF\") 
since late 2001. As a condition of entry, the IF Working Group 
stipulated that USAID would amend its 2002 Trade Mainstreaming 
Report with a fuller analysis of the links between trade and 
poverty in the country. At the request of the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce, USAID/Mozambique and EGAT are working 
together to complete the work by July 2004. In September, USAID 
will sponsor the required \"National Validation Workshop\" which 
will lead directly to the incorporation, or mainstreaming, of 
trade into Mozambique\'s growth and poverty reduction strategy. 
The IF, because it is comprehensive in its sweep (including, for 
example, roads, telecommunications and customs, red tape 
faced by exporters) provides a framework for addressing the 
myriad problems that hamper overall competitiveness. 
 
------------------ 
INDUSTRY 
------------------ 
6. (SBU) On a visit to Mozambique\'s largest mega-project, the 
MOZAL aluminum smelter, the Ambassador and accompanying 
Econ/Poloffs met with the General Director, production managers, 
and manager of the MOZAL Community Development Trust (MCDT). 
MOZAL is the largest revenue - producing venture in Mozambique. 
The Mozambican-registered company is a primary aluminum-producing 
smelter and a share venture managed by BHP Billiton of Australia 
(47% and the smelter operator), Mitsubishi Corporation of 
Japan (25%), the Industrial Development Corporation of South 
Africa (IDC, 24%) and the Government of Mozambique (4%). When 
operations began in 2000, Mozambican exports doubled in size, 
providing for US$400 million in foreign exchange earnings per 
year and adding more than 7% to the Mozambican GDP. Phase II of 
MOZAL opened in October 2003, doubling the firm\'s production 
capacity to 506,000 tons (aluminum ingots). When asked why 
BHP Billiton chose to operate in Mozambique, Director General 
Peter Wilshaw gave three reasons: availability of cheap, abundant 
power (due to the South African electricity grid), easy access 
to a harbor (to bring in raw materials and export finished 
products), and access to a cheap labor force. MOZAL has operated 
well in the Mozambican environment because the GRM created a 
special council to work with MOZAL. MOZAL was able to register 
its business in only two weeks, as opposed to the cited 153 days 
(World Bank figure) that generally plagues registration of small 
and medium-sized enterprises. MOZAL operates in an industrial free 
zone, receiving certain fiscal incentives from the GRM including 
specific duty/tax exemptions, taxation on revenue vice the corporate 
tax, and allowance of a labor force that is up to 15% expatriate 
staff. Mr. Wilshaw noted that the GRM has been a great support to 
MOZAL, contributing to the success of Phase I and II for production. 
MOZAL employees mentioned there is \"talk\" of a Phase III and the 
compound has room for expansion. This expansion could go forward 
in the next few years, creating even more of an industrial giant. 
(COMMENT: The GRM has taken extra steps to support MOZAL and former 
Prime Minister Mocumbi once stated, \"if MOZAL fails, Mozambique 
fails\". MOZAL\'s business is hugely important to the success of the 
Mozambican economy. The firm\'s operations drive major economic 
indicators such as GDP and country trade statistics. Not only is 
MOZAL important economically for Mozambique, but also demonstrates 
an example of corporate social responsibility. The firm developed 
a Community Trust that invests money in HIV/AIDS campaigns, health 
centers, school and classroom development, road safety campaigns, 
and social activities to improve the community surrounding the MOZAL 
compound. If all businesses, regardless of size, were treated 
similarly by GRM, the Mozambican economy would be a much more 
favorable environment for foreign and national investment. END 
COMMENT). 
 
------------------------ 
AGRICULTURE 
------------------------ 
7. (U) Zimbabwean farmers settling in the Manica Province have 
galvanized the province\'s agricultural sector through the 
introduction of new products and an upgrade of existing products 
and infrastructure (including irrigation systems and equipment). 
Most recently, the farmers introduced baby corn production in 
Mozambique. The first export of this product was sent to the UK. 
The province is also exporting vegetables and flowers to the 
European market. Local economic news sources report that, due to 
the Zimbabwean agricultural influence, Manica now has 33 agro 
industry companies working, employing approximately 4,000 workers. 
 
8. (U) The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADER) 
launched a soybean pilot project on February 26 in Sofala Province. 
Financed by a Brazilian group that recently visited Mozambique, USD 
10 million was invested in cultivating 10 hectares of the soybean 
product. If the project is successful, soybean production is likely 
to expand in November 2004 to other provinces in the central and 
northern regions, including Manica, Tete, Zambezia, Nampula, Cabo 
Delgado, and Niassa. According to the Minister of Agriculture, Helder 
Muteia, \"the national territory has excellent conditions to produce 
this agricultural product\". 
 
------------ 
LABOR 
------------ 
9. (U) In March, a tripartite commission comprised of unions, 
private sector groups, and the GRM will begin to discuss the 
minimum wage. Currently, the group is preparing for the first 
round of negotiations. In 2003 the minimum wage was settled at 
982,000.00 meticais/year (USD $43/month), which represented a 21 
percent increase from the previous year. Minimum wage is adjusted 
yearly according to a formula that includes the inflation rate, 
GDP growth and a negotiated variable. Many companies, particularly 
in the agricultural, agribusiness sectors, as well as SMEs have 
indicated that any increase above inflation (13%) will lead to job 
losses and business failures. 
 
10. (U) Following a successful Consultative Group (CG) meeting in 
Paris (Oct 2003) during which donor pledges exceeded Mozambique\'s 
stated needs by $100 million, the country\'s donor coordination body - 
the Donor Partners Group - agreed to form a Private Sector Working 
Group (PSWG). The PSWG is charged with coordinating the donors\' 
response to a variety of constraints to private sector growth, many 
of which were highlighted during the CG. USAID chairs the working 
group and presented a letter on the group\'s behalf to the Prime 
Minister requesting that GRM counterparts be identified to enhance 
the effectiveness of the group. The first major issue being 
addressed by the PSWG is Mozambique\'s labor law, specifically a 
recent decree (December 2003) that does not reflect a number of 
improvements to labor policies agreed to by the private sector and 
the Ministry of Labor through a long process of negotiation that 
USAID facilitated. The PSWG has produced a non-paper on the labor 
law issues that details the main issues with the December decree, 
and also underscores the potential payoff in terms of private 
investment if all of the key reforms are adopted. 
 
--------------- 
FINANCE 
--------------- 
11. (SBU) Selected Ambassadors of the G-14 General Budget Support 
Donor countries called on the Prime Minister/ Minister of Planning 
and Finance to discuss weaknesses in the GRM\'s procurement system. 
In encouraging Ms. Diogo to bring the procurement legislation and 
practice up to international standards, the group promised 
continuing support in an effort recognized to require some further 
work and time. They came, however, to point out an immediate concern. 
A directive from the Ministry of Planning and Finance that was issued 
in 1996 and is still in force authorizes the payment to the Treasury 
(50%), the Tender Commission(s) (35%), and related staff (15%) of 
the commissions derived from the tendering process. 
The Ambassadors pointed out that this appears to their home offices 
as official corruption, and suggested that the directive be revoked 
as soon as possible. The PM said that there were lots of problems 
with the \"outdated\" procurement system but such reform was complex 
and needed both a measured and structured approach. The PM\'s clear 
preference is to deal with issues like this in the context of the 
reform process overall. However, she said that Government was also 
looking for \"quick wins\". She talked about the background to the 
directive, which was issued when she was Deputy Minister. The aim 
was to control corruption, by providing incentives to those involved 
in tendering not to accept bribes from individual bidders. She 
agreed that she would look carefully at the \'96 directive with a 
view to revoking it sooner. She clearly recognized that 
this matter was a great concern to some partners and her pledge to 
deal with it is encouraging. 
 
------------- 
WATER 
------------- 
12. (U) March 17-19th, Mozambique will host the Water Africa 2004 
Sub-Sahara Exhibition in Maputo at the Chissano Center. This 
exhibition will showcase South African, British, Zimbabwean, 
Italian, and American companies\' products and services in the 
water, mining, and, construction sectors. To date, twenty-two US 
firms operating in the water sector have sent their material to 
participate in the international forum. Firms hail from Hawaii to 
Wyoming and Louisiana, providing manufactured solar power water 
pumping equipment to water and sewer industry geographic information 
systems. The US booth at the exhibition is a joint USDOC-USDOS effort 
that will showcase the firms\' material and coordinate communication 
between interested clients and firms. 
La Lime 
"
"14996","3/16/2004 12:44","04MAPUTO360","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000360 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS - JHAEN, OES/SAT - FECHAVARRIA 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID - GWEYNAND 
COMMERCE FOR AHILLIGAS 
ENERGY FOR FHODSOLL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ENRG, EFIN, SENV, MZ, Electricity 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: GEOTHERMAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT 
 
REF: 03 STATE 347715 
 
1. Per reftel, Maputo provides the following information: 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
------------------ 
 
Support to Develop Geothermal Energy in East Africa 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
------------------ 
2. Mozambique is rich in hydropower and natural gas 
resources and is exploiting the capacity of both sources for 
energy production. The GRM is supportive of international 
aid to geothermal infrastructure development in the Rift 
Valley, but advises that little research has been done in 
this field in Mozambique. Additionally, the GRM informs Post 
there is no funding to explore geothermal energy development 
in Mozambique, as all GRM focus is on developing already- 
discovered energy resources such as hydroelectric power, 
natural gas, steam coal, and solar power. Post is aware of 
projects in the energy sector and believes Mozambique must 
first develop production in these areas in which it is well 
endowed and has attracted foreign investment, before 
pursuing geothermal energy options. 
 
3. Mozambique has immense hydropower and natural gas 
resources that currently supply the national market and a 
number of consumers in South Africa. The Cahora Bassa Dam, 
Africa\'s second largest in terms of hydropower production, 
supplies electricity to South Africa (which is then sold 
back to Southern Mozambique at a higher price) and to the 
northern and central regions of Mozambique. The South 
African Chemical and Fuel Company, SASOL, has embarked on a 
mega-project in the province of Inhambane to extract natural 
gas from Mozambique and export it to South Africa. The first 
exportation of natural gas under the SASOL project occurred 
in February 2004. Aside from these two sources of energy, 
Mozambique has steam coal deposits located in the Tete 
Province (yet to be explored for energy production), the 
beginning of solar panel installation in certain areas, and 
mini-hydro projects. If/when the GRM selects a firm to 
reconstruct the Sena Railway line (decision pending), 
linking Tete\'s coalmines to the coast, exploration of a 
steam coal project will move forward. There are already 
several foreign investors interested in exploring this 
opportunity. The GRM is also looking into further hydropower 
projects on the Zambezi River such as Cahora Bossa North 
(which would install generators along the north side of the 
Cahora Bossa Dam, roughly doubling current capacity) and the 
Mepanda Uncua Dam (1300 MW), downstream from the Cahora 
Bassa. A feasibility study has been completed on the dam\'s 
hydropower potential, but the GRM is still seeking potential 
investors. 
 
4. In a meeting at the National Directorate of Energy, 
Ministry of Mining and Energy Resources, National Director 
Pascoal Bacela described the GRM\'s energy policy as \"the 
willingness to explore every energy resource\" available to 
Mozambique. The Ministry\'s first priority is to increase 
the population\'s access to energy. The Ministry is also 
concerned with finding clean and efficient methods of energy 
production that do not harm the environment. On geothermal 
energy infrastructure development Bacela said, \"Mozambique 
would need significant financing\" to move forward in this 
area of exploration. \"This (exploration) opens a good 
possibility for Mozambique\" and the GRM \"would be willing to 
cooperate in development of the African Rift Valley 
Geothermal Development Facility (ARGEo) if this project 
brings development to Mozambique and its resources.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Barriers to Geothermal Development 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
5. In Mozambique, only 7% of the population has access to 
electricity. Of this 7%, 80% live in urban areas. Public 
investment (GRM and donor-funded) totals $200 million/year 
(on average) for the construction of transmission lines to 
expand the national electricity network. The GRM, through 
the World Bank Energy Reform and Access Project (ERAP), is 
working to increase access by encouraging private sector 
involvement in the electricity sector. The ERAP project 
will include components of technical assistance, electricity 
sector restructuring (i.e. privatization of the national 
power company, EDM), establishing an independent energy 
regulator, and grid expansion through capital subsidies. 
The effective date of the project is March 31, 2004. 
 
6. Hidroelectrica Cahora Bassa, an 82% Portuguese-owned and 
18% Mozambican owned company, controls Cahora Bassa 
hydropower production and sale to Mozambique, South Africa, 
and Zimbabwe. Although this company is the second largest 
revenue-producing firm in Mozambique (according to KPMG\'s 
annual \"Top 100 Companies in Mozambique\" Study, 2003), it 
operates with an extravagant amount of debt. There are 
several reasons for this, some dating back to transmission 
line damage during the Civil War, unusually low tariffs paid 
by South Africa (Eskom) for hydropower, and Zimbabwe\'s 
recent inability to pay its electric bills. Mozambique 
produces more electricity than it can use at Cahora Bassa. 
The problem lies in the fact that the national market for 
electricity is severely limited due to the lack of 
transportation infrastructure and the pure inability of a 
majority of Mozambicans to pay for a \"luxury\" item such as 
power. 
 
7. Energy sector aside, there are some basic obstacles for 
foreign investment in Mozambique. These obstacles include: 
length of time for business registration, the tax 
administration system, the labor law, property rights, 
operation of customs, bureaucracy, and corruption. The 
business registration process in Mozambique operates very 
inefficiently and is highly time-consuming, causing 
aggravation on the behalf of many foreign investors. The 
World Bank recently reported that, on average, 153 days is 
the average length of time it takes for a company to achieve 
registration in Mozambique. The applicant company must 
complete 15 procedures (OECD average is 7) in this process. 
Bureaucracy is high and it is common to come across corrupt 
officials, whether during a labor inspection or the customs 
clearance process. The Ministry of Finance has not yet 
formulated an efficient system for repaying VAT promised to 
exempted investors and donors. Experience demonstrates that 
significant return on this VAT often only happens with 
diplomatic intervention at the highest levels. Many 
companies have operated with restricted cash flows due to 
the amount of time it takes to receive repayments. The labor 
law is in the process of revision, but is regarded as highly 
pro-worker and investment-unfriendly. There is a severe 
paucity of skilled labor in Mozambique and the law makes it 
very difficult and costly to employ foreign labor. Property 
rights are weakly protected in Mozambique and the judiciary 
is largely corrupt. Customs operates inefficiently, and 
products spend a significant amount of time stationary at 
port. With cognizance of the barriers, the GRM repeats the 
theme of needing to attract foreign investment for the 
country to develop and grow. Many issues are currently being 
discussed within joint GRM, private sector, and donor 
circles to lessen the investment-negative impact of these 
barriers. 
 
8. Mega-projects originating in Mozambique, such as the 
MOZAL aluminum smelter and the SASOL natural gas pipeline, 
operate in industrial-free zones. The GRM has been committed 
to working with these projects to satisfy investors and 
create a smoothly operating business climate. These firms 
enjoy various tax incentives and account for a majority of 
the country\'s revenue production and import/export 
statistics. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
US Mission Assistance 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
9. USAID is involved in the energy sector through support to 
the National Energy Council (CNELEC). The goal of the 
support is to create an independent regulatory body that 
will oversee the electricity sector. Support includes 
institutional capacity building, training, and technical 
assistance. The GRM is undertaking the steps necessary to 
privatize EDM through the World Bank ERAP project. An 
independent regulator is both a necessary part of system 
privatization, and a condition precedent for the 
disbursement of the second tranche of funds under ERAP. 
USAID\'s current priorities in the energy sector do not 
include geothermal exploration. 
LA LIME 
"
"15206","3/22/2004 13:57","04MAPUTO389","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000389 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S, AF/FO, T, PM, AND L/T 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS, MARR, PREL, MZ, Article 98 
SUBJECT: ARTICLE 98 WITH MOZAMBIQUE BROUGHT INTO FORCE 
 
REF: HODGE/DAVISON E-MAIL AND FAX OF 5MARCH04 
 
On 3 March 2004 the Mozambican Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
issued note 62/DAMC/DJ/RT/B/A.6/2004 stating that Mozambique 
had completed all domestic legal requirements to bring our 
bilateral Article 98 Agreement into force. The original 
Mozambican note as well as a certified copy of the Embassy\'s 
note of 26 June 2003 indicating completion of all U.S. legal 
requirements were pouched to L/T on 8 March. 
LA LIME 
"
"15624","4/2/2004 9:27","04MAPUTO463","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000463 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S KDAVISON 
PLEASE PASS TO OPIC FOR MSHORE 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/01/2014 
TAGS: EINV, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, MZ, OPIC, Nacala Corridor 
SUBJECT: NACALA CORRIDOR PROJECT IN JEOPARDY -- YET AGAIN 
 
 
Classified By: Econ/Poloff Elizabeth Jaffee for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary. The Nacala Port and Rail Corridor project is 
yet again in trouble. Two principal outstanding issues 
remain: 1) the lack of the government of Malawi (GOM)\'s 
signature on a Direct Agreement and 2) on-going disagreements 
between the project\'s US-led consortium and the principal 
Mozambican government counterpart, Ports and Rails of 
Mozambique (CFM), over management and personnel matters. The 
project has reached critical stage. Without a Direct 
Agreement with Malawi, the project cannot go forward. US 
shareholders Rail Road Development Corporation (RDC) and 
Edlow Resources Limited, who have been in Maputo for meetings 
since March 28, have informed post that the GOM has refused 
to sign an Direct Agreement based on previously negotiated 
shareholder terms. The proposed changes to the terms of the 
Direct Agreement with Malawi would dilute US interests in the 
project below the threshold set by OPIC and, even if 
negotiated at a lower level, would require extensive legal 
revisions to the various agreements already in place. For 
CFM\'s part, it continues to play hard-ball over the number of 
CFM employees to be retained. The lack of transparency in the 
process has been extremely troubling. RDC and Edlow are 
trying to be flexible on many of the issues, but their 
patience is running thin. End Summary. 
 
2. (C) Project Background: The Nacala Corridor project dates 
from 2000, when a concession agreement was signed between CFM 
and the Nacala Corridor Development Company (SDCN), a 
consortium comprised of foreign and national investors, 
creating an autonomous company, Nacala Corridor Development 
(CDN), for the rehabilitation and modernization of the 
railroad and port system on a key transport route between 
Malawi, Zambia and Mozambique. CDN has a highly complicated 
shareholders structure, with SDCN holding 51% of the shares 
and CFM holding the remaining 49%. Foreign investors (RDC, 
Edlow Resources, Manica Limited) hold 67% of SDCN\'s shares. 
Private national investors reportedly include the Minister of 
Transportation, the Secretary General and presidential 
candidate of ruling party FRELIMO, and several key members of 
Parliament operating through Mozambican registered companies. 
 
3. (C) Malawi Wants Share Of American Interest: On March 31, 
RDC and Edlow Resources reps met with Malawi\'s Minister of 
Transportation Stambuli and members of Malawi\'s Privatization 
Commission. A representative of Mozambique\'s Ministry of 
Transportation was also present. The GOM representatives are 
in Maputo as part of President Muluzi\'s state visit. 
According to RDC and Edlow, the originally negotiated terms 
of the Direct Agreement called for 16% of CDN\'s shares to be 
provided to a Malawian entity out of CFM\'s 49% interest. 
However, during the March 31 meeting, Minister Stambuli 
stated that Malawi refused to sign the agreement under the 
previously negotiated terms. Instead, Malawi was now 
insisting that the US investors sell 33% of its shares in 
SDCN to the Malawian private firm Farmers World. Minister 
Stambuli told RDC and Edlow that he needed an answer 
immediately or the deal was off. RDC and Edlow responded 
that they did not have the authority to make such a decision 
and, more importantly, such an arrangement could put the 
entire project in jeopardy. Specifically, changing the terms 
of the Direct Agreement in this manner would bring American 
participation below the percentage required by OPIC and, even 
if negotiated to a lower number of shares being sold, require 
legal revisions and reviews of all existing project 
agreements since it would dramatically alter the shareholding 
position of the leading (i.e., US) investors. This, in turn, 
would require renegotiating the OPIC agreement. 
 
4. (C) Conversation to Continue in Malawi: Edlow Resources 
met again with Minister Stambuli on April 1. Stambuli 
continued to insist on Malawi\'s shares coming from SDCN. 
Edlow reminded Stambuli of the previously agreed to terms 
that the shares would come from CFM and suggested that the 
GOM speak to CFM over the terms. Edlow has drafted a 
response to the GOM that, while not rejecting the GOM\'s 
proposal, notes that any changes to the shareholding 
structure would require both SDCN and OPIC approval. Edlow 
representative Russell Neely will be leaving Maputo for 
Malawi on April 2 and will contact Embassy Lilongwe regarding 
a possible meeting with Minister Stambuli. 
 
4. (C) Concerns of Malawi Government Representing Private 
Interests: Further complicating the situation is the role of 
a private company, Farmers World, on whose behalf the GOM 
appears to be negotiating. According to the RDC and Edlow, 
Farmers World had held discussions with the Mozambican 
government for the purchase of the 16% equity that was 
supposed to be reserved for a Malawian interest. Farmers 
World and the Mozambicans could not agree on a price and, 
subsequently, it appeared the Mozambican side no longer 
intended to sell the 16% interest to any Malawian interest. 
The exact relationship between the Malawian government and 
Farmers World and why a private company\'s interests were 
being raised on behalf of the GOM is unclear. However, RDC 
and Edlow speculate that the GOM is trying to use Farmers 
World to somehow increase the government\'s shares under the 
Direct Agreement while allowing Mozambique -- through CFM -- 
to retain 49% of the shares. 
 
5. (C) Problems Also With the Mozambicans: Though less of an 
immediate concern, CFM\'s complete inflexibility over 
personnel and management issues continue to place the project 
in jeopardy even with a Direct Agreement with Malawi. The 
principal outstanding issues with CFM include the conclusion 
of a management agreement and the number of CFM employees to 
be retained. RDC, Edlow and Manica described meetings with 
CFM on March 29-31 as \"difficult\" and \"tense\". CFM has showed 
characteristic inflexibility. The problem is one largely of 
CFM\'s own making. At the end of 2003, CFM tripled current 
employees\' wages thus making retaining more than a limited 
number of CFM employees economically impossible. CFM also 
changed the regulations on severance to retrenched workers 
from the standard 3 months of severance to 6 months. This has 
put the consortium in an impossible situation. The consortium 
had originally proposed retaining 30 CFM employees, a number 
deemed unacceptable by CFM. They have agreed to increase the 
number, but the issue of retrenchment must further be 
negotiated. The consortium is providing CFM with a new 
proposal on personnel and management issues and appears to 
have been flexible in terms of personnel numbers. 
 
6. (C) Prime Minister May Be Helpful: During a pull-aside 
meeting on March 31 with Prime Minister Diogo at a dinner in 
honor President Muluzi, the Ambassador urged resolution of 
the two outstanding issues concerning Mozambique to ensure 
the project move forward. PM Diogo was not surprised to hear 
about CFM\'s objections to the consortium\'s proposal on the 
number of CFM personnel to be retained, but seemed genuinely 
concerned about the CFM\'s apparent intention not to sell the 
16% equity to a Malawian interest. The Prime Minister 
undertook to get a better handle on CFM\'s negotiations 
recognizing the national interest in getting the Nacala 
Corridor project completed (Note: PM Diogo, in her previous 
role of Minister of Planning and Finance, appears to be one 
of the few government officials able to reign in CFM\'s 
Director Rui Fonseca) 
 
7. (C) Comment: This is not the first time the Nacala 
Corridor project has been close to collapsing. Numerous 
delays by the government of Mozambique (GRM) in signing a 
Direct Agreement required under OPIC regulations in late 2003 
almost jeopardized OPIC financing, without which the deal 
cannot go forward. While it is unclear what role national 
shareholders and the recent appearance of Farmers World as an 
interest in the Malawi agreement are playing in preventing 
the finalization of the project, there is no doubt that Rui 
Fonseca is actively trying to sabotage the project. There may 
be genuine concern about the future of CFM\'s employees. 
However, it is more likely that Fonseca, an ideological 
carry-over from Mozambique\'s socialist past, is most 
concerned about the loss of his empire, as the Nacala project 
will be the first privatization of a Mozambican railroad. The 
only member of the GRM who has appeared willing to confront 
Fonseca on the issue is Luisa Diogo. Minister of 
Transportation and Communication Salomao is helpful but has a 
poor record in overcoming the positions of powerful 
parastatal directors he ostensibly supervises. 
Unfortunately, the project has highlighted the difficulties 
of doing business in Mozambique and the enormous influence 
that personality and personnel interests continue to play in 
business deals in Mozambique. 
LA LIME 
"
"15625","4/2/2004 9:38","04MAPUTO464","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000464 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KCRM, MZ, Trafficking in Persons 
SUBJECT: ALLEGATIONS AND ACCUSATIONS IN NAMPULA: UNCOVERING 
THE TRUTH ABOUT TRAFFICKING IN ORGANS AND CHILDREN 
 
1. Summary: Allegations of trafficking in human organs and 
children in the northern provincial capital of Nampula have 
riveted the public\'s attention for the past several months 
and received wide-spread press coverage. In the middle of the 
firestorm is a foreign couple accused of trafficking in 
organs by a Brazilian missionary. Following weeks of 
sensationalistic articles slanted against the couple, the 
climate has begun to change as the press has acknowledged 
that the couple may have been the victims of rumors and 
unfounded allegations. An investigation by the Attorney 
General\'s office found no evidence to support the accusations 
against the couple. High-ranking government officials and 
opposition party leaders in Maputo and the provinces have 
weighed-in on the case, with both parties calling for 
enhanced measures to investigate and prosecute traffickers. 
The case has been discussed twice in the National Assembly. 
While a number of international organizations and high-level 
government officials have questioned the accuracy of the 
allegations, criticism of the investigation undertaken by the 
Attorney General\'s office has been widespread. End Summary. 
 
2. The allegations leveled against the foreign couple (the 
husband is South African, the wife is Danish) stem from a 
single source: a Brazilian missionary named Maria Elialda dos 
Santos. The couple are neighbors of dos Santos and own a 
successful poultry project in Nampula. The case first 
attracted public attention in December, when the couple were 
detained by local authorities on trafficking charges and 
spent several days in jail. The couple was released due to a 
lack of evidence and the intervention of the Danish 
Ambassador. Post contacts in Nampula who know the couple 
personally have categorically stated that they are innocent 
and are being framed by Ms. dos Santos over a land dispute. 
 
3. In response to the allegations, the Attorney General\'s 
office sent several teams of investigators to Nampula, 
including the country\'s leading forensic doctor. Local police 
and investigators have also been working on the case. The 
preliminary report on the investigations found no evidence of 
trafficking in human organs. However, the report did not 
specifically clear the couple of the charges. The 
investigation on allegations of trafficking in children, 
based principally on charges of missing or \"disappeared\" 
children, were inconclusive. Investigations are on-going. The 
Attorney General\'s report has been widely criticized by the 
press, religious groups, local NGOs and the opposition party 
RENAMO, who have questioned publicly the credibility of the 
investigation. 
 
3. The Attorney General\'s annual report to the National 
Assembly on the country\'s legal system, presented on March 9, 
focused extensively on the Nampula case. While Attorney 
General Madeira noted during his remarks that there was no 
evidence to support the allegations of trafficking in human 
organs, he did not fully vindicate the foreign couple. In 
fact, he stated only that the investigation did not 
\"categorically\" prove that the couple was involved in the 
alleged crimes and called for a continuation of the 
investigation. The Nampula case was also cited during the 
opening session of the National Assembly on March 1. During 
the session, Manual Tome, Head of the FRELIMO parliamentary 
bench, urged a professional and thorough investigation of the 
case and noted the Assembly\'s \"willingness and readiness\" to 
work towards the adoption of anti-trafficking legislation. 
 
4. Comment: The Nampula case has served to highlight both the 
lack of education about trafficking in persons among civil 
society and many government officials, and the power that 
traditional beliefs still hold in Mozambique. NGOs and 
government programs on trafficking in Mozambique have focused 
almost exclusively on children, reflecting, in part, concerns 
stemming from a tradition of child migration and abuse in the 
country. Yet, international organizations such as the 
International Organization on Migration (IOM), which produced 
a report on trafficking in Southern Africa in 2003, found 
that a significant number of cases of trafficking in 
Mozambique involve women. On the positive side, the Nampula 
case has served to raise public awareness about trafficking 
and may well prompt the adoption of more aggressive 
government policies to investigate and prosecute traffickers, 
including the adoption of desperately needed anti-trafficking 
legislation. However, given the lack of financial and 
technical resources within the government on trafficking 
issues, international assistance will likely be required for 
the development and implementation of effective policies or 
programs. 
LA LIME 
"
"15819","4/8/2004 9:05","04MAPUTO487","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO83","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000487 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR AF/S, INL/AAE AHENRY-PLOTTS 
DOJ FOR OPDAT JSILVERWOOD AND ICITAP EBEINHART 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, KCOR, EAID, KCRM, MZ 
SUBJECT: ATTORNEY GENERAL SEEKS GREATER SUPPORT TO BUILD 
PROFESSIONALISM 
 
REF: MAPUTO 83 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified -- Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (U) Attorney General Joaquim Madeira gathered donor 
country ambassadors on March 26 and appealed for greater 
support to help create more professional and effective 
prosecutors. He reiterated the need for his staff, also 
referred to as the \"Ministerio Publico\" (MP) or Procuradoria 
Geral (PGR), to have more staff resources, and emphasized the 
need for better training. Following on his annual report to 
parliament March 10, he stressed the obstacles he faces in 
successfully prosecuting corruption. He opening the meeting 
by making comparisons between his situation and international 
counterparts in Panama, South Africa, Guatemala, and 
elsewhere, whose investigations lead them to high-level 
political figures. While acknowledging US support (USAID DA 
funding as well as INL funding), Madeira appealed to the 
donor community to fund further professionalization and an 
increase of his staff resources. 
 
2. (U) In the meeting at the Attorney General\'s office, 
Madeira and his Assistant Attorneys General were present, as 
well as representatives of ten donor countries, including 
five heads of mission. The AG opened by describing the 
situation when he took office three and half years ago. On 
that occasion, he asked the Danish mission why they had 
chosen the court system for a large-scale assistance program, 
but not considered the AG\'s office. They replied that the 
donor community would not waste their resources on an office 
noted for apathy, negligence, corruption, and crime. 
Pointing to the progress made during his tenure, and the 
formation of the Anti-Corruption Unit (UAC), he launched an 
appeal for reconsideration as a worthy recipient of 
assistance, alluding to the worldwide emphasis on combating 
corruption. He described this year as a year of 
consolidation for his office and laid out their training 
needs. 
 
3. (U) In the context of thanking the donor community 
(primarily Denmark, but also the US) for their support to the 
Judicial Training Center, he expressed a desire to see 
Mozambican judges continue to receive scholarships for 
completion of law degrees. He noted that almost all 
provincial level judges now have degrees, but that district 
level judges should also all have such qualifications. 
Citing ten candidates from his prosecutors, Madeira appealed 
to donors to fund scholarships for law studies in Maputo, 
Beira, Nampula, and Quelimane, including funding to defray 
financial hardship to the beneficiaries, as well as to 
increased staffing levels required for releasing employees 
for necessary training. Describing the problems resulting 
from the MP\'s lack of a \"training float,\" he mentioned 
INL-funded participation at ILEA Botswana, which he highly 
values, and the negative effects caused by the absence of 
seven of his staff for six weeks. 
 
4. (U) Madeira also referred to the need to improve 
financial management within the PGR to facilitate management 
of donor funds. This has been a constraint to efficient USG 
support. The Norwegians funded a financial management 
assessment, which USAID is using as the basis to provide 
financial management training, with the goal of making the 
PGR capable of directly managing USG funds within six months 
to facilitate direct implementation of USG support to the 
Anti-Corruption Unit. Achieving this goal will also trigger 
funding from European donor countries. 
 
5. (U) The Anti-Corruption Law passed in November 2003 has 
still not fully been promulgated and implementing regulations 
have not yet been drafted. This lack of full approval by the 
GRM is another constraint to the UAC, as the law formally 
creates the Unit as an independent department within the PGR, 
entitled to its own line item in the budget and an allotment 
of prosecutors. Until now, the Unit has functioned with 
staff on loan from provincial offices and other departments 
and lacks its own dedicated resources. 
 
6. (SBU) After making his appeal for donors to reconsider 
supporting his office, Madeira took questions. In a reply to 
the Spanish Ambassador, he agreed that combating corruption 
is an effort that should be collective and not just the 
domain of one government agency. He used that opportunity to 
criticize the Criminal Investigation Police (PIC) as an 
unreliable partner in the fight and to display some 
impatience with the pace of legal reform. Responding to the 
Dutch Ambassador he directed donors to the English version of 
the UAC\'s annual report (reftel) for details on the personnel 
issues he raised. The Italian Ambassador inquired if the PGR 
utilized specialized consultants from other government 
agencies or outside the government, prompting the AG to 
describe significant problems created by use of expert South 
African specialists\' English-language evidence in previous 
trials. Madeira mentioned interest and offers of specialized 
assistance from Brazl, Italy, Portugal, and Spain for the 
investigation of the Siba-Siba Macuacua murder case and 
reiterated that his goal is to raise the PGR to same standard 
of professionalism as in those countries. In a meeting with 
the World Bank on March 29, he stated that he is very 
interested in this type of support. The Swedish commented 
that the appeal for support was timely, due to the ongoing 
joint review session of donors who provide direct budget 
support to the GRM. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: Madeira\'s appeal to the donors comes just 
two weeks after his annual report to the National Assembly, 
during which he emphasized the weaknesses still prevalent in 
his office and reiterated his severe criticism of the PIC, 
citing cases of intentional sabotage of investigations, and 
individuals from the PIC arrogantly extorting bribes from 
those under investigation. Since the PIC is already widely 
considered to be corrupt, headlines focused on his admission 
of insufficient professionalism within the PGR. In 
describing this as a year of consolidation, the AG also 
implied that the political leadership is not going to back 
any dramatic investigations, revelations, or trials, that 
could damage FRELIMO\'s prospects in this election year, such 
as the long-awaited Siba-Siba case. The USG is the only 
donor providing assistance to the Attorney General, with our 
support of the Anti-Corruption Unit. As the GRM moves 
forward on public sector reform, and post coordinates with 
the British in our approach to the GRM as a pilot country for 
the G-8 Evian Transparency Initiative, it can be hoped that 
other donors respond positively to Madeira\'s request for more 
support. While dramatic results may not prove forthcoming in 
the short term, post sees the investment in the UAC as an 
important element to achieve our MPP goal of reducing 
corruption in Mozambique. 
Hankins 
"
"15885","4/12/2004 11:05","04MAPUTO505","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO455","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000505 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO - BNUELING, FCS - WCENTER 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest, Electricity 
SUBJECT: MARCH MONTHLY ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: MAPUTO 00455 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified - Protect Accordingly 
 
----------------------- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
---------------------- 
1. (U) Mineral Resources Survey: The GRM signed an agreement 
with a South African firm, Fugro Airborne Surveys, to 
undertake aerial surveys in the northern and central 
provinces of Zambezia, Tete, Niassa, and Cabo Delgado, as 
reported by Noticias, the daily newspaper. The objective of 
the surveys is to collect information on the country\'s 
geological potential. Fugro will overfly the area using low- 
level remote sensing technology to detect geological pulses. 
Similar surveys have already been completed in Mozambique\'s 
southern provinces. Total investment in the project is 
around $33 million, co-financed by the World Bank, the 
African Development Bank, the Nordic Development Fund, the 
South African Government, and the GRM. The new survey 
should be completed by March 2005 and final results of the 
country\'s geological mapping are expected by late 2006. 
Mining of precious stones is already underway in Niassa 
where Tanzanians are involved in mine exploration. 
 
------------------ 
MACROECONOMICS 
------------------ 
2. (U) World Band/IMF Joint Staff Assessment: A team from 
the World Bank and the IMF simultaneously conducted the 
annual Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of Mozambique\'s progress 
in implementing the GRM\'s Action Plan for the Reduction of 
Absolute Poverty (PARPA). The JSA concluded that performance 
is \"satisfactory\". The IMF and the GRM negotiated terms for 
a new Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility [PRGF] 
arrangement and general agreement was reached; yet some 
details remain to be worked out. The new PRGF will support 
Mozambique\'s quest for poverty reduction, economic growth 
and stability. The PRGF is designed to maintain monetary 
and fiscal discipline while allowing Mozambique to continue 
its rapid GDP growth path with a comfortable external sector 
situation (REFTEL). 
 
3. (U) Poverty Review: Recently reported results from the 
2002/3 Household Survey, completed by the National 
Statistics Institute (INE), indicate that the poverty 
incidence in Mozambique has dropped to 54.1% in 2003, down 
from 70% in 1997. These numbers demonstrate that Mozambique 
is surpassing its poverty reduction targets as benchmarked 
by the GRM\'s Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute 
Poverty (PARPA), which estimated poverty to drop to 60% by 
2005. Revealing the results in front of Parliament, Prime 
Minister and Minister of Planning and Finance, Luisa Diogo, 
said these numbers and recent demography and health surveys 
also undertaken by INE indicate that Mozambique is \"on the 
right path\". According to Diogo, the \"fundamental 
instrument\" for poverty reduction is education and since 
1999, expansion in primary and secondary education has 
vastly surpassed PARPA targets. Based on survey results, 
illiteracy has fallen from 60.5% in 1997 to 53.6% in 2003. 
The Minister presented a further challenge before 
Parliament, saying \"We hope to cut the illiteracy rate to 
50% this year (2004)\". In health care statistics, the 
building of new rural hospitals and health units contributed 
to a rise in the number of people who could reach a health 
care center in less than an hour, from 40% in 1997 to 54% in 
2003. The expanded vaccination program for childbearing 
women and children and an insecticide approach to preventing 
malaria has contributed to significant health gains. 
Additionally, the GRM has been active in the struggle 
against HIV/AIDS as 43 VCT centers were opened in 2003 and 
more than 200,000 patients used counseling and testing 
services. 
 
--------------------------- 
PORTS, ROADS, AND RAILWAYS 
--------------------------- 
4. (SBU) Sena Line: The US-Mozambique Chamber of Commerce 
hosted a lunch with guest speaker Minister of Transportation 
Tomas Salomao this month. Salamao\'s speech to the business 
audience focused on reconstruction of the Sena Railway Line, 
a top GRM initiative and major infrastructure project, 
valued at $100 million. The Minister emphasized that 
rehabilitation of the line is important for development of 
the Zambeze River Valley and valuable to resource 
exploration and exportation opportunities in the area, 
namely of coal and sugar. Salomao admitted that the project 
would take time once the tender is awarded, estimating three 
and a half years for full completion. The GRM received three 
bids on line reconstruction in January 2004. The candidates 
have been scaled down to two, a Chinese and an Indian firm. 
The GRM\'s plan is to award the project and appeal to the 
World Bank for project financing. There continues to be US 
interest in exploring the possibility of barging down the 
Zambeze River, achieving coal exportation differently. This 
interest is meeting heavy GRM resistance, as the Sena line 
is a highly political issue that will go forward regardless 
of its economic viability, unless, of course, the World Bank 
refuses financing. 
 
--------- 
TOURISM 
--------- 
5. (U) New Tourism Law: The Mozambican Parliament passed the 
first reading of a bill to regulate the tourism industry. 
Tourism Minister and former businessman, Fernando Sumbana, 
described tourism as a sector \"responsible for rapid 
economic and social development\" and a \"fundamental 
instrument in the struggle for poverty reduction\". A visibly 
growing industry in Mozambique, tourism is becoming more and 
more important to the national economy by attracting foreign 
investment, creating employment, and developing local 
infrastructure. The current bill intends to ensure that 
Mozambique\'s tourism potential is used in a rational and 
sustainable manner. It requires that tourist operators fix 
prices in the local currency (most prices are currently 
quoted in US dollars), properly insure resorts, and make 
provisions for disabled tourists. Additionally, it allows 
for tourists to formally lodge complaints and requires that 
operators answer in a timely and appropriate manner. The GRM 
will charge fees for licensing tourist activities, but the 
details of this levy are not yet available. 
 
6. (SBU) COMMENT: The GRM is putting significant effort into 
creating an environment for tourism growth and development, 
as they see tourism growth as a key to reducing absolute 
poverty in line with the PARPA. USAID is in the process of 
creating a six-year strategy for tourism development in 
Mozambique and has reviewed tourism destinations in the 
north, central, and southern regions. In meetings with 
Minister Sumbana, there seems to be agreement that the North 
is a good environment for USAID tourism investment because 
of the range of possible tourist destinations (Lake Niassa, 
the Niassa Reserve, Ilha de Mozambique, Nacala, Pemba, the 
Quirimbas, and Ibo Island) and the relatively free and 
unpoliticized regulatory environment. Large challenges 
remain for tourism attraction in Mozambique: poor 
infrastructure, a single air carrier, crime, the expense of 
reaching tourist destinations, and for operators, lack of 
clear land titles and skilled labor. END COMMENT. 
 
-------- 
ENERGY 
-------- 
7. (U) Portuguese-Mozambican Talks on Dam Dispute: The Prime 
Minister of Portugal, Durao Barroso, made an official visit 
to Mozambique in March. One of the prime discussion pieces 
during this visit was the question of Cahora Bassa Dam 
ownership. The GRM, as stated by President Chissano on March 
29, would like to obtain control over the dam. In the 
current arrangement, Hidroelectrica Cahora Bassa (HCB), 82% 
Portuguese-owned and 18% Mozambican-owned, maintains 
ownership and operation of the dam, which supplies a 
majority of its hydropower to South Africa\'s Eskom. Portugal 
has indicated that it is ready to sell some or all of its 
shares in HCB, as long as a reasonable agreement is reached. 
Although ranked by KPMG Consulting as the second-largest 
revenue-producing firm in Mozambique for 2001 and 2002, HCB 
has always operated in a state of debt (owed to the 
Portuguese Treasury). Dam operation is highly expensive, and 
until last month, Eskom was paying absurdly low prices for 
the hydropower. With the new tripartite agreement between 
Mozambique, Portugal, and South Africa (signed in February 
2004) South Africa will be paying higher tariffs for 
electricity, allowing HCB to operate with increased capital. 
During Barroso\'s visit, President Chissano also made a pitch 
to the Portuguese Government for further debt relief. If HCB 
ownership turns over to Mozambique, Mozambique would no 
doubt like to see Portugal relieve HCB debt owed to the 
Portuguese Treasury. 
 
8. (U) Energy Sector: According to facts presented at an 
Electricity and Mining Seminar in Maputo by the National 
Director of Energy, Pascoal Bacela, Mozambique has the 
lowest level of domestic energy consumption in all of 
Southern Africa. Only seven percent of the population has 
access to electricity, which corresponds to about 250,000 
consumers. Furthermore, eighty percent of consumers live in 
rural areas. Director Bacela presented energy sector 
opportunities for private investment and encouraged 
investors to take advantage of current hydropower projects, 
such as the Mpanda Mkuwa and Cahorra Bassa Dam, to pursue 
opportunities in electricity distribution. Currently, the 
GRM is completing distribution of energy to all provincial 
capitals by using hydropower coming from Cahora Bassa. 
Bacela indicated that the GRM is interested in continuing to 
use its hydropower resources and explore natural gas and 
steam coal energy options. 
LA LIME 
"
"15927","4/13/2004 13:50","04MAPUTO513","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE2738","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000513 
 
SIPDIS 
G/TIP FOR GHOLLIDAY 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KWMN, ASEC, SMIG, PHUM, ELAB, MZ, DHRF, Trafficking in Persons 
SUBJECT: SOLICITATION FOR ANTI-TIP BILATERAL PROPOSAL FOR 
MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: STATE 02738 
 
1. Overview of request: Post is requesting bilateral G/TIP 
funding in the amount of $250,900 for a technical assistance 
program to develop critically needed national 
anti-trafficking legislation in Mozambique. This project will 
be implemented through the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM), which has extensive experience in anti-TIP 
programs in the Southern African region, including 
Mozambique. The timeframe for the project is 10-12 months. 
The government of Mozambique (GRM) has become increasingly 
engaged in combating trafficking through high-level public 
recognition of the problem, calls for development of anti-TIP 
legislation, and investigations by the Attorney General\'s 
office into alleged cases of trafficking. However, the lack 
of anti-TIP legislation has precluded prosecutions of alleged 
traffickers. GRM officials and NGOs have cited the 
development of anti-TIP legislation as a critical element to 
enhanced anti-trafficking efforts. Support for the 
development of anti-TIP legislation project would also serve 
to compliment on-going USG activities to strengthen 
Mozambique\'s judicial system and professionalism of the 
police. NGOs, IOM and the GRM were consulted in preparation 
of this proposal. 
 
2. Background to the Request. Mozambique is a country of 
origin for internationally trafficked women and children. 
South Africa is the principal receiving country for 
trafficked persons from Mozambique, though trafficking is 
also believed to occur within the country. There are no 
reliable numbers available on the extent of the problem. 
Poverty, a history of child migration, cultural/religious 
practices, and weak border controls are all factors 
contributing to trafficking. Anti-trafficking legislation 
does not currently exist, though trafficking can be addressed 
under other laws. However, NGOs and government officials 
acknowledge that criminalization of trafficking through 
specific anti-trafficking legislation is essential for the 
government to effectively investigate and prosecute 
trafficking cases. In early 2004, the Attorney General\'s 
office undertook an investigation in the northern provincial 
capital of Nampula over allegations of trafficking in human 
body parts and child disappearances. The wide-spread press 
surrounding the Nampula case has led to calls by the 
President and members of Parliament for the creation of 
anti-trafficking legislation. 
 
3. Development of Anti-Trafficking Legislation. 
A - Project Description. The project will supplement IOM\'s 
Southern African Counter-Trafficking Assistance Program to 
deliver quality technical assistance in supporting the 
development of counter-trafficking legislation that is both 
consistent with international conventions and protocols, and 
supportive of the region\'s best practices and lessons learned 
and the process of harmonization of laws. The project will 
focus on a series of workshops to be held over a 10-12 month 
duration and will target key members of the Parliament, 
legislative drafters, law enforcement and immigration 
officials, and civil society. Specific focus areas to be 
covered by the project include: 1) trafficking in persons 
internationally and in the SADC region, 2) definitions and 
international protocols, 3) victim protection, 4) 
prosecution, and 5) prevention. 
B - Sustainability. Host country commitment has been 
exemplified through public statements by key government 
officials calling for the creation of legislation. In March, 
several members of Parliament stated that the Parliament was 
ready to begin drafting anti-trafficking legislation. A 
principal element of the project is building domestic 
expertise on legal aspects of trafficking in persons. Thus, 
the same core group of individuals will participate 
throughout the project so that knowledge is cumulative. This 
project has strong linkages to other USG programs. 
Specifically, the Embassy is using INL funding for an 
intermittent long-term International Criminal Investigative 
Training Program (ICITAP) advisor to assist Mozambique\'s 
Police Sciences Academy (ACIPOL) in management and curriculum 
development, coordination of specialized training courses and 
improved facilities. ICITAP plans to hold a course focused on 
trafficking for late spring 2004. USAID is using DA and ESF 
funds to improve the country\'s judicial system and more 
effectively address corruption through support to 
Mozambique\'s Anti-Corruption Unit (UAC). In addition, Post 
is currently supporting several anti-trafficking or related 
projects through DHRF, including a series of technical 
seminars for immigration and police officials. 
C - Evaluation/benchmarks. IOM will submit periodic 
evaluations of the program and a final report. Successful 
completion of the project will be based on the number of 
participants from government and civil society participating 
in each project activity and the development of materials. 
Post will meet with participants regularly to assess the 
results of assistance. 
D - Budget. $250,900 
International Legal Consultant $90,000 
National Legal Consultant $30,000 
Administrative Assistant $10,000 
Workshop Costs (travel, venue, materials) $91,200 
Office & Other Support Services $25,000 
Statutory Overhead $4,700 
LA LIME 
"
"15971","4/14/2004 11:32","04MAPUTO515","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE82718","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L MAPUTO 000515 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/FO, AF/RSA, AF/S 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/13/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, SU, MZ, AU 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE ON DARFUR MONITORING MISSION 
 
REF: STATE 82718 
 
1. (U) Classified By: Econ/Pol Chief David Hodge for 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador delivered reftel demarche on 
establishment of the Darfur Ceasefire Commission (CFC) the 
morning of April 14, 2004 with Ambassador Carlos dos Santos, 
President Chissano\'s diplomatic adviser and post\'s principal 
interlocutor on African Union (AU) issues. President 
Chissano was participating in his weekly Council of Ministers 
meeting, which typically last all day, and will depart this 
evening with dos Santos for Rome for meetings on 
African/European relations through Saturday April 17. Dos 
Santos will brief Chissano on the CFC issues either during a 
break in the Council of Ministers or en route to the airport. 
We will report any substantive response from Chissano septel. 
 
3. (C) Ambassador dos Santos was aware of the Darfur 
situation, saying that he thought the ceasefire was a window 
of opportunity to make the Sudan peace process work and 
finally lead to stability. He understood our concerns 
regarding GOS commitment to stop the Jingaweit and thought 
President Chissano would likely contact President Bashir. 
Dos Santos promised that they would be in touch with the 
Mozambican Ambassador in Addis, who would chair the meeting 
next week if it is at the Ambassador level (if not, Foreign 
Minister Simao would have to travel). Finally, dos Santos 
was pleased to learn of our willingness to provide logistical 
support to facilitate AU leadership of the CFC. 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
LA LIME 
"
"15986","4/14/2004 13:49","04MAPUTO517","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","03MAPUTO1532","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L MAPUTO 000517 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR INL AHENRY-PLOTTS AND JLYLE 
DOJ FOR OPDAT JSILVERWOOD AND ICITAP EBEINHART 
PRETORIA FOR INL SSNYDER 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2014 
TAGS: KCOR, KCRM, KJUS, EAID, MZ, PROG 
SUBJECT: ANTI-CORRUPTION LAW GOES BACK TO ASSEMBLY 
 
REF: A. 03 MAPUTO 1532 
 
B. MAPUTO 487 
 
1. (U) Summary. The Anti-Corruption Law passed by the 
National Assembly in November 2003 (Ref A) will be 
re-examined in parliament on April 15. It was sent back to 
the Assembly by President Chissano, who refused to sign the 
legislation, due to questions regarding the constitutionality 
of one its provisions. The delay in approving the law has 
already had negative consequences for the Attorney General\'s 
Anti-Corruption Unit, in particular regarding additional 
staff resources authorized under he law (Ref B). Some 
observers also have speculated that the delays in 
implementation can be attributed to concerns regarding the 
mandatory reporting responsibilities for auditors. End 
summary. 
 
2. (C) The law requires a declaration of assets by public 
servants, provides for whistle-blower protection, and 
authorizes the creation of a Central Anti-Corruption Office. 
The pro-government daily Noticias reported that the President 
considered the exclusive authority of the Attorney General\'s 
Office (where such a Central Office would reside, and provide 
own resources for the Anti-Corruption Unit created in 2002) 
for cases involving corruption and influence peddling to be 
problematic. He reportedly would prefer the entire judiciary 
to have jurisdiction for cases. Additionally, mission 
officers have been told that the provision for automatic 
denial of requests for government permits after a 45-day 
period is also an issue. The original draft of the law 
foresaw automatic approval after a short period, if no 
negative reply was issued by a government entity. This would 
have avoided a common friction point for corrupt officials to 
demand bribes. However the law as passed includes the 
reverse, which could prove highly problematic and possibly 
unconstitutional in certain situations, for example, in 
registering a birth or death. 
 
3. (SBU) On March 26, the Attorney General described the 
negative consequences caused by the lack of staff and budget 
envisioned in the legislation. Unfortunately, even once the 
Assembly revises the relevant passages of the law and the 
President signs it into law, it could still be a considerable 
wait before implementing regulations are drafted and 
approved. Post is aware of a similar problem regarding the 
implementing regulations for the Anti-Money Laundering Law 
passed by the Assembly in December 2001, which was ratified 
in February 2002. In April 2004, central bank officials told 
Econ/Pol Chief that the draft implementing regulations are 
now complete and they hope to see them finalized this year. 
 
4. (C) Comment: In addition to officially stated reasons 
for the delays in approving the Anti-Corruption Law, post has 
heard speculation regarding complaints made to the President 
by the major accounting and consulting firms present in 
Maputo. They claim that being forced to adhere to the 
mandatory reporting requirements, if and when they encounter 
negative information during an audit, would put them out of 
business. End Comment 
LA LIME 
"
"16153","4/20/2004 14:15","04MAPUTO541","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000541 
 
SIPDIS 
S/GAC FOR RTOBIAS AND WBRENCICK 
BERLIN PLEASE PASS TO RTOBIAS AND WBRENCICK 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2014 
TAGS: KHIV, PREL, EAID, MZ, Scenesetters, HIV/AIDS/PEPFAR 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR GAC AMBASSADOR RANDALL TOBIAS\' 
VISIT TO MOZAMBIQUE APRIL 28-30 
 
 
Classified By: Econ/Pol Officer Elizabeth Jaffee for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Introduction and summary. Mozambique is at a critical 
stage in its efforts to stem the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In 
Southern Africa, Mozambique presents both the greatest 
challenges and possibly the greatest opportunity to become 
the next Uganda-like success in turning around the HIV/AIDS 
threat. The Mozambican Government (GRM) has been outspoken in 
the battle against HIV/AIDS and is a cooperative partner in 
our HIV/AIDS efforts. The USG has been a leading player in 
international HIV/AIDS efforts in Mozambique, working closely 
with our implementing partners, other donors, and the 
Ministry of Health (MOH) and the National AIDS Council (NAC). 
While the MOH has welcomed the significant increase in USG 
support to combat HIV/AIDS in Mozambique through the 
President\'s Emergency Plan, there has been friction with the 
Minister of Health over some aspects of our support (see 
below). Likewise, bilateral and multilateral donors have 
perceived the program as unilateral. Your visit can be an 
important opportunity to inform key government officials of 
the Emergency Plan\'s objectives and assure donors of our 
sincere desire to coordinate efforts. 
 
POLITICAL/ECONOMIC OVERVIEW: 
============================ 
2. (U) Mozambique is rightly considered a post-conflict 
success story. Since the signing of the 1992 Peace Accords 
that ended sixteen years of civil war, Mozambique has made 
significant progress in promoting economic reforms and 
consolidating democracy. Yet, Mozambique faces enormous 
development challenges. The HIV/AIDS epidemic puts at risk 
much of the progress gained over the past decade. US 
bilateral relations are strong. US government efforts in 
Mozambique have focused on good governance, economic 
development and health. The USG was also the major donor 
contributing to reconstruction and rehabilitation activities 
following the catastrophic floods in 2000. 
 
3. (U) In late 2004, Mozambique will hold its third 
multi-party presidential elections since independence in 
1975. The current constitutionally-elected president, Joaquim 
Chissano, will step down after having served two terms. 
Chissano and the leadership of FRELIMO dominate policy-making 
and implementation. Mozambique currently holds the Presidency 
of the African Union (AU). President Chissano has been 
actively engaged on broader African issues and has sought to 
use his AU Presidency both to build stronger African 
institutions and to find African-led solutions to African 
problems. In February, Planning and Finance Minister Luisa 
Diogo replaced Pascoal Mocumbi as Prime Minister (while 
retaining the finance portfolio). Mocumbi, a medical doctor 
and former candidate for Secretary General of the WHO, 
resigned his post to serve as the High Commissioner of a new 
European Commission health body, the Europe-Developing 
Countries Clinical Trial Partnership. On November 19, 2003, 
Mozambique held municipal elections which were considered 
generally free and fair. However, many institutions, such as 
the judiciary and the police, remain weak. Corruption remains 
a problem in both the public and private sectors. 
 
4. (U) Mozambique continues to be one of the most dynamic and 
fastest-growing economies in sub-Saharan Africa, albeit from 
a low base. Mozambique is one of the world\'s poorest 
countries, with per capita GDP of less than $250. That said, 
economic growth has averaged 8% over the last 3-4 years and a 
recent household survey indicates that the incidence of 
extreme poverty has declined from 70% to 55% over the past 5 
years. Mozambique has significant but so far mostly untapped 
natural resources, including coal, natural gas, titanium ore, 
tantalite, graphite, iron ore, and semi-precious stones. One 
third of the economy is based on agriculture, most of it 
subsistence, but Mozambique exports cashews, cotton, sugar, 
sorghum, tea, citrus fruit, and tobacco. Mozambique has 
privatized over 1200 mostly smaller companies and 37 large 
enterprises since the privatization program began 10 years 
ago. Only 11 large state-owned or operated companies remain, 
including the national airline, telephone, electricity, 
insurance, oil and gas exploration, port and rail, airports, 
water supply, and fuel distribution companies. US-Mozambican 
trade, although quite small, is expanding, with the vast 
majority of Mozambique\'s exports to the US entering under 
either AGOA or GSP. South Africa and Portugal are the leading 
foreign investors. Only 6 of the top 100 companies in 
Mozambique are US: Coca-Cola, Mobil, Seaboard, Avis, 
Colgate-Palmolive and KPMG In 2003, Mozambique was assigned 
an international credit rating of B/B by Fitch Ratings, 
reflecting Mozambique\'s positive track record on economic 
reforms, political stability, strong economic growth, 
openness to FDI, and expanding exports. 
 
5. (U) Mozambique faces significant development challenges. 
The literacy rate is about 40 percent and infant mortality 
rates are among the highest in Africa. Life expectancy is 46 
and is expected to decline into the 30s by 2010 as a result 
of AIDS. The country also lacks infrastructure, power, and 
clean water for most of its citizens. The Government has 
placed its Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty (PARPA) 
at the head of its policy agenda. PARPA emphasizes six areas 
as the key reducers of absolute poverty: education; health; 
basic infrastructure; agriculture and rural development; good 
governance; and macroeconomic and financial management. The 
donor community funds approximately 60 percent of the 
national budget, though the HIPC and Enhanced HIPC (Heavily 
Indebted Poor Countries) debt relief programs have permitted 
increased budgetary support to alleviate poverty. 
 
HIV/AIDS: 
========= 
6. (U) Mozambique\'s overall HIV/AIDS prevalence rate is 
14.9%, though prevalence rates vary greatly by region, with 
the highest rates occurring in the central provinces and near 
the principal transportation corridors. The GRM\'s efforts to 
combat HIV/AIDS are led by the Ministry of Health and the 
National AIDS Council, chaired by the Prime Minister and 
comprised of several ministries and civil society. In March 
2004, the Ministry of Health approved a National Strategic 
Plan for HIV/AIDS/STI, which presents an integrated and 
comprehensive approach to scale up prevention, care and 
treatment services through existing health facilities and 
linkages with community support groups, to be provided 
through an Integrated HIV/AIDS Network model. The political 
environment in Mozambique is very favorable to accelerating 
ARV treatment throughout the country, though Mozambique\'s 
significant development challenges are a constraint for rapid 
scale-up of treatment activities. The MOH already has 
national guidelines for provision of ARV services, through 
which all treatment programs, including NGO activities, are 
expected to work. In addition to the Emergency Plan, funding 
has been committed through the Global Fund, the World Bank 
MAP and the Clinton Foundation (via several European donors) 
to strengthen the MOH and its services to expand ARVs. 
 
7. (U) Principal Challenges: 
A - Mozambique\'s severely limited human resource capacity is 
a principal constraint to improved and expanded treatment. 
Currently, Mozambique has an inadequate number of physicians 
and other health care providers to provide treatment. Given 
the fact that the country has under 500 local medical doctors 
to treat a population of over 17 million, training of health 
care practitioners is a priority to ensure goals for 
treatment are reached. Training support is needed at all 
levels-- from curriculum development for universities and 
technical schools, to support for development of short, 
targeted training for service delivery, public health 
programs, management and administration, monitoring and 
evaluation, laboratory services, etc. To this end, the 
mission has established a human resource capacity working 
group to discuss programs that will enhance the country\'s 
ability to provide ARV treatment. A number of Track 2 
proposals will have training components and the working group 
is planning for a human capacity technical assessment. 
B - Another significant factor limiting rapid scale-up of 
treatment programs is the country\'s inadequate laboratory 
facilities. Currently, the country has only two 
lab sites that have the ability to process CD4 counts. Year 
1 Emergency Plan funding will be used to build and equip new 
laboratory facilities and expand existing facilities. Post 
has been successful in linking with other organizations such 
as Sant\'Egidio to more rapidly expand laboratory services 
related to ARV treatment. 
C- One of the major deficiencies of the health care system in 
Mozambique is its coverage, which extends to less than 60% of 
the population and concentrates services in urban areas. Over 
98% of the population, however, report that they regularly 
seek care from traditional healers. Emergency Plan funding 
will be instrumental in expanding both geographic coverage 
and activity scope. 
? 
OTHER ISSUES IMPACTING USG PROGRAMS: 
==================================== 
8. (C) Ministry of Health. Our relations with Minister of 
Health Francisco Songane, a medical doctor who has served as 
Minister since January 2000, have been strained at times. 
Like many GRM agencies, the MOH remains a highly bureaucratic 
and centralized institution, where key decisions and policies 
rest in the hands of the Minister. Qualified, competent human 
resources within the Ministry are scarce and the flow of 
information between the Minister and his staff appears 
constrained. On occasion, Songane has attempted to dictate 
the scope of USG programs. While Songane has welcomed the 
significant increase in US funding being provided to 
Mozambique through the Emergency Plan, he has raised concerns 
over several aspects of the program. For example, Songane 
expressed concern over the Track 1 award to Columbia 
University, our principal implementing partner in the area of 
treatment. As a new partner receiving funding under Track 1, 
the MOH was not consulted in the development or awarding of 
Columbia\'s proposal. Songane has stated that an agreement 
should have been signed between Columbia and the MOH prior to 
the award. Having said that, Columbia has been very flexible 
in adjusting its program to address MOH concerns. 
 
9. (C) Another issue has been the USG\'s decision not to fund 
the MOH\'s Common Fund for Health. The US has been criticized 
by both donors and the GRM for not using this sector budget 
support mechanism to fund HIV/AIDS programs, with the 
perception being that the USG is taking a unilateral 
approach. However, until very recently, donors had not 
contributed to the Common Fund and financial mechanisms did 
not exist to enable financing of projects. One of the 
explicit conditions of our Emergency Plan support going to 
NGO and FBO partners has been demonstrated, close 
coordination in the field with provincial MOH authorities. 
 
10. (C) Donor Coordination. The role of USG in the Country 
Coordination Mechanism for the Global Fund has also been a 
sensitive issue for post in terms of coordinating efforts in 
HIV/AIDS. Here, the USG\'s reluctance to contribute to the 
Common Fund has been a principal issue. In addition, there 
has been criticism of the Emergency Plan\'s exclusive focus on 
HIV/AIDS and not broader health sectors concern. 
LA LIME 
"
"16154","4/20/2004 14:37","04MAPUTO542","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE87240","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L MAPUTO 000542 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/19/2014 
TAGS: PREF, PHUM, PREL, SU, CD, MZ, EUN 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE ON DARFUR CEASEFIRE MONITORING 
ARRANGEMENTS 
 
REF: A. STATE 87240 
 
B. MAPUTO 515 
C. STATE 82718 
Classified By: Econ/Pol Chief David Hodge for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) On April 20 the Ambassador delivered reftel (A) 
demarche to Ambassador Carlos dos Santos, diplomatic adviser 
to President Chissano. Dos Santos was not aware of what had 
transpired at the April 19 Addis meeting. He promised to 
brief President Chissano that afternoon at the Parliament 
before the President\'s evening departure to Cotonou, Benin. 
Dos Santos said that Chissano would continue to pay close 
attention to Darfur developments. Following our previous 
demarche with dos Santos, reftel (B), Chissano had last week 
given instructions from Rome to the Mozambican Ambassador in 
Addis and sent a letter to Secretary General Konare 
encouraging strong AU leadership (sent by fax with the 
original hand carried by the AU commissioner attending the 
Rome meeting). 
Minimize Considered 
LA LIME 
"
"16161","4/20/2004 15:33","04MAPUTO544","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04MAPUTO542","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L MAPUTO 000544 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/19/2014 
TAGS: PREF, PHUM, PREL, SU, CD, MZ, EUN 
SUBJECT: MORE FROM MOZAMBIQUE ON DARFUR CEASEFIRE 
MONITORING ARRANGEMENTS 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO 542 
 
B. STATE 87240 
Classified By: Econ/Pol Chief David Hodge for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) Following up on their meeting earlier that day 
(reftel A) on Darfur ceasefire monitoring arrangements 
(reftel B), late in the afternoon of April 20 the Ambassador 
spoke again with Ambassador Carlos dos Santos, diplomatic 
adviser to President Chissano. Dos Santos reported that he 
had spoken with the Mozambican Ambassador in Addis Ababa, Ana 
Nemba Uaiene, who reported a somewhat different version of 
the April 19 meeting at the AU than that conveyed in the U.S. 
demarche (reftel B). Uaiene characterized the meeting as 
having been mainly focused on budget issues and that it had 
been agreed to send a military observer mission to Darfur as 
an interim measure. Ambassador Uaiene told dos Santos that 
they still had not addressed the CFC, were considering 
several proposals, and were aware of the U.S. position. 
 
2. (C) While we are not familiar with Ambassador Uaiene, we 
know she is one of Mozambique\'s most senior diplomats and 
believe she plays a critical role in how President Chissano 
handles AU issues. Given the differences in what she is 
reporting back to Maputo and U.S. desire to have Chissano 
weigh in on Darfur, it might be worthwhile to approach her 
directly on the CFC. 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
LA LIME 
"
"16207","4/21/2004 15:37","04MAPUTO547","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE73331","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000547 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/MLANGE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF, RW, MZ 
SUBJECT: RWANDAN REPATRIATION SET TO BEING THIS SUMMER 
 
REF: A. STATE 73331 
 
B. MAPUTO 7156 
 
1. Econ/pol officer delivered points (ref A) on the 10th 
anniversary of the Rwanda genocide to officials from the 
National Institute to Support Refugees (INAR) and discussed 
the status of the repatriation of Rwandan refugees with local 
UNHCR reps. Both INAR and UNHCR noted that the repatriation 
process is still in the initial phase and that, as a 
voluntary program, large scale repatriation is unlikely in 
the near-term (ref B). According to UNHCR, three Rwandan 
refugees have been voluntarily repatriated since the signing 
of the tripartite agreement in December 2003. UNHCR and INAR 
are currently implementing an information campaign on the 
voluntary repatriation program which will begin in June/July 
of this year. Part of the information campaign will include a 
trip to the Marratane refugee camp in Nampula by a small 
group of recently repatriated Rwandans to talk about their 
experiences. 
 
2. INAR officials are sensitive to the fact that the program 
is voluntary and is working closely with UNHCR on the 
information campaign. However, both UNHCR and INAR 
acknowledge that repatriation may be a hard sell. In many 
cases, the reluctance of Rwandan refugees to be repatriated 
stems from economic rather than security related concerns. A 
number of current Rwandan refugees at Marratane are 
professionals working in Nampula city. A new community center 
and several water/irrigation projects implemented with USG 
funding (septel) have also expanded work opportunities at the 
camp. However, with the camp close to its capacity of 5,000, 
(the camp currently houses over 4,800 refugees, with 100-150 
new arrivals each month, principally from the Great Lakes 
region), successful repatriation of refugees is critical to 
easing the strain on camp resources.? 
LA LIME 
"
"16382","4/27/2004 6:14","04MAPUTO565","Embassy Maputo","SECRET//NOFORN","04STATE71826","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T MAPUTO 000565 
 
SIPDIS 
NOFORN 
DEPARTMENT FOR D, S/CT, EUR, INR AND AF 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/26/2024 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PREL, MZ, RU 
SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM COOPERATION WITH RUSSIA IN 
MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: STATE 71826 
 
Classified By: DCM Dennis Hankins for Reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
1. (S-N/F) Summary: Reftel provided Post opportunity to 
finalize previous discussions with the Russian Embassy to 
develop a cooperative relationship between ORCA and Russian 
counterparts in the counterterrorism area. We envision 
participation by multiple Mission elements including ORCA, 
Econ/Pol, DAO and CONS in this counterterrorism initiative 
with the Russians. End Summary 
 
2. (S-N/F) Several months ago, Russian Ambassador Vladmir 
Zemskiy and the Ambassador discussed shared concerns over the 
terrorist threat in Mozambique and raised the possibility of 
working jointly in the area. From our perspective, working 
with the Russians in Mozambique would help overcome some of 
the lingering hesitance senior intelligence, security, and 
defense officials (many of whom received Russian/Soviet 
training) have in working closely with the United States on 
security matters. For the Russians, cooperation with the 
U.S. would help bolster their image since they no longer have 
the financial resources to match their strong historical ties 
to Mozambique. ORCA indicated its willingness to work with 
Russian counterparts but the Russian Ambassador indicated he 
would have to first seek guidance from Moscow. 
Unfortunately, Ambassador Zemskiy died of a heart attack in 
March before he was able to tell us if he had Moscow\'s 
blessing. 
 
3. (S-N/F) Upon receipt of REFTEL, DCM met April 6 with 
Charge d\'Affaires Valentin Aleshin to determine if Russia 
would be interested in cooperation. Aleshin was not aware of 
the previous conversation between the Ambassadors (Comment: 
Ambassador Zemskiy had previously told DCM he thought little 
of his deputy. End Comment) but was immediately interested in 
pursuing counterterrorism cooperation. While the 
conversation focused on coordinated security assistance, DCM 
noted that we could also consider broader counterterrorism 
cooperation through the Defense Attache, Econ/Pol and 
Consular Sections. Aleshin indicated he would have to seek 
guidance from Moscow. 
 
4. (S-N/F) On April 22, Aleshin came to the Embassy to 
report he had received the go-ahead from Moscow to begin 
contacts between our respective \"security experts\" to develop 
a plan of counterterrorism cooperation. Aleshin suggested 
his instructions called for close direction by himself or 
other Russian Embassy diplomats. We suggested it best to let 
the experts work between themselves but to have the Chiefs of 
Mission meet quarterly to review our overall cooperation on 
counterterrorism. Our Regional Political Affairs officer 
(ORCA) has initiated contact with the Russian Embassy as the 
Ambassador\'s designee. 
LA LIME 
"
"16743","5/10/2004 5:07","04MAPUTO625","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 000625 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO - BNUELING 
FCS - WCENTER 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: APRIL MONTHLY ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
 
----------------------- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
---------------------- 
1. (SBU) With significant Mozambican official travel to 
China in April (President Chissano, Minister of Industry and 
Commerce Morgado, Minister of Labor Sevene, Minister of 
Agriculture Muteia, and others), the Government of China 
announced its willingness to support the building of mega- 
projects in Mozambique, such as dams, irrigation systems, 
and other projects to enhance socio-economic development. 
The Chinese are also interested in investing in the valuable 
Moatize coalmines located in Tete province and in 
rehabilitating the Mocuba textile factory in Zambezia. To 
formalize Chinese intentions and Mozambican willingness to 
cooperate, President Chissano and his counterpart, Hu 
Jintao, signed a new economic and technical agreement 
between the two countries. Under this agreement, there will 
be cooperation in the areas of agriculture, education, 
health, and mining. (COMMENT: China and Mozambique have been 
long-time allies and diplomatic partners. In the area of 
aid, China has built several governmental and military 
facilities for GRM use. The Chinese are bringing more and 
more operations to Mozambique in the areas of construction, 
mining, and agriculture. With this reaffirmed pact of 
cooperation, China could become an even bigger player in a 
greater number of sectors. This creates USG concern, as the 
GRM tends to turn a blind eye to illegal Chinese operations 
taking place in Mozambique, such as illegal fishing and 
deforestation in the central-northern regions. END COMMENT). 
 
2. (U) A study is now underway to assess the viability of 
building a fuel pipeline from the port of Nacala to Malawi. 
According to Minister of Transportation, Tomas Salomao, the 
study will make recommendations to the Mozambican and 
Malawian Governments as to the viability of the project and 
the potential for the pipeline supplying Zambia and parts of 
the DRC. The building of the pipeline was recommended during 
the February 2003 Nacala Corridor\'s Investment Conference. 
(COMMENT: A similar fuel pipeline already exists in 
Mozambique\'s central region, traveling from the port of 
Beira to Zimbabwe. END COMMENT). 
 
3. (U) The South African timber company, Komatiland Forests, 
has assumed control of the Manica Forest Industries 
(IFLOMA). Komatiland is expected to manage the 18,700 
hectares and three production units of IFLOMA and will 
inject thousands of dollars into rehabilitation of 
infrastructure, acquisition of equipment, and in planting 
and operational services. Reactivation of IFLOMA is expected 
to create around 200 new jobs, according to the local press. 
Komatiland has promised to train staff and ensure local 
processing and export of its wood products. 
 
------------------ 
MACROECONOMICS 
------------------ 
4. (U) On April 15, Prime Minister Luisa Diogo launched the 
opening of the second Africa Partnership Forum of NEPAD. 
The USG representatives attending this forum were USAID 
Assistant Administrator for Africa, Constance Newman, and 
American Ambassador to Mozambique, Helen La Lime. Diogo 
stated that African countries can only solve their many 
problems if they work together, \"complemented by support 
from their partners in the developed world\" (AIM news 
report). Although most of the two-day forum took place 
behind closed doors, the themes discussed by African leaders 
and their cooperation partners (donors and funding agencies) 
were clear from Diogo\'s opening. The Prime Minister 
described the continuing issues of underdevelopment, poor 
economic performance, high levels of foreign debt, weak 
access to scientific and technological advances, and the 
prevalence of deadly diseases in Africa. She described the 
devastating impact of HIV/AIDS on Africa as a public health 
problem and a question of strategic and development 
security, partially negating efforts to train and retain 
skilled staff. According to Diogo, it is investment in 
education and training that will bring the continent out of 
its bleak social and economic state. Also crucial to this 
effort is a change in the rules of international trade, 
allowing favorable conditions to developed markets for 
African goods. Lastly, Diogo mentioned the burden of 
Africa\'s foreign debt, saying that it has reached 
\"unsustainable levels\" with countries obliged to divert a 
large part of their GDP to debt payment. The Prime Minister 
called for greater debt relief and praised such steps as the 
World Bank/IMF Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt 
relief initiative. 
 
5. (U) On June 2-4, the World Economic Forum will host the 
Africa Economic Summit 2004 in Maputo, Mozambique. The 
summit will gather leaders from business, politics, and 
civil society, serving as a platform to rally key actors to 
address the major development challenges facing Africa. At 
the event, participants will engage in dialogue to advance 
the cause of Africa\'s integration into the global economy. 
The tentative USG representatives to this forum are Acting 
Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of African Affairs, 
Department of State, Charles Snyder, and Acting Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for Africa, the Middle East, and South 
Asia, Department of Commerce, Holly Vineyard. 
 
6. (U) The Government of India cancelled all Mozambican 
public debt to India this month, amounting to about $3.8 
million. According to local news reports, the Government of 
India also expressed willingness to discuss possible 
alternatives for dealing with private debt, estimated at $6 
million. Under Mozambican law, one alternative would be to 
turn this debt into investment through a swap. Furthermore, 
India has made available a line of credit of $20 million, 
intended to promote projects that will import goods and 
services from India, thus tying the aid. In anticipation of 
this program, many Indian businesses are drawing up projects 
in such areas as rural electrification, pharmaceuticals, and 
food industries. 
 
------------ 
AGRICULTURE 
------------ 
7. (U) A recent study undertaken by the US NGO Technoserve 
revealed that Mozambique has significant potential for 
horticulture production in the central regions of Sofala and 
Manica. The NGO found that 550,000 hectares in the Beira 
corridor could be used in the large-scale production and 
exportation of fruit, vegetables, and flowers to markets 
such as England, South Africa, and Europe. Technoserve 
identifies and lends technical support to small-medium sized 
enterprises producing roses, pineapples, bananas, beans, 
citrus fruits, and vegetables. With appropriate help from 
the donor community, Technoserve estimates that $30 million 
could greatly improve the infrastructure situation that 
limits the volume that many producers are able to achieve. 
The major infrastructure needs include: improving the 
electricity network, expanding the water supply, building 
small dams, improving the rural road network, and 
establishing financial institutions that can provide credit 
to producers. Once infrastructure is improved, producers 
could increase capacity and export more to the world market. 
According to Technoserve, this is an activity that will 
bring profit to the Mozambican agricultural sector and small- 
medium sized producers. 
 
-------------------- 
MINERALS AND ENERGY 
-------------------- 
8. (U) There are positive signals that implementation of the 
Moma Heavy Sands Project will move forward as planned. Irish 
firm Kenmare Resources contracted South African engineering 
group Bateman and Australian joint venture partner Multiplex 
to build the Moma Titanium Minerals mine in Nampula 
Province, Mozambique. Kenmare estimates mine completion will 
take two years. Once operational, the mine will produce 
ilmenite, zircon, and rutile for export, intended to compete 
in the same market as South Africa\'s growing titanium coast 
at Richard\'s Bay. Kenmare stated that a debt-funding 
package is being negotiated with a lender group comprised of 
the European Investment Bank (EIB), the African Development 
Bank (ADB), a Dutch development finance institution, a 
German development finance institution, and South Africa\'s 
largest retail Bank, ABSA. The firm estimates the life of 
the mine to be more than fifty years and expects the project 
to generate revenue of about $85 million/year. According to 
Kenmare, sales contracts covering more than 50% of the first 
five years have already been negotiated. The entire project 
is budgeted at $360 million. (COMMENT: A similar mineral 
mining effort is underway in the southern province of Gaza, 
the Limpopo Corridor Sands Project. The Limpopo Sands 
Project is managed by Southern Mining Corporation (South 
Africa), Western Mining Resources (Australia), and 
Industrial Development Corporation (South Africa). 
Mozambique has tremendous potential in the mining sector due 
to the plethora of mineral resources found along the 
coastline. This sector is just beginning to gain momentum 
and could bring sustainable profits to foreign investors and 
Mozambique alike. END COMMENT). 
 
-------------------- 
BANKING AND FINANCE 
-------------------- 
9. (U) A bill amending the financial regulation of banks and 
other financial institutions was brought before the 
Mozambican Parliament in April. The bill tightens banking 
supervision and seeks to ensure that funds obtained 
illicitly do not enter the banking system. The bill hands 
regulatory powers previously in the hands of the government 
over to the Central Bank - the Bank of Mozambique. Thus, the 
Central Bank, rather than the Finance Ministry, would be 
given the authority to authorize new financial institutions, 
revoke such authorizations, permit or refuse mergers, and 
authorize the dissolution of banks and similar companies. 
The Central Bank is already empowered to freeze any account 
that it suspects to be used in criminal activities. Both the 
Legal Affairs Commission and the Planning and Budget 
Commission of the Assembly of the Republic fear the bill has 
gone too far in transferring power from the Finance Ministry 
to the Central Bank. 
 
-------- 
LABOR 
-------- 
10. (U) In April, the GRM increased the country\'s statutory 
minimum wage by slightly more than the 2003 inflation rate 
of 13.4%. Retroactive to April 1, 2004, the minimum wage for 
industry, services, and the civil service rose by 14%, from 
$41 to $47 per month. The minimum wage for agricultural 
works rose by 15%, from $29 to $34 per month. Although the 
hike in wages for agricultural workers was higher, there is 
still a significant gap between wages for different groups. 
The GRM is addressing this issue. In the private sector, 
wages above the minimum are generally fixed through 
collective bargaining between employers and trade union 
committees. In the public service, all wages are fixed by 
the government. Low wage state workers received a 14% 
increase, whereas mid-high wage state workers received only 
a 10% wage increase. This decision conflicts with the 
declared government policy of decompressing salaries in 
order to retain skilled staff in the public administration. 
The result may be a further migration of highly trained 
workers out of state employment into the private sector, 
foreign agencies or NGOs1). Each year, the statutory minimum 
wage is negotiated in a tripartite Consultative Council, 
between the trade unions, employers\' associations, and the 
government. Negotiations went into deadlock after employers 
refused to negotiate higher than a 10% increase and the 
unions refused to move below a 16,9% increase. At that 
point, the matter was handed over to the GRM. 
 
11. (U) On May 5, the USG will hold a Labor Seminar intended 
to present the results and analyses of several studies, 
commissioned by the US Department of Labor, on the labor 
system in Mozambique. The opening report will present a 
review of the labor law and recommendations for 
liberalization and reform; the second report will present 
the situation of industrial-based bargaining in Mozambique 
(the USG has provided significant training to Mozambicans in 
this area), and the third will address the similarities and 
contrasts between the Mozambican, Kenyan, Malaysian, and 
South African labor systems. The seminar will bring together 
Mozambican government officials, donors, private business 
organizations and employers, unions, and academia for 
discussion on these topics. (COMMENT: Mozambique will begin 
the process of revising its labor law in 2005. The current 
law is ambiguous, burdensome on employers, and discourages 
foreign investment. The USG hopes to continue its efforts, 
through the US Department of Labor and USAID, to move 
Mozambique\'s labor law towards greater openness and 
liberalization. Additionally, the USG is working with local 
business organizations to find ways to reduce HIV/AIDS in 
the workplace (Project Hope and Empresarios Contra SIDA). 
END COMMENT). 
LA LIME 
"
"16794","5/11/2004 13:25","04MAPUTO635","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000635 
 
SIPDIS 
PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, KDEM, EAID, PGOV, MZ, DHRF 
SUBJECT: DHRF STATUS REPORT 
 
 
Part A - Prior Fiscal Year Funds 
Most activities are completed on the FY2002 grants. Last 
invoices are being collected by post and grants are currently 
being closed out. 
 
1. Name of Grantee: AMICUMO 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-01 
Amount Obligated: $8,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $8,000 
Status: Activity has not begun. The proforma invoices that 
were collected do not respect completely the agreement taken. 
Post is considering de-obligating funds. 
 
2. Name of Grantee: AMODESE 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-02 
Amount Obligated: $3,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $0.00 
Status: Activity was completed. 
 
3. Name of Grantee: Abuso Sexual dos Menores 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-03 
Amount Obligated: $10,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $90.26 
Status: Activity is in progress. Abuso Sexual dos Menores 
purchased all materials. The project will soon be 
implemented. 
? 
4. Name of Grantee: FECIV 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-04 
Amount Obligated: $7,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $0.00 
Status: Activity was completed. 
 
5. Name of Grantee: DEMOS 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-05 
Amount Obligated: $15,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $0.00 
Status: Activity was completed. 
 
6. Name of Grantee: ADPRUM 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-06 
Amount Obligated: $3,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $0.00 
Status: Activity was completed. 
 
7. Name of Grantee: AJOZA 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-07 
Amount Obligated: $8,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $0.00 
Status: Activity was completed. 
 
8. Name of Grantee: ANAP 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-08 
Amount Obligated: $8,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $8,000 
Status: Activity has not begun. Post is considering 
transferring funds to a different NGO. 
 
9. Name of Grantee: Radio Pax 
DHRF Grant Number: HR02-656-09 
Amount Obligated: $8,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $16.91 
Status: Activity is in progress. Radio Pax is broadcasting 
programs relating to human rights issues. Final payments 
still need to be made. 
? 
Part B - Current Fiscal Year Funds 
? 
10. Name of Grantee: FECIV 
DHRF Grant Number: HR03-656-01 
Amount Obligated: $25,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $16,045 
Status: Activity is in progress. FECIV held the first of 
three training seminars on April 20/21 in Nampula for 
immigration and police officials on trafficking in persons. 
 
11.Name of Grantee: LDH Nampula - Human Rights programs in 
Nampula 
DHRF Grant Number: HR03-656-02 
Amount Obligated: $3,500 
Unliquidated Balance:$1,646 
Status: Activity is in progress. LDH began to broadcast the 
program: \"Os Nossos Direitos\" in March 2004. It will end in 
December 2004. 
 
12. Name of Grantee: FAWEMO 
DHRF Grant Number: HR03-656-03 
Amount Obligated: $12,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $12,000 
Status: Activity has not begun. FAWEMO is collecting proforma 
invoices to organize and equip a girl\'s center in a primary 
school. 
 
13. Name of Grantee: RNOMCD 
DHRF Grant Number: HR03-656-04 
Amount Obligated: $15,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $105.00 
Status: Activity is in progress. RNOMCD has purchased 
material and rented a venue to start a series of seminars. 
 
14. Name of Grantee: ADPRUM 
DHRF Grant Number: HR03-656-05 
Amount Obligated: $7,500 
Unliquidated Balance: $ 5.00 
Status: Activity is in progress. ADPRUM has purchased all the 
material necessary to start to perform its seminar. A theater 
group began its performance in January 2004. 
 
15. Name of Grantee:FDC 
DHRF Grant Number: HR03-656-06 
Amount Obligated: $7,000 
Unliquidated Balance: $ 7,000 
Status: Activity has not begun. FDC is collecting proforma 
invoices for the creation of a mechanism for reporting of 
sexual abuse cases and for the creation of youth/children 
clubs in ten schools. 
 
16. Success Stories: A- NGO ADPRUM used DHRF FY02 funds to 
hold a series of activities relating to human rights issues 
in the district of Boane, near Maputo. The NGO organized a 
seminar to discuss a range of human rights issues, including 
the concept of democracy and discrimination against women in 
the labor sector. The seminar involved local authorities and 
traditional leaders, as well as local associations and 
economic actors. Following the seminar, a series of 
theatrical pieces were performed for 16 local communities 
carried out by the &Grupo de Teatro e Danca Tradicional8. 
At the end of each performance, the entire community was 
invited to discuss and debate human rights issues. There was 
strong community participation and the NGO itself expressed a 
general satisfaction with its accomplishment. 
 
17. B- A training seminar was also funded by DHRF FY02 and 
organized by AMODESE, a local NGO, for 32 community judges in 
the province of Tete in January 2003. The Seminar lasted 
five days and focused on the following topic: &Management, 
Resolution and Mediations of Community Conflicts8. Speakers 
analyzed different aspects of conflicts emphasizing in 
particular how to prevent, manage and resolve them. The 
purpose was to improve the judges, capabilities to negotiate 
and mediate disputes by promoting a process of peaceful 
resolution. The last day,s discussion also covered the law 
that regulates the local tribunals and its effective 
application. At the end of the seminar many of the community 
judges stated that the information they received was very 
useful and will help them in the process of hearing, 
analyzing and judging different community cases. 
LA LIME 
"
"16795","5/11/2004 13:26","04MAPUTO636","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000636 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR AF/S AND INL/AAE 
PRETORIA FOR SSNYDER 
DOJ FOR OPDAT JSILVERWOOD 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCOR, KCRM, KJUS, PGOV, MZ 
SUBJECT: BCM TRIAL: WAITING FOR A VERDICT ON MAY 25 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: The verdict in the BCM bank fraud trial 
will be handed down on May 25. The case involves nineteen 
defendants accused of defrauding fourteen million USD from 
the Commercial Bank of Mozambique (BCM) between March and 
August 1996. Most commentators do not expect any senior bank 
officials to be implicated in the verdict. With preparations 
underway for the general election later this year, the 
verdict could still hurt FRELIMO, as they strive to present 
themselves as effectively fighting corruption. End summary. 
 
2. (U) The Basic Elements of the Case: In this trial, 
nineteen defendants including a Maputo BCM branch manager, 
numerous other low-level bank employees, the Satar brothers 
(who were owners of Unicambios exchange house), and some 
Unicambios employees are accused of bank fraud. The Satar 
brothers, previously convicted for ordering the murder of 
investigative journalist Carlos Cardoso, are also alleged to 
be the masterminds behind this fraud scheme. The Satar 
family has dual Mozambican and Pakistani citizenship. Momade 
Abdul Satar, also known as \"Nini,\" was sentenced last year to 
23 years in prison for his involvement in the Cardoso murder. 
His brother, Tayobe, fled the country with his parents and 
is rumored to be in Dubai or Pakistan. The defendants are 
accused of perpetrating fraud involving sixty certified 
checks, totaling fourteen million USD, that were cashed at 
the branch in question despite insufficient funds. The 
branch manager had to override the computer system to allow 
the checks to be cashed, and he testified that senior 
managers, who were not standing trial, had to endorse the 
checks. 
 
3. (SBU) Little Public Attention: The relatively uneventful 
BCM trial, which spanned from December 12, 2003, to March 24, 
2004, did not provoke the same kind of reaction from common 
Mozambicans as the earlier Carlos Cardoso murder trial. 
While the trial generated much press coverage, the 
Mozambican public has not been following the case nearly as 
closely as the Cardoso trial just over a year ago. This is 
due in part to the technical aspect of the financial crimes 
involved and the public sense that the defendants on trial 
did not represent the true high-level political figures 
behind the fraud. Once the verdict is handed down later this 
month, the next of the big trial in the public eye will be 
the Siba-Siba Macuacua murder case, which is likely to prove 
more sensational. Macuacua, the Central Bank employee 
appointed as the CFO of Banco Austral, was thrown down the 
stairwell of the fourteen-story bank building in August 2001 
while investigation a similar fraud purported to involve 
unpaid loans to senior government officials\' family members 
and business partners. 
 
4. (SBU) Higher Levels Seen as Untouched: Most observers 
cynically expect the trial to result in convictions of the 
current defendants, without frying any bigger fish. Among 
the board members implicated by the defendants is Teotonio 
Comiche, brother of current Maputo mayor and FRELIMO 
Political Commission member Eneas Comiche. None of the 
senior managers who provided testimony are currently under 
investigation, despite attempts by the lawyer for the main 
defendant to expose involvement of the well-connected former 
board members. The husband of PM Luisa Diogo, prominent 
lawyer Albano Silva, is the private prosecutor in the case, 
representing the board\'s interests (BCM has since been merged 
into BIM, Mozambique\'s largest private commercial bank. Many 
speculated that Silva\'s purpose from the onset has been to 
shield Teotonio Comiche and his fellow administrator, Augosto 
Candida, from prosecution. 
 
5. (SBU) Death Threats and Accusations At The End: After 
months of complicated testimony centering on the bank\'s 
procedure, the testimony become more interesting towards the 
close. In the last week of the trail, Silva claimed that he 
had received numerous death threats on his cell phone. 
Additionally, the main defendant Vicente Ramaya, submitted a 
list of 69 individuals alleged to have benefited from the 
fraud. The testimony involved tales of large sums of cash 
being delivered in sports bags, and illicit trips to South 
Africa to deliver cash. In his closing statement, \"Nina\" 
Satar accused another BCM board member, Alberto Calu, of 
involvement in money laundering and lamented that the senior 
managers are too close to FRELIMO to be successfully 
prosecuted. For his part, Ramaya explained that at the time 
of his arrest in 1996, he was assured that he would be 
released on bail, which he was for a small amount. However, 
he claimed that his family received death threats. The 
dramatic closing arguments of Silva overshadowed those of the 
public prosecutor, Ana Maria Gemo. Silva vehemently denied 
accusations that he attempted to bribe the judge, and traded 
thinly veiled insults with the defense attorneys, including 
the accusation that Ramaya\'s attorney had tried to bribe 
Supreme Court Justices who would hear any appeal of the 
Cardoso verdict. He reminded the court of the assassination 
attempt on him in 1999 and detailed the text messages on his 
phone with death threats. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: The public has been largely disappointed 
with the trial and does not expect any surprises when the 
verdict is announced later this month. There has been little 
live television or radio coverage and the press took some 
time to give much play to the story. As opposed to the 
Cardoso Murder Trial which seized the country\'s attention in 
2003, the complicated financial transactions at the core of 
this case failed to generate much public interest. Presiding 
Judge Achifaro Aboobacar will be transferred to the Nampula 
provincial court in June. He certainly will not be named man 
of the year in the press, as was the judge presiding over the 
closely-watched Cardsoso trial. 
 
7. (SBU) Comment Continued: The BCM Trial highlights the 
mixed picture of the government\'s efforts to tackle 
corruption. On the one hand, the government did bring this 
case to trial prior to elections and allowed unfettered press 
coverage -- despite testimony that accused senior government 
and party officials of wrongdoing. At the same time, the 
case probably only moved forward through donor pressure and 
there is little sense that higher political and bank figures 
allegedly behind the fraud are likely to be charged. 
LA LIME 
"
"16864","5/13/2004 6:26","04MAPUTO655","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 000655 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR S/GAC AMB TOBIAS, AMB LANGE, AND WBRENCICK 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USAID/GH/OHA AND USAID/AFR/SA 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO HHS/CDC and HHS/HRSA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KHIV, KSPR, EAID, PREL, MZ, HIV/AIDS/PEPFAR 
SUBJECT: Ambassador Randall Tobias\' Visit to Mozambique 
 
 
1. Summary: US Global AIDS Coordinator Ambassador Randall Tobias 
visited Mozambique April 28-30 to discuss the President\'s 
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief with government officials, key 
implementing partners, and post\'s HIV-AIDS working group, and to 
see first-hand the challenges and opportunities for Mozambique as 
it confronts the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Ambassador Tobias was 
accompanied by S/GAC\'s Director for Diplomatic Liaison William 
Brencick and Press Officer Amy Black. Meetings were held with 
the President, Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Minister of 
Health, as well as a dinner with several other ministers and the 
Executive Secretary of the National AIDS Council. A roundtable 
discussion was held with bilateral and multilateral donors and a 
reception with religious leaders and implementing partners. The 
delegation also visited sites in Maputo and Xai-Xai that are 
being supported through the USG and the Ministry of Health. The 
visit provided an opportunity for all parties to gain a better 
understanding of the Emergency Plan-- both what it is and what it 
isn\'t-- and to address concerns from government and donors on 
procurement and prevention policies. Press during the visit was 
positive and included both TV and print journalism. End Summary. 
 
Graca Machel on the HIV/AIDS Challenge in Mozambique 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
2. A meeting on April 28 with Graca Machel, president of the 
Foundation for Community Development, a key USAID implementing 
partner, and former First Lady and Minister of Education, served 
as an excellent opportunity to discuss broad issues impacting 
efforts to combat HIV/AIDS in Mozambique. Discussions ranged 
from the need for greater leadership within the government to 
more effective and cohesive use of prevention messages. Machel 
noted that despite lower prevalence rates than neighboring 
countries, Mozambique has yet to \"turn the tide\" and that there 
was awareness that efforts have not been entirely effective. To 
this end, she encouraged both more effective and cohesive use of 
HIV/AIDS messages. In response to a question on Mozambique\'s 
national leadership on HIV/AIDS, Machel described President 
Chissano as \"vocal\" on HIV/AIDS, but stressed that the broader 
leadership must become more actively engaged by talking publicly 
about the issue. On the positive side, she said AIDS could serve 
as bridge between various groups in the country and can thus be 
used to address broader development issues. Turning to the issue 
of Mozambique\'s limited human resource capacity and lack of 
trained physicians, Tobias stressed that we must look beyond 
physicians to provide treatment. Explaining his belief that \"all 
heath care is local\"-- Tobias cited an example in Uganda where a 
small number of doctors could be used effectively to train large 
numbers of health professionals, thus increasing access to care 
and treatment within the community. 
 
Exchanges with Mission Team and Mozambican Partners 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
3. That afternoon, Ambassador Tobias met with post\'s interagency 
working group on HIV/AIDS to discuss both USG and government of 
Mozambique (GRM) efforts to combat HIV/AIDS and the broader 
political/economic implications of the pandemic. The working 
group highlighted the regional variance in prevalence rates, with 
the central regions recording the highest rates; discussed the 
historical reasons for Mozambique\'s lower prevalence rates than 
neighboring countries and challenges for combating the epidemic 
(such as limited human resources capacity and inadequate 
infrastructure); and raised several issues regarding our 
relationship with the Ministry of Health. A reception held later 
that evening provided the delegation with an opportunity to 
interact with our key implementing partners and religious 
leaders. During remarks at the reception, Ambassador Tobias 
stressed that combating HIV/AIDS is a priority for President Bush 
and noted that the Emergency Plan should be seen as reflecting 
not just the commitment of the USG, but of the American people. 
 
Visit to the Field 
-------------------- 
4. On April 29, the delegation headed to Xai-Xai, the capital of 
the southern province of Gaza. The delegation visited several 
sites, including a provincial hospital that cares for clients 
living with HIV/AIDS, malaria, TB and other diseases; a health 
center that that has just begun to train staff providing PMTCT 
and voluntary counseling and testing; and a center working with 
orphans and vulnerable children (OVCs). Both centers are 
supported by USG funding. The USG has recently begun activities 
focused on OVCs with Emergency Plan funding. During the visit to 
the health center, Ambassador Tobias was tested for HIV, which 
sent an important message to the local community about the 
importance of learning one\'s HIV status and reducing the stigma 
associated with HIV/AIDS. (Note: MOH officials had been 
informed that Ambassador Tobias would like to be tested during 
the visit to help promote and de-stigmatize VCT services. Unlike 
in Ethiopia, GRM officials were not receptive to being tested 
publicly. Endnote.) Ambassador Tobias also had the opportunity 
to meet with a group of persons living with AIDS. In addition to 
having the opportunity to see the positive impact of USG funding, 
the Xai-Xai visit highlighted several of the challenges and 
opportunities to combating HIV/AID in Mozambique, including the 
lack of human resource capacity and the strong tradition of 
community involvement. Ambassador Tobias was the guest of honor 
that evening at dinner hosted by Ambassador Helen La Lime that 
included the Ministers of Health, Labor, Women and Social Action 
Coordination, as well as the Executive Secretary of the National 
AIDS Council and the Diplomatic Advisor to President Chissano. 
 
Outreach to Other Donors 
------------------------------- 
5. Bilateral and multilateral donors met with Ambassador Tobias 
on the morning of April 30. Ambassador Tobias described the 
Emergency Plan, noting that it represents a significant increase 
in USG funding for HIV/AIDS and highlighted that the Plan\'s 
resources are focused in the areas of HIV/AIDS prevention, care 
and treatment. It was stressed that USG activities \"fit\" with 
other donor activities and are developed within the MOH\'s 
national plan. USG funding and the focused approach of our 
programs should be used to leverage other donors to contribute in 
areas not addressed through the Emergency Plan. Tobias stressed 
that combating HIV/AIDS globally is one of President Bush\'s top 
three priorities. While recognizing differences in each of the 
focus countries, Tobias noted that many of the issues affecting 
HIV/AIDS efforts were uniform, including: inadequate 
infrastructure, lack of trained medical personnel, the need for 
strong national leadership, and the impact of cultural factors. 
 
6. Participants stressed the need for strong collaboration, 
including integrating the Emergency Plan into the national health 
system, and noted that significant donor support for HIV/AIDS 
already existed. Two coordinating groups with the MOH and the 
National AIDS Council (NAC) already exist, though several 
participants expressed concern over the effectiveness of the NAC, 
which has responsibility for policy coordination and prevention 
programs. In addition, participants noted the need to broaden and 
deepen leadership on HIV/AIDS. In response to a question by 
Tobias about what could be achieved within one year, discussions 
included examples of success stories (for example, UNICEF noted 
the rapid increase in the number of women treated at PMTCT 
centers, which was attributed to both integrated health centers 
and rapid tests) and the need for a longer-term vision. Good 
results were also cited from home-based/community care. The 
UNAIDS representative voiced concerns with two aspects of the 
Emergency Plan: 1) the perceived lack of emphasis on use of 
condoms in prevention programs and 2) the exclusion of generics 
in treatment. Ambassador Tobias responded that the Emergency 
Plan\'s prevention programs included all elements of \"ABC\", with 
condom distribution focused on high-risk groups. However, he 
noted that results have been disappointing for prevention 
programs that are based solely on broad-based condom 
distribution. Thus, the Emergency Plan seeks new approaches and 
emphasizes both delayed initiation of sexual activity and 
faithfulness. The effectiveness of these two approaches has been 
confirmed by recent studies. On generics, Ambassador Tobias 
stressed that the principal concern is ensuring safe and 
effective treatment, and that the definition of generic drugs 
varied. He explained that generics, including those approved by 
the WHO, have not gone through a formal regulatory process and 
that the fundamental concerns for treatment are in infrastructure 
and resistance. 
 
Minister of Health Presentation 
------------------------------------- 
7. Later that day, Ambassador Tobias and delegation members met 
with Minister of Health Songane, who then accompanied the 
delegation to the Primeiro de Maio health center in Maputo, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation Simao, and President 
Chissano. The meeting with Minister of Health Songane included a 
presentation by Ministry of Health officials on the MOH National 
Strategic Plan for HIV/AIDS/STI and an open discussion on the 
Emergency Plan and broader USG-MOH cooperation on HIV/AIDS. The 
MOH presentation highlighted both the strong demand for services 
and the current limitations (e.g., insufficient numbers of 
hospitals, laboratories, and health professionals) in the supply 
of services. A key concern of the MOH has been ensuring that the 
Emergency Plan supports the MOH\'s strategy. Joanna Mangueira of 
the National AIDS Council (NAC) noted that the NAC was receiving 
USAID funding and was currently developing a national strategy. 
During discussions with Songane and the other MOH officials, CDC 
and USAID officials emphasized ways in which USG programs were 
being developed to support the MOH strategy. 
 
8. Following the meeting at the Ministry of Health, Songane 
accompanied the delegation to Primeiro de Maio, a model VCT and 
health center under the supervision of the Ministry of Health. 
The clinic is supported by several donors and is a successful 
example of how implementing partners can collaborate with the 
government to strengthen service delivery. The center includes 
VCT services provided by USG-funded Population Services 
International (PSI). Clients who test positive are referred to 
the neighboring treatment service that is supported by Medicins 
sans Frontieres, Luxembourg. The health center also has an 
integrated maternity ward and family planning services. Speaking 
to a group of people living with AIDS at the center, Tobias 
commended the activists for speaking out, noting that their 
public efforts serve to encourage testing and reduce stigma 
associated with the disease. 
 
FM Simao Understands the Challenge 
------------------------------------ 
9. During the meeting with Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
Cooperation, Minister Simao, a physician and former Minister of 
Health, stated his appreciation for Mozambique\'s inclusion in the 
Emergency Plan, saying that the program sent an important message 
that Mozambique was not \"left alone\" to address the pandemic. 
The visit was described by Simao as a \"moral boost\" to continue 
the fight against HIV/AIDS. Simao described his greatest 
concerns as the provision of drugs, since the disease affects the 
most productive sectors of the economy, and stressed the need for 
both regional coordination and strong leadership. Specifically, 
he stated that government officials have the obligation to speak- 
out publicly with the community. Simao was optimistic about 
stabilizing prelvance levels, noting that there is a greater 
value for life since the ending of the civil war in 1992. 
Responding to concerns regarding the use of generics, Ambassador 
Tobias noted that the issue is one of standards and ensuring the 
safety of drugs, not intellectual property rights. The issue of 
resistance from non-regulatory approved drugs is another concern. 
Tobias stressed that the real constraining factor is medical 
personnel and access to testing and treatment programs. Simao 
noted the need for integrated health facilities, to which 
Ambassador Tobias agreed, citing the positive example of the 
Primeiro de Maio center. 
 
President Chissano Active on HIV/AIDS, but Challenges Loom 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
10. Ambassador Tobias and the delegation finished the visit by 
meeting with President Chissano, where Ambassador Tobias thanked 
Chissano for his leadership on HIV/AIDS and answered questions on 
the Emergency Plan. President Bush\'s personal interest and 
commitment to combating HIV/AIDS was also highlighted. Of 
particular interest to Chissano were the level of new funding 
under the Emergency Plan and our policy regarding generics. 
Ambassador Tobias explained our policy and addressed the 
importance of both treatment and testing. Chissano noted the 
challenges of increasing awareness about HIV/AIDS and 
acknowledged that current message campaigns have not always been 
effective. Citing illiteracy and traditional beliefs, Chissano 
stated that various ways of explaining and presenting information 
must be used, including the use of traditional healers. The 
President also noted that there is an opportunity to halt the 
disease, particularly given lower prevalence rates that other 
countries in the region. However, the problem must be seen as 
regional, describing the pandemic in Mozambique as a fire that 
was fueled by the winds from other countries. A press briefing 
followed the meeting with President Chissano. 
 
11. Comment: The visit was successful in raising awareness of 
the Emergency Plan and the President\'s commitment to combating 
HIV/AIDS. Ambassador Tobias effectively addressed concerns about 
the Emergency Plan\'s policies and programs for prevention and 
treatment and assured all key partners of our commitment to a 
collaborative effort to address the pandemic. Just as 
importantly, Ambassador Tobias and the delegation were able to 
meet with a wide range individuals, from high-level government 
officials and donors to local activists, and to see first-hand 
the limitations of Mozambique\'s health care system. For post, 
the visit was an opportunity to highlight the positive impact of 
USG funding and discuss key issues impacting the implementation 
of our Emergency Plan programs. End Comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"16899","5/14/2004 8:34","04MAPUTO659","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 000659 
 
SIPDIS 
COMUSNAVEUR FOR LT DOLAN, PLEASE PASS POLAD NAPLES 
STATE FOR AF/S AND AF/FO 
ACCRA PLEASE PASS TO VIP PARTY 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, PTER, KCRM, MZ, EFIS, Scenesetters, Coastal Security, ACOTA 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR VISIT OF USCOMNAVEUR 
 
REF: USCOMNAVEUR LONDON UK 061924 MAY 04 
Classified By: Econ/Pol Officer Chris Jester for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (U) Introduction and summary. Your visit comes at a time 
when the positive bilateral relationship between the U.S. and 
Mozambique is expanding. Mozambique is the only country in 
the world that is both a focus country under the President\'s 
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief and one of the sixteen 
candidates to receive funding under the Millennium Challenge 
Account. Following the announcement on May 6 that Mozambique 
was selected, planning has begun for a team to visit from 
Washington by the end of May to begin discussion on the MCA 
Compact with Mozambique. Your visit also closely follows the 
visit April 28-30 of the President\'s Global Coordination for 
HIV/AIDS, Ambassador Randall Tobias. 
 
2. (C) Last month the Ministry of Defense agreed to receive 
peacekeeping training under ACOTA and specifically requested 
that a contingent scheduled to replace their troops in 
Burundi be trained by December. The Interior Minister met 
with the Ambassador and emphasized their willingness to 
receive assistance in border security, noting the critical 
situation of Mozambique increasingly serving as a transit 
country for trafficking in narcotics, people, and other 
contraband, and conducive environment for international crime 
and terrorism. We have been working with the Mozambicans to 
try and build their capacity to receive EDA coastal patrol 
vessels, but have met with bureaucratic delays, specifically 
in their lack of progress drafting a model maritime code. 
End summary. 
 
POLITICAL/ECONOMIC OVERVIEW: 
============================ 
3. (U) Mozambique is rightly considered a post-conflict 
success story. Since the signing of the 1992 Peace Accords 
that ended sixteen years of civil war, Mozambique has made 
significant progress in promoting economic reforms and 
consolidating democracy. But Mozambique still faces enormous 
development challenges. The HIV/AIDS epidemic puts at risk 
much of the progress gained over the past decade and growing 
corruption hinders development and further foreign 
investment. US bilateral relations are strong. US 
government efforts in Mozambique have focused on good 
governance, economic development and health. The USG was also 
the major donor contributing to reconstruction and 
rehabilitation activities following the catastrophic floods 
in 2000. 
 
4. (U) In late 2004, Mozambique will hold its third 
multi-party presidential elections since independence in 
1975. The current constitutionally-elected president, 
Joaquim Chissano, will step down after having served eighteen 
year, including two elected terms. Chissano and the 
leadership of FRELIMO dominate policy-making and 
implementation. Mozambique currently holds the Presidency of 
the African Union (AU). President Chissano has been actively 
engaged on broader African issues and has sought to use his 
AU Presidency both to build stronger African institutions and 
to find African-led solutions to African problems. In 
February, Planning and Finance Minister Luisa Diogo replaced 
Pascoal Mocumbi as Prime Minister (while retaining the 
finance portfolio). On November 19, 2003, Mozambique held 
municipal elections which were considered generally free and 
fair. However, many institutions, such as the judiciary and 
the police, remain weak. Corruption remains a problem in both 
the public and private sectors. 
 
5. (U) Mozambique continues to be one of the most dynamic and 
fastest-growing economies in sub-Saharan Africa, albeit from 
a low base. Mozambique is one of the world\'s poorest 
countries, with per capita GDP of less than $250. That said, 
economic growth has averaged 8% over the last 3-4 years and a 
recent household survey indicates that the incidence of 
extreme poverty has declined from 70% to 55% over the past 
five years. Mozambique has significant but so far mostly 
untapped natural resources, including coal, natural gas, 
titanium ore, tantalite, graphite, iron ore, and 
semi-precious stones. One third of the economy is based on 
agriculture, most of it subsistence, but Mozambique exports 
cashews, cotton, sugar, sorghum, tea, citrus fruit, and 
tobacco. Mozambique has privatized over 1200 mostly smaller 
companies and 37 large enterprises since the privatization 
program began 10 years ago. Only 11 large state-owned or 
operated companies remain, including the national airline, 
telephone, electricity, insurance, oil and gas exploration, 
port and rail, airports, water supply, and fuel distribution 
companies. US-Mozambican trade, although quite small, is 
expanding, with the vast majority of Mozambique\'s exports to 
the US entering under either AGOA or GSP. South Africa and 
Portugal are the leading foreign investors. In 2003, 
Mozambique was assigned an international credit rating of B/B 
by Fitch Ratings, reflecting Mozambique\'s positive track 
record on economic reforms, political stability, strong 
economic growth, openness to FDI, and expanding exports. 
 
6. (U) Mozambique faces significant development challenges. 
The literacy rate is about 40 percent and infant mortality 
rates are among the highest in Africa. Life expectancy is 46 
and is expected to decline into the 30s by 2010 as a result 
of AIDS. The country also lacks infrastructure, power, and 
clean water for most of its citizens. The Government has 
placed its Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty (PARPA) 
at the head of its policy agenda. PARPA emphasizes six areas 
as the key reducers of absolute poverty: education; health; 
basic infrastructure; agriculture and rural development; good 
governance; and macroeconomic and financial management. The 
donor community funds approximately 60 percent of the 
national budget, though the HIPC and Enhanced HIPC (Heavily 
Indebted Poor Countries) debt relief programs have permitted 
increased budgetary support to alleviate poverty. 
 
COUNTER TERRORISM ISSUES 
======================== 
7. (U) The GRM has acceded to all twelve UN 
Counter-Terrorism conventions. The USG has offered to assist 
the Mozambican MFA in preparations for hosting a 2004 
National Counter-Terrorism Conference in Maputo on 
implementation of UN Counter-Terrorism conventions. We have 
sent Ministry of Finance and Central Bank of Mozambique 
officials to USG training provided in Botswana. 
 
8. (C) Mozambique has no capacity to patrol its maritime 
border, with an unprotected coastline twice the length of 
California. We have sent eight Mozambican naval officers to 
the International Maritime Officers Course in Norfolk over 
the past five years. Four groups from DIILS in Newport to 
provide Mozambican Navy an international law course for MFA, 
MOD, Interior and Justice Ministries, with goal of 
establishing maritime patrol capacity (provision of EDA 
patrol craft and IMET crew training). Mozambique is 
addressing the need to establish a codified system of 
maritime law, as we seek to identify equipment and funding 
available through US programs. DOD also conducted a Maputo 
airport survey in 2003. 
 
9. (C) Officials from Customs, Police, Ministry of interior, 
Immigration, and Finance Ministry attended a USG 
Counterterrorism seminar in Gaborone, Botswana. DOJ has 
provided FBI training for prosecutors at Mozambique\'s 
Judicial Training Center including anti-money laundering 
components. Post will also seek State INL funding for 
equipment requested by Mozambican customs for container 
inspection in ports of Maputo, Beira, and Nacala. The 
Minister of Interior seeks US assistance in tackling problems 
faced by the GRM in trying to combat trans-border crime and 
the growing role of Mozambique as a transit country for 
narcotics, especially cocaine originating in Brazil destined 
for South Africa. 
 
10. (SBU) The Interior Minister would also welcome any 
assistance to improve GRM capacity to track money laundering. 
He noted the demographic factor of the large number of 
Muslim businesses in the northern provinces involved in 
importing goods for sale in Mozambique and the difficulty his 
ministry faces in knowing the real names of account holders 
and merchants bringing goods through customs. He also 
confirmed reports of large numbers of undocumented Pakistani 
aliens and the more recent trend of Somali refugees entering 
or transiting Mozambique. 
 
12. (SBU) In February, we hosted a Counterterrorism Action 
Group (CTAG) meeting with counterparts from Spain, Portugal, 
Russia, France, Italy, Switzerland, UK, Germany, European 
Commission, and Ireland (representing EU troika). 
Participants concurred that improved maritime security for 
Mozambique\'s vulnerable coastline was the top priority and 
agreed to coordinate the efforts of the USG, France, 
Portugal, and the EC to provide coastal patrol capacity. 
Other areas of mutual concern discussed include financial 
oversight, trafficking of drugs and people, money laundering, 
and corruption. CTAG participants indicated few direct 
programs; however, nearly all indicated programs to build 
government capacity in areas directly related to CT 
capabilities. 
 
BUILDING COASTAL PATROL CAPACITY 
================================ 
13. (C) The French see the coast as the key to 
counterterrorism efforts and are also addressing this 
specific vulnerability. They will provide two small patrol 
boats to the GRM in 2004, which are currently being refitted 
in Simonstown by the South African Navy. They plan joint 
naval exercises for later this year and had two GRM Navy 
personnel on their frigate during a January 2004 port visit 
to Maputo. Portugal is working with the GRM on developing 
the necessary maritime code, a prerequisite for our EDA 
request. They are optimistic that they have more success 
that we have seen after four DIILS visits. The British 
provide training in bank auditing and financial systems and 
are conducting a large project with Mozambican Customs 
implemented by Crown Agents. However, British concerns 
regarding counterterrorism have their focus on Kenya, 
Tanzania, and South Africa. 
 
14. (C) The European Commission provided some customs 
training to the GRM, but has focused on assisting GRM public 
sector reform, judicial reform, and increased budget 
accountability. They provide direct financial support to the 
Ministry of fisheries for monitoring the coastline (including 
funding surveillance flight hours). The have funded the 
chartering of a vessel from the South African Fisheries 
Ministry, through SADC,s Monitoring, Control, and 
Surveillance of Fisheries program (MCS). In April, two 
illegal Chinese fishing vessels were seized. The European 
Union provide approximately two million euros annually for 
assistance related to fisheries. Included in the program is 
technical support for development of a maritime code. 
Portugal, the driving force behind CPLP joint military 
exercises, emphasizes training for PKOs and staff command and 
control. They provide support to the GRM Military Academy in 
Nampula and are also assisting with development of the 
maritime code. 
 
15. The group recognized the need to coordinate our efforts 
to get the GRM to adopt a model maritime code and prepare 
themselves to utilize coastal patrol boats. All participants 
agreed that weak land borders, ineffective and corrupt police 
and judicial officials, absent coastal patrol capacity, and 
poor coordination between GRM entities all contribute to an 
environment conducive to organized crime and terrorists. Post 
and many other donors are focused on corruption and 
transparency issues, especially considering their linkage to 
transnational crime, alien smuggling, money laundering, and 
possible terrorist financing. The EC and others also express 
concern regarding weak security in ports and along the coast 
contributing to illegal fishing and export of precious 
hardwood timbers, both with severe environmental 
repercussions. 
 
HIV/AIDS: 
========= 
16. (U) Mozambique is at a critical stage in its efforts to 
stem the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In Southern Africa, Mozambique 
presents both the greatest challenges and possibly the 
greatest opportunity to become the next Uganda-like success 
in turning around the HIV/AIDS threat. The Mozambican 
Government (GRM) has been outspoken in the battle against 
HIV/AIDS and is a cooperative partner in our HIV/AIDS 
efforts. The USG has been a leading player in international 
HIV/AIDS efforts in Mozambique, working closely with our 
implementing partners, other donors, the Ministry of Health 
(MOH) and the National AIDS Council (NAC). Mozambique\'s 
overall HIV/AIDS prevalence rate is 14.9%, though prevalence 
rates vary greatly by region, with the highest rates 
occurring in the principal transportation corridors. The 
political environment in Mozambique is very favorable to 
accelerating ARV treatment throughout the country, though 
Mozambique\'s significant development challenges are a 
constraint for rapid scale-up of treatment activities. In 
addition to the Emergency Plan, funding has been committed 
through the Global Fund, the World Bank MAP and the Clinton 
Foundation (via several European donors) to strengthen the 
MOH and its services to expand ARVs. 
LA LIME 
"
"17130","5/20/2004 15:59","04MAPUTO675","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO636","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000675 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S AND INL/AAE 
PRETORIA FOR SSNYDER 
DOJ FOR ICITAP EBEINHART AND OPDAT JSILVERWOOD 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, KCOR, KJUS, ASEC, MZ 
SUBJECT: ANIBALZINHO ESCAPES AGAIN, GRM EMBARRASSED 
 
REF: MAPUTO 636 
 
1. (U) On May 9, Anibal dos Santos Junior once again escaped 
from maximum security prison, creating a highly embarrassing 
situation for the GRM. \"Anibalzinho\" was serving the 28-year 
sentence he received in absentia in January 2003 for his 
central role in the November 2000 murder of journalist Carlos 
Cardoso. He had previously escaped in August 2002 and was 
apprehended in South Africa the day before his sentence was 
handed down. As with his previous escape, many commentators 
speculate that he was allowed to escape because he could 
reveal information damaging to government officials. 
 
2. (SBU) The public has reacted the escape with disgust, 
disappointment, and derision. Schoolchildren have even taken 
to playing a game in which one child, playing \"Anibazinho,\" 
is allowed to walk out the open door. The influential weekly 
\"Savana\" has encouraged government ministers to accept 
responsibility and resign. Some commentators have pointed to 
the escape as proof that crime syndicates control the 
government. Those with a weakness for conspiracy theories 
are certain that this time dos Santos was killed to prevent 
any revelations that could bring down powerful people. 
 
3. (U) President Chissano has announced that recapture of the 
escaped prisoner is \"essential and imperative,\" because \"it 
would help the authorities to clarify a number of other 
criminal cases that he knows.\" Three officers from the 
prison have been detained as suspects for facilitating his 
escape. The Attorney General\'s Office was questioning others 
in the prison who were convicted along with dos Santos for 
the Cardoso murder in additional follow-up investigations on 
related charges. These investigations also allegedly 
involved the BCM bank fraud. One of those being questioned, 
Nini Satar, is a key defendant in the BCM trail and claims 
that he called Anti-Corruption Unit Chief Isabel Rupia on May 
4 to warn her that Anibalzinho was going to escape. 
 
4. (SBU) On May 18, Ambassador and USAID Director attended a 
government event which featured numerous speakers, including 
President Chissano and the Minister of Justice. Speaking on 
behalf of the G-15 donors group, the Swiss Cooperation 
Director delivered a strong criticism of the GRM legal reform 
effort. He described results to date as unsatisfactory and 
expressed shock at the escape, describing it as a serious 
blow to the credibility of the government\'s reform. He 
referred to the recent joint review exercise and the finding 
that the delays in investigation and resolution of serious 
cases such as these financial crimes, along with the 
unresolved murders such as the Siba-Siba case, leave a strong 
impression of impunity. 
LA LIME 
"
"17227","5/25/2004 5:51","04MAPUTO689","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000689 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR OES/OMC - JSTORY 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS, SENV, ETRD, MZ 
SUBJECT: REQUEST TO SEND TURTLE EXCLUDER DEVICES (TEDs) 
TRAINING TEAM TO VISIT MOZAMBIQUE 
 
1. This is an Action Request for the OES Bureau - See 
paragraph 6. 
 
2. SUMMARY. The GRM requests that the USG send a TEDs 
Training Team to Mozambique August 2-6 to train local 
fishermen and government officials to build, use, and 
monitor TEDs. This request is generated from recent 
legislation that requires all industrial and semi-industrial 
shrimping fleets to be equipped and using TEDs by January 
2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
3. On April 28, the GRM, through the Ministry of Fisheries, 
sent a request for assistance to the OES Bureau, Office of 
Marine Conservation (OMC), proposing that a Turtle Excluder 
Devices (TEDs) Training Team visit Maputo on August 2-6. The 
Ministry would like to have the TEDs Training Team train 
local artisans and fishermen to build, use, and inspect 
TEDs, in light of the recent Mozambican legislation 
requiring all industrial and semi-industrial shrimping 
fleets to install and use TEDs by early 2005. 
 
4. The Ministry of Fisheries has recently worked towards 
changing domestic fishing regulations to make the 
utilization of TEDs mandatory for Mozambican shrimping 
fleets. This regulation will be in effect as of January 
2005. In this endeavour, the Ministry has worked closely 
with the US Embassy and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF). 
Mozambique\'s utilization of TEDs results not only in 
conservation benefits for endangered sea turtles, it also 
allows Mozambique the possibility of becoming certified to 
export industrially caught shrimp to the US. This two-fold 
benefit will champion the US priority of protecting the 
environment and strengthen commercial ties between 
Mozambique and the US. The Ministry is advocating that the 
team provide Mozambican industrial shrimping fleets and 
officials in the Ministry of Fisheries with the technical 
knowledge to build, use, and inspect TEDs. This US 
Department of State-led Team may include gear experts and 
biologists from the National Marine Fisheries Service. The 
Ministry has indicated that it will provide a space for the 
training and will send invitations to boat owners, boat 
captains, net-makers, and officials who will be responsible 
for inspecting TEDs. The Ministry has requested the training 
take place in Maputo and Beira, where most shrimping 
operators are located. 
 
5. The Mission highly supports the GRM request to send a USG 
team to Mozambique to extend technical knowledge and 
training to involved fisheries industry and governmental 
personnel. The GRM has taken the first step to amend 
official regulations to include the use of TEDs in shrimping 
operations. The USG, in partnership with the GRM and WWF, 
has the opportunity to take the next step by providing 
Mozambicans with the capacity to implement new regulations. 
WWF has agreed to work with the Mission in beginning an 
informational campaign about the purpose and utilization of 
TEDs prior to the arrival of the TEDs Training Team. 
 
6. ACTION REQUEST: Mission requests OES confirmation of a 
TEDs Training Team visit to Mozambique during the 2-6 August 
period. 
LA LIME 
"
"17308","5/27/2004 12:24","04MAPUTO701","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000701 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, MZ 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE CANDIDATURE FOR ICAO 
 
 
1. Per Diplomatic Note 879, dated May 14, 2004, from the 
Mozambique Ministry of Foreign Affairs, AmEmbassy Maputo 
was informed that in accordance with the rotation arrangement 
among the fourteen Member States of the Southern African 
Development Community (SADC), the Republic of 
Mozambique will present its candidature for the election to the 
Council of International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
during the forthcoming 35th Session to be held in September/ 
October 2004, in Montreal. 
 
2. The Government of the Republic of Mozambique is 
requesting U.S. support for its candidature to the Council 
of ICAO. 
LA LIME 
"
"17341","5/28/2004 10:35","04MAPUTO710","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO659","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000710 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR AF/S, AF/RSA, AF/FO, AND ACOTA BHUGHES 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISA CLUEKER 
COMUSNAVEUR FOR LT DOLAN, EUCOM PLEASE PASS POLAD NAPLES 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, MASS, PTER, KHDP, MZ, EFIS, PKO, ACOTA, Coastal Security 
SUBJECT: COMNAVEUR VISIT STRESSES MARITIME BORDER CONCERNS 
 
REF: MAPUTO 659 
 
1. (U) On May 20 and 21, Commander of U.S. Naval Forces 
Europe, Admiral Gregory G. Johnson visited Maputo and met 
with Mozambican officials. His meetings principally covered 
USG concerns over Mozambique\'s lack of coastal patrol 
capacity, Mozambican success in the African Union 
Peacekeeping Mission in Burundi (AMIB), and the GRM interest 
in ACOTA peacekeeping training. 
 
2. (U) As part on AOR orientation trip to four African 
countries, USCOMNAVEUR met with Vice Minister of Defense 
Henrique Banze and Chief of Mozambican Armed Forces (FADM) 
General Lagos Lidimo. He also toured the Maputo port with 
Alec Don, of the Maputo Port Development Company, and had a 
lunch discussion with Ambassador Carlos dos Santos of the 
Presidency, Minister of Fisheries Cadmiel Mutemba, Banze, and 
Assistant Director of the Institute of the Sea and Borders 
Dr. Christiano Santos. He was accompanied on the calls by 
Ambassador, POLAD, flag aide, and notetakers. 
 
3. (SBU) Vice Minster Banze thanked the Admiral for his 
visit and his positive assessment of Mozambique\'s progress 
since 1992, bilateral relations with the USG, and their 
unique position as an MCA qualified country and partner in 
the President\'s AIDS Emergency Plan. Admiral Johnson also 
thanked Banze for his ministry\'s interest in the ACOTA 
program. Banze recognized the challenges faced by the GRM 
military in both staffing and resources, in particular the 
total lack of capacity to patrol Mozambique\'s long coastline. 
The GRM is aware that fishery and other natural resources 
are being plundered and that traffic in illegal migrants, 
narcotics, contraband, and possibly arms is transiting 
unhindered. Both agreed that international criminals and 
terrorists could exploit this weakness. Both Banze and 
General Lidimo outlined GRM interest in receiving timely 
ACOTA peacekeeping training to sent a trained replacement 
contingent to relieve the reinforced company that has been in 
Burundi since October 2003 by the end of this year. In the 
separate meetings they both also expressed the FADM\'s desire 
to increase their demining capability as a specialization for 
the small national military. 
 
4. (U) After receiving a tour and explanation of the ongoing 
efforts to rehabilitate the country\'s principal port and 
establish Maputo as a rival to Durban for traffic with South 
Africa\'s Gauteng region, the group attended a lunch hosted by 
the Ambassador. Discussion focused on Mozambique\'s role in 
the African Union, NEPAD, the AMIB, HIV/AIDS, and upcoming 
U.S. and Mozambican elections. 
 
5. (U) Admiral Johnson\'s party did not clear this message. 
LA LIME 
"
"17342","5/28/2004 10:38","04MAPUTO712","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000712 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO - BNUELING, FCS - WCENTER 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: MAY MONTHLY ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
? 
----------------------- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
---------------------- 
1. (U) A major Zimbabwean horticultural company is shifting 
its operations to Mozambique and Zambia as a result of land 
seizure in Zimbabwe. Ousted by the Zimbabwean Government, 
 
Kondozi Company will be granted 800 hectares of land in the 
Manica Province by the GRM, according to AIM Reporting. 
Hundreds of Zimbabwean farmers are already working in this 
province, overwhelmingly in the agricultural sector. 
Majority shareholder, Edwin Moyo, said his firm would buy a 
further 2,000 hectares in Gwembe Valley, Zambia. The 
company will operate with advanced irrigation equipment and 
is financed by big names such as the South African 
Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) and Barclays Bank 
International. 
 
------------------ 
MACROECONOMICS 
------------------ 
2. (U) The leaders of the New Partnership for Africa\'s 
Development (NEPAD) convened in Maputo to assess NEPAD\'s 
progress and acknowledge the challenges that lie ahead for 
the continent. Representatives from twenty African countries 
attended the meeting of the NEPAD Implementation Committee 
to discuss, among other things, poverty eradication and 
achievement of the UN\'s Millennium Development Goals. 
Improving Africa\'s infrastructure and food security are high 
priorities for the NEPAD group. 
 
--------------------------- 
PORTS, ROADS, AND RAILWAYS 
--------------------------- 
3. (SBU) With the April announcement that Rites and Ircon, a 
private Indian consortium, was awarded reconstruction and 
management of the Sena Railway Line (leading from the coast 
to the extensive coal deposits at Moatize), as well as 
management of the Machipanda Line (leading from the coast to 
Zimbabwe), pol/econoff and USAID paid a visit to the Ports 
and Railways Company (CFM) to speak with key contacts. The 
GRM, through CFM, will be in negotiations with the Indian 
group to determine subcontract arrangements, management 
details, and sign the formal contract next month. Also, 
later in June, the World Bank will appraise the agreed-upon 
terms, and assuming economic feasibility, the project will 
be sent to the World Bank for a $120 million loan/IFC/MIGA 
package approval in July. Mission officers think this 
timetable is optimistic, considering the hesitation the GRM 
places on big infrastructure and privatization deals. On the 
other hand, unlike other projects, reconstruction of the 
Sena Line has huge political impetus and has already been 
treated as a top governmental priority. CFM board member and 
civil engineer, Domingos Bainha, asserted that Sena Line 
reconstruction would take three and a half years. Important 
products likely to be carried on the 600km line are: 
limestone, cotton, sugar, wood, and eventually, steam and 
coking coal from the Moatize mines. Bainha also noted that 
the Sena Line would carry passenger traffic. According to 
CFM, the line will increase employment (creating 1500 jobs 
at the start of construction), transport goods and people, 
spur economic development, and revive and grow small towns 
in the central provinces. CFM will be a 49% shareholder in 
the construction and management of the line. COMMENT: The 
Mission believes there are several economic and financial 
inconsistencies with the push forward to fund Sena Line 
reconstruction. With a low tonnage capacity, CFM expects 1 
million tons of coal/year to be transported and exported, 
once reconstruction is complete. Car size and axle load, as 
well as limited capacity at the shallow and muddy port of 
Beira, will not allow for rapid expansion of coal exports. 
This figure pales in comparison to the 80 million tons of 
coal/year that is shipped out of the closest regional 
competing port, Richard\'s Bay, South Africa. USG questions 
the economic viability of the Sena Line, especially 
considering the overwhelming financial cost to rebuild the 
infrastructure. The are alternatives for transporting the 
Moatize coal that may be more economically sound; including 
construction of a spur to the Nacala Railway Line (in the 
North) and use of the natural deep water port of Nacala, or 
barging coal along the Zambeze River (in the central region) 
to load at sea. END COMMENT. 
 
-------- 
ENERGY 
-------- 
4. (U) With an award out for reconstruction on the Sena 
Railway Line, conversation about investors for the Moatize 
coalmines is increasing. The Minister of Mineral Resources 
and Energy, Castigo Langa, announced that the GRM is 
preparing to attract possible investors for this project by 
releasing a tender at the beginning of June. Several 
international mining firms have shown interest in competing 
for the coalmines by conducting evaluations on mine capacity 
and potential. One such group is Compania do Vale do Rio 
Doce, a well-known Brazilian mining firm. The GRM estimates 
that the mine has the capacity to supply up to 10 billion 
tons of coal, but world export of the product depends on a 
functional railway line to the coast, which may take another 
three and a half years to complete (Sena Line). 
 
------------ 
AGRICULTURE 
------------ 
5. (U) In the present agricultural campaign, Mozambique is 
expected to harvest over two million tons of main crops, a 
target set by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MADER). 
 
6. (U) In 1999, MADER launched PROAGRI, the GRM\'s sector 
wide investment program, which counts with broad donor 
support including that of USAID. One of the overarching 
objectives of the program is to strengthen the public 
sector\'s ability to perform its core functions in a market 
economy: policy making; efficient delivery of some key 
agricultural support services; and the establishment of 
framework for the sustainable and transparent management of 
natural resources. Although new systems for financial 
management and investment planning were successfully 
introduced, the Ministry has lagged on the more structural 
reforms required in staffing and ministry re-organization. 
Further, the consistently tardy transfer of budget resources 
from the Ministry of Planning and Finance has compromised 
the achievement of field-based results, with very few 
farmers registering improvements in the quality and 
relevance of agricultural support services delivered in the 
field since the launch of PROAGRI. According to the Vice- 
Minister of Agriculture, Joao Carrilho, access to credit and 
lack of infrastructure that allow farmers to bring products 
to market are major obstacles for small producers in 
Mozambique. At present, a multi-donor appraisal team is 
reviewing the proposal for the second five-year tranche of 
PROAGRI, or PROAGRI II. The proposal under review 
introduces some changes that will increase effective 
decentralization to provincial and district levels and 
ensure a more results oriented program. A new institutional 
configuration that streamlines functional responsibilities 
is also proposed. USAID will continue supporting this 
important process but will increasingly tie its budget 
support to specific policy and agricultural activities. 
 
7. (U) According to the National Institute of Sugar (INA), 
sugar production will rise 20 percent in 2004. This 
expectation is gleaned from the per hectare yield projection 
of 71 tons/hectare in 2003 to 76 tones/hectare in 2004. 
Sugar production was decimated by the civil war, as most 
factories were demolished. Post-1992, actions have been 
taken to rehabilitate four sugar factories, namely 
Mafambisse and Marromeu factories, both located in the 
central region of the Sofala Province and Maragra and 
Xinavane factories in the Maputo Province. Other giant 
factories located in Zambezia and Sofala still lack 
investment and sit inoperative. The GRM hope is to bring the 
production of sugar back up to pre-civil war levels, 
increasing output and local employment. 
? 
-------- 
LABOR 
-------- 
8. (U) On May 5, the USG sponsored a half-day labor seminar 
focused on Mozambican labor law reform. The seminar, funded 
by USDOL and managed by the Mission, attracted over 60 
participants from the private sector, the GRM, academics, 
unions, legal experts, and donors. The seminar was hailed as 
the most covered USG press event of the year in Mozambique. 
The seminar featured four researchers, presenting analyses 
on Mozambican labor law, union-based bargaining in 
Mozambique, and Mozambique\'s labor system in comparison with 
regional competitors. At the end of each presentation, 
authors suggested recommendations for reform and the 
audience launched into debate on various labor topics. 
Success of the seminar was marked by the full-day 
participation of Minister of Labor, Mario Lampiao Sevene, 
initiative of the US Ambassador to open the event and call 
for greater labor law liberalization to attract foreign 
investment and increase employment, and the event\'s 
timeliness. The seminar was held just prior to the GRM\'s 
announcement of a team to review current legislation, set to 
be amended and revised by 2005. 
LA LIME 
"
"17343","5/28/2004 10:59","04MAPUTO713","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000713 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S 
USDOL FOR ILAB - BYOUNG, MMITTELHAUSER 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO - BNEULING 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ECON, MZ 
SUBJECT: DRAWING ATTENTION TO THE NEED FOR LABOR REFORM: A 
USG LABOR SEMINAR IN MOZAMBIQUE MARKS SUCCESS 
 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY. Productive to current labor law revision 
efforts, the USG launched a half-day labor seminar in 
Mozambique on May 5. The seminar featured participants from 
various sectors and included the fullday participation and 
attention of Minister of Labor, Mario Lampiao Sevene. 
Receiving more press attention than any other USG-funded 
event this year, the seminar focused on key recommendations 
for labor law reform. Labor law revision will reach 
completion by 2005. USG priorities for this process include 
the adoption of more liberalized labor policies that attract 
more foreign investment and encourage economic development. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------- 
IMPRESSIVE GROUP OF ATTENDEES 
----------------------------- 
2.(U) On May 5, the USG hosted a 60-person labor seminar 
focused on the need for labor law reform in Mozambique. The 
USDOL-funded event, managed by USDOL and the Mission, 
invited over 80 participants from the Ministry of Labor, the 
Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the private sector, 
unions, donors, academics, and other organizations such as 
the International Labor Organization (ILO) and the 
Solidarity Center, to take part in the half-day event. 
Success was due in large part to the attendance and full 
participation of the Minister of Labor, Mario Lampiao 
Sevene, and a well-rounded and engaged audience of key 
players from business and unions, as well as a huge press 
presence. Coverage included spots on four national and 
international TV networks and press articles from over seven 
national publications. The seminar received overwhelming 
attention and positive feedback from all sectors. The GRM 
also announced that it has identified a working group for 
revision of the current Mozambican Labor Law, to be 
completed in 2005, a year earlier than previously planned. 
 
------ 
THEMES 
------ 
3.(U) In 2003, the USDOL selected four researchers to 
analyze and report on three themes related to the Mozambican 
labor system. USDOL has been very active in Mozambican 
labor programs and has most recently contracted the Federal 
Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) to provide labor 
dispute resolution training to a tripartite group of 
government, union, and private sector representatives in 
Mozambique. (Additionally, USDOL funds a $900,000 HIV/AIDS 
prevention in the workplace program in Mozambique, Project 
Hope.) The themes presented were: the current labor system 
and recommendations for reform, a history of industrial- 
based bargaining in Mozambique and recommendations to 
improve its functioning, and a comparative analysis of labor 
laws and regulations in Mozambique, Kenya, South Africa, and 
Malaysia. 
 
------------ 
LABOR ISSUES 
------------ 
4.(U) The U.S. Ambassador to Mozambique opened the seminar 
with remarks aimed to encourage the GRM, through the 
Ministry of Labor, to reform the current labor system in 
order to make Mozambique more competitive regionally, 
thereby attracting greater foreign investment and reducing 
poverty. Following the Ambassador\'s remarks, Minister of 
Labor Mario Sevene gave a thoughtful speech on the current 
status of labor issues, the GRM\'s drive to move forward and 
effect change on specific labor legislation, the need for 
the worker and private sector communities to work with the 
Ministry to achieve this, and the timetable for the labor 
law revision. After formal remarks were given, authors 
presented their findings and key recommendations to the 
audience. This was followed by a wide-ranging and 
provocative discussion on labor issues: sick leave (which is 
unlimited in Mozambique); severance pay (a worker with six 
years and a day of service is entitled to one year\'s 
severance pay); the right to strike (where the ambiguity of 
the law deflects attention from real grievances to the 
legality of the action); heavy corruption in labor 
inspections (labor inspectors personally keep 25 percent of 
fines levied, and have great discretion over the amount of a 
given fine); the difficulty of hiring and firing of workers 
(as a general rule, only restructuring of a company provides 
the right to dismiss); and contracting of foreign labor 
(also a highly discretionary bureaucratic process that fuels 
corruption). 
 
------------ 
WHAT\'S WRONG 
------------ 
5. (SBU) Although the Mozambican labor system is 
theoretically pro-worker, many of its provisions are 
ambiguous and complicated, raising the costs of employment 
in the formal sector without providing any commensurate 
benefits to either the employer or the worker. To make 
matters worse, it is a major roadblock to foreign 
investment, particularly the kind of labor-intensive 
investment that would create new jobs. The law reflects 
inward-looking socialist policies, not competitive with 
other countries in the region. There is widespread 
frustration in the private sector and donor communities that 
the GRM is not moving quickly enough to promote reform that 
will open Mozambique\'s economy and allow for economic 
growth, an influx of small-to-medium sized firms, an overall 
increase in employment, and increased production. Minister 
Sevene\'s full-day presence at the seminar captured each 
participant\'s attention, as the Minister rarely attends such 
events in their entirety. We hope it signals, after 
significant delays, the Ministry\'s commitment to making 
positive labor law change happen by 2005. 
 
----------- 
A GOOD STEP 
----------- 
6. (U) Although many of the issues discussed during the day 
have been on the table for some time, this seminar, by 
bringing together powerful players from the government and 
private sector, gave significant new impetus to lagging 
reform efforts. It also reflected a growing understanding 
from all involved on the need to stimulate employment, and 
that radical reform has to come quickly if Mozambique is to 
produce the jobs required for broad based, poverty-reducing 
growth. 
LA LIME 
"
"17490","6/4/2004 7:12","04MAPUTO733","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE84543","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000733 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR S/ES-O AND AF/S 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MZ, PGOV, PREL 
SUBJECT: NAMES, TITLES, AND CONTACT NUMBERS FOR GRM 
 
REF: STATE 084543 
 
1. (SBU) Per reftel, post provides updated information below: 
Post: Maputo 
Date of Submission: 4 June 2004 
Head of Government: Joaquim Alberto Chissano 
President of the Republic of Mozambique 
Office numbers: (258) (1) 49-11-21/2; 49-00-44 
Comments: President Chissano speaks English. President\'s 
secretary is Ms.Arminda Mafuiane, 
 
SIPDIS 
cell number: (258) (82) 30-38-36, she speaks English. 
Private Secretary is Mr.Elias Jaime Zimba, phone number: 
(258) (1) 49-15-15, cell number: (258) (82) 30-38-34, he 
speaks English. 
Head of Government: Luisa Diogo 
Prime Minister 
Office numbers: (258) (1) 42-68-61/ 42-68-80 
Cell phone number:(258) (82) 30-80-53 
Comments: PM Diogo speaks English. Secretary is Mr.Jose 
Manhique, cell number: (258) (82) 30-02-03; he speaks English 
Foreign Minister: Leonardo Simao 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation 
Office number: (258) (1) 49-22-58 
Cell phone number: (258) (82) 22-22-35 
Comments: Simao speaks English. Minister\'s Secretary is Ms. 
Otilia Dos Reis Cuna, phone (258) (1) 49-22-58, cell phone 
(258) (82) 48-13-66, she speaks English. Chief of Staff is 
Mr. Milagre Macaringue, phone number: (258) (1) 49-14-57, 
cell number: (258) (82) 30-29-75, he speaks English. 
LA LIME 
"
"17498","6/4/2004 10:52","04MAPUTO740","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04MAPUTO678","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L MAPUTO 000740 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S KDAVISON 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MZ, DHLAKAMA 
SUBJECT: DHLAKAMA SPEAKS TO AMBASSADOR ON VISIT TO 
WASHINGTON AND US-MOZAMBICAN RELATIONS 
 
REF: MAPUTO 00678 
Classified By: Ambassador Helen La Lime for reasons 1.5 b and d 
 
1. (C) Ambassador and econ/polofficer (notetaker) met with 
RENAMO opposition leader and presidential candidate for 
Afonso Dhlakama at his request on June 4 to discuss his 
planned trip to the United States and a variety of bilateral 
and regional issues. Dhlakama was more upbeat and positive 
than usual. The Ambassador used the meeting to highlight 
US-Mozambican cooperation, noting Mozambique\'s participation 
in the President\'s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief and 
eligibility under the Millennium Challenge Account, and 
recent high-level USG visits to Mozambique. The need for 
greater progress on judicial and labor reforms and 
anti-corruption efforts were also discussed. The Ambassador 
stressed the need for the political leadership to speak-out 
on HIV/AIDS. 
 
2. (C) Dhlakama spoke at length on a variety of political and 
economic issues. He expressed satisfaction on US engagement 
in Mozambique, noting that this has been a relatively new 
development, reflecting the government\'s move away from the 
\"East\" and to a multi-party system. He agreed on the need for 
greater progress on judicial reform and corruption (which, 
according to Dhlakama, goes from \"top to bottom\"). Speaking 
on the economy, Dhlakama stressed the importance of 
developing national production, particularly of small and 
medium sized businesses, and reducing the country\'s reliance 
on imports from South Africa. In this sense, regional 
integration was described as a net negative for Mozambique. 
Dhlakama was optimistic about the country\'s economic 
potential, noting its extensive resources in fishing, timber 
and minerals, though he was critical of the mega-investments 
(principally from South Africa), which he said only benefited 
the south of the country. 
 
3. (C) Turning to US-Mozambican relations and the US role in 
Africa, Dhlakama stated that the US must define its friends 
and strategy and defend its interests in Africa. According 
to Dhlakama, he had conveyed this message to US officials 
during his visit to the United States last year. The lack of 
support for US policy in Iraq by many leaders in Africa was 
noted, as was the reluctance of some key African leaders, 
such as Mbeki, to take clear positions on regional issues 
such as the situation in Zimbabwe. Dhlakama noted that he had 
been meeting with European officials regarding Mozambique\'s 
upcoming presidential elections and had encouraged the 
participation of international observers. 
 
4. (C) Regarding his trip to Washington, originally planned 
for June 23-30 (reftel), Dhlakama appeared familiar with the 
often lengthy visa waiver process and stated that he already 
had moved his trip dates. He now plans to arrive in the 
United States on July 20. Dhlakama stated his interest in 
meeting with officials from both the Department of State and 
Defense. 
LA LIME 
"
"17799","6/15/2004 8:15","04MAPUTO776","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO406","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000776 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
JOHANNESBURG FOR FCS - WCENTER 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, EAGR, EFIS, Tourism 
SUBJECT: ECONOMIC ACTIVITIY INCREASES IN A REMOTE PROVINCE: CABO 
DELGADO RELIES ON TOURISM, SHRIMP AQUACULTURE, AND NEW INVESTMENT 
 
REF: MAPUTO 00406 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY. More foreign operators are moving in to take 
advantage of resource-rich opportunities in the poor province of 
Cabo Delgado. Operators of Middle-Eastern, South Asian, and 
European descent, are bringing employment and increased 
production to the community, although the lack of infrastructure 
and extremely high operating costs are still problematic for 
businesses. Cabo Delgado\'s hope lies in the development of 
tourism, which both the GRM and the USG have made a top priority. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Characterized by a majority Muslim population, 
considerably low living standards, and a shared border with 
Tanzania, the northern-most province of Mozambique, Cabo Delgado, 
is home to significant natural resources and generally untapped 
economic potential. The mining, forestry, agriculture, fishing, 
and tourism sectors have recently attracted several new investors 
in Cabo Delgado, giving the province a European, Asian, and 
Middle Eastern economic flair. 
 
3. (SBU) On up-country travel, econ/poloff and political 
assistant met with the Director of Operations of the port of 
Pemba, the provincial capital. A recently rehabilitated facility 
(1994), the port is small and only receives six to seven ships 
per month. With a depth of twelve meters, the port does not need 
to provide dredging or piloting for incoming traffic. Regular 
traffic hails from Mombasa, Kenya, and Maputo, bringing household 
goods and electrical equipment every fifteen days to be sold on 
the local market. Cotton and timber are the province\'s primary 
exports, with most goods being shipped to Asia (predominately 
China). Timberworld and Southgate, two UK-based timber firms, and 
Komatiland Forestry, a South African-based firm, have operations 
in Cabo Delgado. Of real concern is illegal Chinese logging in 
the Cabo Delgado Province. According to port authorities, Chinese 
operators manage the majority of timber that transits Pemba Port, 
subject to tax exemptions. More often than not, these operators 
are illegally logging throughout the northern and central 
provinces of Mozambique, thus destroying precious natural wetland 
forest reserves. The GRM seems to turn a blind eye to such 
activity, possibly due to the high profile aid the Chinese 
provide to the GRM and Mozambican military forces (for example, 
the Chinese have recently constructed an international trade 
center and new Ministry of Foreign Affairs building). 
Additionally, China and Mozambique have been long time trade and 
investment partners (REF A). Due to the rising cost of 
electricity across the country, the graphite and marble factories 
located in Ancuabe and Montepuez, respectively, have slowed 
operations, reducing exports. The port expects to be shipping 
large amounts of prawn in the near future, as Indian Ocean 
Aquaculture, a majority British-owned shrimp aquaculture firm, 
has shown intentions of exporting their product to Japan and the 
US by July 2004. Indian Ocean is still in the process of 
refurbishing their packing plant, but has projected plans to move 
forward with exports as soon as the facility infrastructure is 
complete. 
 
4. (U) Despite excellent economic opportunities, Cabo Delgado\'s 
population remains one of the poorest in the country. The 
population suffers from an infant mortality rate of 187/1000, a 
life expectancy below 40 years, and an illiteracy rate of 75 
percent (general population) and 93 percent (women) (data from 
Aga Khan Foundation). Cabo Delgado is far removed from the 
capital of Maputo and somewhat isolated from GRM activities and 
programs. The Muslim-based Aga Khan Foundation surveyed the 
province and found the coastal areas to be among the most poor. 
In 2001, Aga Khan began a program in Cabo Delgado focused on 
social organization, rural development, health care, and 
education to increase communities\' living standards. The Coastal 
Rural Support Program\'s (CRSP) goal is to reduce poverty and 
improve the welfare of poor families living in seven districts, 
and gradually ten districts, by 2008. The program seeks to 
mobilize communities and their resources by initiating Village 
Development Organizations. The Foundation started a micro-credit 
program for fishing and farming associations, allowing the 
purchase of seeds, goats, boats, and nets. Additionally, the 
program supports increasing opportunities and skills for women by 
offering credit schemes and training in various professional 
skills, including accounting and marketing. On health, the 
program trains and develops health personnel and provides AIDS 
awareness education through village and women\'s organizations. 
The fourth and final program component, education, is enhanced 
through improved school management (training teachers and 
committees) and support for improved literacy, especially for 
girls. The integrated Aga Khan program has achieved marked 
success by evidence of increasing development in target 
communities and Aga Khan will continue to work as the most active 
economic and social aid organization in Cabo Delgado. 
 
5. (U) Tourism in Cabo Delgado is one of the most lucrative areas 
for investment, given the unspoilt beaches, remote islands, and 
preserved coral reefs. The 2003 National Tourism Policy 
identifies Pemba and the Quirimbas (an adjacent island chain) as 
a focus region for the GRM\'s current tourism investment strategy. 
The largest and most luxurious hotel in Pemba, the Pemba Beach 
Hotel, built with Saudi investment, attracts an increasing number 
of business travelers and vacationers. The hotel has proved a big 
employment generator for the local community; so much so, that 
the Catholic University in Pemba has developed and geared a 
Tourism Management and Hospitality curriculum that sends 
graduates to jobs at the Pemba Beach Hotel and approximately 187 
other tourism affiliated businesses in the province. The 
University\'s program is impressive and greatly benefits the 
community by linking students with businesses and providing 
targeted training. Studying at the University, forty-five 
percents of students hail from Cabo Delgado, twenty percent from 
Nampula, Maputo, and other provinces respectively. The USG 
provides support to the Catholic University by donating English 
language material (audiotapes and books) and Microsoft software. 
The University is expanding rapidly and will build a conference 
center, temporary quarters for lecturing professors, and increase 
classroom space in the near future. As USAID prepares to focus on 
tourism development in the northern provinces of Niassa, Nampula, 
and Cabo Delgado in the next six years, greater focus will be 
given to developing tourism infrastructure and capacity in this 
region. 
 
6. (SBU) Day-to-day business operations in Pemba are dominated by 
a Mozambican of Middle Eastern descent, Osman Yacob. Osman is one 
of the province\'s high profile characters and maintains excellent 
relations with the Governor of Cabo Delgado Province. Yacob and 
his family, including his son, Mahomed Assif Osman, import and 
sell a majority of Pemba\'s household goods and equipment. A visit 
to one of Osman\'s many stores makes clear a variety of goods for 
sale on the local market, including anything from hoses and 
bicycles to detergent and tires. Assif, who is at the heart of 
the operation, spoke openly about increasing development and 
continuing problems in Pemba. According to Assif, the Pemba Beach 
Hotel and Indian Ocean Aquaculture have created significant 
employment in the capital, increasing economic activity and 
raising the province\'s profile. Due to poor infrastructure, the 
biggest hassles businesses face are stiff transportation costs on 
goods, bureaucracy (obtaining licenses, claiming incentives), and 
corruption, specifically at the port of Nacala (the closest large 
port). The Osman operation receives 60-70 containers of goods a 
month into the port; most goods are produced in Brazil, China, 
and Dubai. An interesting trend that has developed in the 
northern provinces of Mozambique is the operation of Middle 
Eastern and South Asian (mainly Indian and Pakistani) businessmen 
working to distribute and sell on the local market. It is 
speculated that several of these businessmen pay bribes and cut 
corners in order to do business. 
 
7. (U)An interesting new development in Cabo Delgado, the Indian 
Ocean Shrimp Aquaculture farm is setting up operations at a rapid 
pace. On a visit with Patrick Wood, Managing Director of Indian 
Ocean Aquaculture (IOA), he showcased the firm\'s corporate 
headquarters, packing plant (formerly TexManta, the province\'s 
now defunct major textile factory), shrimp farms (consisting of 
14 ponds), and hatchery. IOA boasts a plethora of international 
investors (predominately British), with a minority share of 
American investment. Biologists and experts from Fiji, Great 
Britain, the Philippines, Australia, and other countries are 
living and working on IOA\'s several properties. Currently, IOA is 
designing product packages and completing construction on the 
packaging plant. The firm\'s export targets are Japan and the US. 
Wood expects the first prawn exports to hit the US by July 2004. 
 
8. (U) COMMENT: It is clear that economic activity in Cabo 
Delgado is heating up, employment is being created, and the 
development agenda is heavily reliant on increasing tourism. An 
interesting mix of investors is afoot, trying to get ahead in a 
region that is increasingly becoming a relative hotspot in the 
generally lukewarm Mozambican investment environment. Activity 
and access to Cabo Delgado will intensify as Pemba International 
Airport opens up more international flights. Of significant 
interest in the upcoming decade will be the results of how this 
development affects the poor, Muslim community of Cabo Delgado. 
With USG private sector interest in the North (privatization of 
Nacala Port and Railway and IOA) and significant USG support in 
demining and tourism development, the USG will have a hand in 
economic and social developments that transpire. END COMMENT. 
HANKINS 
"
"18109","6/24/2004 8:37","04MAPUTO834","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04MAPUTO463","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000834 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S, INL/AAE, DS/ 
JUSTICE FOR ICITAP AND OPDAT 
PRETORIA FOR NLEA, DEA, USCS 
JOHANNESBURG FOR DHS 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, EAID, PREF, PTER, ASEC, MZ, KISL, RENAMO, FRELIMO 
SUBJECT: THINGS LOOK DIFFERENT FROM UP NORTH 
 
REF: A. A) MAPUTO 463 
 
B. B) MAPUTO 776 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires Dennis Hankins for reason 1.4 (b and d) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. Recent visits to Nampula and Cabo Delgado 
Provinces impressed upon embassy officers major challenges 
facing northern Mozambique and the need for continued USG 
attention to the region. Corruption, smuggling, porous 
borders and weak infrastructure compound high unemployment 
and a lack of economic development. In political terms, the 
FRELIMO government is aware that it needs to demonstrate 
economic results and investment in the region to avoid a 
defeat in this December\'s general election. The Muslim 
population is growing, approaching two thirds of the 
population in some areas, and commerce is almost entirely in 
the hands of South Asian Muslims. People and goods move 
freely in and out of the country, and the GRM has no capacity 
to control their movement. End summary. 
 
2. (C) A High Interest Area: A number of US interests 
converge in Mozambique\'s northern provinces of Cabo Delgado 
and Nampula. Reported reports of drug smuggling, alien 
trafficking, illegal entry of Pakistanis and Somalis raise 
concerns about the potential of the region as a headquarters 
for criminal and terrorist activities. The rapidly growing 
control of South Asians over key business sectors as well as 
active proselytizing activities by conservative Muslim groups 
add to the concerns. At the same time, the region has drawn 
some US investment interest in the transportation area and 
the potential exists for future investments in the tourism 
and minerals sectors. 
 
3. (U) Economically Lagging: Economic development in the 
northern provinces lags far behind that of southern 
Mozambique and the Maputo region. In contrast to booming 
construction and renovation taking place in the capital, 
Nampula appears run-down and neglected. Unemployment is high 
and most large businesses have been closed for years, or even 
decades. Plans for rehabilitation of the rail line from the 
port of Nacala to Malawi have stalled and the government 
ports and rail authority, CFM, has laid off numerous 
employees in preparation for long-delayed privatization. CFM 
will need to lay off many more in conjunction with an 
eventual Nacala Corridor concession agreement (Ref A). In 
Pemba, the capital of Cabo Delgado Province, some development 
is tangible in the tourism sector. Despite the enormous 
potential and some successful high-end tourism projects, 
further growth is hampered by weak infrastructure, in 
particular the lack of good health care facilities. The 
agricultural products that the region exports include 
cashews, timber, prawns, and cotton. Exports of marble and 
some other minerals have dropped significantly. (Ref B). 
 
4. (C) A Haven for Somalis and Other Aliens: During the 
June 1-3 visit by poloff and A/RSO to Nampula City and 
Nacala, it was clear that the Mozambican authorities have no 
capability, and little interest, in effectively controlling 
the flow of people and goods, in and out of the country. 
UNHCR officials at the refugee camp in Maratane confirmed 
that hundreds of Somali refugees have simply shown up at the 
camp, having crossed the border with Tanzania or entered 
through smaller ports in Cabo Delgado. Camp registration 
records only account for refugees entering the camp and there 
are no controls for monitoring those refugees that leave. 
Although records showed that the registered camp population 
numbered approximately five-thousand residents, UNHCR 
officials felt that the true population was only about 
four-thousand. In Pemba and Nampula, Somalis are now engaged 
in selling smuggled goods in the markets and also engage in 
illegal money exchange. Somalis who register at the camp 
seldom stay more than a few days, and many show up later at 
the border with Swaziland, destined for South Africa. A 
cabinet member of the Mayor\'s office and an aide to the 
Governor also confirmed that a growing number of Nigerians 
are engaged in business activities in the informal markets of 
Nampula. The Mayor\'s office in Nacala complained about the 
dominant position of South Asian businessmen in the local 
economy, in particular their practice of bringing a large 
number of family members from Pakistan and India to run and 
staff most of their businesses. 
 
5. (C) A Leaky Harbor: In a visit to the port of Nacala, 
embassy officers spoke with CFM Port Director Agostinho Langa 
and also met with Ussemane Julaia of Manica Freight Services. 
Julaia was very open and candid about the problems of 
corruption and smuggling present in Nacala, the most 
notorious port for illegal activity. Despite the recent 
contracting of a private security firm (with FRELIMO ties), 
theft from the port has not stopped. Also, as Langa 
explained, thirty-five percent of the traffic from the port 
is destined for Malawi, and thus avoids customs inspection. 
Julaia and Langa both confirmed that it is easy for train 
cars to be emptied out at isolated rail sidings and 
transported to other parts of Northern Mozambique or on to 
South Africa. Ships at the dock are also boarded by persons 
in crafts as small as rowboats. Maritime patrols in the 
harbor are nonexistent. There appears to be a thriving black 
market of such illegally imported goods from Dubai and other 
ports of origin. Additional, authorities concede that 
narcotics trafficking is prevalent, using these or other 
methods of transit. 
 
6. (C) Growing Muslim Influence: Traveling around Pemba or 
on the road from Nampula to Nacala, it is common to find 
small mosques built by the African Muslim Agency. Large new 
mosques have been constructed, both in the north and in 
Maputo, with funds from successful Muslims in Mozambique and 
with outside funding from the Gulf states. Some schools and 
other social services are visibly funded by Muslim 
organizations, including training centers to prepare 
Mozambican students for study abroad in Sudan. Pemba is a 
good example of the power of the Muslim business community, 
with all major shops owned by Osman Jacob, an embassy contact 
with close ties to FRELIMO. Jacob, and his son who is 
responsible for operations of most of his businesses, both 
told embassy officers that corrupt practices and bribery are 
essential to successfully running both legitimate and illegal 
business in the region. The illegal export of precious 
hardwood from Cabo Delgado, Nampula, and Zambezia provinces 
by East Asian-controlled enterprises is but one example. 
 
7. (C) Comment: The prevalence of corruption, lax security, 
and a large Muslim business community in the northern 
provinces combine to accentuate fears among the diplomatic 
community, government officials, and well-informed private 
businessmen that an increasingly conducive environment for 
international terrorists exists in the region. Uncontrolled 
flows of Somalis, Nigerians, refugees from Central Africa, 
and South Asians with long-standing ties to Mozambique or 
South Africa are one area of concern. The ability of 
economic migrants and narcotics traffickers alike to move 
freely across Mozambique\'s borders is heightened by 
corruption among GRM officials. The sea border in the North 
is particularly susceptible to undetected maritime traffic. 
 
8. (C) Comment Continued: In the past year, the Mission 
has significantly increased its resources devoted to 
developments in the north. Ambassador, Econ/Pol, Consular 
and RSO have made repeated visits despite the high cost and 
distance involved (a four hour flight to Pemba). Public 
Affairs supports the Musa Bin Bique University in Nampula (a 
moderate, generally Muslim, institution) and Mission 
personnel have held public diplomacy meetings with Muslim 
leaders as well as high school students. End comment. 
HANKINS 
"
"18329","7/1/2004 14:59","04MAPUTO877","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000877 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR MCC 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ECON, PREL, MZ, MCC 
SUBJECT: MCC VISIT TO MOZAMBIQUE, 8-11 JUNE 2004 
 
 
1. SUMMARY. DURING A THREE DAY VISIT, THE THREE- 
PERSON MCC TEAM MET WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, FIVE 
MINISTERS, THE CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR, MOZAMBIQUE\'S 
\"TECHNICAL TEAM,\" AND REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE 
PRIVATE SECTOR, CIVIL SOCIETY, THE FINANCIAL SECTOR, 
FOREIGN INVESTORS, AND DONORS. IN EACH MEETING, THE 
TEAM CONVEYED THE CORE MANDATE OF THE MCC - 
INVESTING IN ECONOMIC GROWTH THROUGH PARTNERSHIPS 
WITH DEVELOPING COUNTRIES - AND HEARD ABOUT 
MOZAMBIQUE\'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA, OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
AND CONSTRAINTS TO ECONOMIC GROWTH, AND SPECIFIC 
PROJECT IDEAS THAT COULD BE INCLUDED IN AN MCA 
COMPACT PROPOSAL. THE TEAM ENDED THEIR VISIT WITH A 
VERY WELL-ATTENDED PRESS CONFERENCE AND A 
DEBRIEF/LUNCH WITH AMBASSADOR LA LIME AND USAID 
DIRECTOR KNOTT. END SUMMARY. 
 
2. THE MCC COMES A-CALLING. THE MCC TEAM ARRIVED 
IN MAPUTO ON THE AFTERNOON OF 8 JUNE 2004 AFTER 
SIMILAR STOPS IN LESOTHO AND MADAGASCAR. CLAY 
LOWERY LED THE TEAM WHICH INCLUDED TOM BRIGGS AND 
WESLEY WILSON. THE FIRST STOP WAS A COUNTRY TEAM 
BRIEFING DURING WHICH THE AMBASSADOR DELIVERED AN 
OVERVIEW OF THE SITUATION IN-COUNTRY, POL/ECON CHIEF 
HODGE PROVIDED A POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC OVERVIEW, 
AND USAID DIRECTOR KNOTT GAVE A PRESENTATION ON 
MOZAMBIQUE\'S DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENT. 
 
3. THE CORE MESSAGE. LOWERY DELIVERED TO THE 
COUNTRY TEAM, AND IN EACH MEETING DURING THE TEAM\'S 
VISIT, AN EXPLANATION OF \"WHAT WE\'RE ALL ABOUT.\" THE 
MAIN POINTS BEING: 
-- THE MCC\'S ONLY PURPOSE IS TO INVEST IN ECONOMIC 
GROWTH. ELIGIBLE COUNTRIES SHOULD LOOK AT THE MCC 
AS AN INVESTOR; NOT TRYING TO MAKE A PROFIT BUT 
TRYING TO HAVE AN IMPACT ON ACCELERATING GROWTH AND 
REDUCING POVERTY. IF A PARTICULAR COUNTRY\'S COMPACT 
PROPOSAL DOES NOT PRESENT A GOOD INVESTMENT 
OPPORTUNITY, THEN THE MCC WILL NOT INVEST. 
-- COMPACT PROPOSALS MUST HAVE MEASURABLE RESULTS. 
IF THE IMPACT ON ECONOMIC GROWTH CANNOT BE MEASURED, 
THEN THE PROPOSAL WILL NOT BE FUNDED. MONITORING 
AND EVALUATION SYSTEMS, ALONG WITH SYSTEMS TO ENSURE 
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED UP 
FRONT. 
-- THE MCC IS INTERESTED IN FORMING PARTNERSHIPS 
WITH THE ELIGIBLE COUNTRIES. LOWERY UNDERSCORED 
THAT THE PARTNERSHIPS WERE TO BE BETWEEN THE MCC AND 
\"THE COUNTRY,\" I.E. THE PEOPLE (GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE 
SECTOR, CIVIL SOCIETY, ETC.) 
 
4. DAY 1. THE TEAM\'S FIRST MET WITH PRIME MINISTER 
LUISA DIOGO, WHO IS ALSO MINISTER OF FINANCE AND 
PLANNING. (THE AMBASSADOR AND USAID DIRECTOR KNOTT 
ACCOMPANIED THE TEAM FOR ALL OF THE MEETINGS/EVENTS 
DURING THE VISIT.) 
5. DIOGO OPENED BY CONGRATULATING THE MCC FOR THREE 
REASONS: (1) FOR FULFILLING THE MONTERREY 
COMMITMENT; (2) FOR TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION THE 
PROGRESS MOZAMBIQUE HAS MADE SINCE THE END OF THE 
CIVIL WAR AS EVIDENCED BY A NUMBER OF POSITIVE 
TRENDS (AVERAGE GROWTH OF 7-8% FOR TEN YEARS; 
REDUCTIONS IN POVERTY - FROM 70% IN 1997 TO 54% IN 
2003; CREATION OF INSTITUTIONS TO FIGHT CORRUPTION; 
MACROECONOMIC STABILITY); AND (3) THE STATED 
APPROACH OF THE MCC WHICH FITS WELL WITH 
MOZAMBIQUE\'S PRESENT AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND 
AGENDA SINCE MOZAMBIQUE\'S BEST HOPE FOR SUSTAINABLE 
GROWTH IS TO RESOLVE THE COUNTRY\'S MAJOR 
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS AND TO STEADILY INCREASE 
SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES\' SHARE OF GROWTH. 
IN SHORT, MOZAMBIQUE\'S \"PRESENT AND FUTURE CHALLENGE 
IS TO HAVE THE PRIVATE SECTOR FLOURISH.\" 
 
6. THE PRIME MINISTER WENT ON TO COVER THE 
GOVERNMENT\'S PRIORITIES AND DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY FOR 
PROMOTING PRIVATE SECTOR-LED GROWTH AND REDUCING 
POVERTY. AMONG THE POLICY AREAS THAT ARE BEING 
ADDRESSED IN SOME MANNER TO IMPROVE THE PRIVATE 
SECTOR ENABLING ENVIRONMENT (ALL REQUIRE 
CONTINUED/ADDITIONAL EFFORT): LABOR REFORM, CUSTOMS 
REFORM, CORRUPTION, BUSINESS REGISTRATION, AND 
LEGAL/JUDICIAL REFORM. THE PRIME MINISTER ALSO 
MENTIONED THE GOVERNMENT\'S EFFORTS TO FIGHT HIV/AIDS 
AND STRENGTHEN THE PUBLIC EDUCATION AND HEALTH 
SYSTEMS. 
 
7. IN ADDITION TO THE POLICY REFORMS NEEDED TO 
STIMULATE THE PRIVATE SECTOR, DIOGO STATED THAT 
VIRTUALLY ALL FACETS OF MOZAMBIQUE\'S INFRASTRUCTURE 
REQUIRED REHABILITATION AND, IN SOME CASES, KEY 
POLICY REFORMS. AS SUCH, THE GOVERNMENT OF 
MOZAMBIQUE (GRM) IS FOCUSED ON DEVELOPING LARGE 
INFRASTRUCTURE COMPONENTS OF THE COUNTRY\'S 
TRADITIONAL TRANSPORT CORRIDORS TO SERVE AS \"ANCHOR 
PROJECTS,\" E.G. MAPUTO PORT IS AN \"ANCHOR\" IN THE 
MAPUTO CORRIDOR, AND NACALA AIRPORT AND RAIL LINE 
COULD BE \"ANCHORS\" IN THE NACALA CORRIDOR. DIOGO 
REASONED THAT SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF THESE 
PROJECTS COULD ALLOW MOZAMBIQUE\'S AGRICULTURAL 
POTENTIAL TO BE REALIZED THROUGH MORE AND GREATER 
COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS. IN MANY INSTANCES, THE GRM\'S 
PREFERENCE IS TO IMPLEMENT MAJOR INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROJECTS THROUGH PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS, A 
THEME WHICH CAME UP REPEATEDLY THROUGHOUT THE DAY. 
 
8. DIOGO DID OFFER SOME EXAMPLES OF PROJECTS THAT 
MIGHT BE INCLUDED IN MOZAMBIQUE\'S COMPACT PROPOSAL, 
ADDING THAT THE TEAM WOULD HEAR MORE DETAILS FROM 
THEIR MEETINGS WITH INDIVIDUAL MINISTERS. THESE 
SAMPLE PROJECTS INCLUDED ALL FORMS OF TRANSPORT 
INFRASTRUCTURE (TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO MARKETS AND TO 
SOCIAL SERVICES), WATER/SANITATION PROJECTS IN URBAN 
AND RURAL AREAS, AND REFORM AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
WITHIN CUSTOMS. 
 
9. THE TEAM HEARD MORE DETAILS ON THESE AND SEVERAL 
OTHER RELATED PROJECTS THROUGHOUT THE COURSE OF THE 
DAY. LOWERY TOOK EACH OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND BY 
SUGGESTING THAT MOZAMBIQUE TAKE A STEP BACK AND 
CONSIDER THE RESULTS THAT ARE TO BE ACHIEVED BY 
IMPLEMENTING A PARTICULAR PROJECT. A PARTICULAR 
ROAD IS NEEDED, BUT WHAT IMPACT ON GROWTH WILL 
BUILDING THAT ROAD HAVE?; AND BEYOND BUILDING AND 
MAINTAINING THAT ROAD, WHAT ELSE MUST BE DONE TO 
ALLOW ENTERPRISES TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE NEW ROAD 
AND GROW AS A RESULT? WHAT ROLE DOES CUSTOMS REFORM 
PLAY AND WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE? HOW CAN ACCESS TO 
CAPITAL BE IMPROVED? ETC. 
 
10. ON THE ISSUE OF BUDGET SUPPORT, DIOGO CONCEDED 
THAT, SHOULD A COMPACT PROPOSAL BE APPROVED FOR 
FUNDING, MOZAMBIQUE WOULD NOT WANT 100% OF ITS MCA 
FUNDING AS BUDGET SUPPORT. 60-65% IN BUDGET SUPPORT 
AND THE REMAINDER IN PROJECTS WOULD BE SUITABLE. 
LOWERY RESPONDED THAT DECISIONS ON HOW THE FUNDING 
FLOWED WOULD BE MADE IN THE CONTEXT OF THE COMPACT 
PROPOSAL AND AFTER SUFFICIENT DUE DILIGENCE TO 
ENSURE FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY. 
 
11. DIOGO CLOSED THE MEETING AND CAPTURED 
MOZAMBIQUE\'S OVERARCHING OBJECTIVE IN COMPETING FOR 
MCA FUNDING BY STATING THAT \"WHAT WE\'D LIKE TO 
ACHIEVE IS 8% GROWTH A YEAR TO REACH OUR POVERTY 
REDUCTION TARGETS; AND THE GROWTH MUST BE 
SUSTAINABLE.\" SHE ADDED THAT IN TERMS OF TIMING, 
MOZAMBIQUE COULD CONTINUE THE DIALOGUE WITH THE MCC 
BY SENDING A DRAFT COMPACT PROPOSAL TO WASHINGTON BY 
THE END OF JULY WITH THE EXPECTATION OF RECEIVING 
CONSTRUCTIVE CRITICISM AND ADVICE IN RESPONSE. 
 
12. DURING THE REST OF THE DAY THE TEAM MET WITH 
MINISTER OF TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS TOMAZ 
SALOMAO, MINISTER OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE CARLOS 
MORGADO, MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS AND HOUSING 
ROBERTO COSTLEY-WHITE, MINISTER OF HEALTH FRANCISCO 
SONGANE, MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE HELDER MUTEIA, AND 
GOVERNOR OF THE BANK OF MOZAMBIQUE ADRIANO MALEIANE. 
THESE DISCUSSIONS REITERATED THE POINTS EXPRESSED BY 
THE PRIME MINISTER AND OFFERED SOME ADDITIONAL 
DETAILS ON INDIVIDUAL PROJECTS. PERHAPS OF EQUAL 
IMPORTANCE WAS THAT THE MCC TEAM HAD THE OPPORTUNITY 
TO EXPLAIN THE MCC DIRECTLY TO THE MOST RELEVANT 
MEMBERS OF THE CABINET AND DISCUSS ANY IDEAS OR 
ISSUES. 
 
13. THE LAST MEETING OF THE DAY WAS WITH 
MOZAMBIQUE\'S MCA TECHNICAL TEAM. THIS GROUP 
CONSISTS OF SEVENTEEN MEMBERS: FIFTEEN FROM THE GRM, 
MAINLY AT THE NATIONAL DIRECTOR LEVEL; ONE FROM 
CIVIL SOCIETY (A UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR); AND ONE FROM 
THE PRIVATE SECTOR (THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE 
CONFEDERATION OF MOZAMBICAN BUSINESS ASSOCIATIONS). 
IT REMAINS TO BE SEEN IF MOZAMBIQUE\'S SOLID 
EXPERIENCE WITH CONSULTATIVE PROCESSES INVOLVING 
GOVERNMENT, CIVIL SOCIETY, AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
WILL BE APPLIED FULLY IN THE COUNTRY\'S COMPACT 
PROPOSAL. 
 
14. THE MCC TEAM CERTAINLY DROVE HOME THE NECESSITY 
FOR BROAD HOST COUNTRY PARTICIPATION IN DEVELOPING 
THE COMPACT HOME IN THEIR MEETINGS WITH THE GRM AND 
IN DISCUSSIONS WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF MOZAMBIQUE\'S 
PRIVATE SECTOR, CIVIL SOCIETY, FINANCIAL SECTOR, 
FOREIGN INVESTORS (INCLUDING A VISIT AND BRIEFING ON 
THE MAPUTO PORT CONCESSION), AND DONOR COMMUNITY. 
THESE MEETINGS ALSO PROVED USEFUL FOR INCREASING THE 
MCC\'S UNDERSTANDING AND APPRECIATION OF MOZAMBIQUE\'S 
DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENT. 
 
15. DAY 2: USAID DIRECTOR KNOTT ACCOMPANIED THE 
TEAM ON A TRIP TO THE TOWN OF CHOKWE IN GAZA 
PROVINCE TO SEE THE RESULTS OF USAID-FUNDED ROAD AND 
RAIL RECONSTRUCTION PROJECTS. THE TEAM SAW BOTH 
WHAT CAN BE DONE WITH HOST-COUNTRY CONTRACTS 
(CONTRACTS FINANCED BY USAID BUT LET BY THE GRM) AND 
A VERY SMALL PIECE OF THE COUNTRY\'S INFRASTRUCTURE 
NEEDS. 
 
16. GETTING THE WORD OUT. THE LAST ITEM ON THE 
TEAM\'S SCHEDULE WAS A PRESS CONFERENCE ORGANIZED BY 
THE PUBLIC AFFAIRS OFFICE. THE EVENT WAS VERY WELL- 
ATTENDED BY BOTH PRINT AND ELECTRONIC MEDIA. LOWERY 
REPRESENTED THE MCC TO THE PRESS, KICKING THE 
PROCESS OFF AS USUAL WITH HIS CORE MESSAGE. HE THEN 
FIELDED QUESTIONS ON THE OBJECTIVES OF THE MCC, 
FUNDING LEVELS, TIMING, AND THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 
THE MCC AND USAID - AMONG OTHERS. THE PRESS 
COVERAGE HAS BEEN POSITIVE AND FAIRLY ACCURATE. MCC 
RELATED PRESS ITEMS ARE BEING PACKAGED AND WILL BE 
FORWARDED TO THE MCC. 
 
17. ALL-IN-ALL, THE TRIP APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN 
SUCCESSFUL. MOZAMBICANS FROM A VARIETY OF SECTORS 
IN THE SOCIETY HAVE BEEN INFORMED ABOUT THE MCA (AS 
HAVE FOREIGN INVESTORS AND DONORS), AND THE MCC IS 
BETTER INFORMED ABOUT MOZAMBIQUE. THE NEXT STEP FOR 
MOZAMBIQUE IS TO BEGIN PREPARATION OF THE COMPACT 
PROPOSAL. POST WILL REPORT ON PROGRESS OVER THE 
COURSE OF THE NEXT FEW MONTHS. 
HANKINS 
"
"18423","7/6/2004 14:32","04MAPUTO894","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO712|04MAPUTO744|04MAPUTO877","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 000894 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO, FCS - WCENTER 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: JUNE MONTHLY ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO 00877 B. MAPUTO 00712 C. MAPUTO 00744 
Sensitive But Unclassified - Protect Accordingly 
 
----------------------- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
---------------------- 
(U) The Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) visited 
Mozambique and spoke with key GRM officials to introduce the 
MCA program (Ref A). The group stressed the importance of 
formulating proposals that accelerate growth and reduce 
poverty. Calling themselves \"development investors\", the 
group stated that while proposals must have measurable 
results, there is no timetable or format for proposal 
submission and that it is not likely the MCC will fund 
projects in all sixteen MCA-eligible countries. Currently, 
the GRM has put together a high-level drafting group that 
will submit proposals to the MCC. This group consists of 
ministers from Industry and Commerce, Planning and Finance 
(who currently also serves as the Prime Minister), Health, 
Public Works, and Transportation. A larger, technical 
drafting group to serve under the high-level body has also 
been named. This group consists of national directors of 
several ministries, private sector representation through 
CTA (Confederation of Mozambican Economic Associations), and 
civil society representation through Cruzeiro do Sul. The 
MCC immediately has $1 billion to invest in development 
projects across the sixteen countries. They are expecting to 
receive an additional $1.5 billion to invest in FY05. 
(U) The Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) 
signed two agreements for a total of $20 million in 
financing for the rehabilitation of roads in the city of 
Maputo and the stretch from Chissano-Chibuto in Gaza 
Province. Longtime partners with the GRM, BADEA guaranteed 
the Ministry of Planning and Finance $10 million directly 
from BADEA and $10 million from a BADEA-contracted partner. 
An unspecified amount of the financing comes in the form of 
a donation. 
(U) On June 1, the 900-kilometer natural gas pipeline that 
runs from Inhambane, Mozambique to Secunda, South Africa, 
was inaugurated. Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano, 
President Mbeki of South Africa, and Mtswati III, King of 
Swaziland attended the formal inauguration along with 
several ambassadors, including the U.S. Ambassador to 
Mozambique. Total investment for pipeline construction and 
installation reached $1.2 million, financed by Mozambican 
and South African entities - the National Hydrocarbon Firm 
(Mozambique) and SASOL (South Africa). The pipeline 
originates in Inhambane and passes through the provinces of 
Gaza and Maputo before reaching Secunda, South Africa. 
Discovery of natural gas in the Pande and Temane fields 
(Inhambane) occurred in 1962 after several studies were 
conducted, but the following years of colonial and civil war 
hampered any investment. Currently, gas is exported to South 
Africa via the pipeline; however, several studies are being 
conducted to see if gas runoff may be used to benefit 
Mozambique. A public-private partnership is providing energy 
via the pipeline to Vilankulos, Inhassoro, and Nova Mambone 
(Inhambane) and Machanga (Sofala). Tourists on the island of 
Bazaruto and Magaruque also benefit from Temane gas 
electricity. 
(U) Following a series of delays, Kenmare Resources of 
Ireland signed an agreement with three European and two 
African financial institutions to obtain $269 million in 
financing to construct a heavy sands production factory in 
the northern province of Nampula. The five financial 
institutions are: European Investment Bank (BEI), German 
Development Bank (KFW), Dutch Development Bank (FMO), 
African Development Bank (ADB), and South African bank, 
ABSA. According to Noticias daily news, Kenmare hopes to 
begin construction within the next four months, although the 
project requires an extra $42 million in financing. The 
financed amount will be paid back over a period of 15 years. 
Sources say that up to 425 people will be employed, only 10% 
of which will be foreign laborers. Up to 619,000 tons of 
ilmenite, 55,000 tons of zircon, and 18,000 tons of rutile 
will be produced annually in the Moma heavy sands project. 
Generally, these resources contribute to the production of 
paint, ceramics, material used in aviation and medical 
surgery. 
(U) Vodacom Mocambique, a subsidiary of Vodacom South Africa 
that provides mobile cellular service, has reached over 
100,000 customers in Mozambique since its inception in the 
market in December 2003. Vodacom Mocambique believes that 
the key to its success lies in the range of products 
offered, including prepaid cellular minutes with no airtime 
window, prepaid roaming to South Africa, and free \"Please 
call me\" messages. The company is in competition with Mcel, 
the previously sole national cellular phone company, which 
is racing to offer new promotional packages to keep current 
customers. Vodacom is the only firm to offer bundled minutes 
with contract packages so that Mozambican customers can send 
messages to over 600 GSM cellular networks worldwide. 
Vodacom Mocambique began coverage in Maputo, Vilanculos, and 
Matola. It has now expanded to cover Pemba, Beira, Nacala, 
and Nampula and the corridors between Maputo and South 
Africa, Swaziland, Xai-Xai and Beira to Zimbabwe. 
 
---------- 
TOURISM 
---------- 
(U) The Ministry of Tourism has pre-selected four tourism 
operators to work in Limpopo National Park, located in the 
southern province of Gaza. The Ministry will award a 
contract shortly so tourism operation may begin before 2005. 
In addition to launching tourism in the park, other 
activities will commence simultaneously to resettle peasant 
farmers living in the Shinguedzi river basin, an area 
currently reserved for park operations. Approximately 2,000 
wild animals have been introduced into the park from South 
Africa as part of the restocking plan. Minister of Tourism, 
Fernando Sumbana, would like to create routes so that 
tourists may start visiting the area, bringing in money to 
further develop the park\'s infrastructure, assure park 
sustainability, and benefit the surrounding communities. 
 
--------------------------- 
PORTS, ROADS, AND RAILWAYS 
--------------------------- 
(SBU) Two representatives from the World Bank (WB) Transport 
Group, Washington, DC paid a visit to Embassy officers. WB 
representatives are on a two-week visit to Maputo to carry 
out a review of negotiations between the GRM (Ministry of 
Transportation) and Indian company Rites and Ircon, the 
chosen developer of the Sena Railway Line. The WB will 
provide Rites and Ircon a $100 million soft loan to 
reconstruct the Sena Line. Loan approval is estimated to 
take place in August. According to the WB, the main 
justification for rehabilitating the 600 km Sena Line is to 
restore a railway line that used to carry up to about 2 
million tons of goods during its past operation, at an 
average cost of about $200,000 per km (total cost of nearly 
$120 million). The expected economic rate of return is 18%, 
as presented in an economic report by ECORYS, but it is 
believed to be commercially viable only as a public-private 
partnership where IDA funds ($104.5 million) are on-lent to 
the private sector (25 year concession) at a concessionary 
rate and the private sector is investing $35 million 
(including the rolling stock and investments in the 
Machipanda/Zimbabwe Line). Additionally, the WB made clear 
that the concession for the Moatize coalmines, the ultimate 
target for export, is completely separate from the rail 
concession. Barge transport would be considered as a 
technically viable alternative for the transport of coal 
when, and if, it does materialize from the Moatize coalmines 
if successfully concessioned (not expected for another eight 
years or so), and where tonnage would be expected to be in 
the order of 6-10 million/year. Quoting WB sources, \"The 
existence of the Sena Line would therefore not preclude 
consideration of the barge transport as an alternative, 
which could well present a competitive alternative to be 
considered by the private sector.\" According to the WB, 
Minister of Transportation Salomao, has extended an 
invitation to the U.S. firm seeking investment in Zambeze 
River barging, ACLI, to conduct a Zambeze River Survey. This 
effort was ignored and most likely blocked in the past, due 
to the fear that barging would derail plans for 
reconstruction of the Sena Line (REF B). 
 
-------- 
ENERGY 
-------- 
(U) Stating that Mozambique must expand access to energy to 
encourage development, Nazario Meguigy, director of the 
Project Technical Implementation Unit (UTIP), reopened 
debate on construction of the Mphanda Nkhuwa Dam. According 
to local news sources, Meguigy warned that Mozambique runs 
the risk of losing large industrial projects if it does not 
accelerate negotiations for dam and power plant 
construction, which began in August of last year. Mphanda 
Nkhuwa would be located on the Zambeze River, southeast of 
the country\'s largest energy-producing dam, Cahora Bassa. 
Because the majority of energy generated from Cahora Bassa 
is soaked up by South Africa, it does not provide 
significant development opportunities for Mozambique. 
Meguigy supports development of a second dam because it 
would create infrastructure, employment, stimulate economic 
growth, and raise the standard of living for Mozambicans in 
the surrounding area. Up until this point, the UTIP has only 
solicited large construction firms and financial 
institutions that may be interested to invest. At the same 
time, reopening this debate has incited many 
environmentalists to argue against dam construction, saying 
that dams worsen the quality of life for surrounding 
citizens rather than improving them. 
 
------------ 
AGRICULTURE 
------------ 
(U) The Luabo sugar mill, located in Zambezia, may soon be 
rehabilitated if the GRM and Mauritius successfully conclude 
negotiations. Rehabilitation of Luabo is estimated to cost 
between $60-80 million and will produce sugar, rice, and 
raise cattle (as part of the Luabo complex). Currently, 
there are four sugar factories operating in Mozambique, 
employing over 17,000 workers. Launched in May, the 2004 
agricultural campaign is expected to produce around 253,000 
tons of sugar, representing a 20% increase in production 
from last year. 
(U) The current agricultural campaign is estimated to 
produce over two million tons of staple crops in 2004, a 
target set by the National Agricultural Development Program, 
PROAGRI. Production of grain and vegetables is up by ten 
percent and root crops up by five percent in 2004. Vice- 
Minister of Agriculture, Joao Carrilho, stated that 
marketing of agricultural products must be improved, 
implying greater access to micro-credit and existence of 
banking institutions in rural areas. In Mozambique, 
approximately 30 micro-credit institutions (all in urban 
areas) serve 52,000 customers and lend the equivalent of $8 
million. One of the Ministry\'s challenges, according to the 
vice minister, is to attract savings held in rural areas 
where farmers keep their money at home due to the lack of 
rural financial institutions. Regarding this issue, Deputy 
Governor of the Bank of Mozambique, Ernesto Gove, promised 
that rural savings and finance will gain new momentum with 
the implementation of a new law, recently approved by the 
Parliament, which calls for extension of micro-credit to 
rural areas. 
(U) The National Prices and Wages Commission published the 
new price for raw cotton under the 2004 agricultural 
campaign on June 2. Companies must pay producers a minimum 
of 5,000 meticais (US$0.20)/kilo for first-class cotton. 
This amount is a 30% increase in the price from the previous 
year. The decision was made by the Commission in order to 
resolve a deadlock in negotiations between peasant producers 
and buying companies that took place in Nampula, the 
country\'s largest cotton-growing region, in recent months. 
The recent recovery of world cotton prices has significantly 
helped the situation of local producers. 
 
-------- 
LABOR 
-------- 
(SBU) The Minister of Labor, Mario Lampiao Sevene, is 
individually calling in donors (including the USG) to 
present his plan and timetable for revision of the labor 
law, expected in 2005. In a recent meeting with the U.S. 
Ambassador to Mozambique, Sevene made clear intentions for 
the Ministry of Labor to head labor law revision, as opposed 
to the Technical Law Revision Unit (UTREL), which is 
generally the lead on drafting technical legal matters (REF 
C). For many private sector groups and donors who call for 
greater labor law liberalization, it is worrisome that the 
Ministry will seek to lead this revision, as many see a 
greater chance for overhaul and liberalization to be 
achieved under UTREL as opposed to the Ministry. 
HANKINS 
"
"18603","7/12/2004 7:22","04MAPUTO923","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE144531","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000923 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS - TPEREZ 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EFIN, MZ, OPIC, Debt 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE RESPONSE: SOVEREIGN CREDIT RATING FOLLOW- 
UP 
 
REF: STATE 144531 
 
1. (SBU) Provided below is Post\'s response to Reftel request 
for input on Mozambique\'s Sovereign Credit Rating (SCR). 
I. LOCAL SUPPORT FOR SCRs: 
a. The Government of Mozambique (GRM) maintains a strong 
interest in retaining and updating its SCR. The Government, 
through the Ministry of Planning and Finance, cooperated 
fully with Fitch Ratings in providing all necessary 
information for the rating to be assigned (accomplished in 
July 2003). 
b. Enthusiasm for the rating can be described as average. In 
discussions with Domingos Lambo, Deputy Director, National 
Directorate of Planning and Budget, Ministry of Planning and 
Finance (MPF), it is clear the GRM perceives benefits to 
having an SCR. Most importantly, the rating allows foreign 
investors to easily obtain macroeconomic data on Mozambique 
and formulate investment decisions. Additionally, access to 
consolidated data allows the GRM to assess its own economic 
status and plan economic and financial reforms to make 
further progress. 
c. The GRM indicates that it would like to participate in 
the SCR annual maintenance program. Lambo stated the GRM\'s 
budget will support this, but fears Mozambique will not have 
the capacity to provide annual statistics to keep the rating 
current. Mozambique has not developed an efficient, 
comprehensive system for collecting data and suffers from an 
acute lack of information, especially from areas outside of 
the capital city of Maputo. Formerly, the Ministry of 
Planning and Finance used to collect economic and social 
data but this function moved to The National Institute of 
Statistics (INE), after its creation. 
d. Local private sector businesses are supportive of the SCR 
rating process because it sends a \"macroeconomic message\" on 
Mozambique\'s economic and financial standing relative to 
other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. Additionally, a good 
rating, such as Mozambique received (B/B+) makes investors 
more confident of their investment decisions. 
II. IMPACT ON GOVERNMENT POLICY 
e. An African success story in terms of rapid political and 
economic achievement since the end of the civil war (1992), 
the GRM continues to shape policies that will lead toward 
further growth and development. The GRM has made improving 
the quantity and quality of its economic indicators an 
explicit goal. Lambo clearly stated that improving 
indicators, such as the SCR, is a GRM priority. In the early 
90\'s, Mozambique had no statistical economic data. In 1994, 
post-civil war, the Ministry of Planning and Finance 
formulated four economic indicators to help paint a picture 
of the Mozambican economy. Currently, Mozambique has over 70 
indicators/classifications that more accurately represent 
the economy on several levels. The World Bank and the IMF 
are working with INE to strengthen the institution\'s 
capacity to collect more detailed data across the 128 
national districts. Economic and social indicators translate 
directly into the GRM\'s number one policy priority, reducing 
absolute poverty in Mozambique. There is a push to improve 
economic and social ratings so the current government may 
prove effectiveness in raising Mozambican quality of life. 
National elections in Mozambique are scheduled for December 
2004. Economic, financial, and social improvements in 
international ratings provide wins for the current ruling 
party who will fight to remain in power post-2004. 
f. The GRM is cognizant that it is not as competitive 
regionally as some of its neighbors, such as South Africa 
and Botswana. However, Mozambique is competitive with 
nations such as Malawi and Zambia and seeks to improve 
international credit ratings, such as the SCR, to gain this 
edge. 
III. DEVELOPMENT IMPACT 
g. It is unclear if the SCR has been a factor in attracting 
FDI to specific investment projects in Mozambique. Large 
projects such as the MOZAL Aluminum Smelter and the SASOL 
natural gas pipeline choose to operate in Mozambique because 
of the large-scale availability of natural resources and the 
provision of \"export processing zones\" as granted by the 
GRM. 
IV. UNDP/S&P PROGRAM 
i. The GRM believes that having multiple ratings is 
beneficial to attracting further investment. It is the 
policy of the Minister of Planning and Finance (also acting 
Prime Minister), Luisa Diogo, to take measures that will 
\"sell the image of Mozambique\" to outsiders. Positive 
ratings will allow Mozambique to display its relative 
advantages to foreign investors. 
V. CURRENCY ZONE RATINGS 
k. Mozambique shows interest in currency zone ratings, but 
believes the most effective way to \"sell the region\" is 
through statistics published by SADC. 
LA LIME 
"
"18729","7/15/2004 5:23","04MAPUTO945","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000945 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2009 
TAGS: MASS, MARR, PREL, KPKO, BY, MZ, ACOTA 
SUBJECT: HELPING MOZAMBIQUE BECOME AN EFFECTIVE 
PEACEKEEPING CONTRIBUTOR 
 
Classified by Amb Helen LaLime; Reasons: 1.4 (b and d) 
 
1. (U) This is an action request -- see paragraph 8. 
 
2. (C) Summary: Mozambique continues to seek a more active 
role in peacekeeping, especially in Africa. Despite very 
limited resources, the Mozambican Armed Forces have worked 
effectively at reinforced company strength in the Africa 
Union\'s PKO in Burundi. As that mission comes under U.N. 
control, Mozambique has been asked to increase its presence 
to battalion strength. The U.S. and Mozambique are closely 
engaged in meeting Mozambique\'s long-term training 
requirements for peacekeeping through the ACOTA program. 
Mozambique, however, also needs short-term equipment support 
to equip itself for the Burundi operation. Having proven 
itself effective at conflict prevention and resolution in the 
diplomatic realm, Mozambique should be considered for 
assistance to also give it military peacekeeping 
capabilities. End Summary 
 
3. (C) Mozambique seeks to become a peacekeeping nation: 
Under the direction of President Chissano, Mozambique is 
seeking to increase its capabilities to serve in peacekeeping 
operations. Mozambican political leaders have described this 
policy as a logical extension of Mozambique\'s increasingly 
effective diplomatic engagement in conflict prevention and 
resolution. During his presidency of the Africa Union, 
President Chissano engaged effectively in the Great Lakes, 
Sudan, Cote d\'Ivoire, Liberia and Sao Tome. Mozambicans are 
proud to cite their own history of effective conflict 
resolution, including the UN PKO in Mozambique, as a model 
they can share with other countries struggling to come out of 
conflict. 
 
4. (C) Initial PKO Steps: The Mozambicans have frequently 
engaged in peacekeeping but at a modest level. Small 
contingents were deployed to East Timor, the DRC and the 
Comoros. The Mozambicans this month deployed five military 
to Darfur to help plan for AU deployment needs (Mozambique 
does not presently plan to send a contingent to any long-term 
Sudan PKO). In 2003, Mozambique undertook its most ambitious 
PKO initiative by deploying a 220-person reinforced company 
to participate with South African and Ethiopian units in the 
AU\'s Burundi PKO. Meeting the equipment and funding 
requirements for that PKO was a daunting task. The British 
provided over $5 million in equipment and budget support to 
make it happen. Prior to their deployment, observers in the 
field were frankly skeptical that the Mozambicans would 
provide any value-added to the mission given their poor 
resources and lack of experience. Half a year into their 
deployment, we are told the Mozambicans have greatly exceeded 
expectations and are performing creditably their assigned 
tasks. 
 
5. (C) Gearing Up for More: Following the decision that 
the U.N would assume the peacekeeping mission in Burundi, the 
Mozambicans were asked to not only maintain their presence in 
Burundi but to increase their deployment to an 850-man 
battalion level. President Chissano took the political 
decision to comply with the request leaving the military 
struggling to meet the standard equipment requirements the 
U.N. has set for the battalion. The Mozambicans are in close 
negotiations with the U.N. to determine what type of 
equipment and funding support will be available. At the same 
time, they have approached donors to seek equipment support. 
Among the standard items the U.N. has specified for any 
battalion participating in a PKO, the Mozambicans have 
highlights as critical gaps the following: 
-- 50 KVA Generators (2) 
-- 30 KVA Generators (7) 
-- APC (1) 
-- Armored Command Vehicle (1) 
-- Armored First Aid Vehicle (1) 
-- Armored Ambulance (1) 
-- Ambulances (4) 
-- Jeep-type 4x4s (15) 
-- Radio Jeeps (10) 
-- 2.5-5tn Transports (16) 
-- First-aid truck (1) 
-- Maintenance Truck (2) 
-- Water Trucks (3) 
-- Fuel Trucks (2) 
-- Refrigerator Truck (1) 
-- Bucket Loader (1) 
-- Forklifts (2) 
-- Cargo trailers (20) 
-- Water Trailers (12) 
-- Fuel Trailers (12) 
-- 100 Watt Radio (3) 
-- 20 Watt Radio (21) 
-- 5 Watt Radio (45) 
The Mozambicans also shares a preliminary budget of support 
costs for the first 60 days of the Mission of $1.9 million. 
 
6. (C) Where the U.S. is helping: The USG was unable to 
provide direct support to Mozambique for its 2003 deployment 
to Burundi. What limited assistance was available was 
instead directed to the Ethiopian contingent. Since that 
time, the USG has engaged the Mozambicans on the ACOTA 
program with the expectation that we will be able to help the 
Mozambicans develop the training capacity over several years 
to prepare troops for peacekeeping operations. Negotiations 
to date have been positive and ACOTA has proposed holding a 
strategic meeting in September with some 30 Mozambican 
military, political and diplomatic experts to clarify their 
long-term training needs. It is hoped that training of 
Battalion Officers and military trainers can start in January 
2005 if not earlier. The ACOTA team is looking initially to 
train up four companies to meet Mozambique\'s stated desire to 
have at least one trained battalion ready for peacekeeping 
operations. In addition to he training, the ACOTA program 
will provide some unit equipment including field hospital, 
communications and water treatment material. ACOTA 
specifically will not provide vehicles or lethal equipment. 
While the Mozambicans welcome this contribution to the 
long-term capabilities of their military, they are aware this 
training will have little or no impact on their current 
operational requirements. 
 
7. (C) Where the U.S. can help more: We are aware the USG 
will not be in a position to meet the extensive list of 
equipment requested in paragraph 4. If the U.N. really want 
Mozambique to expand its presence in Burundi they will have 
to work with them to meet their equipment needs or scale back 
the equipment list by reducing the complexity of the mission 
order or pairing Mozambique with a better equipped partner. 
That said, we believe it is in U.S. security interests to 
support Mozambique\'s efforts to contribute immediately in 
Burundi and, over the longer term, in the region. The 
Mozambicans would be extremely appreciative of any tangible 
support that can be given to their immediate operational 
needs. 
 
8. (C) Action Request: Embassy requests that the 
Department, in conjunction with DoD, identify items that 
could be provided to meet some of the Mozambican equipment 
requirements for the Burundi Mission. If EDA proves the best 
avenue to meet some of these needs, we would welcome a DoD 
team to come discuss the program with the Mozambicans and to 
work out FMF financing to cover any make-ready or shipping 
costs. We underline that while we have been applauding 
Mozambique\'s increasingly active and effective peacekeeping 
initiatives over the past several years -- we have yet to 
provide any tangible support for these efforts. It\'s time to 
do something. 
 
9. (U) Minimize considered. 
LA LIME 
"
"18953","7/21/2004 13:39","04MAPUTO975","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE152009","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000975 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, PHUM, KDEM, MZ, UNGA, Trafficking in Persons 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE RESPONSE TO U.S. INITIATIVES FOR THE 
59TH UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
 
REF: STATE 152009 
 
1. (SBU) Econ/poloff delivered reftel demarche in a meeting 
with Farouk Faquira, Chief of the United Nations Department, 
Office of International Relations, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs on Tuesday, July 20. Faquira appreciated the 
presentation of U.S. initiatives prior to the opening of the 
59th UN General Assembly (UNGA) in September. At the same 
time, he stated that Mozambique is preparing its initiatives 
for the UNGA and they are simliar to those initiatives 
espoused by the U.S., specifically in terms of advancing 
economic freedom and promoting democracy. Additionally, 
Faquira noted that Mozambique is becoming more active in the 
area of trafficking in persons. The GRM is acutely aware of 
its vunerability to such illegal activity due to weak border 
patrol on land, sharing borders with six other nations, and 
on the 1600-km unprotected coastline. The GRM would like to 
embark upon an in-depth study on trafficking in persons and 
how Mozambique, in particular, is vunerable in this regard. 
On the issue of human cloning, Faquira assured econ/poloff 
that the GRM would not block a U.S. initiative to vote 
against a partial ban. He admitted that Mozambique does not 
have the technology or the knowledge to analyze the potential 
affects of cloning. Without this know-how, the GRM would 
rather take a stance to vote against cloning regardless of 
the purpose. Finally, Faquira noted that the GRM was also 
reviewing options to reduce the number of Middle East 
resolutions present in the UNGA. 
 
2. (SBU) Providing thoughtful responses and acknowledging 
upcoming U.S. UN initiatives, Faquira indicated that the GRM 
will soon complete a list of their own 59th UNGA initiatives. 
Post will maintain contact with the MFA on this and seek to 
receive and transmit initiatives at the soonest opportunity. 
LA LIME 
"
"19008","7/22/2004 15:07","04MAPUTO983","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE145218","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000983 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, DRL/IL - AWILSON 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO VZWANE 
LABOR FOR ILAB MMITTELHAUSER, KSOLEM 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, MZ 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE INTEREST IN REGIONAL LABOR RIGHTS TRAINING 
SEMINAR 
 
REF: STATE 145218 
 
1. Post recommends two participants for the September 29th-30th 
ILAB-DRL/IL worker rights training seminar in Johannesburg, E/P 
labor reporting officer Loren Dent and Political Assistant Naimo 
Vasco Antonio. Please find below the candidate information. 
 
2. NAME: Loren Dent 
LOCATION: Embassy Maputo 
TITLE: Econ/Pol Officer (covering labor affairs) 
EMAIL: dentln@state.gov 
PHONE: 258-1-492-797 
DEPARTURE DATE FROM POST: 07/2005 
In a seven person, four-officer E/P section, Ms. Dent covers the 
labor portfolio and does extensive labor reporting. With the 
Government of Mozambique on the heels of revising its labor law 
(new law anticipated in 2005), labor is a hot topic. The USDOL 
and ILO are currently funding various labor initiatives in 
Mozambique concerning industrial-based bargaining and labor 
dispute resolution training, the reduction of HIV/AIDS in the 
workplace, understanding workers\' rights, and research on the 
current labor law and recommendations for reform. Ms. Dent has 
planned several visits for USDOL representatives and the regional 
labor officer (Johannesburg) to speak with local labor unions, 
government officials in the Ministry of Labor, the Minister of 
Labor, academia, and the private sector. Most recently, Ms. Dent 
organized a 60-person labor seminar in coordination with USDOL 
ILAB to bring players from various sectors together to discuss 
recommendations for labor reform in anticipation of the 2005 
labor law revision. This seminar was a success and realized full- 
day participation by the Minister of Labor and remarks by both 
the Minister and the U.S. Ambassador. The USG has significant 
interest in seeing Mozambique\'s labor law reform create a more 
investment-friendly climate that will raise Mozambique\'s regional 
competitiveness. The next program, anticipated for the fall of 
2004, will bring Peter Hurtgen, Director of the Federal Mediation 
and Conciliation Service (FMCS), to Mozambique to speak on labor 
rights and mediation. With significant labor issues and the 
widespread affect that a law revision will have on the entire 
community, Ms. Dent has provided several reporting cables on the 
local situation and how current USG programs are positively 
affecting change in Mozambique. Ms. Dent has never received any 
type of labor reporting officer training and looks forward to the 
opportunity to participate in this two-day course. It is a 
certainty that with ongoing USDOL and ILO programs and the labor 
law revision, labor will remain a serious topic with considerable 
discussion in Mozambique and among potential investors. This 
course comes at a good time to sharpen the skills necessary to 
accurately understand and report on current events. 
? 
3. NAME: Naimo Vasco Antonio 
LOCATION: Embassy Maputo 
TITLE: Political Specialist, FSN (covering labor affairs) 
EMAIL: antonionv@state.gov 
PHONE: 258-1-492-797 
DEPARTURE DATE FROM POST: N/A 
As one of Post\'s two E/P FSNs, Vasco is instrumental in analyzing 
and accurately reporting labor events in Mozambique. Vasco 
communicates regularly with our contacts at the Ministry of 
Labor, including the Minister\'s chief of staff, the labor unions, 
academia, and the private sector, to keep abreast of labor 
issues, particularly dialogue between workers and employers. 
Vasco was key in helping a two-year USDOL effort in Mozambique 
led by FMCS. In 2003-2004, FMCS labor dispute resolution trainers 
visited Mozambique on four occasions to provide training to a 
tripartite group of participants: government, labor unions, and 
the private sector. Vasco identified participants, encouraged 
their participation, worked with USDOL and FMCS to ensure things 
were prepared before the trainers arrived, and followed-up with 
participants. This training was so valuable that it has been 
taken on the road by the FMCS trainees and currently union 
members and workers are learning about labor dispute resolution 
in the provinces. Vasco\'s labor work was also critical to the 
success of the May 2004 labor seminar that was managed dually by 
Post and USDOL. Vasco has never had the opportunity to attend 
labor training and would greatly benefit from the information and 
recommendations presented, especially given the importance of 
labor issues in Mozambique. This training will not only benefit 
Vasco, it will also benefit Post by providing one of our most 
intelligent and capable FSNs with important skills needed to 
manage the labor portfolio. 
 
4. Due to end-of-year fiscal constraints, we regret that Post 
does not have the funds to pay for candidates\' per diem in 
Johannesburg. Post would appreciate if USDOL would consider 
covering the full cost of candidates\' participation in the 
seminar if chosen. 
LA LIME 
"
"19103","7/26/2004 16:08","04MAPUTO998","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000998 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE PASS TO THE MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE ACCOUNT 
USTR FOR AMB SHINER AND PCOLEMAN 
AF/S FOR KDAVISON 
USDOC/ITA FOR AHILLIGAS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EAID, PREL, MZ, AGOA, MCC, TIFA 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE CAUTIOUSLY APPROACHES THE PROSPECT OF A 
FTA 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. Ambassador met with Minister of Industry 
and Commerce Carlos Morgado on July 22 to follow-up on 
discussions held between Morgado and USTR officials in 
Washington in early July on the prospect for a US-Mozambique 
FTA, as well as to discuss the status of Mozambique\'s 
participation in the MCA and how Mozambique can better take 
advantage of AGOA. Ambassador was accompanied by USAID 
Enabling Environment Team Leader Tim Born and Econ/pol 
officer Elizabeth Jaffee (notetaker); Minister Morgado was 
accompanied by four Ministry officials, including the 
Director for International Affairs. While obviously 
welcoming the offer, Morgado was cautious and non-committal 
regarding the FTA. The key concern from the stand-point of 
the Mozambican government (GRM) is the lack of technical 
capacity. This problem is so acute that technical assistance 
would be necessary to assist the GRM formulate a position on 
whether to even move forward with a FTA. The Ambassador 
outlined both the process for negotiations and potential 
benefits from a FTA. A useful first step would be the 
National Assembly\'s ratification of the Bilateral Investment 
Treaty (BIT), which has been awaiting ratification by 
Mozambique\'s National Assembly for over four years. Morgado 
is drafting a letter for USTR which will highlight the GRM\'s 
concern over its limited capacity to negotiate and request 
technical assistance. End Summary 
 
---- 
FTA 
---- 
2. (SBU) The Ambassador opened the meeting with Morgado by 
describing the USG\'s broader interest in negotiating a FTA 
with a sub-Saharan African country and our particular focus 
on Mozambique as a key reformer in the region. A 
US-Mozambican FTA was described as an opportunity to deepen 
our trade relationship, broaden reforms within Mozambique, 
and put a \"seal of approval\" on Mozambique as a site for 
investment, including third-country investment. It was noted 
that this is a collaborative and mutually beneficial process 
and that capacity building would be \"built-in\" to any 
negotiations. However, it was stressed that Mozambique had to 
make its own decision based on the costs and benefits of a 
FTA. The Ambassador noted the various stages of FTA 
negotiations, highlighting the role of both a BIT and TIFA. 
The fact that Mozambique\'s National Assembly has yet to 
ratify the BIT, despite the US Senate\'s ratification in 2000, 
was raised as a concern. Mozambique was encouraged to ratify 
the BIT as soon as possible. 
 
3. (SBU) Morgado stated that he made clear during his 
meeting with USTR that Mozambique did not yet have a formal 
position on pursuing FTA negotiations. Mozambique\'s limited 
trade capacity was cited as the principal constraint. It is 
only within the past few years that Ministry of Industry and 
Commerce (MIC) personnel have begun to obtain the skills 
necessary for active participation in regional or 
multilateral trade negotiations. US-Mozambique FTA 
negotiations would further strain limited capacity, 
particularly as Mozambique is already engaged in on-going 
negotiations with Europe and SADC. Morgado described the 
US-SACU FTA negotiations as potentially negatively impacting 
prospects for regional integration (specifically, SADC), by 
selected countries negotiating within an existing trade 
block. Turning to next steps, Morgado noted that he will be 
sending a letter to Ambassador Shiner that will highlight 
Mozambique\'s limited capacity and request technical 
assistance from the USG. The need for \"PR\" within the GRM on 
pursuing potential FTA negotiations was also discussed. 
Regarding the BIT, Morgado noted that as a treaty the BIT 
must be ratified by the National Assembly, which is 
notoriously slow and has other legislative priorities. He 
further noted that the GRM had been advised by Washington 
that a BIT must be approved by the National Assembly, not by 
executive decree, which he said could be done by the end of 
the month. Initiation of FTA negotiations could provide the 
political impetus for the National Assembly to ratify the 
BIT. Post would appreciate clarification on whether the USG 
requires National Assembly ratification of a BIT. 
 
--------- 
AGOA/MCC 
--------- 
4. (SBU) When questioned as to why Mozambique had not taken 
greater advantage of AGOA, Morgado cited two key factors: 1) 
inadequate resources/technical capacity for promotion 
activities and 2) supply side constraints. He described the 
GRM\'s strategy under AGOA as focused on several key sectors. 
In particular, Morgado highlighted the strong potential for 
increased exports of value-added aluminum products such as 
coils and axles. (Note: Morgado has previously expressed his 
interest in taking advantage of Mozal, a huge aluminum 
smelter located outside of Maputo that accounts for a 
significant portion of Mozambique\'s export earnings. End 
Note) Another potential area for increased exports is 
processed foods (specifically, sugar-based products such as 
jams). Morgado down-played the potential for shrimp, citing 
difficulties for local exporters to meet USG health and SPS 
requirements, as well as already established links to Europe 
and capped supply. The link between potential MCC projects 
and addressing supply side constraints was noted, with the 
Ambassador stressing the importance of the GRM communicating 
directly and regularly with MCC officials. Morgado stated 
that Mozambique had agreed on a joint principal for MCC and 
would submit a proposal by the end of August. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: There is no question that a FTA would be a 
significant boost to Mozambique. However, post shares 
Morgado\'s concerns about Mozambique\'s limited capacity to 
negotiate. Through USAID, the USG is already providing 
significant technical assistance to MIC, which has been 
critical in developing national capacity. Much more extensive 
assistance will be required for any actual FTA negotiations. 
Moreover, while Mozambique is rightly considered a committed 
\"reformer\" and a model for other African countries, 
businesses face considerable constraints. An ineffective 
judiciary, inflexible labor laws, and extensive red-tape 
continue to inhibit trade and investment. In the near-term, a 
TIFA could provide an excellent mechanism to begin 
discussions on addressing these issues. In the medium to 
long-term, a FTA could provide both the political and 
economic impetus for the GRM to removing these constraints. 
We look forward to USTR\'s response to Morgado\'s letter. End 
Comment 
LA LIME 
"
"19127","7/27/2004 12:29","04MAPUTO1000","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03MAPUTO1664","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001000 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, MZ, Elections 04, Small Political Parties 
SUBJECT: THE WEAK STATE OF SMALL PARTIES IN MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: 03 MAPUTO 01664 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY. Facing presidential and legislative elections 
in December of 2004, Mozambique will likely showcase 
impressive two-party competition between the major political 
competitors, FRELIMO and RENAMO-UE. Small third party forces 
are in a weak stage of development and require 
capacity-building so that they may attract a legitimate base 
of support and draw up and articulate sound party principles. 
The only potential bright spot for small independent parties 
may be with the Party for Peace, Democracy, and Development 
(PPD), led by ex-RENAMO member, Raul Domingos. The newly 
passed general elections law will likely create greater 
transparency in the upcoming elections, however opposition 
parties already complain of fraud in the electoral process. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------- 
A LACKING THIRD PARTY FORCE 
----------------------------- 
2. (U) In advance of the 2004 general elections, econ/poloff 
and political specialist held a series of meetings with 
leaders of small political parties to gauge political 
outlook, assess small party preparation, and seek feedback on 
the recently approved general elections law. FRELIMO, the 
current ruling party, has enjoyed power since Mozambican 
independence in 1975. RENAMO-UE, the major opposition force, 
comprised of RENAMO and ten small parties that together form 
a coalition, is just beginning to get a taste of power, 
showcasing an extremely close presidential race in the 1999 
general elections, and winning mayorship of four of 
thirty-three municipalities in the 2003 municipal elections 
(REFTEL). In 2004, current FRELIMO President Joaquim Chissano 
will step down and a new FRELIMO contender, Armando Guebuza, 
has already taken the campaign block. RENAMO-UE will continue 
to support its perennial presidential contender and party 
leader, Afonso Dhlakama. Although Mozambique has achieved 
generally healthy two-party competition, what it fiercely 
lacks is a legitimate third party force. 
 
----------------------------- 
THE CURRENT STATE OF AFFAIRS 
----------------------------- 
3. (SBU) Sadly, many small parties are not able to articulate 
a party platform or speak articulately about party 
priorities. The four parties represented in our discussions, 
PAMOMO - Democratic Party for the Reconciliation of 
Mozambique (independent), PIMO - Independent Party of 
Mozambique (independent), PT - Worker\'s Party (independent), 
and PCN - National Convention Party (part of RENAMO-UE), 
spent significant time complaining about the state of 
democracy in Mozambique and the unfairness of elections, 
without offering any true solutions to improve the situation. 
Starting out our mission by speaking to PAMOMO leader, Albano 
Maiopue, an attorney and former advisor to Dhlakama, he was 
scathingly critical of the Mozambican democratic system and 
the current state of political affairs. He described the 2003 
municipal elections as a \"huge electoral injustice\", claiming 
abuses of fraud on the part of FRELIMO and forecasting the 
upcoming election to be even worse. Disappointed by the 
current system, Miopue had no suggestions for improving it, 
only encouraging a greater observation force and greater 
party equality. He repeatedly complained about the lack of 
funds small parties have to work with and how this translates 
into a vacuum for true multiparty competition. With around 
25,000 supporters, PAMOMO holds no seats in the Parliament 
and its strongest support is found in the North (Zambezia, 
Cabo Delgado, and Nampula). Running independently in the 2004 
legislative elections, PAMOMO is not expected to achieve the 
5% vote threshold necessary to put a representative in the 
Parliament. 
 
 
4. (SBU) Similar discussions took place with Malgalhaes 
Ibramugy, Secretary General of PIMO, a second independent 
party. Although PIMO stands for the Independent Party of 
Mozambique, it is also known as the Islamic Party of 
Mozambique, as a vast majority of its members are party to 
the tenants of Islam. The president of the party, Yacub 
Sibindy, who is also the nephew of RENAMO leader Afonso 
Dhlakama, is an outspoken and well-recognized political 
figure throughout the country, who wins significant media 
attention. The party was founded in 1993 when a Muslim group 
of deputies in Parliament established like-minded policies 
and created PIMO. The Constitution forbids parties to be 
established based along religious or tribal lines, however 
PIMO dismisses that it is a religiously-affiliated party. 
Although it runs independently, PIMO won three seats in the 
municipal assemblies during the 2003 elections and runs a 
heavy campaign in the North, where most of its support, 
particularly Muslim support, is found. Describing the current 
registration period as a \"fiasco\", Ibramugy took stabs at 
FRELIMO governance and explained the \"widespread 
intimidation\" that occurs throughout the country, stating 
that non-FRELIMO supporters are prevented from registering. 
Calling Mozambican politics a \"dirty game\", he criticized the 
work of observers and donors as half-hearted, saying the 
international community must \"open its eyes\" and pay greater 
attention to the entire political process, from the opening 
day of registration to the final announcement of results at a 
national level. Although PIMO unfairly describes the current 
political situation in Mozambique as \"unhealthy\", it enlists 
broader support than other small parties by putting itself in 
the spotlight. PIMO also has access to greater funding than 
other small parties (source unknown), which may account for 
its limited success. 
 
5. (SBU) The Worker\'s Party, PT, has not established a broad 
media presence, but gains some strength by representing the 
working masses. PT, a leftist party founded in 1993, is 
independent of RENAMO-UE. Its founder, Miguel Mabote, 
campaigns wearing a helmet, bringing to life the spirit of 
the party. PT, gaining most of its support from the southern 
provinces of Gaza and Inhambane, won seats in the 1998 
municipal elections most likely attributed to RENAMO-UE\'s 
decision to boycott the elections. In 2003, PT did not win 
any seats in the municipal assemblies. PT described reducing 
unemployment, providing education to the masses, and 
improving health conditions and combating HIV/AIDS as top 
party priorities. Demonstrating a refreshing and optimistic 
view of Mozambique and its political process, Mabote said 
that Mozambique has an important political and economic role 
to play in the region. Although PT exhibited a more promising 
and less accusatory political stance, it still complained of 
a lack of funds to function as an effective third party 
force. PT is not expected to make an impact on the current 
year presidential or legislative electoral outcomes. 
 
6. (SBU) Undeniably the most impressive of the four small 
party leaders, Lutero Simango, President of the National 
Convention Party, is currently a deputy in the National 
Assembly. PCN, a party of intellectuals and academics, joined 
the RENAMO-UE coalition in 2003. Simango\'s father was a 
senior leader in FRELIMO during the days of Mozambique\'s 
transition to independence and was murdered by the party for 
allegedly maintaining overly close ties with the Portuguese. 
Simango\'s brother, Deviz Simango, a member of RENAMO, 
recently won the most contentious mayoral race in the 2003 
municipal elections in Mozambique\'s second largest city of 
Beira. Simango was complimentary of the new electoral law, 
stating that it will create positive change in the upcoming 
elections. PCN has developed a campaign slogan, \"Five 
objectives for Five Years (of governance)\". The five 
objectives are: justice, inclusivity, economic participation, 
employment of youth and women, and a united nation. Simango 
stressed that PCN has great internal capacity as a party of 
intellectuals and businessmen. When asked why PCN joined 
RENAMO-UE, Simango stated the party needed a \"strong machine\" 
that could lend financial support and an image to their small 
group of supporters. With a strong social base, RENAMO-UE was 
the way for PCN to win parliamentary representation. Simango 
believes that with the upcoming changes in government there 
should be a reformed government philosophy that focuses on 
developing the countryside, jump-starting the paralyzed 
economy, and reforming \"professional beggars\" into 
businessmen. Appearing as the only organized small party with 
a leader competent to present realistic and coherent party 
views, PCN will likely be successful in the 2004 legislative 
elections if it remains part of the RENAMO-UE coalition. 
 
---------------------- 
THE NEW ELECTORAL LAW 
---------------------- 
7. (U) On May 12, 2004, the Parliament approved the new 
general elections law, and soon after, the President of the 
Republic, Joaquim Chissano, signed it into force. With the 
exception of a few articles, most of the innovations in the 
new electoral law were already part of the local elections 
law, however, lessons learned from the 2003 municipal 
elections made way for several important new additions. Those 
articles most likely to affect change are Articles 53, 95, 
and 98. Article 53 allows political party agents monitoring 
the voting operations at polling stations to receive original 
copies of the minutes and result tally sheets, signed and 
stamped. Articles 95 and 98 authorize intermediary counting 
to take place at the provincial level (as per the norm), yet, 
votes must be counted district by district and results must 
be summarized and presented in a chart, district by district, 
and subsequently distributed and posted at all polling 
stations. In theory, these changes will allow greater 
transparency in the process by providing selected party 
representatives with official results at the most basic level 
and validating provincial electoral results by a 
district-level breakdown. These additions came as a 
compromise between FRELIMO and RENAMO-UE directly following 
the 2003 municipal elections. 
 
8. (U) In response to the new law, small parties tend to be 
supportive of Article 53 and denounce Articles 95 and 98 as 
\"no new change\". The four parties represented in our 
discussions uniformly agree that greater access to official 
results at each polling station is an improvement to 
electoral transparency. On the other hand, small party forces 
believe that district-level breakdown of votes at the 
provincial level will still allow for fraud. How? Parties 
allied with RENAMO, as part of the UE, complain that the 
transportation of ballots from polling stations to provincial 
electoral commission headquarters allows for tampering of the 
process (i.e., the stealing and/or fabrication of votes). 
Additionally, the parties complained that representatives of 
the National Electoral Commission (CNE) and the Technical 
Secretariat for Electoral Administration (STAE), that 
 
SIPDIS 
administer the electoral process, are FRELIMO agents that 
introduce fraud into the process. Finally, parties believe 
that the most significant amount of fraud occurs during the 
country\'s registration process. As Mozambique just finished 
registration for the 2004 elections, there have been several 
allegations by RENAMO-UE and small parties that RENAMO 
supporters were refused registration. There is also fear 
among the opposition that the 18-day period set aside for 
registration is not enough time to adequately register all 
voters. The opposition has requested a registration 
extension, but the CNE has rejected this proposal. 
 
------------------------- 
ON THE POLITICAL HORIZON 
------------------------- 
9. (SBU) COMMENT: On the heels of the national elections, it 
is clear that FRELIMO and RENAMO-UE will be the only true 
competitors. Although competition between the two major 
parties is likely to be hot, an honorable showing by small, 
independent parties is not expected. The ten small parties 
which form the RENAMO-UE coalition will benefit from the 
support RENAMO-UE wins, and will likely win some legislative 
representation in the Parliament. Independents like PIMO, PT, 
and PAMOMO are unlikely to reach the 5% voter support 
threshold necessary to put a candidate in Parliament. 
10. (SBU) RENAMO-UE and small parties rightly complain and 
contest certain electoral issues that may be cause for fraud 
in the electoral process. However, these forces spend an 
overwhelming amount of their time complaining and pointing 
out \"how bad\" the situation is, that they generally discredit 
themselves and their parties. Changes in the electoral law 
should lead to a more transparent process in the 2004 
elections. The 2003 municipal elections were declared \"free 
and fair\" by the European Commission electoral expert group 
and it is expected that the 2004 presidential and legislative 
elections will run smoothly and on time (December 1-2). 
Although it is difficult to predict whether FRELIMO or 
RENAMO-UE will carry the most presidential or legislative 
votes in 2004, there is significant national interest in the 
outcome of the elections. On a small party front, the hope is 
that by the next municipal or presidential/legislative 
elections, more mature, developed, and capable third parties 
will compete and elicit a chance of having their voices heard 
at a national level. Through current USG programs, conducted 
by the International Republican Institute (IRI), this 
capacity-building is currently underway. END COMMENT. 
LA LIME 
"
"19131","7/27/2004 13:11","04MAPUTO1001","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001001 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
AF FOR A/S CONSTANCE NEWMAN 
S/GAC FOR AMB TOBIAS 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO MCC FOR TBRIGGS 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR AMB SHINER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PREL, PGOV, ETRD, MZ, RENAMO, Elections 04, FRELIMO 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES TO VISIT UNITED 
STATES 
 
 
1. (SBU) The visits to the United States of ruling party 
FRELIMO presidential candidate Armando Guebuza and opposition 
party RENAMO Presidential candidate Afonso Dhlakama offer an 
opportunity to learn about the positions of the two main 
candidates in what should be tightly contested December 
elections in Mozambique. Likely third-party (PDD) 
presidential candidate, Raul Domingos, will attend the 
Democratic National Convention and also visit Washington. 
Post understands that meetings for Guebuza have been 
scheduled with USTR, MCC, S/GAC and CCA. Guebuza will be the 
first candidate to visit Washington. We expect him to be 
particularly interested in discussing Mozambique\'s 
participation in the President\'s Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief (PEPFAR), eligibility for the Millennium Challenge 
Account (MCA) and bilateral trade issues, such as prospects 
for a US-Mozambique FTA. 
 
------------------------- 
THE CONTEXT OF THE VISITS 
------------------------- 
2. (SBU) Mozambique is rightly considered a post-conflict 
success story. Since the signing of the 1992 Peace Accords 
that ended sixteen years of civil war, Mozambique has made 
significant progress in promoting economic reforms and 
consolidating democracy. In December, Mozambique will hold 
its third multi-party presidential elections since 
independence in 1975. The current constitutionally-elected 
president, Joaquim Chissano, will step down after having 
served two terms. Chissano and the leadership of FRELIMO 
dominate policy-making and implementation. During November 
2003 municipal elections, FRELIMO won all but 4 of the 
country\'s 33 mayorships US-Mozambican bilateral relations 
have been excellent under Chissano.Though the electoral 
campaign does not officially begin until October 17, both 
FRELIMO and RENAMO party officials have already hit the 
campaign trail. Guebuza and Chissano have been traveling 
extensively in the Northern and Central provinces of 
Mozambique, focusing on areas of traditional RENAMO support. 
Most recently, Guebuza visited the populous Northern province 
of Nampula, the site of RENAMO\'s best showing in the 
municipal elections. These visits are key to increasing 
Guebuza\'s name recognition, particularly in rural areas that 
have generally served as RENAMO\'s base. The actual elections 
will be held on December 1 and 2. The USG is supporting the 
electoral process through financial assistance to the Carter 
Center and domestic observer groups. As with the municipal 
elections, post will send observers to key municipalities 
throughout the country. 
 
---------------------- 
BIOGRAPHIC INFORMATION 
---------------------- 
3. (SBU) Though Guebuza was not Chissano\'s personal choice as 
candidate, he has indicated that he is likely to continue 
current government policies if elected. Post has also heard 
that a number of key ministers are likely to retain their 
positions in a Guebuza administration. Key themes in recent 
addresses have included combating corruption, reducing 
poverty, and creating a national entrepreneurial class as a 
way to make the country\'s climate attractive for foreign 
investment and economic growth. Touting the importance of 
human rights and freedom of expression, Guebuza has in the 
past praised the United States for its democratic values. 
However, Guebuza is also known as nationalist and has on 
occasion called for the \"Mozambicanization\" of businesses. A 
central theme for Guebuza has been that the GRM reach out to 
the rural areas where 80% of the Mozambican community 
resides. Guebuza has demonstrated a depth of understanding of 
business and economic concerns. Despite past government 
experience (including serving as Interior Minister under 
Samora Machel, where he was responsible for the 
implementation of the \"24/20\" program which gave Portuguese 
residents 24 hours to leave newly independent Mozambique with 
20 kilos of effects), he is also a businessman and one of the 
richest men in Mozambique. In a country where government 
connections and conflicts-of-interest are an integral part of 
doing business, a key test for Guebuza if FRELIMO wins in 
2004 will be the ability to separate personal business 
interests from the broader economic and commercial needs of 
the country. 
 
------------------------------- 
KEY BILATERAL ISSUES - IN BRIEF 
------------------------------- 
4. (SBU) A) Trade & Investment: Mozambique has yet to take 
full advantage of AGOA, and US trade and investment in 
Mozambique remains small. Currently, only one apparel company 
in Mozambique is exporting under AGOA, with a second company 
expected to begin operations shortly. The prospect of a 
US-Mozambique FTA offers a unique opportunity to deepen the 
trade relationship, but also raises concerns over the 
technical capacity of the Mozambican government to enter into 
negotiations. As an eligible MCC country, Mozambique has an 
opportunity to address a number of the constraints to 
increased trade and investment. It would be interesting to 
hear Guebuza\'s vision for linking these programs to increased 
trade and investment as a mechanism for reducing poverty. 
B) HIV/AIDS: Mozambique is at a critical stage in its efforts 
to stem the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In Southern Africa, Mozambique 
presents both the greatest challenges and possibly the 
greatest opportunity to become the next Uganda-like success 
in turning around the HIV/AIDS threat. Despite considerable 
efforts to ensure PEPFAR be seen as a collaborative approach 
to addressing the epidemic, our relationship with the 
Minister of Health has at times been tense. Recently articles 
in the local and international press have accused the USG of 
a \"unilateralist\" approach to combating HIV/AIDS. While 
current Minister of Health Songane is not expected to retain 
his post if Guebuza is elected, it should be stressed that 
the USG views the GRM as a full partner in PEPFAR and is 
making every effort to ensure that our programs compliment 
and support those of the government. 
C) Regional Issues: During his Presidency of the African 
Union (AU), President Chissano was actively engaged on 
broader African issues and sought to use his AU Presidency 
both to build stronger African institutions and to find 
African-led solutions to African problems. Mozambique\'s 
participation in the AU\'s peace-keeping operations in Burundi 
is one such example. ACOTA has visited Mozambique twice in 
the past few months. We look forwarding to supporting the GRM 
increase its capacity to contribute to peace-keeping 
operations. 
LA LIME 
"
"19224","7/29/2004 13:41","04MAPUTO1026","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001026 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/PD 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, PREL, EAID, KDEM, PHUM, PGOV, OEXC, OPRC, OIIP, MZ, KISL 
SUBJECT: MUSLIM OUTREACH IN MOZAMBIQUE 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Post is cognizant of the religious diversity in 
Mozambique and has taken efforts to include representatives from 
various religious groups, including Muslims, in its outreach 
efforts. Given the current demographics of Mozambique and recent 
world events, post is expanding these efforts. End Summary. 
 
BACKGROUND 
2. (SBU) Mozambique\'s rapidly growing Muslim population is 
generally moderate and well integrated into broader Mozambican 
society. Approximately 20 percent of Mozambicans who profess a 
recognized religion are Muslim24 percent are Roman Catholic, 22 
percent are Protestant, and. However, many Muslim clerics 
disagree with this statistic, claiming that Islam is the 
country\'s majority religion. The northern provinces and the 
coastal strip are the most strongly Muslim areas of the country. 
Most members of Mozambique\'s Indian community are Muslim, though 
they tend to remain separate from the larger black Islamic 
community. In northern cities such as Pemba and Nampula, the 
Indian and Pakistani communities control much of the local 
commerce. Religious groups, including Muslim groups, operate in 
Mozambique without impediment, and religious freedom is 
guaranteed under the Constitution. Muslim missionaries from 
South Africa and the Kuwaiti-based Africa Muslim Agency have 
established Islamic schools (\"madrassas\") in many cities and 
towns in the northern provinces and the capital Maputo. In early 
2003, the Islamic Community completed construction of a Grand 
Mosque in downtown Maputo. A large number of small mosques have 
recently been constructed with external financing in the northern 
province of Nampula. 
 
3. (SBU) The Government of Mozambique does not favor a particular 
religion, nor is there a state or dominant religion. Though the 
law governing political parties specifically forbids religious 
parties from organizing and any party from sponsoring religious 
propaganda, the Independent Party of Mozambique (PIMO), a 
predominantly Muslim group without representation in Parliament, 
has taken positions based on religious principles, advocated 
moral behavior, and criticized the government for corruption. 
The Government has thus far tolerated PIMO\'s activities, and PIMO 
remains a minor political party. There have been several 
efforts recently to unify the often divided Islamic community in 
Mozambique. In September 2003, a national meeting of Muslims was 
held in the central provincial capital of Beira, with the aim of 
encouraging local Muslims to become more involved in health and 
education in remote areas of the country. 
 
RECENT AND ONGOING EFFORTS BY POST 
4. (SBU) a) In 2002, post established an American Corner at 
Mussa Bin Bique University, an Islamic university located in 
Nampula. In the past year, the Ambassador has spoken at the 
University, and Public Affairs is planning on using much of its 
library allotment for FY 2004 on acquiring additional materials 
to strengthen the outreach efforts of this American Corner. 
b) In the past, post has sent prominent Muslim leaders on 
International Visitor (IV) programs. These have included Jose 
Abudo, current Minister of Justice, and David Cassimo, a leading 
theologian, Imam and member of Conselho dos Alimos de Mocambique. 
This year, post has already nominated Suleimane Amuji, the 
prominent Muslim mayor of Vilankulos, to participate in a 
Democratic Governance and Civic Participation IV program. 
Amuji\'s nomination is part of a larger USAID initiative to work 
with key municipal leaders elected in 2003. Post also intends to 
nominate participants for the Leadership and Muslim Community IV 
program. 
c) In the past year, the Ambassador has launched a Mission 
Speakers Initiative to send teams of Mission personnel to speak 
at local high schools. The Mission intends to expand this 
program to include speaking at religious-affiliated high schools, 
including Muslim high schools. 
d) Additionally, as part of its PEPFAR plan, the Mission is 
working with the Aga Kahn Foundation to assess available HIV- 
related services and develop a 5-year operational plan for an 
HIV/AIDS program in Cabo Delgado, a predominantly Muslim 
province, linked with a new USG-supported anti-retroviral therapy 
site. 
e) The USAID Food Security programs focus is on helping rural 
Mozambicans learn and develop the knowledge, skills and 
technology they need to produce more food, increase their 
household incomes and reduce malnutrition among their children. 
These programs operate in the Northern provinces of Nampula, 
Zambezia, Sofala and Manica, where they reach communities with 
arge Muslim populations. 
f) The Mission will also be designating a Religious Affairs 
Officer whose portfolio will include strategic outreach 
initiatives and increased dialogue with key members of 
Mozambique\'s Muslim community. 
LA LIME 
"
"19352","8/2/2004 15:18","04MAPUTO1040","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001040 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC, PREL, KIRF, KISL, KDEM, MZ, RENAMO, Religion (non-islam) 
SUBJECT: AMERICAN MISSIONARIES GET TANGLED IN POLITICAL, 
RELIGIOUS CONFLICTS IN NORTHERN MOZAMBIQUE. 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. On June 26, 14 Americans were expelled 
from Montepuez in Cabo Delgado province, where they were 
setting up an evangelical mission, on the pretenses that 
they were acting as spies for Renamo, the opposition party. 
On July 14-16, Conoff visited Cabo Delgado to meet with 
local officials to mediate and generally learn more about 
the situation. The expulsion took place during a 
presidential election year in a politically contested 
region, and serves as a cautionary tale that some elements 
in the government are still looking to paint Americans as 
\"pro-Renamo\" for political purposes. The incident is also 
one in a series of difficulties that American evangelicals 
have encountered in the past year while establishing 
missions in heavily Muslim Northern Mozambique. Given that 
the American missionary presence will continue rising in 
these areas, and that missionaries are often the only 
visible American presence, the Embassy will have to monitor 
and, when appropriate, mediate potential conflicts into the 
future. End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The 14 Americans (plus one Japanese citizen) 
expelled from Montepuez are members of the Boa Nova for 
Africa missionary group, an evangelical group that has 
operated in Southern Mozambique for many years. The group 
members arrived in Montepuez in April 2004 with the 
intention of setting up a mission and living in the 
community for 10-15 years; it was Boa Nova\'s first excursion 
into the North. In mid-June, the missionaries contacted the 
Embassy, indicating that they were under suspicion of being 
Renamo operatives. One week later, they were ordered to 
evacuate by the town administrator, leaving their household 
belongings behind. According to several people with whom I 
spoke, the Governor of Cabo Delgado, Jose Pacheco, had 
openly accused the Americans on a popular local radio 
program of being Renamo spies. The group relocated to the 
neighboring province of Nampula, where another American- 
based missionary organization is currently hosting them. 
 
3. (U) Conoff visited Montepuez on July 15 as part of a 
pre-scheduled ACS trip to Cabo Delgado province, in order to 
determine what happened, and how we might be able to 
mediate. It seemed apparent that the cause of the problem 
was political, not religious. Among cities in the North, 
Montepuez is one of the most religiously mixed and relaxed; 
Catholic churches, older evangelical missions, and a 
surprisingly run-down Mosque co-exist in close proximity. 
The town is at the same time perhaps the most politically 
tense place in the country. Montepuez was always a site of 
Renamo-Frelimo conflict during the civil war, but the 
conflict escalated in the aftermath of the government\'s 
handling of a protest carried out against the government by 
Renamo in November 2000. After sporadic violence during the 
event, a large number of protestors were taken to the 
Montepuez prison, where approximately 80 prisoners died. 
Subsequent investigations found that 96 inmates had been 
locked into a 3m by 7m cell, and most of these died of 
suffocation. 
 
4. (SBU) The government has responded to the Montepuez 
scandal by simultaneously endowing the city with generous 
funding and by increasing its police and security force 
activities. Each trend was easy to identify. Mayor Rafael 
Correia and Town Administrator Alberto Cossa detailed for me 
a large number of visible accomplishments, such as new 
schools, roads, and cellular phone services, all of which 
helped him win re-election last year. Each man separately 
stated that the missionaries would be welcome back in the 
area once they cleared their plan with Religious Affairs and 
the governor\'s office in Pemba. Police Chief Cesar Maciamo 
was not so conciliatory, however, and openly accused the 
missionaries of being spies in my meeting with him. Maciamo 
is a recent appointee of the Governor Pacheco. He did not 
elaborate further on why he thought this. 
 
5. (SBU) While in town, Conoff also met with 20-plus 
Renamo supporters in Montepuez. Many claimed that they had 
been imprisoned for political activities in the past few 
years, and detailed a long list of alleged abuses by 
Frelimo. They knew of the Boa Nova situation but claimed 
they had no contact with them. Every party member in the 
meeting was over 40 years old, and they lamented the fact 
that no young people join their party because it is 
impossible to get a job as a known Renamo supporter. It 
seems clear that Frelimo is consolidating its grip in the 
Montepuez area. 
 
6. (U) Upon returning to Pemba, Conoff met with 13 
American citizens, including two families from Boa Nova who 
traveled from Nampula for the meeting. They are now writing 
a work plan proposal to return to Montepuez only after the 
December 2004 elections. Conoff later met with the Director 
of Religious Affairs, Inacio Abdul, to get a sense of the 
situation. Mr. Abdul admitted that the idea of a group of 
six young American missionary families working for Renamo 
was farfetched at best. He seemed favorable to the idea of 
letting them enter Montepuez after the elections, with the 
Governor\'s approval. It was not possible to meet with 
Governor Pacheco because of the concurrent visit of 
President Chissano to the province. Other meetings were 
held with the Police, Migration, Customs, and other relevant 
officials. 
 
7. (U) The Boa Nova situation can be seen as a case in 
which missionaries poked around a political hornet\'s nest 
with a little too much curiosity. The last year has seen 
multiple cases, however, of American missionaries getting 
into trouble with local religious authorities for reasons 
that are not directly political. In February 2004, two 
American missionaries were kicked out of Niassa province on 
the grounds that their objectives were unclear. A 
missionary family from Zambezia was forced to relocate to 
Nampula in May for the same reason, but expects to be back 
soon. Another missionary organization in Sofala province, 
Care for Life, was temporarily kicked out of the province in 
May for alleged improprieties and was reinstated by the 
governor one week later. Missionaries report that 
authorities in the Northern provinces of Cabo Delgado, 
Niassa, Tete, and Zambezia will not allow evangelical 
Christian missionaries into the province unless they can 
detail the economic and community development activities 
that will take place alongside proselytizing activities. 
While such provisos do not appear to be technically legal 
based on our limited understanding of Mozambican law, they 
should come as no surprise, considering that these provinces 
are at least half Muslim, and the religious affairs 
officials of all these provinces plus Nampula are Muslim. 
Muslim organizations, for their part, are actively pouring 
money into highly visible construction and education 
projects. (My cab driver told me that a Saudi-based 
organization paid for his cousin to study Islamic religious 
thought in the Sudan.) 
 
8. (U) Post expects more of these minor conflicts in the 
future since the American population in Northern Mozambique 
is largely comprised of missionaries - and the population is 
growing rapidly. Cabo Delgado alone has increased in the 
past 18 months from 8 to 31 registered Americans, all but 
two of whom are missionaries. The American population in 
Nampula province now counts around 60 missionaries, three 
non-missionary private Americans, and 4 Peace Corps 
Volunteers. (The Peace Corps is not present in Cabo 
Delgado, Zambezia, or Niassa.) Most of these groups have 
been careful to set up operations in areas that are not 
exclusively Muslim, allowing themselves space to operate. 
In the past year, however, two evangelical groups have 
contacted us about their intentions to set up sizable 
operations in Northern Mozambique, with a focus on entirely 
Muslim areas of the Coast - often areas where no Americans 
have ever lived. The potential for conflict is significant. 
 
9. (U) In anticipation of further problems, the Consular 
Section has scheduled further meetings with Religious 
Affairs authorities in Maputo, and will be developing 
informational literature to guide American citizens on the 
procedures involved in registering a religious organization. 
Beyond providing literature explaining the rules, it will be 
difficult for Post to determine how much assistance we are 
able to provide to American evangelical groups. The Boa 
Nova case had clear political content focused on this year\'s 
elections, charging that Americans were actively supporting 
one side, and therefore required mediation. But future 
conflicts may be purely religious in nature, and Post will 
have to take situations case-by-case in order to determine 
our stake in the situation. 
LA LIME 
"
"19429","8/4/2004 15:28","04MAPUTO1053","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE141379","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001053 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR EB/IFA/OIA - ABRYAN, AF/S - KEES DAVISON 
PLEASE PASS USTR 
COMMERCE FOR AMANDA HILIGAS 
LABOR FOR ILAB - PATRICK WHITE, BOB YOUNG 
JOHANNESBURG FOR REGIONAL LABOR OFFICER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, EFIN, ELAB, KTDB, PGOV, MZ, OPIC 
SUBJECT: INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT APPENDIX FOR 
MOZAMBIQUE - 2004 
 
REF: STATE 141379 
 
1. Per reftel, post submits Investment Climate Statement 
(ICS) appendix below: 
MOZAMBIQUE: July 2004 Appendix to 2003 Investment 
Climate Statement 
This appendix serves as an update to the 2003 Investment 
Climate Statement for Mozambique. It has been provided 
to assist investors in the interim period resulting from 
the U.S. Government\'s decision to begin publishing the 
Country Commercial Guide (of which the Investment Climate 
Statement is a chapter) on a calendar year basis, in 
January instead of August. 
The United States Government has reviewed the 2003 
Investment Climate Statement for Mozambique, and has noted 
the following changes that have occurred since its 
publication. In most circumstances, if a portion of the 
2003 Investment Climate Statement has not been modified in 
this appendix, it is because the U.S. Government is 
satisfied that it continues to accurately reflect the 
state of affairs in Mozambique as of July 2004. 
Openness to Foreign Investment: 
-------------------------------- 
Several indicators were published in 2004 that shed light on 
Mozambique\'s process of business registration. The \"Doing 
Business in 2004\" Report, by the World Bank, identified 
Mozambique as one of the most difficult countries for 
business establishment, citing an average of 14 steps and 153 
days to register a business. 
Privatization has slowed down and impediments remain in the 
privatization of parastatals, largely because these deals are 
politically sensitive. The GRM has indicated that it is 
searching for private investors in the case of Linheas Aereas 
de Mocambique (LAM), Mozambique Telecommunications (TDM), and 
Mozambique Electricity (EDM). To date, this has been a spoken 
initiative with no real action to solicit the interest of 
private firms and move forward. 
Conversion and Transfer Policies: 
--------------------------------- 
No significant changes since 2003. 
? 
Expropriation and Compensation: 
------------------------------- 
No significant changes since 2003. 
? 
Disputes Settlement: 
-------------------- 
The current commercial code, from 1888, is under revision. 
The National Assembly did not pass newly proposed legislation 
and the Code rests with the Government for refinement. It is 
anticipated the National Assembly will vote on the Code again 
in the Extraordinary Session in October 2004. 
Two centers for commercial arbitration, one in Maputo (CACM) 
and a second in Nampula, have opened and are operating 
successfully. These facilities offer arbitration for 
complaints between companies, and do not deal directly with 
labor issues. 
? 
Performance Requirements and Incentives: 
---------------------------------------- 
The GRM identifies \"Rapid Development Zones\" and grants 
special fiscal, labor, and immigration arrangements for 
companies operating in these zones. Zones, as identified by 
the Investment Promotion Center (CPI) in 2004, include: 
Niassa Province, Nacala District, Ilha de Mocambique 
(Mozambique Island), Ibo Island, and the Zambezi River Valley 
(encompassing parts of Tete, Sofala, and Manica Provinces). 
Investments in these zones are exempt from import duties on 
certain goods, exemption from the real property transfer tax, 
and an investment tax credit equal to 20% of the total 
investment (with a right to carry forward for five years). 
The GRM continues to support development of \"industrial free 
zones\" (export processing zones). Please see \"Foreign Trade 
Zones/Free Ports\" heading below. 
? 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment: 
--------------------------------------------- 
No significant changes since 2003. 
? 
Protection of Property Rights: 
------------------------------ 
Intellectual property right infringement continues to be a 
relatively insignificant problem in Mozambique due to the 
small size of the domestic market. There is, however, an 
increasing number of pirated copies of audio, videotapes, and 
DVDs and other goods (sunglasses, etc) sold in the informal 
market. 
Transparency of the Regulatory System: 
-------------------------------------- 
No significant changes since 2003. 
? 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment: 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
No significant changes since 2003. 
? 
Political Violence: 
------------------- 
Opposition party members, both from RENAMO and small 
independent parties, complained of intimidation prior to and 
during the 2003 municipal elections, but there were no 
reported cases of political violence. In speaking with 
political party leaders prior to the 2004 presidential 
elections, no political violence is expected. Many opposition 
parties and FRELIMO recently subscribed to an electoral code 
of conduct to be observed during the 2004 electoral process. 
Although not legally binding, the code commits the signing 
parties to avoiding acts of violence during the period. 
? 
Corruption: 
----------- 
The GRM launched a new Anti-Corruption Unit in the Office of 
the Attorney General that is charged with investigating and 
prosecuting corruption-related offenses. The National 
Assembly passed a new anti-corruption law in 2004 that 
updates previously antiquated legislation. Civil society has 
become more vocal on corrpution-related issues and is 
demanding stronger government action. The anti-corruption 
NGO, Etica Mocambique, was formed to work on ameloriating 
this problem. Recently, Etica has started a television and 
print media sensitization program to help citizens identify 
and protect themselves against cases of corruption. 
? 
Bilateral Investment Agreements: 
--------------------------------- 
The Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between Mozambique and 
the United States is still awaiting Mozambican ratification 
in the National Assembly. The UK completed their BIT with 
Mozambique in March 2004. 
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs: 
--------------------------------------------- 
No significant changes since 2003. 
? 
Labor: 
------ 
The estimated work force in Mozambique numbers 9.2 million. 
In 2004, the GRM increased the country\'s statutory minimum 
wage by slightly more than the 2003 inflation rate of 13%. 
The minimum wage for industry, services, and the civil 
service rose by 14%, from $41 to $47 per month. The minimum 
wage for agricultural workers rose by 15%, from $29 to $34 
per month. Although the hike for agricultural workers was 
higher, there is still a significant gap between wages for 
different groups. Nationwide literacy levels are estimated at 
48% with municipal areas accounting for the majority of 
literate adults. 
Labor unions, created during the socialist years, are gaining 
strength and asserting greater independence from the ruling 
party, FRELIMO. Total membership among Mozambique\'s fourteen 
unions is close to 200,000. With respect to revision of the 
labor law in 2004-05, labor unions are exerting significant 
pressure on the GRM to keep many of the law\'s extremely 
pro-worker provisions. 
? 
Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports: 
-------------------------------- 
The two essential requirements for Industrial Free Zone 
status are: job creation for Mozambican nationals and the 
exportation of at least 85% of annual production. Industrial 
Free Zone Developers enjoy an exemption from customs duties, 
VAT, and Specific Consumption Tax on the importation of 
construction materials, machinery, equipment, accessories, 
accompanying spare parts, and other goods destined for the 
establishment of the Industrial Free Zone. Mozambique\'s big 
commercial success stories, such as MOZAL and SASOL, operate 
in industrial free zones. 
LA LIME 
"
"19591","8/10/2004 12:49","04MAPUTO1081","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO293","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001081 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
FOR OBO/REPM/EV - PIERRE WELCH 
E.O. 129958: N/A 
TAGS: ABLD, AMGT, MZ, Tourism, NEC 
SUBJECT: MOZ GOVT BOTH SUPPORTS AND OPPOSES NEC SITE 
 
REF: MAPUTO 00293 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. Tourism Minister Sumbana stated publicly 
that he opposed any effort by the USG to acquire the Four 
Seasons site for use as an NEC. He confirmed his opposition 
in private, but conceded that he could be overruled for 
reasons of bilateral cooperation. At a subsequent meeting 
with Post representatives, Foreign Minister stated that 
Sumbana could be managed, but that our prime concern should 
be ensuring support from the municipal government. He also 
expressed his eagerness to see this deal concluded before 
the next government transition. 
 
------------------------------------- 
OPPOSITION TO THE SALE 
------------------------------------- 
2. (U) On July 15 a local newspaper reported that Four 
Seasons site had been sold to the SOTUR/IMOBCI consortium. 
It said that the USG had expressed interest in the site for 
its new Embassy but that its proposal was rejected by 
Minister of Tourism Sumbana. He was directly quoted as 
saying: \"I turned down the proposal from the U.S. Embassy 
because the area, and the building itself, are not 
appropriate for diplomatic services. The premises was 
designed solely as a tourist project.and it should stay that 
way.\" 
 
3. (SBU) At our instruction, U.S. Embassy-contracted 
attorney spoke with Sumbana privately to confirm his 
position and rationale. Sumbana stated that, as Minister of 
Tourism, it was his responsibility to oppose the sale of 
land to the USG for the reasons stated above. He said he 
had been assured by the concessionaires throughout the 
tender process that they were not interested in selling to 
the USG and would develop the site for tourist purposes. He 
also expressed concern for the impact a U.S. Embassy would 
have on traffic flow during and after construction. 
 
4. (SBU) Sumbana conceded that if the GRM decided it was in 
their best interest to permit the USG to build an Embassy on 
that site, he would be overruled. He further suggested the 
solution lies through dialogue among the GRM, the 
SOTUR/IMOBCI consortium and the USG. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: SOTUR/IMOBCI has been playing both sides 
while legally finalizing its concession, and surprisingly 
Sumbana appears to have believed their stated intentions not 
to sell the site to the USG. This could explain why earlier 
this year SOTUR/IMOBCI would not agree to send a letter to 
the Minister of Tourism announcing their willingness to sell 
the property to the USG. It should also be noted that, 
should the USG acquire this property, it will be necessary 
to obtain a waiver from the GRM (acting through the Ministry 
of Tourism) to permit other than tourist development of the 
site. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
MEETING WITH FOREIGN MINISTER 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
6. (SBU) Ambassador, Management Officer, GSO and attorney 
met on August 4 with Foreign Minister Simao to discuss 
Sumbana\'s remarks and to learn the status of the bundle of 
rights proposal. Ambassador told Simao that she was 
continuing to work the U.S. end of this project and 
expressed the hope that we would be able to close this deal 
soon. Given the mixed message the GRM was sending, she 
asked for clarification on the GRM\'s position vis--vis 
disposition of the Four Seasons site. 
 
7. (SBU) Simao responded that a working group had been set 
up with all stakeholders, including the Mayor\'s office, and 
that our proposal was on the table. He added that he, too, 
wants to finalize this process soon, and certainly before 
the Mozambican Presidential elections which are scheduled to 
take place in December. He agreed that it was Sumbana\'s job 
to defend tourism proposals, but, downplaying Sumbana\'s 
role, said that Sumbana could be convinced to \"put a hotel 
elsewhere.\" Simao said that the Municipal Government was 
the new key player given the Mayor\'s strict adherence to 
planning and zoning regulations. He was pleased to hear 
that the Embassy has kept the Mayor informed of our interest 
in the site. He also stressed the importance of winning 
public support for our proposal as fears of restricted beach 
access could generate public opposition. 
 
8. (SBU) Simao said that another working group involving 
other departments had been formed to study our bundle of 
rights proposal. When Ambassador asked what next steps 
should be taken to keep this effort moving forward, he 
suggested that we wait for the GRM response to the bundle of 
rights proposal. He indicated that it would be forthcoming. 
 
9. (SBU) Comment: Foreign Minister Simao supports this 
project and wants to see the USG acquire the land. He is 
concerned that the Embassy build the necessary links with 
the municipal government since they also will weigh in 
heavily on this project. The Mayor is well aware of USG 
interest in the site and has told the Ambassador on at least 
two occasions that he supports the project. We will 
continue to seek ways to cement our positive relationship 
with the Municipal Government. Regarding the bundle of 
rights agreement, we plan to schedule a working level 
meeting to confirm that the GRM is actively addressing the 
issues we require and that a response is indeed forthcoming. 
La Lime 
"
"19707","8/13/2004 9:13","04MAPUTO1091","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001091 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO, FCS - RDONOVAN, JVANRENSBURG 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: JULY MONTHLY ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
---------------------- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
---------------------- 
1. (U) Vodacom, the South African mobile phone operator that 
began operations in Mozambique in December 2003, now estimates 
that it has 100,000 subscribers in Mozambique. Mcel, the national 
operator, estimates that is has 500,000 subscribers. There is 
clear market growth in this sector and the number of total 
subscribers is expected to rise to 1 million over the next five 
years (Vodacom estimate). Vodacom mobile phone coverage now 
extends to all provincial capitals, except Quelimane, which is 
scheduled for coverage in August 2004. The South African firm is 
ahead of schedule for installation and has launched a 
particularly strong marketing campaign. A Vodacom source 
announced that only 10-20% of their subscribers have come over 
from Mcel, yet it bodes well for both firms that mobile phone 
service is in demand. In Africa, Vodacom operates in Lesotho, 
South Africa, Tanzania, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and 
now Mozambique. The cost of Vodacom service is lowest in 
Mozambique. Vodacom has focused its marketing campaign on 
attracting individuals and has not attracted many corporate 
clients yet. Ninety-six percent of Vodacom\'s clients are pre-paid 
subscribers. Vodacom estimates that it will \"break even\" in 
another 12-14 months. Their Mozambique investment totals $200 
million. 
 
2. (U) The Corridor Heavy Sands Project (Australia) will spend 
$500 million in the first phase of development for the initial 
production of some 400,000 tons of titanium dioxide slag per 
year. The project is based on immense deposits of titanium 
dioxide minerals located near the town of Chibuto in the Gaza 
Province. The deposits were discovered in late 1997, and 
represent the world\'s largest known economic resource of titanium 
dioxide and associated minerals. Corridor Sands will establish 
an integrated heavy mineral sands mining, mineral processing, and 
beneficiation operation that will include the mine and an 
associated two-stage mineral processing plant. The minerals are 
ilmenite, rutile, leucoxene, and zircon. Corridor Sands Limited 
(CSL) has the exclusive right to develop the deposit and the 
Industrial Corporation of South Africa holds an option to acquire 
10% of CSL. For CSL to reach its planned full production level of 
one million tons of titanium dioxide slag per year, the project 
will require a total capital investment of approximately $800 
million. Infrastructure construction will begin in 2006 and the 
first production is anticipated for 2008. As a mega-project, CSL 
operates in an industrial free zone. Mega-projects such as MOZAL 
aluminum smelter and the SASOL natural gas pipeline fuel the 
economic growth of Mozambique by an estimated 1-2% per year. With 
two mineral processing mega-projects in the pipeline (Moma Heavy 
Sands and Corridor Sands), Mozambique\'s economic growth will be 
further fueled by this significant investment. Mozambique\'s GDP 
growth has remained one of the highest in Africa over the 1992- 
2003 period, averaging 8% growth per year. 
 
3. (U) Universal Leaf Tobacco (Mozambican subsidiary known as 
Mozambique Leaf Tobacco or MLT) continues construction on the 
country\'s first tobacco processing plant in the province of Tete. 
A local news source indicates that construction, which began in 
July 2003, is moving along at a good pace and should be completed 
within the predicted 15 months, allowing for plant inauguration 
before the end of 2004. The $45 million undertaking (one of the 
largest in the last several decades in Tete) is projected to 
bring substantial development to the Tete Province, creating more 
than 2,000 jobs. Universal Leaf Tobacco is one of the biggest 
producers, processors, and exporters of tobacco in the world. 
They operate in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi, Tanzania, 
Ghana, and now, Mozambique. 
 
4. (U) The GRM laid the first stone in building a pipeline to 
supply natural gas to the city of Matola. The building of the 
100km branch line linking the gas fields of Inhambane to Matola 
was awarded to the newly formed Matola Gas Company (MGC) and 
construction should be completed by June 2005. When the job is 
completed and gas starts flowing to Matola, where much of the 
country\'s industry is located (including the MOZAL aluminum 
smelter), the cost of Mozambican fuel imports could be cut by 
about $80 million/year (local news source). The MOZAL smelter 
will be the pipeline\'s biggest customer, however, the gas will 
supply smaller industries and the general public. 
 
---------------- 
MACROECONOMICS 
---------------- 
5. (U) In the recently published OECD \"African Economic Outlook\" 
Report, a fairly positive picture is painted of the Mozambican 
economy. According to the report, Mozambique\'s trade deficit was 
reduced to 15% of GDP in 2003 (from 16% in 2002) and is set to 
fall to 8.6% in 2004 and 7.7% in 2005. The trade deficit 
reduction is largely due to the massive increase in exportation 
of aluminum ingots, produced by the MOZAL aluminum smelter that 
just inaugurated Phase II of operations (December 2003). Also 
helping to even the trade balance is the higher price of 
electricity that Eskom (South Africa) must pay for Cahora Bassa 
power. Mozambique, Portugal, and South Africa signed an agreement 
in early 2004 to raise these tariffs. The start of export of 
natural gas down the SASOL-built and operated gas pipeline from 
Inhambane to Secunda, South Africa, also helps boost the trade 
balance. Fiscal revenues improved in 2003, reaching nearly 13% of 
GDP, compared with 12.5% in 2002 and 11.8% in 2001. The report 
attributes this to new, modernized taxes on personal incomes and 
profits, as well as measures to limit tax exemptions for 
investors. Inflation stood at 12.7% in 2003, driven by the rise 
in price of imported oil and the strengthening of the South 
African Rand. The report notes strong growth in the production of 
food and cash crops, particularly of sugar, thanks to heavy 
foreign (Mauritian and South African) investment rehabilitating 
the sugar mills. The report makes clear that obstacles remain for 
investors wishing to do business in Mozambique. Shortage of 
domestic capital, high borrowing costs, excessive bureaucracy, 
and inadequate infrastructure are some of the challenges that 
remain. 
 
---------- 
TOURISM 
---------- 
6. (SBU) The Carr Foundation will invest an estimated $1 million 
per year for the next several years into development and 
rehabilitation of Gorongosa National Park in the Sofala Province. 
This park was decimated in the civil war and very little wildlife 
remains (an estimated 200 elephant, four zebra, and other 
species). The Carr Foundation traveled to Mozambique in March 
2004 to survey different areas for tourism investment. The 
Foundation chose to invest in Gorongosa because of its location 
on the Beira corridor and relatively good park access. The 
Foundation will support the park in a 40-year financial 
commitment that involves community development, conservation, and 
economic sustainability through ecotourism. In the future, 
tenders for tourism operators to work in the park will be 
released. Although Gorongosa\'s ecosystem is still in place, 
animals must be transferred from other parks (Marromeu, Niassa 
Reserve, possibly Zimbabwe and South Africa) to start small-scale 
tourism. Currently, only around 1,000 tourists visit the park 
each year and each one spends as little as $5 on average during 
their visit. Everything must be brought into the park, including 
food, water, and fuel. 
 
--------------------------- 
PORTS, ROADS, AND RAILWAYS 
--------------------------- 
7. (U) CFM, the transportation parastatal, signed an agreement 
with Cornelder (Holland) for a 25-year concession to develop and 
privatize the port of Quelimane in Zambezia Province. Fourteen 
million dollars in financing will be provided by KFW, a German 
bank, allowing for port rehabilitation and modernization. 
Cornelder is a long-time partner of CFM, as it signed a similar 
agreement in 1998 to privatize container terminals at the port of 
Beira, one of the country\'s most critical ports. The port of 
Quelimane is less important and sees significantly less traffic 
than the three biggest ports of Maputo, Beira, and Nacala. 
Revitalization of the port will benefit Zambezia Province that 
exports primarily tea, seafood, and timber. 
 
-------- 
ENERGY 
-------- 
8. (U) EDM, the national electricity company, will invest $700 
million in the next 15 years to carry out electricity projects 
throughout the country. With this level of investment, EDM 
estimates that nearly one million customers will be connected to 
the national electricity network (currently only 200,000 are 
connected to the network). To make this happen, EDM must invest 
$50-60 million per year until the year 2020. Presented at a 
national workshop, the Electricity Strategy for Mozambique from 
2005-2020 (financed by the African Development Bank), identifies 
ways to strengthen the quality of electricity provided and 
targets areas that are in need of electrification. To date, the 
two most northern provinces of Cabo Delgado and Niassa have the 
least amount of coverage. The plan discusses the need to 
electrify Northern Niassa and more of Inhambane Province. 
Additionally, it encourages strengthening of coverage in Maputo 
and Beira. EDM is the only electricity provider in Mozambique. 
The extremely low purchasing power of Mozambicans makes 
investment in electrification unprofitable, making it difficult 
to attract private investors. For this reason, the GRM will 
likely remain the fundamental investor in electricity expansion 
and refortification. 
 
-------- 
LABOR 
-------- 
9. (U) On July 21, the GRM launched a Labor Law Revision Seminar, 
funded by UNDP, on the terms of reference and suggested changes 
for the new labor law. This is a continuation of seminars that 
has been taking place across the country (Beira, Nampula, and 
Xai-Xai) to encourage dialogue on labor law reform. The law is to 
be passed in 2005. The Seminar hosted participants from the 
private sector, the government, the unions, and donor groups. 
LA LIME 
"
"19857","8/18/2004 11:14","04MAPUTO1114","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001114 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR INL/AAE, DS DSS/IP/AF 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, PHUM, SNAR, KHIV, MZ, KCRM 
SUBJECT: STATE OF AFFAIRS OF MOZAMBICAN POLICE AND 
PROMISING PROGRAMS FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF MOZAMBICAN LAW 
ENFORCEMENT 
 
 
1. SUMMARY. Over a period of three days, Ambassador and 
acting RSO met with the commissioner of the Mozambican 
national police (PRM), Miguel dos Santos, and the 
spokesperson of the PRM and head of the Community Policing 
Program, Nataniel Macama. Notable issues discussed included 
the state of crime in Mozambique, border security, activities 
at the police academy, community policing, and the effect of 
HIV/AIDS on the police force. Although positive programs are 
in place to strengthen police capacity, Mozambique lacks the 
resources necessary to adequately protect its borders and 
control crime. Cooperation between the USG and the PRM is 
good. END SUMMARY. 
 
2. Major areas of criminal activity in Mozambique range from 
street crime, to drug use and smuggling, and poor monitoring 
of the use of Mozambique\'s dwindling natural resources. 
Hashish and marijuana are the two most common drugs moving 
through and in use in Mozambique (imported from east Asia). 
Due to porous and poorly controlled land and sea borders, 
control of trafficking in illegal drugs is difficult. 
Mozambique does not have the capacity or resources necessary 
to control its vast borders. Mozambique has 2700 km of 
seacoast but zero sea vessels to patrol this vast coastline. 
The PRM has developed a maritime police unit and has trained 
approximately 100 maritime police officers to date, but no 
resources have been made available to put these initial 
efforts into practice. The PRM is also unable to cope with 
the large amounts of illegal fishing and logging due to this 
same lack of resources. 
 
3. The PRM has been successful, however, in combating street 
crime and drug use on the street, through the development of 
a Community Policing Program. This program was developed with 
the assistance of the German government to create a system 
similar to a neighborhood watch program. Trusted community 
leaders are elected to lead the community policing efforts in 
specific neighborhoods. These leaders discourage people in 
the community from committing crimes and report incidents to 
the police. The program empowers people in the community to 
take responsibility in their community, but it does not give 
them the authority to take matters into their own hands. Thus 
far, approximately 300 communities throughout Mozambique have 
joined this program. Statistically, street crime is on a 
decline in Maputo and in the rest of Mozambique, which has 
been attributed to this program. A specific example is an 
area in Maputo that used to be nicknamed \"Colombia\", for the 
high amount of illegal drug sales and use, which no longer 
carries this moniker due to the reduction of criminal 
activity. 
 
4. The success of this program has been hindered by the lack 
of some critical elements necessary to communicate with the 
police when a crime occurs. Although community leaders are 
more involved with the police, many of these communities lack 
phones or other means of communication. Many times, a person 
is sent many kilometers to the nearest police station to 
report a crime. The US Department of State through the 
American Embassy Maputo and the International Narcotics and 
Law Enforcement (INL) office, and with the Assistance of the 
International Criminal Investigative Training Assistance 
Program (ICITAP), have proposed a community policing program 
in the form of equipping and training police officers on 
bicycles. This program, previously applied in Ghana, would 
allow the police easier access to reach out to the community 
and aid the communication process between the police and the 
community. 
 
5. Combating HIV/AIDS is a looming challenge for Mozambique 
and the PRM does not escape this challenge. Thirty to forty 
police officers die monthly from complications related to 
HIV/AIDS. Yearly, the police force graduates 1000 new 
recruits, but loses 600 officers to HIV/AIDS. Although 
efforts have been made to combat the epidemic in the police 
force, resources are limited. Post has initiated plans to 
incorporate efforts to aid the PRM in combating HIV/AIDS in 
the PEPFAR strategic plan. 
 
6. Both Commandant dos Santos and Mr. Macama were 
appreciative of the assistance that the US government has 
provided the PRM. Commandant dos Santos offered his continued 
support in ensuring the safety and security of the US mission 
and the fight against global terrorism. 
LA LIME 
"
"20101","8/26/2004 13:04","04MAPUTO1152","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE122452","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001152 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/RSA - ACOTA, PM/RSAT, AND AF/S FOR BNEULING 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIA, MASS, MARR, PREL, MZ, ACOTA 
SUBJECT: GRM RESPONSE: ACOTA END-USE, SECURITY AND 
RETRANSFER ASSURANCES 
 
REF: STATE 122452 
 
1. Post received on August 25 a diplomatic note containing 
ACOTA end-use, security and retransfer assurances from GRM. 
Following is the complete texts of diplomatic notes exchanged 
between Post and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation 
of the Republic of Mozambique. 
 
2. Begin text of U.S. note: 
No. 297 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Cooperation of the Republic of Mozambique and has the honor 
to inform the Ministry and has the honor to refer to the 
provision of U.S. equipment and training in association with 
the African Contingency Operations Training and Assistance 
program. Further, the Embassy has the honor to refer to the 
Ministry\'s note of 13 May 1994, which together with the 
Embassy\'s note number 056 of 30 March 1994, constitute an 
Agreement between the two governments regarding the end-use, 
security and retransfer assurances for grants of defense 
articles or related training or other defense services 
furnished by the Government of the United States of America 
under the authority of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as 
amended, or successor legislation, to the Government of the 
Republic of Mozambique (hereinafter, the Agreement). In this 
regard, the Embassy proposes that the terms and conditions of 
the Agreement shall apply to equipment, training, and related 
services provided under the African Contingency Operations 
Training and Assistance program to the Government of the 
Republic of Mozambique and funded by Peacekeeping Operation 
funds. 
The Embassy proposes that, if the foregoing is acceptable to 
the Government of the Republic of Mozambique, this diplomatic 
note, together with the Ministry\'s reply, shall constitute an 
agreement between the two governments which shall enter into 
force as of the data of the Ministry\'s reply. 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
the opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and Cooperation of the Republic of Mozambique the assurances 
of its highest consideration. 
Maputo, June 23, 2004 
End Text. 
 
3. Begin Text of GRM note: 
No. 369 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the 
Republic of Mozambique presents its compliments to the 
Embassy of the United States of America and refers to the 
Embassy\'s note number 297, of June 23, 2004, which reads as 
follows: 
> 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the 
Republic of Mozambique has the honor to confirm that the 
proposal set forth in the Embassy\'s note is acceptable to the 
Government of the Republic of Mozambique, and, this note in 
reply, together with the above Embassy\'s note, constitute an 
Agreement between the two Governments which shall enter into 
force on this date. 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the 
Republic of Mozambique avails itself of the opportunity to 
renew to the Embassy of the United States of America the 
assurances of its highest consideration. 
Maputo, August 23, 2004 
End Text. 
 
4. Certified copies of diplomatic notes will be pouched to 
the Department, as per reftel reporting instructions. 
DUDLEY 
"
"20130","8/27/2004 9:11","04MAPUTO1154","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001154 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S, DRL, AND INL/AAE-AHENRY-PLOTTS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, MZ, RENAMO, FRELIMO, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: CLASHES BETWEEN FRELIMO AND RENAMO HEAT UP IN 
SOFALA PROVINCE 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified. Please protect accordingly. 
 
Summary 
------- 
1. (U) Reports of friction between the ruling FRELIMO party 
and the main opposition party, RENAMO, have increased over 
the past weeks, ahead of Mozambique\'s December 1- 2 general 
elections. On August 12, violence broke out between RENAMO 
armed guards and police in the town of Inhaminga in the 
central province of Sofala. One police officer was killed. 
Although the current situation in Inhaminga is described as 
calm, scuffles between the two groups continue in the hotly 
contested province, according to local press reports. End 
Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
2. (SBU) The 1992 Rome Peace Agreement (RPA) called for the 
demobilization RENAMO troops. It also contained a clause 
allowing an armed RENAMO security unit \"responsible for the 
personal security of its highest ranking leaders...for the 
period between the ceasefire and the elections.\" Despite 
this proviso, the party has retained a force of some 150 men 
in strongholds in the Sofala province, on the grounds that 
the unit protects RENAMO leader Afonso Dhlakama\'s home in the 
region. Under the RPA, this group was to be integrated into 
the Mozambican state police force following the 1994 
elections. However, in 1998, Dhlakama declared that he did 
not want his bodyguards integrated into the police, allegedly 
denying the RPA contained such a clause. While it appears 
true that Dhlakama prefers to maintain his guard unit 
separate from the police force, it is equally true that there 
has been little or no visible effort on the part of the 
Government (GRM) to resolve the issue. End Background. 
 
FRELIMO and RENAMO Clash as General Elections Approach 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
3. (U) Reports of skirmishes between members of the ruling 
FRELIMO party and the main opposition, RENAMO, have increased 
over the past weeks, causing some skeptics to question the 
stability of the peace Mozambique has enjoyed over the past 
12 years. On August 12, reports surfaced in the local press 
of gunfire between armed RENAMO \"presidential guards\" and the 
police\'s Rapid Intervention Force (RIF) in the town of 
Inhaminga in the central province of Sofala, causing worried 
citizens to flee into the bush for safety. According to most 
reports, the clash broke out after RENAMO guards entered the 
police station in Inhaminga, demanding the release of two 
RENAMO men detained on accusations of assault on a local 
FRELIMO official. The police did not open fire and allowed 
the detainees to be removed. RIF forces from Beira were 
called in later to assist the local police in recapturing the 
prisoners, at which time gunfire was exchanged. At least one 
local policeman was killed by RENAMO guards during the 
incident. Local authorities say the situation in Inhaminga 
is currently calm with shops, schools, and public 
institutions open again. Post has learned from regional and 
local police officials in Beira that police will be deployed 
throughout the district from now until the post electoral 
period. Despite such assurances, scuffles between the two 
groups continue to be reported in the press. 
 
4. (U) On August 17, local police said a group of 15 RENAMO 
guards armed with AK-47s attacked a vehicle in Cheringoma, 
also in Sofala province. No casualties were reported, but 
the group made off with over USD 4,000 in cash and 
belongings. Unofficial sources in the press claimed the 
armed men in question were the same \"presidential guards\" 
driven out of Inhaminga a week earlier. The RENAMO political 
delegate in Sofala denied the police version of the attack. 
Reports of further shooting in Cheringoma surfaced again on 
August 24, however, the Sofala provincial police command 
neither confirmed or denied the incident in the press. 
 
Comment 
------- 
5. (SBU) Friction between the two groups has lingered in 
RENAMO strongholds in Sofala province since the signing of 
the RPA. Some local and personal conflicts in this highly 
contested region take on political overtones when those 
involved belong to opposing parties. Although little press 
attention is usually given to these incidents, such reports 
receive heightened attention during pre-election periods. 
Some private newspapers have published editorials playing 
down the events, reminding readers that such stories are 
commonplace during elections and are being used to the 
political advantage of the two increasingly uneasy parties. 
There is also little concern that such incidents will erupt 
into full blown fighting. 
 
6. (SBU) Nevertheless, these incidents highlight the distrust 
between the two main parties, and the need for continuing 
efforts to establish a culture of political tolerance. The 
clashes in Sofala imply that the country\'s Electoral Code of 
Conduct is not working. The Code, drafted earlier this year 
by smaller parties in the RENAMO-UE coalition and signed by 
both RENAMO and FRELIMO, commits signatories to observe 
principles of non-violence up to and during the election 
period. Although it is uncertain how these recent skirmishes 
will affect the elections, it seems clear that such acts are 
likely to continue and to remain front page news in the run 
up to the general elections. End Comment. 
DUDLEY 
"
"20240","8/31/2004 13:31","04MAPUTO1174","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE172525","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001174 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S - BNEULING 
USDA/FAS/EXPORT CREDITS FOR MCHAMBLISS 
PRETORIA FOR AGRICULTURAL ATTACHE - SREYNOLDS, RBICKFORD 
USDOC FOR AHILIGAS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, EAID, MZ, Title 1 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: FY05 USDA FOOD ASSISTANCE TITLE I-FUNDED FOOD 
PROGRESS REQUEST 
 
REF: STATE 172525 
 
----------------------- 
REQUEST JUSTIFICATION 
----------------------- 
1. Although it still remains one of the poorest countries in Africa, 
Mozambique has been successful in its efforts to encourage economic 
growth, attract foreign investment, and revitalize several industries 
destroyed by the civil war. Mozambique\'s agricultural sector has vast 
potential, yet many factories sit idle and processing equipment is 
damaged and outdated. Several NGOs have provided business and technic 
support to promising agricultural sectors such as cashews, flowers, 
citrus fruit, and general horticulture. Although agricultural activit 
is increasing, the sector is operating far below its potential. The 
recent National Assessment of Poverty and Well-Being in Mozambique, 
conducted by the Ministry of Planning and Finance, indicated that 60% 
of the population still lives in poverty. With these levels of povert 
improvements in the standards of living of the poor remain a central 
policy objective for the GRM. In this context, Title I is an importan 
economic tool to help Mozambique achieve its goals in reducing absolu 
poverty by providing a government-to-government food donation and in 
turn, using the proceeds from sold commodities to improve access to 
rural financial services and expand income generating options for 
farmers living and working in rural areas. Receipt of Title I food 
commodities may bolster Mozambique\'s potential to develop its 
commercial markets, as the country undertakes measures to improve foo 
security and agricultural development. Despite progress in increasin 
agricultural production, Mozambique still contains areas of food 
insecurity and as the World Food Programme indicates, one third of th 
population is classified as chronically food insecure. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
VALUE AND TYPE OF COMMODITY REQUESTED 
-------------------------------------- 
2. Mission requests funding for PL 480 Title I-Funded Food for Progre 
grants of agricultural commodities, specifically $5 million of crude 
sunflower oil. 
 
3. Title I sales of this commodity to Mozambique would not disrupt 
normal world commercial trade. 
 
-------------------------------- 
DESCRIPTION OF USE OF PROCEEDS 
-------------------------------- 
4. Title I commodities will be sold by the Ministry of Industry and 
Commerce (MIC). Ninety percent of the proceeds will be jointly 
programmed by MIC and USAID to support the Center for the Promotion o 
Rural Financial Services (CPSFR). This program works with existing 
financial institutions (commercial banks, leasing companies, 
microfinance institutions) to cover some of the costs associated with 
obtaining greater outreach in rural areas fostering access, 
competition, better services, and collection of domestic savings in t 
financial sector. Mozambican banks have little incentive to expand 
outreach in rural areas given the high costs of rural transactions an 
the possibility of making money on speculative transactions. With a 
goal towards building capacity in the rural finance sector, the CPSFR 
is designing and implementing pilot projects that expand the access o 
financial products in rural areas. Local stakeholders include the 
banks, leasing companies, micro finance institutions and NGOs, the 
Central Bank (Banco de Mocambique), the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MIC), and t 
Ministry of Planning and Finance. The CPSFR has been successful in 
establishing guarantee funds to small-scale cashew processing plants 
and two local leasing companies (BIM Leasing and BCI Leasing). The 
Center is currently negotiating the extension of lines of credit for 
soya production. Additionally, it intends to provide credit funds to 
local commercial bank, Novo Banco, to expand its provision of financi 
services outside of Maputo(also under negotiation). The joint 
programming of money under this program contributes to commercial 
market development in Mozambique by promoting investments in high- 
growth industries such as horticulture, cashew, soya, and garments. T 
CPSFR is funded by the Act Reflow Account and Title III proceeds. 
Additional funding from Title I proceeds will strengthen the program\' 
impact. The GRM, specifically the Minister of Industry and Commerce, 
Carlos Morgado, is highly supportive of the CPSFR program and is 
dedicated to joint-programming of Title I proceeds. 
 
5. The remaining ten percent of the proceeds will be used to support 
USDA\'s collaborative research program. This program will facilitate 
research between US and Mozambican scientists on specific issues. 
Initial discussions with USDA (FAS Pretoria), identified areas for 
possible cooperation in improving quality control on Mozambican seafo 
exports and identifying ways to improve food security. 
 
6. The GRM has demonstrated great interest in an FY05 Title I-Funded 
Food for Progress program, especially given that Mozambique did not 
receive Title I commodities in FY03 or FY04. Mission urges approval o 
this request, which we believe will program resources in a concerted 
and coordinated manner with other USG initiatives in support of 
expanding free enterprise in the agricultural sector. 
 
7. This request has been coordinated with FAS Pretoria. 
LA LIME 
"
"20294","9/2/2004 8:21","04MAPUTO1183","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO1001|04MAPUTO1154","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001183 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE AF FOR A/S NEWMAN AND AF/S BNEULING 
PASS NSC FOR CCOURVILLE 
PASS MCC FOR SGAULL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PREL, PGOV, ETRD, MZ, Elections 04, RENAMO, Scenesetters 
SUBJECT: SCENE-SETTER FOR VISIT OF AFONSO DHLAKAMA TO 
WASHINGTON 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO 1154 
B. MAPUTO 1001 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Opposition party RENAMO\'s presidential 
candidate Afonso Dhlakama will visit Washington following his 
attendance at the Republican National Convention. RENAMO 
party officials consider Dhlakama\'s visit to Washington key 
for both the party\'s and the candidate\'s credibility. As in 
past meetings with Embassy officials, Dhlakama will likely be 
interested in a range of economic and political topics. Key 
bilateral issues that deserve particular attention include 
the December general elections, trade and investment, 
HIV/AIDS, and GRM participation in regional issues. The visit 
will provide an opportunity to gain a better understanding of 
Dhlakama\'s specific policy objectives and campaign 
strategies, something that has proved difficult in the past. 
End summary. 
 
--------- 
THE VISIT 
--------- 
2. (U) Dhlakama\'s trip is being organized and funded by the 
Konrad Adenauer Foundation. His visit follows trips to 
Washington by ruling party FRELIMO presidential candidate 
Armando Guebuza and expected third-party PDD presidential 
candidate Raul Domingos (Ref B). In addition to meetings with 
AF A/S Newman, NSC Senior Director Courville, and MCC CEO 
Applegarth, Dhlakama will also speak at a symposium hosted by 
IRI, discuss Mozambique\'s investment climate with US 
businesses, and meet with World Bank and International 
Monetary Fund officials. 
 
---------------------- 
THE CONTEXT OF THE VISIT 
------------------------- 
3. (SBU) On December 1 and 2, Mozambique will hold its third 
multi-party presidential elections since independence in 
1975. The current president, Joaquim Chissano, will step down 
after having served since 1986, winning elections in 1994 and 
1999. Chissano and the leadership of FRELIMO dominate 
policy-making and implementation. US-Mozambican bilateral 
relations have been excellent under Chissano. Mozambique is 
the only country in the world to be both a focus country 
under the President\'s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) 
and an eligible country for the Millennium Challenge Account 
(MCA). 
 
4. (SBU) During November 2003 municipal elections, FRELIMO 
won all but 4 of the country\'s 33 mayorships in what were 
considered generally free and fair elections. Though formal 
campaigning for the December elections does not officially 
begin until October 17, high-level FRELIMO party officials 
have already hit the campaign trail, focusing particularly on 
northern and central provinces which are likely to be closely 
contested. RENAMO officials have been less visible in 
campaigning, though Dhlakama has been outspoken regarding 
what he considered a highly flawed voter registration 
process. Dhlakama has stated that the voter registration 
process, which recently ended, deliberately under-registered 
or bypassed voters in traditionally RENAMO supported areas. 
RENAMO has asked, without success, that the voter 
registration process be repeated. 
 
5. (SBU) Another concern for RENAMO has been the National 
Electoral Commission\'s (CNE) decision to allow Mozambicans 
living abroad, many of whom are considered to be FRELIMO 
supporters, to register to vote. However, no decision has 
been taken as to whether Mozambicans living abroad who have 
registered will in fact be eligible to vote. Recent conflicts 
between armed RENAMO supporters and the police in the central 
province of Sofala (Ref A) have highlighted political 
tensions in the pre-election period. Dhlakama has met with 
European officials regarding the upcoming presidential 
elections and has encouraged the participation of 
international observers. He visited China in late August. 
 
---------------------- 
BIOGRAPHIC INFORMATION 
---------------------- 
6. (SBU) Dhlakama came to prominence in 1976, at the start of 
the brutal 16-year guerrilla war against FRELIMO. He has been 
President of RENAMO since 1980. Since the signing of the Rome 
Peace Agreement in 1992, Dhlakama has played a crucial role 
in transforming RENAMO into a viable political party and 
keeping the disparate factions of his party from lapsing back 
into violence. Despite his party disputing the outcome of the 
1999 presidential elections, Dhlakama grudgingly accepted the 
results, and RENAMO did not revert to violence to press its 
case that the FRELIMO victory was fraudulent. He has since 
reaffirmed his party\'s acceptance of reconciliation on 
numerous occasions, such as annual ceremonies involving 
President Chissano and other FRELIMO officials. In past 
meetings with Embassy officials, Dhlakama has expressed 
satisfaction with US engagement in Mozambique. Regarding 
priorities for the country, he has stressed the need for 
greater progress on judicial reform and corruption, as well 
the importance of developing national economic production, 
particularly in small and medium sized businesses, as a means 
of reducing the country\'s reliance on South African imports. 
If RENAMO wins the elections, a key challenge will be to find 
technically competent party members to fill key government 
positions; Dhlakama claims that many competent figures 
support RENAMO, but will not reveal their loyalties before 
the election. 
 
---------- 
KEY ISSUES 
---------- 
7. (SBU) A) Elections: The USG is supporting the electoral 
process through financial assistance to the Carter Center and 
domestic observer groups. As we did during the municipal 
elections, post will send observers to key municipalities 
throughout the country. Given recent tensions in Sofala 
province (Ref A) and complaints by RENAMO over the voter 
registration process, it will be important for USG officials 
to gain assurances from Dhlakama of his commitment to a fair 
and non-violent electoral process. 
B) Trade & Investment: Mozambique has yet to take full 
advantage of AGOA, and US trade and investment in Mozambique 
remains small. Currently, only one apparel company in 
Mozambique is exporting under AGOA, with a second company 
expected to begin operations shortly. Mozambique has an 
opportunity to address a number of the constraints to 
increased trade and investment. It would be interesting to 
hear Dhlakama\'s vision for promoting increased trade and 
investment as a mechanism for reducing poverty. 
C) HIV/AIDS: Dhlakama has not been particularly vocal on 
HIV/AIDS or donor support to combat the epidemic. USG 
officials may wish to encourage his active engagement on the 
issue. Should Dhlakama raise allegations that the USG is 
pursuing a \"unilateralist\" approach to combating HIV/AIDS, 
USG interlocutors can stress that the USG views Mozambique as 
a full partner in PEPFAR and is making every effort to ensure 
that our programs complement and support Mozambique\'s. 
D) Regional Issues: During his recently-ended Presidency of 
the African Union (AU), President Chissano was actively 
engaged on broader African issues and sought to use his AU 
Presidency both to build stronger African institutions and to 
find African-led solutions to Africa\'s problems. Mozambique\'s 
participation in the AU\'s peace-keeping operations in Burundi 
is one such example. ACOTA has visited Mozambique twice in 
the past few months and is planning a Strategy and Planning 
Conference for mid-September. We look forward to supporting 
the GRM increase its capacity to contribute to peace-keeping 
operations and would expect to continue our engagement 
regardless of the December election outcome. Dhlakama has in 
the past criticized the reluctance of some key African 
leaders, such as Mbeki, to take clear positions on regional 
issues such as the situation in Zimbabwe. We encourage USG 
officials to reaffirm the importance of Mozambique\'s 
continued attention to and participation in regional affairs. 
LA LIME 
"
"20369","9/6/2004 9:56","04MAPUTO1196","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04MAPUTO1154","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001196 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/FO AND AF/S 
NSC FOR COURVILLE 
PASS USTR FOR P.COLEMAN 
PASS MCC FOR T.BRIGGS AND S.GAULL 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MZ, Elections 04, Guebuza, FRELIMO 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE GUEBUZA ON BILATERAL 
RELATIONS, CAMPAIGN, PLANS FOR GOVERNING 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1154 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR HELEN LA LIME, REASON 1.5(D) 
 
1.(C) Summary: Ruling party presidential candidate Guebuza 
told Ambassador La Lime he hoped to capitalize on the 
surprisingly widespread sympathy for Mozambique he found in 
his July trip to the U.S. He described the recent violent 
RENAMO-FRELIMO skirmishes in Sofala province (reftel) as 
troubling but limited confrontations. He appeared confident 
that he would win the December 1-2 elections. Guebuza cited 
as priorities for his government decentralization, training, 
fighting AIDS, and most of all getting results. He also 
acknowledged deficiencies in the police and courts. End 
Summary. 
 
2.(U) Ambassador La Lime and DCM met on September 6 with 
ruling party presidential candidate Armando Guebuza. Since 
returning from a July visit to the United States to attend 
the Democratic convention and meet with Administration 
officials, Guebuza has been making high-profile appearances 
throughout the country, visiting all provinces except Maputo. 
Although formal campaigning may not begin until mid-October, 
Guebuza has been much more visible to date than his only 
significant opponent, RENAMO leader and two-time unsuccessful 
candidate Afonso Dhlakama, who recently visited China and is 
currently in the United States. 
 
Bilateral Relations 
------------------- 
3.(C) Ambassador La Lime reviewed key bilateral themes and 
our interest in strengthening the relationship. She noted 
the visit the previous week of a Millennium Challenge 
Corporation team to consult with Mozambicans preparing the 
country,s proposal for MCC assistance. She explained that 
the House,s cut in the Administration,s FY05 budget 
proposal meant that Mozambique would need to set priorities 
among the several projects it had initially identified. On 
HIV/AIDS issues, she explained that, despite some recent 
press reports, the USG cooperates regularly with GRM health 
officials and seeks their advice in shaping our comprehensive 
program. She also noted our desire to strengthen our trade 
and investment relationship and said that a first step would 
be Mozambican enactment of the 1999 bilateral investment 
agreement, once we confirm whether executive decree is 
acceptable or whether legislative approval is necessary. 
 
4.(C) Guebuza said that during his July trip to the U.S. he 
had been pleasantly taken aback by the amount of sympathy he 
found for Mozambique. He noted that in earlier times he had 
found widely differing views within the U.S., but that now 
the support seemed widespread, and he was very interested in 
capitalizing on it. On development issues, he acknowledged 
the Mozambican MCC team,s focus on the private sector and 
said the country needed to increase Mozambicans, management 
capacity. 
 
Presidential Campaign 
--------------------- 
5.(C) Guebuza said he would formally present his candidacy 
for the December 1-2 elections later that day. He described 
the recent violent RENAMO-FRELIMO skirmishes in Sofala 
province (reftel) as troubling but limited confrontations 
that were not the crisis that the press was portraying. The 
Ambassador noted our concern over the Inhaminga violence. 
Guebuza acknowledged the need to incorporate RENAMO candidate 
Dhlakama,s armed bodyguards into the police; he said this 
had been a problem for ten years that needed to be resolved, 
but he noted that both sides were now making statements of 
intent to resolve it. He said that the creation of jobs 
would prevent people from thinking of war, and he emphasized 
the positive role that could be played by the Sena railway 
line that the World Bank had just agreed to fund. 
 
6.(C) In response to a question about varying analyses of 
RENAMO,s strength, Guebuza disagreed with the idea that 
RENAMO,s support was stronger than FRELIMO,s in the rural 
areas that make up most of the country and that were not 
included in last year,s municipal elections. He noted that 
most of the municipalities that FRELIMO had won last year 
were in fact more rural than urban, and he appeared confident 
that FRELIMO had majority support in the country as a whole. 
He acknowledged the importance of the electoral process and 
said FRELIMO was ready to accept a fair result. He expected 
a peaceful election without great difficulties and welcomed 
the likely visit of former President Carter to oversee the 
Carter Center,s monitoring effort. Though he noted that it 
was good to see ex-presidents doing such things, he did not 
raise the topic of what, if any, role President Chissano 
might play in Mozambique after leaving the office he has held 
since 1986. 
 
Looking to a Guebuza Government 
------------------------------- 
7.(C) Guebuza said that his government would value and 
benefit from the experience FRELIMO had gained since 1974. 
He cited decentralization as a focus and said he wanted to 
increase the government,s capacity to make a difference in 
rural areas. He also emphasized the need for more training, 
a focus of the GRM,s dialogue with the World Bank. He cited 
the lack of technical schools in rural areas as a key 
deficiency he had identified in his travels over the last 
month. Guebuza noted as well the importance of fighting 
AIDS. In response to the Ambassador,s comment that the 
justice system was inhibiting investment and growth, he 
acknowledged problems with both the police and the courts, 
though he described them as being in rural areas. He said 
Mozambicans needed to know that their actions would bring 
clear responses from all areas of the justice system. 
Guebuza emphasized his focus on monitoring and results in all 
government efforts. 
 
8.(C) Comment: It appeared that Guebuza was being careful to 
avoid any perception that he would act differently from the 
popular Chissano, with whom he is not close. He made a point 
the Prime Minister also made to the MCC team when they 
visited last week, which is that the reform priorities have 
been set and forward movement on them will continue. While 
Guebuza,s priorities do not sound all that different from 
Chissano,s, he is widely viewed as one who would be tougher 
on accountability and on delivery of results, should he be 
elected as Mozambique,s next President. End comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"20494","9/10/2004 8:54","04MAPUTO1211","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO1091","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 001211 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S - BNEULING, OES - JSTORY, AND EB/TRA 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
FCS - RDONOVAN, JVANRENSBURG 
USDOC FOR AHILLIGAS 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
PASS MCC FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest, Electricity 
SUBJECT: AUGUST ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1091 
 
-------- 
CONTENTS 
-------- 
Foreign Investment 
- Zambezi Bridge Project 
- AGOA-related Textile Investment 
- Heavy Sands Processing Factory 
Trade 
- Annual FACIM Trade Fair 
Banking and Finance 
- GRM Sells BIM shares 
Civil Aviation 
- New Airline in Mozambique - Air Corridor 
Ports, Roads, and Railways 
- Nacala Corridor 
- Barging on the Zambezi River 
- Investment in Moatize Coal Mines 
Energy 
- Cahora Bassa Dam 
Fisheries 
- Shrimp Fishing in the Sofala Bank 
- OES/NMFS TED Visit 
Agriculture 
- European Union Involvement 
 
1. (U) The Mozambique monthly economic cable is jointly 
produced by the Embassy and USAID. 
 
------------------ 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
------------------ 
2. (U) The Ministry of Public Works announced the 
creation of a Zambezi Bridge Project Office, located in 
the National Road Administration (ANE), which will 
control the building of the Caia Bridge over the river 
linking Sofala and Zambezia provinces. The bridge is a 
major investment project along the country\'s north- 
south highway. Currently, overland traffic between the 
north and south depends on an unreliable ferry service 
to cross the Zambezi River. With the USD 80 million 
funding for the bridge secured (Swedish, Japanese, and 
Italian funding, in the form of grants, with the World 
Bank to make up any remaining difference), the GRM is 
moving forward with groundwork for construction. The 
Zambezi Bridge Project Office will be responsible for 
building the bridge, managing support services, and 
undertaking projects related to the bridge that will 
have an impact on the local communities. 
 
3. (U) Mauritian investors recently purchased the 
abandoned premises and machinery of the state-run 
textile company, Textil do Pungue, located in the 
central province of Sofala. The factory has been 
paralyzed for 29 years, and the existing machinery is 
obsolete. The group renamed the company \"Palmar 
Mocambique\", announcing that it will invest USD 3 
million in an initial phase to rehabilitate the 
premises and equip the factory with new machinery. News 
sources report that Palmar Mocambique plans to employ 
600 workers. The company intends to export garments 
(primarily jeans) to the United States under AGOA and 
sell garments on the domestic market. 
 
4. (U) Construction will begin on Mozambique\'s first 
heavy sands processing factory in September. The Moma 
Heavy Sands project, valued at USD 360 million, is 
located in the Nampula Province and managed by Kenmare 
Resources of Ireland (reftel). 
 
----- 
TRADE 
----- 
5. (U) The annual trade fair in Maputo, FACIM, (Agro- 
Commercial and Industrial Fair) began on August 30 and 
continues through September 5. FACIM celebrates its 
40th year of activities without interruption since 
opening in 1965. The event was kicked off by the Prime 
Minister, Luisa Diogo. Companies from Portugal, 
Germany, Spain, India, Italy, South Africa, Brazil, and 
Macau are represented at the fair at specific country 
pavilions. Approximately 127 national companies are 
also participating. As was the case last year, the fair 
will be marked by the absence of participation from 
many SADC countries (COMMENT: The reason for this 
absence is unknown, but it could be due to the high 
cost of participation at USD 70 per square meter, which 
makes an indoor pavilion quite expensive. END COMMENT). 
In 2005, the FACIM fairgrounds will be demolished and 
rebuilt with a USD 6 million investment. The current 
compartmentalized and poorly maintained grounds will be 
transformed into a single covered pavilion. Due to 
construction, FACIM will not take place in 2005. 
 
-------------------- 
BANKING AND FINANCE 
-------------------- 
6. (U) According to press reports, the GRM will sell 
off a third of its 23 percent stake in the country\'s 
largest bank, the International Bank of Mozambique 
(BIM). These shares will be sold to bank managers and 
workers. The state\'s involvement with commercial banks 
dates back to 1992, when the Central Bank was stripped 
of its commercial functions and state-owned and 
operated commercial banks were created. When 
commercial banks were privatized in 1996, mismanagement 
led to a massive burden of bad loans on and near 
collapse of BIM (BCM at that time). The GRM paid for a 
part of BCM\'s recapitalization by issuing high interest 
bearing treasury bonds. In 2001, BCM was bought out by 
BIM, and the state retained 23% ownership. The planned 
sale of a third of the 23% honors the GRM\'s promise to 
transfer shares to the bank employees. The sale 
continues the GRM\'s gradual withdrawal from the 
commercial banking sector. 
 
--------------- 
CIVIL AVIATION 
--------------- 
7. (SBU) A new airline, Air Corridor, began operations 
in Mozambique with the airline\'s first flight from 
Nampula to Maputo on August 7th. In a big step, the 
operation of a new airline in Mozambique breaks the 
monopoly of LAM, the country\'s national airline. Air 
Corridor, belonging to the Gulamo Group, rents one 
Boeing 737-200 and employs six Ukrainian pilots. The 
airline, based in Nampula, currently flies only 
domestic routes, but hopes to branch into routes from 
Maputo to Johannesburg, Dubai, Dar es Salaam, and 
Nairobi. Air Corridor representatives, including the 
Chairman, Momade Aquil Rajahussen, told post that the 
company would like to expand its fleet by one or two 
more planes within the next six months. Rajahussen 
stated that there were few problems starting the 
business (COMMENT: If accurate, this is very unusual, 
given the difficult business of breaking politically 
sensitive monopolies and operating in the challenging 
Mozambican business climate. END COMMENT). Grupo Gulamo 
is spending USD 2 million in the initial phase of the 
airline\'s operation and intends to spend up to USD 20 
million over the next five years. The airline is 
financed purely by private equity from members of the 
Gulamo Group. Several press reports highlighted recent 
incidents involving Air Corridor, including a near miss 
with an LAM plane at Maputo International airport and 
maintenance failures in the plane\'s cockpit (cockpit 
window). Representatives are accusing the press of 
launching false allegations against the airline, yet 
both incidents did occur and have caused concern among 
the local community. (septel). 
 
--------------------------- 
PORTS, ROADS, AND RAILWAYS 
--------------------------- 
8. (SBU) In a major success for investment, trade, and 
infrastructure, the Nacala Corridor Consortium (SDCN) 
and the Government of Malawi (GOM) signed a memorandum 
of understanding on the ownership of Malawian shares in 
the privatization of the Nacala Corridor (port of 
Nacala and associated railway line). Under the 
agreement, the GOM will obtain 16.75% of the shares in 
the concession. Negotiations to privatize the northern 
port and rail line have been underway for five years. 
OPIC will finance a USD 32 million loan for 
rehabilitation of the port (approximately USD 20 
million) and the 1800 km railway line that runs into 
Malawi (approximately USD 10 million). The major US 
shareholders in the venture are Edlow Resources Limited 
(ERL) and the Railroad Development Corporation (RDC). 
 
9. SBU (COMMENT: Privatization of the Nacala port and 
railway line had been stalled on the Malawian side due 
to the unwillingness of the GOM to sign the OPIC direct 
agreement for want of more shares in the venture from 
SDCN. This issue has now been resolved. Privatization 
has been stalled on the Mozambican side due to 
unresolved negotiations between SDCN and the port and 
railway parastatal, CFM, on a number of outstanding 
contract management issues. It is unknown whether these 
issues have been resolved, but an inauguration ceremony 
is set for October, when SDCN will assume authority and 
management of the port and railway line. This is a 
positive step forward for a project that will involve 
US businesses and raise the commercial capacity of 
northern Mozambique and parts of Malawi. END COMMENT). 
 
10. (SBU) American Commercial Lines, International 
(ACLI), the American barging firm interested in 
exploring ways to create a barge system on the Zambeze 
River, will visit Mozambique in the next couple of 
months to move forward with a Zambeze River Survey. The 
permission to allow this survey was stalled for a year 
by the Ministry of Transportation due to the 
politically sensitive issue of a barge system possibly 
precluding development of the Sena railway line, a 
major development initiative supported by the World 
Bank. If barging is feasible and economically viable, 
ACLI\'s goal is to transport coal from the Moatize mines 
(located in Tete) to the coast, where it could be off- 
loaded and exported. For this to happen, potential 
transportation players (whether rail or barge) must be 
in communication with the concessionaire of the Moatize 
coalmines in order to strike a transportation deal. 
 
11. (U) The GRM indicated that out of ten interested 
parties, four firms have been short-listed to compete 
for the Moatize coal concession: Companhia de Vale do 
Rio Doce (CVRD) of Brazil, Anglo-American of South 
Africa, BHP-Billiton of Australia, and Rio Tinto of the 
UK. The estimated coal reserves in the Moatize basin 
are between two and three billion tons. With this 
amount, coal could become a major export for 
Mozambique. In advance of a November proposal 
submission deadline, a CVRD delegation, which included 
the CVRD Chairman and the Chairman of the Brazilian 
National Economic and Social Development Bank, visited 
Mozambique and met with President Chissano to express 
CVRD\'s interest in competing for the concession. The 
other three firms viewed the high-level treatment that 
CVRD received as unfair and preferential, yet the GRM 
claims that each of the four firms has an equal chance 
of winning the concession bid. 
 
------- 
ENERGY 
------- 
12. (U) The Governments of Mozambique and Portugal will 
reopen negotiations on ownership of Hidroelectrica 
Cahora Bassa (HCB), the firm operating the Cahora Bassa 
Dam. Negotiations were temporarily put on hold due to 
the resignation of Portuguese PM Durao Barroso to 
assume the Presidency of the EC (COMMENT: Before the 
departure of Barroso, the second round of negotiations 
had been scheduled for August 2004 in Maputo. END 
COMMENT). Under the current arrangement, 82% of the 
shares in HCB are held by Portugal and 18% by 
Mozambique. Mozambique would like to assume majority 
ownership of HCB, with the government of South Africa - 
the primary market for the electricity - as a potential 
minority shareholder (a 51/49 arrangement, 
respectively). Portugal is interested in selling its 
shares, yet there is unsettled business regarding a 
large debt owed to the Portuguese Treasury by the GRM. 
The debt derives from dam maintenance and post civil- 
war reconstruction. The parties do not agree on the 
exact amount of debt owed, and the Government of 
Portugal is unlikely to sell its shares in HCB without 
a solution to the debt payoff. Press reports indicate 
that the GRM is looking for a financial partner to help 
them pay off this multi-million dollar debt, but as of 
yet no partner has been identified. 
 
---------- 
FISHERIES 
---------- 
13. (SBU) The GRM is exploring new ways to manage and 
control the capture of surface-level shrimp, a USD 120 
million industry for Mozambique in 2003. Historically 
an important export for Mozambique, shrimp export 
revenues accounted for 84% of total commercial fishing 
export revenue (USD 80 million) earned in 2003. Leading 
a workshop on the management of shrimp fishing in the 
Sofala Bank, Vice-Minister of Fisheries, Alfredo 
Massinga, described the need to reinforce the control 
of shrimp capture by providing greater fisheries 
enforcement. Massinga also stressed the importance of 
recognizing the resource as part of a larger ecosystem 
that must be properly managed and protected. (COMMENT: 
With an extremely weak capacity to implement any type 
of maritime enforcement, Mozambique\'s fisheries are 
being over-exploited due to heavy illegal fishing by 
predominately Asian operators. The GRM is exploring 
ways to improve its enforcement capabilities. The 
solution may be in privatizing maritime enforcement or 
receiving help from donor countries in the form of 
patrol boats and/or training. END COMMENT). 
 
14. (U) In mid-August, a team from the DOS (OES Bureau) 
and the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) 
arrived in Mozambique to teach local Ministry of 
Fisheries officials, port inspectors, and fishermen how 
to install, use, and monitor turtle excluder devices 
(TEDs) on shrimping nets. At the request of the GRM, 
the team spent several days at the ports of Maputo and 
Beira teaching techniques of TED installation and 
implementation. The team\'s intention was to prepare 
fishermen, officials, and inspectors for implementation 
of the TEDs law that the GRM will enforce beginning 
January 1, 2005. According to the law, all industrial 
and semi-industrial shrimping fleets must install and 
trawl with TEDs after this date, a move to protect sea 
turtles and allow fishermen to export their catch to 
the United States. If Mozambican fishermen are properly 
observing this new regulation when US officials return 
for a certification visit (possibly in May 2005 or when 
the GRM feels that it is ready for an inspection), 
Mozambique may be TED-certified, allowing fishermen to 
export its world-class prawns to the United States. 
 
------------ 
AGRICULTURE 
------------ 
15. (U) Over a period of two years, the European Union 
(EU) will provide a 48 million euro (approximately USD 
54 million) grant to strengthen various agricultural 
projects and improve food security in Mozambique, 
according to the Pinto Teixeira, the local EC head of 
delegation. Teixeira and the Minister of Agriculture, 
Helder Muteia, signed an agreement for 9.5 million 
euros, two million of which will be spent on 
strengthening the National Cashew Institute (INCAJU), 
the Mozambique Cotton Institute (IAM), and the Office 
of Commercial Agriculture Promotion. The remaining 7.5 
million euros will be spent on food security projects 
in Niassa, Nampula, Zambezia, and Inhambane.? 
LA LIME 
"
"20500","9/10/2004 10:50","04MAPUTO1213","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE168472","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001213 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, PHUM, PREL, MZ, AGOA 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE REMAINS ELIGIBLE FOR AGOA BENEFITS 
 
REF: A. STATE 168472 
 
B. MAPUTO 269 
C. 03 MAPUTO 1452 
 
Summary 
-------- 
1. Mozambique meets the requirements for benefits under the 
African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). The Government of 
the Republic of Mozambique (GRM) continues to make progress 
in establishing a market-based economy, eliminating barriers 
to US trade and investment, reducing poverty, promoting 
democratic consolidation, and protecting workers\' rights. 
This positive trend should continue, especially as Mozambique 
begins to benefit economically from higher levels of 
international trade and investment. End Summary. 
 
Market-Based Economy 
-------------------- 
2. Mozambique continues to be one of the most dynamic and 
fastest-growing economies in sub-Saharan Africa, albeit from 
a very low base. GDP growth was 7 percent in 2003 and is 
expected to continue between 7-10 percent over the next 
several years. The GRM has been encouraging foreign direct 
investment (FDI). During 2003, the GRM\'s Investment 
Promotion Center, CPI, approved 101 projects involving 
foreign investment, valued at approximately $112 million. 
Several new, large projects which are not included in the 
2003 figures are expected to begin in 2005/2006. Mozambique 
has privatized over 1200 small companies and 37 large 
enterprises since the privatization program began 10 years 
ago. Foreign investors have participated in Mozambique\'s 
privatization program without impediment. 
 
3. Only 11 large state-owned or operated companies remain, 
including the national airline, telephone, electricity, 
insurance, oil and gas exploration, port and rail, airports, 
water supply, and fuel distribution companies. Concession 
agreements have been signed with private investors for 
various aspects of the management and rehabilitation of the 
ports of Beira, Maputo and Quelimane. In August, 
negotiations were finalized on the Nacala Corridor 
Development Project for the rehabilitation and modernization 
of the railroad and port system on a key transport route 
between Malawi, Zambia and Mozambique. The project includes 
substantial US investment and is expected to include 
financing from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation 
(OPIC). Mozambique opened its cellular telephone industry to 
competition in late 2003 with the granting of a licensing 
agreement to Vodacom. In 2004, Mozambique retained its 
international credit rating of B/B by Fitch Ratings, 
reflecting Mozambique\'s positive track record on economic 
reforms, political stability, strong economic growth, 
openness to FDI, and expanding exports. 
 
Elimination of Barriers to US Trade/Investment 
--------------------------------------------- - 
4. Although quite small, US-Mozambican trade is expanding, 
with the vast majority of Mozambique\'s exports to the US 
entering under either AGOA or GSP. South Africa and Portugal 
are the leading foreign investors. Only 6 of the largest 100 
companies in Mozambique are US-owned or related to the U.S.: 
Coca-Cola, Mobil, Seaboard, Avis, Colgate-Palmolive and KPMG. 
Mozambique remains cooperative on intellectual property 
rights protection. Mozambique does not generally employ 
non-tariff barriers to trade and is an active member in SADC, 
as well as the British Commonwealth. 
 
Poverty Reduction 
----------------- 
5. Illiteracy and infant mortality rates in Mozambique are 
among the highest in Africa. Life expectancy is 46 years 
and, as a result of AIDS, is expected to decline into the 30s 
by 2010. The country also lacks infrastructure, power, and 
clean water for most of its citizens. The Government has 
placed its Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty (PARPA) 
at the head of its policy agenda. PARPA emphasizes six areas 
as key reducers of absolute poverty: education; health; basic 
infrastructure; agriculture and rural development; good 
governance; and macroeconomic and financial management. A 
recent household survey indicates that the incidence of 
extreme poverty has declined from 70 percent to 55 percent 
over the past 5 years. The donor community funds 
approximately 60 percent of the national budget, though the 
HIPC and Enhanced HIPC (Heavily Indebted Poor Countries) debt 
relief programs have permitted increased budgetary support to 
alleviate poverty. 
 
Democratic Consolidation/Rule of Law/Corruption 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
6. Mozambique has made significant progress in the 
consolidation of democracy since the signing of the 1992 Rome 
Peace Accord that ended sixteen years of civil war. On 
December 1 and 2, Mozambique will hold its third multi-party 
presidential elections since independence in 1975. The 
current constitutionally-elected president, Joaquim Chissano, 
will step down after having served since 1986, winning 
elections in 1994 and 1999. Chissano and the leadership of 
FRELIMO dominate policy-making and implementation. On 
November 19, 2003, Mozambique held municipal elections which 
were considered generally free and fair. However, many 
institutions, such as the judiciary and the police, remain 
weak. Corruption remains a problem in both the public and 
private sectors. In recognition of this, the GRM\'s Attorney 
General established an Anti-Corruption Unit, which has 
received funding from USAID and the Department. In addition, 
the National Assembly passed a new Anti-Corruption Law in 
2004, which aims to curb corruption in government offices, 
the police force, hospitals and the schools. The Department 
has also funded Mozambique\'s Police Sciences Academy in an 
effort to improve the performance and professionalism of the 
police force. 
 
Workers Rights 
-------------- 
7. The Constitution provides that all workers are free to 
join or refrain from joining a trade union, and workers enjoy 
these rights in practice. Labor unions, created during the 
socialist years, remain weak and lack resources. Total 
membership among Mozambique\'s thirteen unions is less than 
200,000, concentrated in Maputo and a few other urban areas, 
and much of the labor force is engaged in small-scale 
agriculture. Mozambique\'s labor law, currently under 
revision, is generally considered pro-worker. Labor unions 
are exerting significant pressure on the government to keep 
many of the law\'s provisions. In 2004, the GRM increased the 
country\'s statutory minimum wage by slightly more than the 
2003 inflation rate of 13 percent. 
 
Recommendation 
-------------- 
8. Post once again (ref C) believes strongly that the 
progress made by Mozambique in its economic and political 
policies further solidifies its qualification for AGOA 
benefits. Embassy Maputo is confident that this positive 
trend will continue, especially as Mozambique begins to 
benefit economically from higher levels of international 
trade and investment. 
LA LIME 
"
"20608","9/14/2004 15:57","04MAPUTO1228","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE132748","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001228 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/RSA-ZUEHLKE, SPYKEMAN AND HOUSTON 
STATE FOR AF/S-HTREGER 
IO/UNP FOR NARAJO 
USUN FOR BRUNO 
NSC FOR DICARLO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, OTRA, OVIP, MZ, UNGA 
SUBJECT: 59TH UNGA: REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE HIGH-LEVEL 
ATTENDANCE 
 
REF: STATE 132748 
 
1. Post has received detail regarding GRM\'s high-level 
attendance at the 59th UNGA. Information requested in reftel 
follows: 
A. Head of State will attend. 
Name and Title: His Excellency Joaquim Alberto Chissano, 
President of The Republic of Mozambique 
Arrival and Departure Dates: Not yet available. Expected to 
travel on September 18. 
President Chissano will be present for the General Debate. 
Spouse Travel: No. 
Interpretation Required: No. 
The following people will advance President Chissano to the 
UNGA, arriving in New York on September 14 at 11:52am on 
flight DL 1975: Counsel to the President on Legal Affairs 
Neusa Matos; Counsel to the President on Political Affairs 
Bento Baloi; Counsel to the President on African Union 
Affairs Carlos dos Santos; 3rd Secretary, Protocol Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs & Cooperation Alcinda da Costa Salvado; 
Official Presidential Photographer Fernando Macubulane 
Timane, Principal Superintendent of the Police Alfredo Mussa; 
and Security Officers Carlos Alfredo Matola, Sezecua Fernando 
Tomo, Tomas Chingore, Simao Macuacua, Ambasse Bachir Anli, 
and Gabriel Cumbe. 
The following individuals in President Chissano\'s delegation 
will travel to the UNGA, arriving in New York on September 18 
at 7:10am on flight SA 203: Counsel to the President on NEPAD 
Affairs Firmino Mucavele, Presidential Photographer Ezidorio 
Ribeiro, Television Reporter Simiao Augusto Ponguane, 
Television Cameraman Alfredo Manuel, Radio Mozambique 
Reporter Boaventura Paulo Mandlate, and Journalist Jaime 
Alfredo Cuambe. 
The following individuals in President Chissano\'s delegation 
will travel to the UNGA (dates not yet confirmed): National 
Director of Protocol Alberto Maverengue Augusto, Counsel to 
the President on Economic Affairs Florencio Infante, Personal 
Secretary to the President Elias Zimba, Principal Secretary 
 
SIPDIS 
to the President Arminda Mafuiana, Personal Physician to the 
President Felix Reis, and Deputy Police Commissioner Vasco 
Lino Antonio. 
B. Head of Government is also the Head of State in Mozambique. 
C. Foreign Minister will attend. 
Name and Title: His Excellency Dr. Leonardo Santos Simao, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Travel Dates: Not yet available; Expected to travel on 
September 18. 
Minister Simao will be present for the General Debate. 
Spouse Travel: Yes. 
Spouse Name: Madame Josphine Simao 
Interpretation Required: No. 
D. Other VIPs will attend. No spouses will attend. No VIPs 
require interpretation. 
Names and Titles: The Honorable Ambassador Jose Morais, 
Director of the Department of Studies, Planning and 
Information 
Travel Dates: Not yet available. 
E. MFA officials responsible for IO affairs will atttend. No 
spouses will attend. No interpretation required. 
Names and Titles: 
The Honorable Ambassador Goncalves Sengo, Director of The 
Department for International Organizations, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 
The Honorable Farique Omar Farquira, Head of the Department 
of International Organizations and Conferences, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 
The Honorable Filipe Chidumo, Ambassador Extraordinary and 
Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Mozambique to the United 
Nations 
The Honorable Cristovao Gemos, First Secretary, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 
The Honorable Fernando Manhica, Second Secretary of the 
Embassy of the Republic of Mozambique to the United Nations, 
New York 
Travel Dates: Not yet available. 
LA LIME 
"
"20689","9/16/2004 14:51","04MAPUTO1260","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE1663","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001260 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR ECA/PE/V/G/A KDIOP; INFO AF/PD CDALTON 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL, International Visitors 
SUBJECT: MAPUTO INTERNATIONAL VISITOR PRIORITY LIST FOR FY-05 
 
REF: SECSTATE 1663 
1. PAS Maputo hereby submits a prioritized list of FY-05 Internationa 
Each candidate has full country team approval. The candidates and pr 
a.Suleimane Esep Amuji, RP Democratic Governance and Civic Partici 
b.Daniel Herminio Bento, RP Democratic Governance and Civic Partic 
c.Manuel Jose Dos Santos, RP Democratic Governance and Civic Parti 
d.Joao Benardo Muchapunha, RP Democratic Governance and Civic Part 
e.Alberto Manuel Sarande, RP Democratic Governance and Civic Parti 
f.Florencio Andre Simbine, MRP Combating International Crime 
g.Joaquim Bule, MRP Combating International Crime 
h.Geraldo Saranga, MRP - International Security and Global Cooperati 
obal Cooperati 
i.Joaquim Marcos Manjaze, MRP - International Security and Global Co 
j.Bayano Valy, MRP - Leadership in the Muslim Community 
2.Biographical information and justifications will be sent septel. 
La Lime 
me 
"
"20876","9/23/2004 7:11","04MAPUTO1280","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001280 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
FOR AF/S-HTREGER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, MZ, RENAMO, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: RENAMO ELECTION OFFICE HEAD DISMISSED AS PUBLIC 
UNIVERSITY SPOKESMAN 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified. Please treat accordingly. 
 
Summary 
------- 
1. (SBU) Eduardo Namburete, director of the election office 
of Mozambique\'s main opposition party, RENAMO, was dismissed 
as head of the press office at Maputo\'s Eduardo Mondlane 
University on September 1. He was relieved of his duties 
shortly after assuming the position within RENAMO. Some 
RENAMO supporters have labeled his dismissal political 
harassment. Namburete retains his post as the director of 
the university\'s communication and arts school. End Summary. 
 
Coincidence or Payback? 
----------------------- 
2. (SBU) During a September 8 meeting with acting pol/econ 
section chief and pol/econoff, the new RENAMO election office 
director Eduardo Namburete confirmed his removal as head of 
the press office at Eduardo Mondlane University, the public 
university that is Mozambique\'s largest and most highly 
regarded higher education institution. This came less than a 
month after he was sworn into office as director of the 
opposition party\'s election office. According to Namburete, 
he was advised of his removal by the university\'s Vice 
Chancellor, Brazao Mazula, on the morning of September 1. 
Namburete retains his post as the director of the 
university\'s School of Communication and Arts. 
 
3. (SBU) Some RENAMO supporters have labeled his dismissal 
political harassment. Speaking in the Mozambican parliament, 
the head of the RENAMO parliamentary bench, Ossufo Quintine, 
claimed Namburete was removed only after he refused to leave 
his position as head of the RENAMO election office. 
Namburete did not openly support this claim, stating that 
under relevant articles of the University\'s code, the Vice 
Chancellor has the power to dismiss individuals in nominated 
positions, the head of the press office being one them. 
Despite this, Namburete admitted seeing some of his 
colleagues completely marginalized within the University 
after going public with their support for RENAMO. When asked 
whether he feared the same, Namburete commented he did not 
think he would be isolated. Namburete did disclose, however, 
that since aligning himself with RENAMO, he has lost some 
clients in his private communications consultancy. 
 
4. (SBU) Namburete reported that in the weeks following his 
going public with joining RENAMO, he received telephone calls 
from colleagues congratulating him and vowing their active 
support. Nevertheless, since he was removed from his post at 
the press office, Namburete stated most have remained silent. 
Namburete seemed disappointed, but not surprised by such 
reactions. Namburete cited a case in which a wealthy 
colleague lost his business, home, and car after declaring 
allegiance to RENAMO. Despite the potential of such threats, 
Namburete was clear that he did not intend to return to 
FRELIMO, no matter the consequences. 
 
The Elections: RENAMO Puts on Brave Face 
---------------------------------------- 
5. (SBU) Speaking in his capacity as director of the RENAMO 
election office, Namburete expressed disappointment at the 
dire lack of funding facing the party. He lamented that 
RENAMO could not campaign as actively as FRELIMO due to such 
constraints. He was critical of FRELIMO\'s use of state funds 
and equipment for campaigning purposes, alleging it was equal 
to stealing from the government and the people. Namburete 
admitted that a long and difficult path lay ahead for RENAMO, 
but expressed confidence this would be the year for change 
and that the result of their work would be victory in the 
December elections. RENAMO Secretary General Viana da Silva 
Magalhaes echoed this confidence during a September 21 
meeting with acting pol/econ section chief and visiting AF/S 
deputy director, stating that despite incidences of political 
harassment, citing Namburete as one example, he believed 
RENAMO would ultimately gain the support it needed to win 
this year\'s election. 
 
Comment 
------- 
6. (SBU) Over the past few months, RENAMO has actively 
pursued membership among the intellectual and academic 
community. Such moves have been interpreted as a step by 
RENAMO towards developing a more professional approach to 
this year\'s election, especially in the face of historically 
low support among urban voters and increased scrutiny over 
the party\'s ability to govern. RENAMO was successful in its 
effort to gain Namburete\'s allegiance, but the speed with 
which he was removed from his high profile post may dissuade 
other would be RENAMO academics from going public. End 
Comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"21144","9/30/2004 13:49","04MAPUTO1321","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE194220","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001321 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR EB AND AF/S - HTREGER 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO COAST GUARD PORT SECURITY 
DIRECTORATE:LOSCIUTO 
COMMERCE FOR AHILIGAS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, EWWT, KTIA, PBTS, PHSA, PINS, PREL, PTER, MZ, ASEC 
SUBJECT: STATUS OF MOZAMBIQUE PORT ISPS COMPLIANCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 194220 
 
Action Request in para 3 
 
1. On September 29, econ/poloff delivered reftel letter and 
Port Security Advisory (PSA) to Ministry of Transportation 
and Communication Chief of Staff Antonio Cuna. Mr. Cuna 
responded by saying that the Port of Maputo and the Port of 
Beira were in compliance with the International Maritime 
Organization\'s (IMO\'s) International Ship and Port Facility 
Security (ISPS) Code. The Port of Maputo was in compliance 
with the ISPS code prior to the issuance of the PSA on 
September 9. The Port of Beira was brought into compliance on 
the week of September 20. Mr. Cuna said that the authorities 
were working on bringing Mozambique\'s third and final port, 
the Port of Nacala, into compliance and would do so prior to 
November 9. He added that Mozambican authorities had 
communicated relevant ISPS Code compliance plans to the IMO. 
 
2. Separately, the director of the Port of Maputo called us 
to voice concern over the impact on port activity of the PSA. 
He said the IMO had approved Mozambique\'s plans (post has 
also heard this informally through USG channels) and urged 
that the PSA for Mozambique be lifted as soon as possible, 
and well before the November 9 date when the next PSA is 
scheduled to be issued. 
 
3. Action Request: Post would appreciate confirmation from 
the Coast Guard that the PSA for Mozambique will be lifted 
and guidance on when this will take place. End Action 
Request. 
LA LIME 
"
"21292","10/5/2004 14:31","04MAPUTO1335","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04MAPUTO1196","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001335 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
STATE PASS TO MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION 
MCC FOR BRIGGS, GAULL 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/05/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MZ, Elections 04, DHLAKAMA, RENAMO 
SUBJECT: RENAMO CANDIDATE DHALAKAMA ON U.S. TRIP, CAMPAIGN 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO 1196 
 
B. MAPUTO 1154 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR HELEN LA LIME, REASON 1.5(d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: In a September 29 meeting with Ambassador 
La Lime, RENAMO presidential candidate Afonso Dhlakama 
outlined the themes of democracy and the need for transparent 
elections that he had emphasized in his recent visit to the 
United States. He was pleased with the visit and said he had 
found greater sympathy than on previous visits. Dhlakama 
said that, although RENAMO,s strength was in rural areas, 
his support in cities was increasing. In statements to the 
Ambassador and the press, he has acknowledged the popularity 
of outgoing president Chissano and has contrasted FRELIMO 
candidate Guebuza with Chissano. He downplayed the August 
violence in Sofala province and said he did not expect 
violence to be a problem in the campaign or the election. 
Dhlakama was not as focused in this meeting as he was in the 
U.S., and his party faces several obstacles, including a lack 
of resources and the advantages to FRELIMO of incumbency. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (C) Ambassador La Lime met with opposition RENAMO party 
leader and presidential candidate Afonso Dhlakama on 
September 29 to discuss Dhlakama,s recent trip to the U.S. 
and the December 1-2 national elections. Dhlakama expressed 
pleasure with his visit, especially with the Republican 
convention and his meetings with USG officials and on the 
Hill. He said he had emphasized that if elected, RENAMO 
would respect agreements made by the FRELIMO government. He 
also had called for help in increasing the credibility and 
transparency of Mozambique,s elections and had stressed that 
RENAMO would not seek to take power by force. Dhlakama said 
he had put Mozambique in a regional context for his 
Washington interlocutors, citing the importance for South 
Africa and other countries in the region of a successful 
example of change of ruling party by elections and the need 
to prevent Zimbabwe from becoming the model for the region. 
He said he found greater sympathy from his audiences on this 
trip than on previous ones. (Comment: This tracks with a 
comment FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza made in his Sept. 4 
meeting with the Ambassador (ref a), that he had found 
greater sympathy for Mozambique during his July-August visit 
to the U.S. than on earlier visits. End Comment.) 
 
3. (C) Dhlakama said RENAMO was poor in resources but rich in 
popular support. He said that his support was mostly rural, 
especially among followers of traditional cultures whom 
FRELIMO had alienated. However, he said that stolen (his 
word) internal FRELIMO polling data indicated that his 
support was rising in cities. He claimed that city residents 
generally viewed outgoing President Chissano as a great man 
and liked him somewhat more than they did Dhlakama, whom he 
said they liked much more than they did Guebuza. Dhlakama 
claimed Guebuza was a dictator who lacked support within 
FRELIMO, was anti-white, and was a drug trafficker. 
 
4. (C) Dhlakama said his priorities if elected would be: 
replacing FRELIMO domination of the government with 
non-partisan government; promoting agricultural development; 
making justice independent of party affiliation (he claimed 
that no FRELIMO officials were in jail); creating 
opportunities for the young; and fighting HIV/AIDS. 
 
5. (C) In response to the Ambassador,s question about 
violence in Sofala province involving members of his personal 
guard (ref b), Dhlakama said his men had been provoked. He 
blamed FRELIMO actions for the failure of his personal guard 
to integrate into the police force as called for by the 1992 
Rome peace accord, saying that FRELIMO had not allowed 
successful integration of ex-RENAMO forces into the military 
and that the police remained entirely FRELIMO supporters. He 
said that violence would not be a problem in the election and 
that he, unlike Guebuza, did not want a violent campaign. 
 
6. (C) Comment: In this meeting, Dhlakama did not show the 
same focus that we understand he displayed in his meetings in 
Washington. He rambled at times, and some of his allegations 
against FRELIMO and Guebuza seemed to lack credibility. 
Dhlakama,s statements to the Ambassador and to the press 
suggest that in the campaign he will avoid too-direct 
criticism of the popular Chissano but emphasize that Guebuza 
is not Chissano and position himself as the only alternative 
to continued FRELIMO rule. 
 
7.(C) Comment, continued: In the absence of reliable polls, 
it is difficult to be sure what outcomes are likely in the 
presidential and legislative elections. While RENAMO 
arguments that many people in rural areas are not sympathetic 
to FRELIMO and are less favorably disposed towards Guebuza 
than they are towards Chissano are at least plausible, RENAMO 
has done little campaigning, its candidates appear less 
polished than FRELIMO,s, and it lacks the many advantages of 
incumbency. End Comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"21318","10/6/2004 7:39","04MAPUTO1339","Embassy Maputo","SECRET//NOFORN","04STATE207468","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T MAPUTO 001339 
 
SIPDIS 
NOFORN 
CLASSIFIED BY RSO HOWARD A. HICKS, REASON 1.5 (C) 
E.O. 12958: DECL: EXEMPT XL 
TAGS: ASEC, CASC, MZ 
SUBJECT: 2004 EMERGENCY ACTION COMMITTEE - MAPUTO 
 
REF: STATE 207468 
 
Classified By: RSO HOWARD A. HICKS, REASON 1.5 (C) 
 
1. (S/NF) Summary: On September 30, 2004, the emergency 
Action Committee (EAC) convened. The meeting was held to 
discuss the recent increase of attacks on vehicles traveling 
the EN4 toll road from Maputo, Mozambique to Nelspruit, South 
Africa. Attendees included the Ambassador, DCM (Chair), RSO, 
E/P, PC, PAO, CLO, ADM, CONS and DAO. End Summary. 
 
2. (S/NF) The EAC was convened to discuss the increase in 
armed attacks on vehicles traveling the route between Maputo, 
Mozambique and Nelspruit, South Africa. Because of the high 
number of Mission personnel traveling the route between the 
two cities and the level of violence used during these 
attacks, the Embassy has considered placing travel 
restrictions on Mission personnel planning on traveling to 
South Africa. All members agreed that these attacks were 
cause for concern and believed that Mission personnel should, 
whenever possible, plan to convoy with other travelers. 
Members also reaffirmed post policy prohibiting driving after 
dark outside Maputo. This meeting resulted in an agreement to 
take the following actions: 
a) RSO will provide briefings on defensive driving tactics 
and other information to increase driver security awareness. 
Attendance will be obligatory for all American personnel and 
driving age dependents and optional for locally employed 
staff. 
b) RSO will provide to all American and locally employed 
staff an information sheet containing updated security 
information, requirements and recommendations for drivers to 
neighboring countries, along with emergency phone numbers and 
cellphone instructions. 
c) RSO will post the information sheet on post,s website and 
submit it to post,s newsletter. 
d) CONS will provide the above information in a notice to 
U.S. citizen wardens. 
 
3. (S/NF) The proposed driver security briefing will be 
expanded to encompass the requests made in the reference 
cable that the RSO office instruct Mission personnel and 
dependents on proactive personal security measures, to 
include varying times of departures and arrivals, routes 
taken, and reporting suspicious individuals, to the RSO 
Office. 
LA LIME 
"
"21327","10/6/2004 9:31","04MAPUTO1341","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO1335","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 001341 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
FOR AF/S - HTREGER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, MZ, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE 2004 GENERAL ELECTIONS: END-SEPTEMBER UPDATE 
 
REFS: (A) MAPUTO 1335 
 
(B) MAPUTO 1280 
(C) MAPUTO 1183 
(D) MAPUTO 1154 
(E) MAPUTO 1001 
 
1. Sensitive but unclassified. Please handle accordingly. Not 
for internet distribution. 
-------- 
Contents 
-------- 
2 - Summary 
3 - New Electoral Law 
4 - Election Statistics 
5 - Parliamentary Elections 
6 - Presidential Candidates Deliver Nomination Papers 
7 - First, Unreliable Presidential Poll Says Guebuza Ahead 
8 - Comment 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
2. (SBU) On December 1 and 2, Mozambique will hold multi-party 
presidential and parliamentary elections. The current president, 
Joaquim Chissano, will step down after having served since 1986, 
winning elections in 1994 and 1999. To date, six presidential 
candidates have delivered their nomination papers to the 
Constitutional Commission, thus officially declaring their intent 
to run. Political parties have also been busy compiling their 
candidate lists for the parliamentary elections with some 
surprises in the lists reported so far. Mozambican electoral 
authorities estimate just over 9 million Mozambicans are 
registered to vote. A new electoral law introduced this year has 
introduced some significant changes that most believe will 
increase transparency in the electoral process. Though leading 
presidential candidates Armando Guebuza of FRELIMO and Afonso 
Dhlakama of RENAMO have called for a transparent and peaceful 
process, there are signs of increasing tensions. End Summary. 
 
--------------------- 
The New Electoral Law 
--------------------- 
3. (U) The new electoral law passed on July 17 introduced 
significant changes that respond to some problems experienced in 
previous elections. For example, in an attempt to reduce errors 
made by tired polling station staff, vote tallies on the formal 
result sheets must now be written in both figures and words. 
Also, voting can no longer be extended for a third day. In 
response to the omission of some party symbols from ballot papers 
in last year\'s municipal election, political parties will now be 
invited by the National Electoral Commission (CNE) to proofread 
sample ballot papers before official ones are printed. The new 
law also allows accredited polling staff, security forces, and 
journalists to vote at any polling station, even if they are not 
registered at the specific site. While intermediary counting will 
still be done at provincial level, under the new law results will 
also be published district-by-district. 
 
4. (SBU) Responding to complaints from the opposition and 
observers about FRELIMO\'s use of government vehicles and 
facilities during campaigning, the law introduces a ban on the use 
of any goods or property of central government, local government, 
or state-owned or controlled companies for campaigning purposes. 
Despite this new statute, RENAMO continues to report the use of 
public property for campaigning purposes by FRELIMO (Ref B). In 
an attempt to increase transparency, candidates and political 
agents are now entitled to a duly signed and stamped copy of the 
minutes and tally sheet of the intermediary count at the 
provincial and national counting levels. Such copies can also be 
forwarded to election observers and journalist, if requested. 
RENAMO party officials have praised for this new statute, 
asserting it will stifle FRELIMO\'s ability to \"steal\" the 
elections, as it claims they have in past elections (Ref A). 
 
5. (U) Some changes introduced for the 2003 local elections remain 
in place, including the ban on publishing of opinion polls between 
the start of the campaign and the declaration of results, the 
requirement that at least two of the five polling station staff 
speak the local language, and that polling station staff are to be 
hired in a public competition. 
 
------------------- 
Election Statistics 
------------------- 
6. (U) Voter registration in Mozambique, as regulated by Law 
18/2002, is conducted on an annual basis. Voter registration 
updates serve to register newly eligible voters, record transfers 
for citizens who have moved out of their previous voting district, 
and replace lost or stolen voter cards. More than 1.2 million 
voters across 2494 polling stations were registered in this year\'s 
update process held from June 28 to July 15, nearly double the 
700,000 predicted by Technical Secretariat for Electoral 
Administration (STAE). The following is the official breakdown of 
voter registration updates released by STAE on September 11. 
Table I: 2004 VOTER REGISTRATION FIGURES 
--------------------------------------------- --------------------- 
Province New Transfers Replacements Total 
--------------------------------------------- --------------------- 
Niassa 34,571 9,091 18,798 62,460 
Cabo Delgado 57,028 19,251 25,296 101,575 
Nampula 134,665 33,908 69,058 237,631 
Zambezia 128,863 31,577 71,504 231,944 
Tete 61,832 11,860 14,096 87,788 
Manica 43,280 13,291 17,065 73,636 
Sofala 62,248 21,956 34,165 118,369 
Inhambane 33,063 18,741 12,810 64,614 
Gaza 44,834 23,141 23,020 90,995 
Maputo Province 42,281 18,025 18,413 78,719 
Maputo City 55,260 16,502 26,478 98,240 
--------------------------------------------- --------------------- 
GRAND TOTAL 697,925 217,343 330,703 1,245,971 
 
7. (U) Adding the number of 2004 updated registrations to the 
existing voter base from 1999 and 2003, STAE calculates the total 
Mozambican voter \"universe\" at approximately 9 million. Carter 
Center estimates are slightly more conservative at 8.5 million. 
 
8. (SBU) This year\'s registration process was observed by both the 
national Electoral Observatory and the Carter Center. Though in 
its registration update report, the Carter Center stated it found 
procedures were fair and generally implemented in a uniform 
manner, there were reports of some stations being forced to halt 
registrations, sometimes for several days, when materials ran out. 
In a formal complaint, RENAMO stated that 100 people had been 
turned away by a polling station in Angoche, Nampula province, due 
to a shortage of registration materials. During a September 24 
meeting with Emboffs, the Carter Center also cited some reports of 
intimidation in Tete province. 
 
9. (U) Registration of Mozambicans living abroad took place for 
the first time between September 4 and 25 at Mozambican embassies 
and consulates in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Swaziland, 
Malawi, Tanzania and Kenya in Africa and Portugal and Germany in 
Europe. Whether or not those registered will be able to vote , 
however, is now in question due to the unexpectedly low 
registration numbers. Fewer than 22,000 Mozambicans registered 
during the 3-week period ending on September 25, well under STAE\'s 
estimate of 300,000 Mozambicans of voting age residing in the nine 
countries where registration took place. In the event CNE decides 
not to hold elections in the two external constituencies (Africa 
and Europe), as is expected due to the low registration numbers, 
two parliamentary seats that had been reserved for them will be 
redistributed to Manica Province and Maputo City. 
 
----------------------- 
Parliamentary Elections 
----------------------- 
10. (U) On September 4, CNE announced the breakdown of the 250 
parliamentary seats at stake in the December general elections. 
Assuming no elections are held abroad (ref paragraph 9), the 
breakdown is as follows: 
Table II: 2004 DISTRIBUTION OF PARLIAMENTARY SEATS 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Province Number of 
Parliamentary Seats 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Niassa 12 
Cabo Delgado 22 
Nampula 50 
Zambezia 48 
Tete 18 
Manica 15 
Sofala 22 
Inhambane 16 
Gaza 17 
Maputo Province 13 
Maputo City 17 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
GRAND TOTAL 250 
 
11. (SBU) Deputies to the Mozambican parliament are elected 
through a system of delegate lists compiled by party members at 
the provincial level and approved by the central party political 
commissions. There have been some surprises in this year\'s 
preliminary provincial lists. Ossufo Quitine, current chairman of 
the RENAMO parliamentary bench, failed to be elected in his 
constituency of Nampula, as did senior party member and current 
parliamentarian David Aloni. Quitine, speaking to the Mozambican 
press, brushed aside this apparent lack of popularity, 
characterizing the Renamo elections in Nampula as \"a joke in bad 
taste.\" Sergio Vieira and Mariano Matsinhe, both leading Frelimo 
parliamentarians and former security ministers under Machel, also 
failed to be elected during FRELIMO\'s provincial electoral 
conferences. Other FRELIMO heavyweights who did not make the 
party list are current Minister of Foreign Affairs Leonardo Simao 
and current Minister of Industry and Energy Castigo Langa (Note: 
Under the Mozambican parliamentary system, individuals who hold 
public titles may not serve in the parliament at the same time 
that he/she holds public office. Nevertheless, an individual may 
chose to run for parliament and, if elected, the party will select 
which position he/she will hold. Some believe that the attempt by 
Simao and Langa to gain a spot on the list of FRELIMO deputies 
points to an imminent departure from their respective ministries. 
End note.) 
 
12. (SBU) There is speculation among some that the final 
delegation lists may change before the election date. Although 
widely reported in the press, the names of party candidates for 
the 11 provincial constituencies are not final until the parties\' 
Political Commissions have approved and presented them to CNE. To 
date, neither FRELIMO nor RENAMO have submitted their delegate 
lists, leaving open the possibility for last minute changes. 
 
13. (SBU) RENAMO will again run as the RENAMO-Electoral Union with 
its coalition of 10 small parties. In a somewhat unexpected 
change, Carlos Reis\' National Union of Mozambique (UNAMO) withdrew 
from the coalition, replaced by the Ecological Party of Mozambique 
(PEMO). There are some RENAMO members who are opposed to the 
coalition, arguing that these minor parties simply take advantage 
of the RENAMO banner to gain seats in parliament. Nevertheless, 
RENAMO leadership apparently prefers to keep them in the coalition 
rather than allow a potential dispersal of votes. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Presidential Candidates Deliver Nomination Papers 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
14. (U) Six presidential candidates for the December general 
election have delivered their nomination papers to the 
Constitutional Council, including ruling party FRELIMO candidate 
Armando Guebuza and opposition party RENAMO presidential hopeful 
Afonso Dhlakama. Guebuza was first to deliver his nomination 
papers, presenting more than 50,000 signatures supporting his 
nomination. Dhlakama delivered his credentials on September 29, 
supplying over 58,000 supporting signatures. Others to deliver 
their nominations papers and the requisite minimum of 10,000 
supporting signatures are Raul Domingos of the Party for Peace, 
Democracy and Development (PDD); Joaquim Nhota of the Democratic 
Liberal Party of Mozambique (PADELIMO); Yaqub Sibindy of the 
Independent Party of Mozambique (PIMO); and Neves Pinto Serrano of 
the Liberal Progress Party of Mozambique (PPLM). 
 
15. (SBU) Although formal campaigning does not start until October 
17, FRELIMO\'s Guebuza has been active in the run up to the 
elections, making trips to all 11 provinces, as well as visits to 
the Europe, South Africa, and the United States (Ref D). During 
his recent visit to South Africa, Guebuza met with numerous 
business entities in what some opine is an attempt to quell 
investor fears about his likely election. Although RENAMO\'s 
Dhlakama and PDD\'s Raul Domingos have been less active, both have 
made trips in recent months within the country and abroad, 
including visits to the United States (Refs C and E). 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
First, Unreliable Presidential Poll Says Guebuza Ahead 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
16. (SBU) According to an opinion poll published by the Higher 
Polytechnic and University Institute (ISPU), one of Mozambique\'s 
private universities, FRELIMO holds an overwhelming lead in this 
year\'s presidential race. However, the validity of the opinion 
poll, taken over a 5-day period with a sample of 9,000 voters from 
Maputo City, the northern province of Nampula, and the central 
provinces of Sofala and Zambezia, has come under fire due to its 
lack of balance and questionable methodology. Despite claims that 
the sample was geographically unbiased, nearly a third of the 
respondents came from Maputo City. The survey has also raised 
questions about the effectiveness of opinion polls in Mozambique. 
It is widely acknowledged that there is a tendency for those 
surveyed to provide what they perceive as \"politically correct\" 
responses, thus skewing results towards the party affiliation of 
the pollster. A September 16 local press report said that the 
IPSU professor who conducted the poll did so at the request of the 
FRELIMO party. 
 
-------- 
Comment 
-------- 
17. (SBU) Tensions have run high in the months leading up to this 
year\'s general elections. Both major political parties, RENAMO 
and FRELIMO, have reported acts of intimidation and political 
harassment on the part of the other (Refs B and D). In response 
to these threats, both have taken steps to mobilize old war 
veterans (\"antigos combatentes\"), an act that could perpetuate 
further clashes between the two political opponents and endanger 
the potential for nonviolent elections. It is not yet clear how 
smoothly the December elections will run, both Guebuza and 
Dhlakama have stressed the importance of a peaceful and 
transparent electoral process, and have committed publicly to 
upholding this goal. End comment. 
La Lime 
"
"21554","10/13/2004 14:13","04MAPUTO1364","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE201391","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001364 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/TFS, S/CT, INL/C, IO/PHO, AND AF/S 
TREASURY FOR OFAC 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTFN, KVPR, EFIN, PTER, ETTC, PREL, MZ 
SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY: EMBASSY MAPUTO TERRORIST FINANCE 
COORDINATION OFFICER 
 
REF: STATE 201391 
 
1. (SBU) THE FOLLOWING RESPONSES ARE KEYED TO QUESTIONS 
RAISED IN THE REFERENCED CABLE. 
A) EMBASSY MAPUTO\'S TERRORIST FINANCE COORDINATION 
OFFICER (TFCO) IS DCM JAMES DUDLEY. CONTACT DETAILS: 
Phone: 258-1-492-797 
Fax: 258-1-490-071 
Cell: 258-82-306-645 
E-mail:dudleyjl@state.gov 
TFCO Deputy and Action Officer is James Potts, Economic- 
Political Officer. Contact details are: 
Phone: 258-1-492-797 
Fax: 258-1-490-114 
Cell: 258-82-305-899 
E-mail: pottsjh@state.gov 
B) DISCUSSIONS OF TERRORIST FINANCE ISSUES ARE CARRIED 
OUT, AS NEEDED, IN WEEKLY ECON-POLITICAL SECTION 
MEETINGS AND IN POST SECURITY GROUP MEETINGS. 
C) Post does not have a separate formal TF working 
group. 
D) Post believes that contact with TFCOs at other posts 
would be useful. This does not happen currently. Most 
sharing of best practices can be done through posting on 
the EB classified website, but a regional meeting might 
also be useful. 
E) The Banco de Mocambique, the country\'s financial 
regulatory body, continues to work with Post on 
terrorist finance issues. Bank officials have been 
cooperative and have the capacity to undertake certain 
measures, such as freezing bank accounts as needed, but 
lack investigative capacity. It remains to be seen if 
public diplomacy and community education is needed to 
increase the Bank\'s investigative tools. 
F) Neither the TFCO nor the deputy has received 
terrorist finance training from FSI or other sources. 
G) Post requests detailed contact information for 
appropriate State and Treasury officials on terrorist 
finance-related cables, in order to more effectively 
make follow-up inquires as a result of our contacts with 
local officials. 
DUDLEY 
"
"21568","10/13/2004 16:25","04MAPUTO1366","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE163967","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001366 
 
SIPDIS 
AF/S - HTREGER 
DOL/ILAB FOR FAULKNER 
DRL/IL FOR HARPOLE 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EAID, PHUM, SOCI, ETRD, MZ 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: UPDATED CHILD LABOR INFORMATION 
 
REFS: (A) STATE 163967 
 
(B) 2004 Mozambique Human Rights Report 
Draft, Potts 9/22/2004 email 
(C) 03 MAPUTO 000284 (Post draft 2003 
Trafficking in Persons Report) 
 
1. Please handle accordingly. Not for internet distribution. 
 
Summary 
-------- 
2. (SBU) Mozambique is party to the ILO convention 
against the worst forms of child labor. The Government 
of the Republic of Mozambique (GRM) has a regulatory 
framework in place to monitor and prosecute infractions 
of the labor code, but it does not have a regulatory 
body specifically devoted to child labor cases. The 
Ministry of Labor (MOL) has worked to develop programs 
to combat the worst forms of child labor, but impact to 
date has been minimal. The Labor Law regulates child 
labor; however, child labor remains a problem in 
Mozambique. End Summary. 
 
Incidence and Nature of Child Labor 
----------------------------------- 
3. (U) A rapid assessment child labor survey of 
children under 18 conducted between 1998 - 2002 by the 
MOL and UNICEF identified the worst forms of child 
labor prevalent in Mozambique as children working in 
commercial agriculture, domestic labor, and child 
prostitution. The major factors contributing to child 
labor where chronic family poverty, lack of employment 
for adults, breakdown of family support mechanisms, 
changing economic environment, lack of education 
opportunities resulting from inadequate education 
system, gender inequality, and the impact of HIV/AIDS. 
(Note: Children orphaned by HIV/AIDS often are forced 
to work because they are left without any adult family 
members or with only extended family members who were 
unable to support them. End note.) 
 
Laws and Regulations Defining Child Labor 
----------------------------------------- 
4. (U) The government ratified ILO Conventions 182 and 
29 in July 2003, but has not signed nor ratified the 
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, and 
Child Pornography, nor the Protocol to Prevent, 
Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons. Law 8/98 
sets the minimum age for employment at 15 years, but in 
exceptional cases, allows for children between the ages 
of 12 and 15 to work with the joint approval of the 
Ministries of Labor, Health, and Education. The law 
sets restricted conditions on the work minors between 
the ages of 15 and 18 may perform, limits the number of 
hours they can work, and establishes training, 
education, and medical exam requirements. For children 
between 15 and 18 years of age, the employer is 
required to provide for their education and 
professional training and to ensure conditions of work 
that are not damaging to their physical and moral 
development. 
 
5. (U) For minors under 18 years, the maximum workweek 
is 38 hours and the maximum workday is 7 hours. Minors 
under 18 years of age are not permitted to work in 
unhealthy or dangerous occupations or those requiring 
significant physical effort. Children must undergo a 
medical examination before beginning work. By law, 
children must be paid at least the minimum wage or a 
minimum of two-thirds of the adult salary, whichever is 
higher. The Constitution prohibits forced labor, 
except in the context of penal law. 
 
6. (U) Due to high adult unemployment in the formal 
sector, estimated at around 50 percent, few children 
are employed in regular wage positions; however, 
children, including those under the age of 15, commonly 
work on family farms; independently in seasonal 
harvests or commercial plantations, where they are paid 
on a piecework basis, which principally involves 
picking cotton or tea leaves; or in the urban informal 
sector, where they perform such tasks as guarding cars, 
collecting scrap metal, working as vendors, and selling 
trinkets and/or food in the streets. Regulations are 
not enforced in the informal labor sector. Children 
also are employed as poorly paid domestic laborers, and 
this number appears to be increasing. 
 
7. (U) Mozambican law does not specifically prohibit 
trafficking in persons. Traffickers can be prosecuted 
using laws on sexual assault, rape, abduction, and 
child abuse, but to post\'s knowledge, few to none of 
such cases have been brought to trial. The government 
has responded to trafficking-related allegations in the 
press by conducting follow-up investigations and 
issuing public awareness announcements. In September 
2003, the government launched a program to enhance its 
child protection laws, including the development of 
legislation to specifically address trafficking in 
children. A pilot program of police stations dedicated 
to dealing with trafficking victims, and staffed with 
trained officers, was implemented in three provincial 
capitals. 
 
Implementation and Enforcement of Labor Laws 
-------------------------------------------- 
8. (SBU) The MOL is authorized to regulate child labor 
in both the informal and formal sectors. Labor 
inspectors are authorized to obtain court orders and 
use police to enforce compliance with child labor 
provisions. Violations of child labor provisions are 
punishable with fines. Enforcement remedies generally 
are adequate in the formal sectors, but remain 
inadequate in the regulation of informal child labor. 
The Labor Inspectorate and police force lack adequate 
staff, funds, and training to investigate child labor 
cases, especially in areas outside of the capital. The 
government provides training for police on child 
prostitution and abuse (including pornography); 
however, there is no specialized child labor training 
for the Labor Inspectorate. The government has 
disseminated information and provided education about 
the dangers of child labor. 
 
9. (SBU) Education is compulsory and free through the 
age of 12, but there is a matriculation fee for each 
child, and children are responsible for purchasing 
books and school supplies. Children who have a 
certificate that testifies that their parents\' incomes 
are below a certain poverty level do not pay any 
matriculation fees. Nevertheless, the fees and 
associated costs are a significant financial burden for 
many families. Enforcement of compulsory education 
laws is inconsistent due to the lack of resources and 
the need for additional schools in the upper grades. 
 
Social Programs to Counter Child Labor 
-------------------------------------- 
10. (SBU) The MOL and other organizations have done 
some work on child labor issues, but with little 
impact. Currently, the MOL is developing an action 
plan for reducing child labor and has allocated funds 
to organize a seminar to discuss this issue. The GRM 
also has programs aimed at supporting children from 
impoverished families to stay in school and away from 
the labor market and the worst forms of child labor. 
For example, the GRM has established a scholarship 
program to cover the costs of school materials and fees 
for children. These programs are especially targeted 
at young girls and child-headed households, a 
phenomenon resulting from the high prevalence of 
HIV/AIDS in Mozambique. 
 
11. (U) The GRM\'s Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2001- 
2005, includes an education investment component. The 
GRM designated approximately 2.41 percent of total 
expenditures for education in 2003. The Ministry of 
Education (MINED) has made significant progress in 
increasing enrollments at all levels, expanding the 
school network, rolling out a new primary education 
curriculum, launching a national in-service teacher 
education program and decentralizing resources for key 
school inputs directly to primary schools (grades 1 - 
5). 
 
12. (U) Key indicators attest to such progress with 
indicators established for 2003 generally reached or 
surpassed. The net admission rate for children aged 6 
in grade 1 was 44 percent, 2 points higher than 
expected. At the middle school level, gross enrollment 
rates were 37 percent and 28 percent for boys and 
girls, respectively. The 2003 target gross enrollment 
of 45 percent for girls at the primary school level was 
achieved. The completion rate, however, is increasing 
more slowly, from 22 percent in 1997 to 37 percent (29 
percent for girls) in 2002, which was 1 point below the 
goal. 
 
National Policy and Plan of Action 
---------------------------------- 
13. (U) Government policies to assist the poor and most 
vulnerable, such as child laborers, include a Poverty 
Alleviation Action Plan (PARPA), decentralized 
planning, and a multi-sectoral approach to HIV/AIDS 
where the disease forces children to drop out of school 
in order to work. The Government of Mozambique and 
UNICEF signed a Master Plan of Operations in 2002 aimed 
at improving the living conditions of the country\'s 
children through the PARPA. The overall goal of the 
UNICEF Country Program is to support and strengthen 
Mozambique\'s commitment and capacity to promote, 
protect and fulfill children\'s rights, meet their basic 
needs, and expand the opportunities of children to 
reach their fullest potential. To achieve this goal, 
UNICEF is working with the GRM on a national, 
provincial and district level, as well as with young 
people and children in the community. With respect to 
trafficking in children, the GRM actively participates 
in The Campaign against Trafficking in Children, and is 
establishing an assistance center at the border post of 
Ressano Garcia for repatriated victims of child 
trafficking. 
 
14. (U) In April 2004, Mozambique\'s National Assembly 
opened its doors to youth representatives of the Second 
National Child Parliament. During the session, youth 
delegates spoke to the concerns and demands of the more 
than 9 million children in Mozambique. The Child 
Parliament was organized by the Ministry for Women and 
the Coordination of Social Action with the support of 
UNICEF, the Save the Children Alliance and other 
partners. 
DUDLEY 
"
"21731","10/18/2004 15:05","04MAPUTO1376","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO1341","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001376 
 
SIPDIS 
MCC FOR PAPPLEGARTH, JHEWKO, SGAULL, MHARRINGTON, RHERING 
STATE FOR AF/S - HTREGER, EB/IFD/ODF, AND EB/TRA 
USDOC FOR AHILLIGAS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KDEM, ECON, ETRD, MZ, MCC, Scenesetters 
SUBJECT: SCENE-SETTER FOR VISIT OF MCC CEO PAUL APPLEGARTH TO 
MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO 1341 
 
B. Maputo 1001 
C. Maputo 1183 
 
1. (SBU) Introduction and Summary: Your visit to Mozambique will 
provide an opportunity to gain a better understanding of the 
Mozambican political environment, government, private sector, 
civil society, and MCC team and to increase Mozambican 
understanding of the MCC. You will be here during the campaign 
for December national elections. This message provides 
background on the elections, trade and investment, the fight 
against HIV/AIDS, poverty reduction, and other topics. End 
Introduction and Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
MOZAMBIQUE AND DEMOCRACY 
------------------------ 
2. (SBU) Mozambique is rightly considered a post-conflict success 
story. Since the signing of the 1992 Rome Peace Accords that 
ended sixteen years of civil war, Mozambique has made significant 
progress in promoting economic reforms and advancing democracy. 
On December 1 and 2, Mozambique will hold its third multi-party 
presidential elections since independence in 1975 (Ref A). The 
current president, Joaquim Chissano, will step down after having 
served since 1986, winning elections in 1994 and 1999. 
 
3. (SBU) During November 2003 municipal elections, the ruling 
party, FRELIMO, won all but four of the country\'s 33 mayorships 
in what were considered generally free and fair elections. 
RENAMO\'s four mayoral wins and five city council wins signaled 
the first time that it took power on a local level. All of the 
RENAMO wins were in the central and northern provinces; two of 
them were in major port cities that have a significant impact on 
economic growth in Mozambique. Prior to and during these 
elections, the president of the major opposition party (RENAMO), 
Afonso Dhlakama, alleged intimidation and political harassment of 
voters by FRELIMO authorities - - a complaint repeatedly 
announced by RENAMO supporters during past elections. The GRM 
passed a new general elections law in May of 2004 that will allow 
for greater transparency in the process of vote counting and 
dissemination of electoral results. Mozambican electoral 
authorities estimate just over 9 million Mozambicans are 
registered to vote in the December general elections. Though 
leading presidential candidates Armando Guebuza of FRELIMO and 
Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO have called for a transparent and 
peaceful process, there are signs of increasing tensions. In a 
recent turn of events, the GRM, through the National Elections 
Committee (CNE), has announced that it will not allow 
international observers to participate in observation of the 
final vote counting stage (national level validation). The 
European Union, which helps fund the elections and sends a team 
of official observers, is concerned and is considering next 
steps. The Carter Center also plays an important role in 
observing elections and conducting a parallel vote tabulation 
(PVT) financed by the U.S. Mission. 
 
4. (SBU) The electoral campaign begins on October 17 and 
continues until three days prior to the elections. Many 
government officials will be out of Maputo campaigning during 
your visit. 
 
------------------------------------- 
A WORD ON THE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 
------------------------------------- 
5. (SBU) Though Guebuza belongs to a different ideological camp 
within the FRELIMO party and is considered less flexible than is 
Chissano, he has indicated that he is likely to continue current 
government policies if elected. On his trip to the United States 
in July, when he attended the Democratic National Convention and 
visited you, the Global AIDS Coordinator\'s office (S/GAC), the 
Corporate Council on Africa (CCA), and the State Department, 
Guebuza reiterated the importance of maintaining a strong 
Mozambique-U.S. relationship and stressed that he would honor 
commitments with donor communities and international financial 
institutions (IFIs). A businessman himself as a result of his 
party and government positions, Guebuza demonstrates 
understanding of business and economic concerns and reaches out 
to the private sector community. Guebuza is known as a strong 
nationalist and has on occasion called for the 
\"Mozambicanization\" of businesses (Ref B). This causes some 
concern for foreign investors - both existing and potential. 
Guebuza acknowledges the extensive US commitment to helping 
Mozambique overcome the challenges of poverty and HIV/AIDS. He 
comes across as a serious and intelligent candidate. 
 
6. (SBU) Dhlakama has been President of RENAMO since 1980 and led 
its forces during the civil war against the FRELIMO government. 
Since the signing of the Rome Peace Accords in 1992, Dhlakama has 
played a crucial role in transforming RENAMO into a viable 
political party and keeping the disparate factions of his party 
from lapsing back into violence. Regarding priorities for the 
country, he has stressed the need for greater progress on 
judicial reform and fighting corruption, as well the importance 
of developing national economic production, particularly in 
small-to-medium sized businesses (Ref C). If RENAMO wins the 
elections, one of the party\'s major challenges will be to find 
technically competent people to fill key government positions. 
During Dhlakama\'s September visit to the United States, he 
attended the Republican National Convention and he met with you, 
the State Department, and the National Security Council (NSC). 
Dhlakama describes himself as a friend of the U.S. and will seek 
to strengthen the Mozambique-U.S. relationship if elected. 
 
------------------------------ 
THE STATE OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
------------------------------ 
7. (U) Mozambique\'s recovery from the devastation of civil war, 
its macroeconomic reforms, and its success in attracting large 
investment projects have resulted in an average GDP growth rate 
of eight percent from 1992-2003, the highest in Africa over this 
time period. Foreign direct investment, exports, and revenue 
collections have seen notable increases, and privatization 
continues but has slowed in recent years. GDP growth for 2003 
was approximately seven percent, and the government expects the 
economy to continue to expand at a rate between 7-10 percent. 
 
8. (U) Maintaining this high rate of growth hinges on several 
major foreign investment projects, continued economic reform, and 
the revival of the agriculture, transportation, and tourism 
sectors. This growth is from a low base; per capita GNP for 2002 
was around $200. Inflation for 2003 was 13 percent, in line with 
the levels of recent years. 
 
9. (SBU) The Mozambican business climate remains a work in 
progress. Excellent macroeconomic policies and high-level 
commitment to attracting business mask a bureaucracy that remains 
at times unresponsive to the needs of corporations, especially 
small-to-medium-sized enterprises. Permits are slow; corruption 
is problematic; and the legal system is antiquated. Although 
under revision, the labor law is extremely pro-worker and remains 
an impediment to foreign investment. Land tenure at present 
relies on a lease system without private ownership. Donors are 
working extensively with the GRM to modernize and improve the 
current commercial code, labor law, business registration 
process, tax system, and land ownership policy. Although reform 
is moving in the right direction, it is expected to take several 
years before significant impediments to investment are removed. 
Infrastructure is poor and was further damaged by severe floods 
in 2000. Important strides have been made to improve the 
situation, most notably in road infrastructure. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
COMMERCIAL OPPORTUNITIES AND MEGA-PROJECTS 
------------------------------------------- 
10. (U) Mozambique offers substantial investment and commercial 
opportunities in energy generation (hydropower, coal, and gas), 
transportation (road construction, rail and port services, 
airport construction, and air transport), resource extraction 
(natural gas, minerals, timber, and fishing), aquaculture, 
agriculture/horticulture (cereals, cashews, cotton, sugar, 
vegetables, flowers, and citrus; light industry), and tourism. 
 
11. (U) Mozambique\'s rapid economic growth is enhanced by the 
operation of several mega-projects. These include the MOZAL 
aluminum smelter (Australia), the newly inaugurated SASOL gas 
pipeline (South Africa), and soon-to-be operational mining and 
heavy sands projects in Gaza and Nampula Provinces (Australia and 
Ireland). The GRM works closely with large investors by creating 
government-investor task forces to address issues and concerns 
large investors confront when working in the Mozambican business 
environment. The GRM is very responsive to these investors and 
has created several \"special economic zones\" and \"export 
processing zones\" which provide incentives to investors involved 
in mass-production and export and those investing in 
traditionally poor and under-developed areas. Mozambique\'s mega- 
projects are said to account for 2-3 percentage points of the 
country\'s seven percent GDP growth and a much larger share of 
export growth. 
 
-------------------------------- 
KEY BILATERAL ISSUES - IN BRIEF 
-------------------------------- 
12. (SBU) A) Elections: The USG is supporting the electoral 
process through financial assistance to the Carter Center and 
domestic observer groups. As we did during the 2003 municipal 
elections, post will send observers to key municipalities 
throughout the country. 
B) Trade & Investment: Mozambique has yet to take full advantage 
of AGOA, and US trade and investment in Mozambique remains small. 
Currently, only one apparel company in Mozambique is exporting 
under AGOA, with a second company, owned by the Aga Khan 
Foundation, expected to begin operations shortly. 
C) HIV/AIDS: Mozambique is at a critical stage in its efforts to 
stem the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In Southern Africa, Mozambique 
presents both the greatest challenges and possibly the greatest 
opportunity to become the next Uganda-like success in turning 
around the HIV/AIDS threat. Despite occasional criticism from the 
health minister, we have made considerable efforts to ensure that 
the President\'s Emergency Plan For AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) is seen 
as a collaborative approach to addressing the epidemic. 
Mozambique is the only country to be both a focus country under 
the PEPFAR and eligible to submit an MCC proposal in FY04. 
 
------------------ 
MCA IN MOZAMBIQUE 
------------------ 
13. (SBU) Mozambican government officials, civil society leaders, 
and private sector groups are broadly aware of the MCA and 
Mozambique\'s FY04 eligibility for the program. This will be the 
third MCC team visit to Mozambique since Mozambique was selected 
as part of the group of 16 eligible countries in May. The first 
visit took place June 8-11 and served largely to introduce the 
MCC and meet Mozambican officials leading the proposal process. 
The second visit took place in early September and allowed for 
the MCC\'s familiarization with Mozambique and the draft proposal. 
On October 4, Prime Minister Luisa Diogo met in Washington with 
MCC officials John Hewko, Thomas Briggs, and Stephen Gaull and 
discussed Mozambique\'s submission of a proposal Although the CTA 
business group and the Mozambique-US Chamber of Commerce have 
circulated the proposal widely, the government has not yet 
released it and it has not been covered in the press. We do not 
know whether the government\'s reluctance to release the proposal 
so far is related to electoral concerns. 
DUDLEY 
"
"21901","10/21/2004 15:24","04MAPUTO1398","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001398 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S - HTREGER AND EB/TRA 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
FCS - RDONOVAN, JVANRENSBURG 
USDOC FOR AHILLIGAS AND RTELCHIN 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
 
-------- 
CONTENTS 
-------- 
Macroeconomics 
2. GDP Growth Rate Meeting 2004 Target 
3. Inflation Figures 
Ports, Roads, and Railways 
4. Limpopo Bridge 
5. Traffic at Beira Port 
Energy 
6. Negotiations on Cahora Bassa Dam 
Public Utilities 
7. Water Agreements Signed 
Agriculture 
8. Increase in Cotton Production 
9. Increase in Grain Production 
10. Helping Small-Scale Farmers in Zambezia 
Business 
11. Aid to Artisans 
 
1. (U) The Mozambique monthly economic cable is jointly produced 
by the Embassy and USAID. 
 
-------------- 
MACROECONOMICS 
-------------- 
2. (U) The GRM reports that the Mozambican economy is in line 
with the 8% growth rate target for 2004. Economic activity grew 
by 8.4% in the first six months of the year, when compared with 
the same period in 2003. The first six months of 2004 also saw a 
15.9% growth in exports. Most of this growth is a result of the 
opening of the second phase of the MOZAL aluminum smelter. The 
smelter\'s capacity has doubled to 506,000 tons of aluminum ingots 
per year - all of which is exported. 
 
3. (U) Consumer prices rose by 5.9% in the first eight months of 
2004, and inflation for the full year is expected to be around 
12%. This is slightly lower than the levels of recent years. 
During this same time, the metical appreciated by three percent 
against the US dollar. 
 
-------------------------- 
PORTS, ROADS, AND RAILWAYS 
-------------------------- 
4. (U) In December, the GRM will request bids for design and 
reconstruction of the Limpopo Bridge, in Gaza province. The 
bridge, which was destroyed by Rhodesians in 1979, links the 
districts of Chokwe and Guija. It is anticipated that a firm will 
be chosen in the first semester of 2005 to begin work. The target 
completion date is late 2006. 
 
5. (U) According to news sources, the port of Beira registered an 
8.3% increase in the volume of containerized cargo handled from 
January-August of this year. 28,661 twenty-foot equivalent units 
or teus were handled in this period, compared to 25,461 teus 
during the same time period in 2003. Total movement at the port 
of Beira was 40,801 teus in 2003. Zimbabwean container traffic 
through the port continues to decline due to the economic crisis, 
with 7,632 teus registered from January-August 2004 compared to 
8,806 teus during the same time period in 2003. Despite this 
continuing slow-down, Zimbabwe remains the largest source of 
container trade through the port. Container traffic for Malawi 
and Zambia has registered a slight decline in 2004 to date. 
Botswana, a non-traditional trader at Beira Port, registered an 
increase in container traffic (64 teus compared to date in 2004 
to 40 teus in 2003). Mozambique registered an increase from 2715 
teus in 2003 to 4235 teus in 2004. Contrary to the increasing 
level of container traffic, the port has suffered a 24% decline 
in the passage of general cargo from January-August 2004 (494,416 
metric tons) compared to the same time period in 2003 (650,169 
metric tons). This decline results from the absence of flour 
exported from Zimbabwe and Malawi (Zimbabwe has become a net 
importer of flour due to the current crisis). Likewise, 
ferrochrome and mineral exports from Zimbabwe have sharply 
declined. 
 
------ 
ENERGY 
------ 
6. (U) In a recent visit to Lisbon, President Chissano announced 
his intention to resolve the Cahora Bassa dam issue before the 
end of his mandate (January 2005). The GRM has been in 
discussions with the Government of Portugal over the past year, 
negotiating a new arrangement for ownership of the dam. These 
negotiations were recently put on hold due to the appointment of 
a new Portuguese Prime Minister, Pedro Santana Lopes. Both 
parties are looking for a technical solution that will give 
Mozambique ownership of Hidrolectrica Cahora Bassaa (HCB), the 
firm that runs dam operations. The sticking point remains the 
repayment of a massive amount of debt HCB owes the Portuguese 
Treasury (estimated USD 2 billion, although both parties differ 
on the exact amount) - an amount that the GRM cannot afford to 
pay off. Some are skeptical that an agreement can be reached in 
the next two months. 
 
---------------- 
PUBLIC UTILITIES 
---------------- 
7. (U) The GRM, the World Bank, and the French Development Agency 
will spend nearly USD 15.6 million to improve the quality and 
quantity of water supplied to four major cities across the 
country, including Maputo, Quelimane, Nampula, and Pemba. On 
September 20, the Water Supply Investment and Assets Fund (FIPAG) 
signed agreements with the companies, from France, Zambia, and 
China, that won the international tenders to perform the work 
(launched in 2003 and 2004). Work is expected to be completed by 
mid-2006. The largest amount of work will be done in Quelimane, 
where USD 10.7 million will be spent on expanding coverage of the 
water network from the current 43,000 consumers, representing 
about 20 percent of the population, to over 100,000 consumers. 
In Nampula city, the work is budgeted at USD 2.8 million, and 
will consist of the rehabilitation and extension of the water 
treatment station. In Pemba, a rapidly-growing tourist 
destination on the northern coast, the task is to increase 
pumping capacity from 6,700 to about 14,000 cubic meters a day 
and improve the quality of water, which is expected to cost USD 
2.4 million. The remaining funds will be used to develop a water 
losses study for the city of Maputo. The work in all four cities 
is to be supervised and inspected by \"Aguas de Mocambique\" 
(Waters of Mozambique), the Portuguese-led consortium that has 
the contract to manage water assets in seven of the country\'s 
main cities. 
 
----------- 
AGRICULTURE 
----------- 
8. (U) The GRM targets an excess of 85,000 tons of cotton to be 
marketed this year, despite the poor rainy season, particularly 
in Nampula, the province with the highest capacity for 
production. It was previously estimated that Nampula would 
harvest only 30,000 tons of cotton, but there now is hope of 
yields of up to 37,000 or 40,000 tons, which will take the 
marketing figure to over 85,000 tons across the country. The 
various actors involved in the cotton business have fixed the 
producer prices at 7,000 meticais (about 30 US cents) and 5,000 
meticais per kilo of first grade and second grade cotton, 
respectively. 
 
9. (U) Mozambique hopes to produce more than two million tons of 
grain in the 2004-2005 agricultural season, which will result in 
a five per cent increase from the results of the previous 
harvest. In order to prepare the forthcoming agricultural 
campaign, agricultural fairs are taking place around the country, 
allowing farmers to acquire seeds and agricultural tools. 
 
10. (U) According to local news sources, the Government of India 
has opened a line of credit worth USD 20 million for small-scale 
projects to assist farmers in the central province of Zambezia. 
The Mozambican High Commissioner to India and the Executive 
Director of the Export-Import Bank of India signed the memorandum 
formalizing this initiative in India on September 10. The 
initiative covers areas such as the processing of coconuts, rural 
electrification, and the drilling of wells and the installation 
of hand pumps. On the same day a second memorandum of 
understanding was signed under which the government of Mozambique 
and the Export-Import Bank of India reaffirmed their readiness to 
resolve the problem of Mozambique\'s private debt to India, which 
in late December was estimated to stand at USD 6.8 million 
dollars. The Indian government cancelled USD 3.8 million of 
Mozambique\'s public debt in May 2003 under the HIPC (Heavily 
Indebted Poor Countries) debt relief initiative. 
 
-------- 
BUSINESS 
-------- 
11. (U) Aid to Artisans (ATA), the American nonprofit 
organization, received a USD 900,000 subsidy to expand business 
and guarantee long-term sustainability to craftwork activity in 
Mozambique and South Africa. This financing, provided by the 
Kellogg Foundation, will enhance the capacity of Mozambican and 
South African artists through the provision of training, the 
development of products, and linkages to the market. ATA has 
been working in Mozambique since 1998 and is supported by various 
donors. The primary focus of assistance has been to provide 
opportunities for craftspeople, specifically in wood sculpturing. 
The Kellogg financing will improve the business opportunities for 
local craftspeople. ATA will do this by creating a \"craft 
village\" for the artisans to consolidate their handicrafts and 
sell them on the local market and by improving access to export 
markets through fairs and other events. Additionally, they will 
establish a \"wood shop\" where artisans can obtain prime material. 
Currently, ATA works in Nampula, Manica, and Sofala provinces. 
The financing will allow ATA Mozambique to help a greater number 
of artisans in more locations. 
LA LIME 
"
"21980","10/25/2004 6:15","04MAPUTO1406","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO1371","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001406 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S AND AF/FO 
MCC FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MZ, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: ELECTION OBSERVER ACCESS STILL UNRESOLVED 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1371 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - handle accordingly. Not for 
internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: The EU and the National Elections 
Commission continue to disagree over the access of observers 
to provincial and national vote tabulations. The head of the 
EU\'s observer mission told a press conference that without 
access to the tabulations, the EU would not be able to give 
credibility to the electoral process. There are reports of 
some progress at technical levels, but we do not expect a 
resolution in the next week. The EU may wind up with some 
but not all of the access it is seeking. End Summary. 
? 
2. (U) Tension continues between the European Union (EU) and 
the FRELIMO-controlled National Elections Commission (CNE) 
over election observation guidelines. The main sticking 
point remains observer access to the provincial and national 
vote tabulations; presence at the initial tabulation at the 
polling places has been agreed. Visiting EU election 
observer mission chief Jose Javier Pomes took an optimistic 
stance during an October 18 press conference, claiming 
confidence that a resolution would be forthcoming and stating 
that the EU and CNE were working out a way to secure the EU\'s 
presence at the provincial and national tabulation stages. 
Pomes asserted that the EU\'s acceptance of the GRM\'s 
invitation to observe this year\'s elections was based upon 
access to all stages of the electoral process. Reiterating 
an October 15 EU statement, Pomes said that without this 
access, the EU would not be able to confer credibility to the 
electoral process. In an earlier statement, the 
Johannesburg-based Electoral Institute of Southern Africa 
(EISA), which has developed principles for election 
organization and observation in the SADC region, was also 
critical of the CNE\'s position, warning that failure to allow 
observers access to all stages of the election process would 
reflect poorly on the credibility of the elections. 
 
3. (SBU) There are a few encouraging signs. The EU and the 
CNE continue to talk. In those discussions, though not in 
public, the CNE appears to have stopped claiming that 
allowing observers would violate Mozambican law. The CNE now 
says observers and journalists will be able to view the final 
tabulation stage from outside the data processing room 
through a window. We also understand that the CNE plans to 
allow observers and journalists to view a computer monitor 
showing data entry; this was done in 1999 and did not satisfy 
RENAMO. 
 
4. (SBU) However, EU country diplomats fear that the CNE - 
controlled by its FRELIMO party majority - may not allow 
complete transparency. The Dutch ambassador and the UK high 
commissioner told the Ambassador October 20 that, although 
there were openings in negotiations with the CNE, the issue 
was far from being resolved. The UK high commissioner feared 
that this dispute would be followed by others. The Dutch 
ambassador did not expect the EU to sign a memorandum of 
understanding with the CNE but said that it would send its 
observation team, some of whom have already arrived to view 
the campaign, to the field regardless. The EU will rely on a 
separate MOU with the foreign ministry that gives accredited 
individuals observer status. 
 
5. (SBU) At an October 21 donor meeting, EU Deputy Chief 
Observer Aida Maria Aragao said the CNE had stepped back from 
its categorical denial of observer access to the provincial 
and national tabulation stages, but she discounted a recent 
press report that the CNE had reversed its decision entirely. 
The Carter Center reported at the same event that it has not 
reached agreement on the MOU it has been negotiating at the 
provincial level, which would include observer access to vote 
tabulation. The Center, which has been silent on the issue, 
expects to make a formal statement in the next few days. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: While the two sides are still searching for 
a way to resolve the issue, we do not expect an agreement in 
the next week or so. President Chissano has stepped back 
from his initial public statement last week that he had 
instructed the CNE to resolve the issue; he has since 
emphasized to the press instead the need for the EU to 
respect Mozambican laws. We believe the two sides may 
eventually agree on some form of partial access that is less 
than what the EU is currently seeking. End Comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"22039","10/26/2004 14:11","04MAPUTO1414","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE200879","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001414 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR PM/WRA - KBAKER AND AF/S - HTREGER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KHDP, MZ 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: INFORMATION ON U.S. MANUFACTURED 
LANDMINES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 200879 
 
1. (SBU) 1. Post has received data on U.S.-manufactured 
landmines found in Mozambique. The information requested in 
reftel follows: 
Country: Mozambique 
U.S. mines present 
Number: 130 (out of estimated 82,000 mines cleared/destroyed) 
Percent of Total: 0.16% 
Description: U.S. manufactured M14 anti-personnel mines (25 
found); U.S. manufactured M16/M16A1 anti- group mines (105 
found) 
 
2. (U) Accurate information on the total number of mines 
cleared or destroyed is difficult to obtain due to poor data 
collection and reporting systems. The total figure was 
estimated based on data reported by the National Demining 
Institute (IND) in its Five Year National Mine Action Plan 
2002 - 2006 and Annual Plan of Demining Priorities 2004. 
LA LIME 
"
"22053","10/27/2004 4:34","04MAPUTO1416","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE222924","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001416 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR AF/EX/PMO - CHARLES HEFFERNAN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, APER, ASEC 
SUBJECT: MAPUTO EMERGENCY CONTACT INFORMATION 
 
REF: STATE 222924 
 
1. As requested reftel, following is updated key officer 
emergency contact information for Maputo. Note that main 
office phone line (258)(1) 492 797 is only answered during 
business hours. Post One direct line answered at all 
times is (258)(1) 49 07 23. Main IVG access number is 887- 
0000. 
Name: Ambassador Helen R. Meagher La Lime 
Office Identification: AMB/Executive 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3441; IVG 887-3441 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 319 881 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 492 051; (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 
3418; or IVG 887-3418 
Name: James L. Dudley 
Office Identification: DCM/Executive 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3442; IVG 887-3442 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 306 645 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 490 718; (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 
3406; or IVG 887-3406 
Name: John A. Wysham 
Office Identification: Econ/Pol 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3425; IVG 887-3425 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 315 717 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 490 710 
Name: Leyla L. Ones 
Office Identification: Consular 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3434; IVG 887-3434 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 327 685 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 493 304 
Name: Pamela J. Mansfield (departs 12/15/04) 
John M. Kowalski (arrives 12/15/04) 
Office Identification: MGT 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 4634; IVG 887-4634 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 315 716 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 491 232 
Name: Howard A. Hicks (departs 11/20/04) 
Karen Lass (arrives 11/20/04) 
Office Identification: RSO 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3429; IVG 887-3429 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 313 357 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 493 100 
Name: Gregory L. Garland 
Office Identification: PAO 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 491 918 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 321 292 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 491 040 
Name: Major Michael Evancho 
Office Identification: DAO 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3433; IVG 887-3433 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 306 322 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 494 811 
Name: Jay Knott 
Office Identification: USAID/D 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 352 090 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 310 619 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 492 306 
Name: Alfredo Vergara 
Office Identification: CDC/D 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 314 747 
Cell Phone: (258) 304 762 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 490 680 
Name: John Grabowski 
Office Identification: PC/D 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 499 082 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 301 158 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 490 800 
Name: Guadalupe Pinon 
Office Identification: IMO 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3678; IVG 887-3678 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 319 871 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 486 817 
Name: Gwendolyn M. Sell (arrives 11/13/04) 
Office Identification: IMS 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3678; IVG 887-3678 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 303 185 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 492 729 
Name: Beth J. King 
Office Identification: FSHP/Health Unit 
Office Phone: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3761; IVG 887-3761 
Cell Phone: (258) 82 329 432 
Residence Phone: (258)(1) 492 738 
 
2. Embassy Maputo has the following secure voice 
capability: 
Ambassador: (258)(1)492 797, ext. 3412, or IVG 887-3412 
IPC: (258)(1) 492 797, ext. 3678, or IVG 887-3678 
DAO: (258)(1) 494 209 
 
3. Post One direct phone line: (258)(1) 490 723 
Post One IVG number: 887-3622 
 
4. Please advise if additional information is required. 
Thank you. 
LA LIME 
"
"22075","10/27/2004 11:09","04MAPUTO1421","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 001421 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S HTREGER AND AF/EPS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, MZ, SSH 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S SPECIAL SELF-HELP PROGRAM: FINAL 
REPORT FOR FY02 AND INTERIM REPORT FOR FY03 PROJECTS 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: This cable represents the final report for 
FY02 and the interim report for FY03 Ambassador\'s Special 
Self-Help Program (SSH) in Mozambique. Section one 
contains the final financial status of all projects from 
FY02, and section two contains information on the financial 
status of all projects from FY03, including the amounts of 
money granted, spent, and the balance as well as an update 
on the status of disposition of funds not used by the 
projects. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
SSH Projects FY02 
----------------- 
2. Currently, seven SSH projects from FY02 are considered 
complete, while five remain active pending disbursement of 
payments. Of the USD 70,800 total amount obligated across 
the 12 projects, USD 3,187.37 has not yet been disbursed. 
If these remaining funds are not disbursed by December 31, 
2004, they will be deobligated by the Department of State. 
SSH 02-656-001 Mafambisse Secondary School Construction 
of a classroom 
Amount Granted: USD 2,095.00 
Obligated: USD 1,890.00 
Balance: USD 205.00 
Location: Mafambisse district, Sofala Province 
Status: This project is active. To date, USD 1,890 has been 
obligated for the purchase of construction materials. If 
the remaining amount is not disbursed by the end of 2004 
calendar year, funds will be deobligated and the project 
closed. 
SSH 02-656-002 Milling Machine for the Orphanage Missao 
Morada dos Passarinhos e Defesa das Criancas 
Amount Granted: USD 12,000.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 10,878.08 
Balance: USD 1,121.92 
Location: Beira, Sofala Province 
Status: The project was completed and the remaining balance 
will be deobligated. The mill generates income to buy 
supplies for the orphanage. 
SSH 02-656-003 Two Water Wells for Kawene Community 
Amount Granted: USD 7,584.04 
Disbursed Amount: USD 7,584.04 
Balance: USD 0.00 
Location: Kawene - Vilanculos, Inhambane Province 
Status: The project was completed. Two wells were built 
providing the community with access to clean drinking 
water. 
SSH 02-656-004 Construction of a Sewing/Pottery Room and 
Poultry-raising for the community of Anchilo 
Amount Granted: USD 8,000.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 7,950.00 
Balance: USD 50.00 
Location: Anchilo district, Nampula Province 
Status: The project is in progress and expected to 
terminate by the end of 2004 calendar year. Due to exchange 
rate fluctuations, it will not be possible to purchase 
basic equipment for the room as originally planned and stay 
within budget. 
? 
SSH 02-656-005 Water Well for Josina Machel Community 
Amount Granted: USD 3,542.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 3,542.00 
Balance: USD 0.00 
Location: Bairro Josina Machel, Manica Province 
ce 
Status: The project was completed and inaugurated in 2003. 
SSH 02-656-006 Health Center for Chinhagore 
Amount Granted: USD 5,500.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 5,486.79 
Balance: USD 13.21 
Location: Chinhagore, Manica Province 
Status: The project was completed and inaugurated in 2003. 
The remaining balance was deobligated. The residents are 
satisfied with the new health care unit, and the local 
authorities are planning to convert it into a rural 
hospital to enhance medical assistance to local citizens. 
SSH 02-656-007 Classrooms for 1st of May Secondary School 
of Chicuque - Inhambane 
Amount Granted: USD 6,500.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 6,500.00 
Balance: USD 0.00 
Location: Chicuque district, Inhambane Province 
Status: The project was completed and will be inaugurated 
before the end of 2004 calendar year. 
SSH 02-656-008 Pediatric & Adults Consultation Rooms in 
Manga 
Amount Granted: USD 5,000.00 
Disbursed amount: USD 4,957.78 
Balance: USD 42.22 
Location: Manga Bairro, Sofala Province 
Status: The project, sponsored by the religious 
congregation Irmas Franciscanas Missionarias de Maria 
(Franciscan Missionary Sisters of Mary), was completed 
expediently with significant help from the community and 
sisters. It is now a useful center for the surrounding 
communities. 
SSH 02-656-009 Irmas Franciscanas Hospitaleiras da 
Imaculada Conceicao de Sofala - Milling Machine for 
Chinguessura 
Amount Granted: USD 5,000.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 4,999.38 
Balance: USD 0.62 
Location: Chinguessura, Sofala Province 
Status: The project was completed in 2004 and the remaining 
balance deobligated. Income generated from the mill is used 
to support the community health center. 
SSH 02-656-010 Classrooms for the Secondary School of 
Sussundenga 
Amount Granted: USD 4,200.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 4,196.68 
Balance: USD 3.32 
Location: Sussundenga District, Manica Province 
Status: The project was completed and inaugurated in 
January 2004. This was a successful Peace Corps Volunteer 
project that involved both the community and school 
members. The school now has two additional classrooms. 
SSH 02-656-011 Nsadzu Women\'s Community - Seeds Oil 
Extraction Equipment and Room 
Amount Granted: USD 9,173 
Disbursed amount: USD 8,653.98 
Balance: USD 519.02 
Location: Chifunde District, Tete Province 
Status: The project is near completion and it is expected 
to be finished before December 31, 2004. 
SSH 02-656-012 Human Capacity & Agricultural Production 
Amount Granted: USD 2,205.92 
Disbursed Amount: USD 914.52 
Balance: USD 1,291.40 
Location: Mecanhelas District, Niassa Province 
Status: The project is active. Agricultural equipment and 
seed are being purchased to enable agricultural production 
in the community. The major setback to project completion 
is a lack of transportation to deliver necessary materials 
to the site. The project is expected to be finished by the 
end of 2004. 
 
----------------- 
SSH Projects FY03 
----------------- 
2. All SSH projects from FY03 should have their final 
payments made by the end of the 2004 calendar year. Post 
recently contacted associations and project sponsors to 
encourage the completion of respective projects. Once 
projects are finished, post may close out the funds and 
visit the projects to inspect the final results. 
SSH 03-656-001 Instituto Agrario do Chimoio (IAC) - 
Association of IAC Volunteers Against HIV/AIDS 
Amount Granted: USD 2,300.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 513.68 
Balance: USD 1,786.32 
Location: Gondola district, Manica Province 
Status: The project is active, rehabilitating a venue that 
will be used for informal sessions to educate the students 
and parents regarding HIV/AIDS. The project is facing 
problems because the local vendors do not want to comply 
with State Department payment policies. The project 
sponsor is working to avoid more delays and to complete the 
project. 
SSH 03-656-002 Library for the Secondary School of 
Namaacha 
Amount Granted: USD 7,000.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 7,000.00 
Balance: USD 0.00 
Location: Namaacha district, Maputo Province 
Status: The project was completed, and the Deputy Chief of 
Mission will inaugurate the library on November 12, 2004. 
The library will be named in honor of Ellen Downes, the 
Peace Corps Volunteer who had the idea for the project. 
SSH 03-656-003 Construction of two classrooms for Escola 
Secundaria Novo Destino of Salela 
Amount Granted: USD 4,000.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 0.00 
Balance: USD 4,000.00 
Location: Salela Village, Inhambane Province 
Status: The project is active and invoices for the purchase 
of construction materials and project supplies have been 
submitted to the Embassy. The total grant amount is 
expected to be disbursed by the end of the 2004 calendar 
year. 
SSH 03-656-004 - Comunidade Mocambicana de Ajuda (CMA) 
cutting and sewing equipment 
Amount Granted: USD 3,750.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 3,735.00 
Balance: USD15.00 
Location: Bairro Alto Mae, Maputo Province 
Status: The project is completed, and the remaining balance 
has been deobligated. This project was inaugurated and 
sewing training was given to various groups in 2004. 
SSH 03-656-005 Missao de Sao Tiago Maior of Zambezia 
Province Mill for Namarroi 
Amount Granted: USD 7,950.00 
Disbursed amount: USD 7,941.18 
Balance: USD 8.82 
Location: Namarroi District, Zambezia Province 
Status: The project was completed and inaugurated, and the 
remaining balance was deobligated. The mill is now serving 
communities in the area and is also generating income for 
the community. 
SSH 03-656-006 - Conselho Municipal de Chimoio Total 
Rehabilitation of the Water Pump for the Agostinho Neto 
Community 
Amount Granted: USD 4,250.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 0.00 
Amount Obligated: USD 4,250.00 
Balance: USD 4,250.00 
Location: Manica, Chimoio Province 
Status: The project is active. The total grant amount has 
been obligated, and payments will be disbursed soon. The 
project will be completed by the end of December 2004. 
SSH 03-656-007 - Orphanage Sao Francisco Xavier of Ilha de 
Mocambique Rehabilitation of Water Cistern 
Amount Granted: USD 9,000 
Disbursed Amount: USD 5,902.71 
Balance: USD 2,498.00 
Location: Ilha de Mocambique district, Nampula Province 
Status: Payments of vouchers are in progress and project is 
expected to close by the end of December 2004. The cistern 
was tested after rehabilitation, and some modifications are 
needed before the next rainy season. 
SSH 03-656-008 - Christ the King Mission of Gorongosa - 
Potable Water and Improved Latrines 
Amount Granted: USD 4,600.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 4,600.00 
Balance: USD 0.00 
Location: Gorongosa District, Sofala Province 
Status: The project was completed. One water well and two 
latrines were built, benefiting 720 families in the area. 
This project also improved the potable water supply for the 
surrounding communities. 
SSH 03-656-009 Herois Mocambicanos Secondary School of 
Moatize Construction of a library 
Amount Granted: USD 8,000.00 
00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 7,827.79 
Balance: USD 172.79 
Location: Moatize District, Tete Province 
Status: The project was completed and inaugurated by the 
Embassy on October 18, 2004, and the remaining balance was 
deobligated. This is a successful Peace Corps Volunteer 
project. The library has already proven useful to the 
students and the community. 
SSH 03-656-010 AMUJOVIC - Magoanine Women\'s Training 
Center 
Amount Granted: USD 8,000.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 0.00 
Balance: USD 8,000.00 
Location: Magoanine District, Maputo Province 
Status: The project is still inactive due to the delay of 
land concession by the municipality. The Embassy received a 
letter dated July 16, 2004 in which the municipality 
requested more time to decide on the site concession. 
SSH 03-656-011 1 de Maio Secondary School of Chicuque 
Construction of 4 Classrooms 
Amount Granted: USD 9,150.00 
Disbursed amount: USD 9.139.51 
Balance: USD 10.49 
Location: Chicuque District, Inhambane Province 
Status: All the payments are complete, but the classroom 
construction is still in progress. The project will be 
inaugurated in November 2004. The school management decided 
to convert one of these rooms into an HIV/AIDS 
testing/counseling room for the students. 
SSH 03-656-012 AVIMAS - Expansion of the Poultry Building 
Amount Granted: USD 2,800.00 
Disbursed Amount: USD 2,773.92 
Balance: USD 26.08 
Location: Maputo District, Maputo Province 
Status: The project was completed and inaugurated. The 
remaining balance was deobligated. The project supports 
widows, single mothers, female heads of families, and 
vulnerable orphans in the community of Magoanine. 
LA LIME 
"
"22137","10/28/2004 14:51","04MAPUTO1427","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001427 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR IIP/G/AF; AF/PD (RSEVER); AF/S (HTREGER) 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, OIIP, MZ, OPRC, FRELIMO 
SUBJECT: SCHNEIDMAN CLAIM THAT FRELIMO FOUNDER WAS CIA 
MAKES MAPUTO HEADLINES 
 
1. Independent publications in Mozambique have 
featured former AF DAS Witney Schneidman\'s claims that 
FRELIMO founder Eduardo Mondlane received funds from 
the CIA. The October 28 edition of the Beira weekly 
Zambeze led with the back-page headline, \"FRELIMO 
founder financed by CIA\" On October 27, the 
independent Maputo fax daily Correio da Manha opened 
with the headline, \"Mondlane financed by the CIA.\" The 
October 28 Maputo fax daily Expresso da Tarde 
headlined, \"CIA financed Eduardo Mondlane.\" The 
subsequent LUSA-based stories cited in detail 
Schneidman\'s new book, \"Washington and the Fall of 
Portugal\'s Colonial Empire,\" focusing on comments about 
FRELIMO founder Eduardo Mondlane\'s ties to the United 
States. 
 
2. The articles underscored Schneidman\'s remarks that 
in 1963 Mondlane had supposedly received a CIA 
\"subsidy\" of USD 60,000 funneled through the African 
American Institute. They also cite a letter to 
Attorney General Robert Kennedy that,\"it would be 
idiocy to try to control him (Mondlane), because the 
very attempt to do so would damage his usefulness..To 
support Mondlane would be a good investment for us, 
because his program represents the best and only hope 
for a relatively peaceful solution to the Mozambican 
problem\"(Post translation). 
 
3. COMMENT: Mondlane studied at Oberlin, received a 
doctorate from Northwestern, taught at Syracuse, and 
married an American, who lives in Mozambique and 
remains highly visible by virtue of her work with 
dealing with HIV/AIDS and the Eduardo Chivambo Mondlane 
Foundation. Accordingly, revelations about his ties to 
the U.S. come as no surprise to educated Mozambicans. 
The articles, moreover, speak to Mondlane\'s strength of 
character, thus conforming to his place in the 
nationalist pantheon. Nevertheless, tarring the 
founding father of FRELIMO with the CIA brush sells 
newspapers and may stimulate some discussion, 
especially coming as it does in the midst of a 
presidential election campaign. 
LA LIME 
"
"22170","10/29/2004 8:11","04MAPUTO1430","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001430 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S HTREGER, AF/RSA, AND AF/EPS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, MZ, DHRF 
SUBJECT: DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS FUND INTERIM REPORT 
FOR FY 2003 PROJECTS 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: This cable represents the interim report for 
FY03 for the Democracy and Human Rights Fund (DHRF) in 
Mozambique. It contains information on the financial 
status of all projects from FY03 including the amount of 
money granted, spent, and the balance, as well as an update 
on the final disposition of funds not used by the projects. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------ 
DHRF Projects FY03 
------------------ 
2. Currently, two DHRF projects are considered completed, 
while four remain active pending disbursement of payments. 
Of the USD 57,000 total amount obligated across the 6 
projects, USD 13,856 has not yet been disbursed. If the 
remaining funds are not disbursed by December 31, 2004, 
they will be deobligated by the Department of State 
HR-03-656-01 Campaign Against Trafficking in Children 
Amount Granted: USD 25,000 
Obligated: USD 20,000 
Balance: USD 5,000 
Location: Nampula, Sofala, Manica and Gaza provinces 
Status: This project is active. The NGO Civic Education 
Forum (FECIV) has spent USD 20,000 on two child trafficking 
seminars held in Nampula and Sofala provinces, the latter 
with participants from Manica province as well. FECIV used 
the money to pay for transportation of participants, 
renting of space, photocopies and fees for moderators and 
facilitators. FECIV is planning to use the remaining funds 
to hold a similar seminar in Gaza province before the end 
of the year. 
HR-03-656-02 Radio Program on Human Rights 
Amount Granted: USD 3,500 
Obligated: USD 2,000 
Balance: USD 1,500 
Location: Nampula province 
Status: This project is active. The League of Human Rights 
is facing problems completing this project because local 
vendors in the region who supply needed materials such as 
tapes, recorders, and microphones, do not want to comply 
with State Department payment policies. Attempts are still 
under way to find alternatives. 
HR-03-656-03 Girls Resource Center 
Amount Granted: USD 12,000 
Obligated: USD 5,500 
Balance: USD 6,500 
Location: Changalane, Boane ditrict, Maputo province 
Status: This project is active. NGO Forum for Women 
Educators of Mozambique (FAWEMO) has used part of the funds 
to buy office equipment and t-shirts used in their campaign 
to prevent girls from dropping out of school. FAWEMO is 
planning to hold a similar campaign during school vacations 
in November. 
HR-03-656-04 - Community in Democratic Development 
Amount Granted: USD 15,000 
Disbursed: USD 14,793.14 
Balance: USD 206.86 
Location: Manica province 
Status: The project was completed. The Mozambican Network 
of NGO\'s Against Drugs used the funds to produce a brochure 
on human rights and democracy, as well as to hold 
roundtables and debates in areas where the communities have 
little or no access to information on these topics. The 
remaining balance will be deobligated. 
HR-03-656-05 Human Rights, Democracy and Gender 
Amount Granted: USD 7,500 
Disbursed Amount: USD 7,473.94 
Balance: USD 26.06 
Location: Moamba district, Maputo province 
Status: The project was completed. NGO Association for the 
Development of Rural Project was successful in bringing 
together local communities, the League of Human Rights and 
local authorities in Moamba (i.e. government officials, 
police, and the courts) to learn about and discuss key 
human rights issues like the universal declaration of human 
rights, democracy, discrimination against women on the 
workplace and the role of civil society in the promotion of 
gender participation in the rural areas. 
HR-03-656-06 Campaign Against Sexual Abuse of Children 
Amount Granted: USD 7,000 
Disbursed Amount: USD 6,277 
Balance: USD 623 
Location: Cabo Delgado, Tete and Gaza provinces 
Status: Based on experience acquired in South Africa, NGO 
Community Devlopment Forum (FDC) launched a campaign to 
combat sexual abuse against children in Pemba and the 
transportation corridor areas of Tete province, where the 
problem of child prostitution and exploitation is 
considerable. FDC is planning to use the balance to 
produce pamphlets on the issue. 
LA LIME 
"
"22181","10/29/2004 10:21","04MAPUTO1432","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE156575","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001432 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S HTREGER AND EB/CBA - DWINSTEAD 
DURBAN FOR FCS - JKUEHNER, LKOHRS, AELLARY 
JOHANNESBURG FOR FCS - JVANRENSBURG, WCENTER 
USDOC FOR AHILLIGAS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, BFIF 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: FY 2004 BFIF COMMERCIAL OUTREACH REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 156575 
 
1. SUMMARY. In September-October, econ/poloffs and 
econ/commercial and political assistants traveled to five 
Mozambican provinces visiting various U.S. businesses, commercial 
associations, and local entrepreneurs to support U.S. commercial 
and investment activities and evaluate the business climate 
facing U.S. investors in Mozambique. This year\'s BFIF program 
resulted in the identification of potential business and 
investment opportunities for U.S. firms, requests for information 
on U.S. financial and lending institutions, and continued 
dialogue on Mozambicans\' efforts to take advantage of AGOA. The 
best opportunities for U.S. investment in Mozambique continue to 
be in construction equipment, agribusiness and agriculture, with 
increased potential for high-end tourism. END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
COMMERICAL OUTREACH IN ZAMBEZIA PROVINCE 
---------------------------------------- 
2. On September 10-16, econ/poloff and econ/commercial assistant 
traveled to Zambezia Province in northern Mozambique to conduct 
commercial outreach, meet with business contacts, and familiarize 
themselves with economic activity in the area. During the trip, 
they attended the Zambezia Economic Forum, a conference aimed at 
evaluating the economic and social performance of the province; 
met with the governor of Zambezia province to discuss agro 
industry investment; visited a tea plantation looking to procure 
equipment from the U.S.; toured the port of Quelimane, one of 
Mozambique\'s smaller ports recently concessioned to Cornelder 
(Holland) for privatization; and visited the Agrimo-Dunavant 
cotton factory, the largest U.S. investment in the province 
located in Morrumbala, working with more than 500 farmer groups 
in the area. 
 
3. New activities in agriculture, manufacturing, trade and 
tourism have contributed to the development of Zambezia Province. 
We identified the following investment opportunities. Due to the 
large area available for the rice production in province, 
Zambezia businessmen would welcome U.S. investment in irrigation 
systems and in a rice-peeling factory. South African investors 
have made investments in eco-tourism projects, hunting reserves 
and tourism development on the islands just off the coast of 
Pebane, and there may be opportunities for U.S. investment in 
this sector as well. The Sociedade de Desenvolvimento da 
Zambezia (SDZ) tea plantation would like to receive more 
information on USG financial lending organizations such as EX-IM 
Bank, OPIC, and USTDA. SDZ currently purchases equipment from 
Japan and India but is researching opportunities to procure from 
U.S. suppliers. Cotton processed at Agrimo-Dunavant is exported 
to Mauritius, Lesotho and Taiwan. The cotton exported to Lesotho 
is used to make jeans exported to the U.S. under AGOA. The 
company intends to purchase additional trucks, trailers and 
Caterpillar equipment, and expressed interest in contacting EX-IM 
Bank as a possible source of financing. Post will follow up on 
inquiries and pass additional information, as requested. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
COMMERICAL OUTREACH IN SOFALA AND MANICA PROVINCES 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
4. Econ/poloff and political assistant visited Sofala and Manica 
provinces in central Mozambique September 27 October 1 to 
conduct commercial outreach, business meetings and site visits to 
key industries in the region. The city of Beira, Mozambique\'s 
second largest, has been an important commercial hub due to its 
port and the Beira Development Corridor, running east-west from 
Harare to Beira. On a visit to Belita, the only garment and 
textile factory in Mozambique currently exporting under AGOA, 
Belita Country Manager Joao Nogueira expressed concern over the 
increased competition coming from China, stressing the need for 
Mozambique\'s continued eligibility under AGOA. Belita currently 
employs over 600 workers and exports finished garments to U.S. 
brands including Vanity Fair, Lee and Ralph Lauren Chaps. 
 
5. Also in Beira, econ/poloff and political assistant visited the 
Commercial Association of Beira (ACB), a 500-member association 
active in providing advice to prospective investors and 
establishing working groups to liaise with the GRM on commercial 
issues. ACB members complained that Maputo continues to absorb 
most of the investment opportunities in the country. They urged 
influential countries like the U.S. to help reverse this trend and 
sought assistance in from Embassy in educating U.S. investors on 
investment opportunities in the region. Post looks to pursue 
commercial programs with ACB, such as investment-related talks and 
visitor programs that may help U.S. investors in the central 
provinces or inform businesses how to take advantage of incentive 
programs such as AGOA. 
 
6. Due to its moderate climate, Manica is a rich province for 
agriculture, and the U.S.-based organizations Technoserve and 
ACDI-Voca, both USAID-funded, are very active in providing 
training programs to local producers and finding export markets 
for Mozambican fruit and vegetables. Econ/poloff and political 
assistant met with representatives from both organizations to 
discuss the local agricultural sector and markets for export. 
Many Zimbabwean farmers have moved to border regions of Manica in 
the last few years because of Zimbabwe\'s difficulties, and a visit 
was made to a Zimbabwean-owned farm producing paprika, flowers, 
and tobacco for export to Europe and South Africa. There is 
strong agreement that the horticulture industry in Manica has the 
potential for large growth, and its capacity to produce fresh 
flowers and fruit will lead to more investment. Producers have 
recorded great success in exporting roses and other fresh cut 
flowers, as well as flower seeds. Product is currently driven to 
Harare then flown to market, but high fuel prices and poor roads 
have begun to limit the producers\' ability to ship product in a 
timely manner. Farmers are currently looking into air shipments 
to Europe from Chimoio, but production volume is not high enough 
at present to take advantage of this option. Econ/poloff spoke 
with Zimbabwean farmers and local government officials about the 
current land and loan issues facing local farmers. Long-term 
financing is virtually non-existent in Mozambique, which has 
limited the rate at which planting and production can increase. 
Manican farmers are seeking help from U.S. financial institutions 
to tackle these issues. Post will follow up on inquiries and pass 
additional information, as requested. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
COMMERICAL OUTREACH IN NAMPULA AND TETE PROVINCES 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
7. Econ/poloff and political assistant traveled to Nampula and 
Tete provinces October 11 - 15. Nampula, Mozambique\'s third- 
largest city, has become a magnet for African and South Asian 
businessmen, many of whom operate in the informal sector. Direct 
U.S. investment in the region is still virtually non-existent, 
although cashew and cotton producers are increasing production 
and exporting product to Europe, India, and regional markets, 
many with assistance from the USAID-funded organization 
Technoserve. There appears to be no tangible prospects for 
increased exports from Nampula under AGOA in the near future, and 
Nampula\'s only textile factory with potential export capacity has 
been idled by a strike for over a year, with no signs of 
resolution. The biggest recent economic news in the region has 
been the emergence of Air Corridor, a new Nampula-based airline 
managed and owned by Mozambicans of Pakistani ethnicity. The 
airline started operations in August 2004, breaking the 
government-controlled monopoly on domestic airline services that 
had existed since independence. 
 
8. Tete province is in many ways less developed than Nampula, but 
the economy is growing more rapidly, with U.S. investment playing 
a leading role. The Universal Leaf Tobacco Company of Richmond, 
Virginia (through its local affiliate, Mozambican Leaf Tobacco) 
is currently constructing a factory that will process over 44 
million tons of tobacco per year and will employ an estimated 
1,500 people. Approximately 34,000 local farmers will grow 
tobacco for Mozambican Leaf in Tete province this season, and the 
majority of the product will be sold by Mozambican Leaf to Philip 
Morris. Tete province also boasts a new paprika factory by 
Cheetah (Netherlands), built in 2004, and a new cotton processing 
factory to be built by Dunavant (Australia) in 2005. Discussions 
with local officials revealed that the government was considering 
two bids for a concession to operate the coal mine in Moatize, 
and intended to announce the bid winner prior to Mozambique\'s 
presidential elections in December. The best opportunities for 
U.S. investment in Nampula and Tete provinces continue to be in 
agribusiness (i.e. equipment, warehouses, processors, 
wholesalers, transporters, and retailers to support the growing 
agricultural industry). 
 
------------ 
EXPENDITURES 
------------ 
9. Post was allocated USD 7,000 in BFIF funds for FY04. Our total 
expenditures on these trips were USD 12,295.28, and post plans to 
pay the difference out of program or other funds as appropriate. 
The entire budget was allocated to travel, ground transportation, 
and per diem as follows: 
Total airfare: USD 4,889.06 
Total per diem: USD 4,490.93 
Total ground transportation: USD 2,915.29 
The cost of travel within Mozambique is very high, with plane 
tickets to the North of the country costing the equivalent of full 
fare rates to Europe from South Africa. Post made a concerted 
effort to remain fiscally prudent and double-up programming where 
possible. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
10. This year\'s BFIF program once again proved successful. Post 
was able to provide considerable commercial outreach to U.S. 
businesses operating in Mozambique. Additionally, post was able 
to expand its knowledge of business activity outside the capital 
and identify further areas for U.S. investment and export sales. 
Valuable commercial and economic information was provided to 
businesses looking to partner with U.S. investors, and an 
informative investment conference was attended and business 
contacts were expanded. Mozambique is a difficult and distant 
market for U.S. businesses to penetrate, but with continued 
commercial outreach and increased efforts by post to develop 
bilateral business-to-business contacts, business ties can be 
expanded. Post appreciates this opportunity and looks forward to 
the possibility of working with the BFIF program again in 2005. 
End Comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"22309","11/2/2004 12:01","04MAPUTO1445","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001445 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
AIDAC 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS, AND EB/IFD 
USAID FOR AFR/SA 
MCC FOR APPLEGARTH, HEWKO, HARRINGTON, AND 
HERING MCC ALSO FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EINV, MZ, MCC, OPIC 
SUBJECT: MCC CEO PAUL APPLEGARTH\'S VISIT TO 
MOZAMBIQUE, 20-24 OCTOBER 2004 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Handle Accordingly. 
Not for Internet Distribution. 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: DURING A FOUR-DAY VISIT, 
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION CEO PAUL 
APPLEGARTH AND HIS TEAM MET WITH PRESIDENT 
CHISSANO, SENIOR GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS, PRIVATE 
SECTOR LEADERS, AND THE PRESS IN AN EFFORT TO 
BECOME MORE FAMILIAR WITH MOZAMBIQUE AND RAISE 
AWARENESS OF THE MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE ACCOUNT 
(MCA). THE MCC DELEGATION ALSO TRAVELED NORTH TO 
THE PROVINCES OF CABO DELGADO AND NAMPULA, THE 
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS OF MOZAMBIQUE\'S MCA PROPOSAL. 
THE VISIT WAS A SUCCESS, AND MOZAMBICANS AND POST 
LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING WITH MCC STAFF AS 
EVALUATION OF MOZAMBIQUE\'S PROPOSAL CONTINUES. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) MCC CEO PAUL APPLEGARTH TRAVELED TO 
MOZAMBIQUE OCTOBER 20-24 WITH MCC VICE PRESIDENT 
JOHN HEWKO, SENIOR ADVISOR MAUREEN HARRINGTON, AND 
PRESS OFFICER KRISTEN HERING. THE TEAM\'S VISIT 
INCLUDED MEETINGS AND SITE VISITS IN AND AROUND 
MAPUTO AND AN OVERNIGHT TRIP TO THE NORTHERN 
PROVINCES OF CABO DELGADO AND NAMPULA. MCA 
TECHNICAL GROUP CHAIR IN THE MINISTRY OF PLAN AND 
FINANCE, PEDRO COUTO, AND THE GROUP\'S PRIVATE 
SECTOR REPRESENTATIVE, SERGIO CHITARA, ACCOMPANIED 
THE TEAM ON THE TRIP NORTH. 
 
3. (U) THE MCA TECHNICAL GROUP HAD TASKED CHITARA, 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE CTA - THE CONFEDERATION 
OF MOZAMBICAN BUSINESS ASSOCIATIONS, WHICH IS THE 
PREEMINENT BUSINESS GROUP IN MOZAMBIQUE - WITH 
PRIMARY DRAFTING RESPONSIBILITIES FOR MOZAMBIQUE\'S 
MCA PROPOSAL. MOZAMBIQUE SUBMITTED ITS PROPOSAL 
O/A 23 SEPTEMBER. THE PROGRAM DETAILED IN THE 
DOCUMENT IS FOCUSED ON INFRASTRUCTURE, 
AGRICULTURE/AGRIBUSINESS, AND TOURISM IN THE 
NORTH, PRIMARILY IN THE PROVINCES OF CABO DELGADO, 
NIASSA, AND NAMPULA WITH A SECTION OF NORTHERN 
ZAMBEZIA. 
 
4. (SBU) THE MCC DELEGATION\'S VISIT COINCIDED WITH 
THE FIRST WEEK OF THE CAMPAIGN PERIOD FOR WHAT 
PROMISE TO BE HISTORIC NATIONAL ELECTIONS. 
PRESIDENT CHISSANO\'S AGREEMENT TO MEET WITH THE 
DELEGATION DURING THIS TIME REFLECTS THE 
IMPORTANCE THE MOZAMBICAN GOVERNMENT PLACES ON THE 
MCA AND HIS PERSONAL SUPPORT FOR ITS PRINCIPLES. 
BECAUSE MOST SENIOR MEMBERS OF THE GRM WERE IN THE 
PROVINCES CAMPAIGNING, THE ONLY OTHER MEETINGS 
WITH GOVERNMENT LEADERS WERE WITH MINISTER OF 
TOURISM SUMBANA AND GOVERNOR JOSE PACHECO OF CABO 
DELGADO PROVINCE. 
 
5. (SBU) IN THE MEETING, PRESIDENT CHISSANO 
EXPRESSED HIS STRONG SUPPORT FOR THE MCA AND 
SHOWED HIMSELF TO BE WELL-BRIEFED ON THE SUBJECT. 
CEO APPLEGARTH COMPLIMENTED CHISSANO FOR 
IMPLEMENTING THE POLICIES THAT HAD ENABLED 
MOZAMBIQUE TO QUALIFY. CHISSANO SAID HE BELIEVED 
STRONGLY IN THE IDEAS BEHIND THE MCA AND INTENDED 
TO CONTINUE HELPING MOZAMBIQUE MAKE PROGRESS IN 
EACH OF THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS AFTER 
LEAVING OFFICE IN A FEW MONTHS. CEO APPLEGARTH 
CONFIRMED THAT MOZAMBIQUE\'S NATIONAL ELECTIONS (1- 
2 DECEMBER) WOULD PLAY A ROLE IN MCC CONSIDERATION 
OF MOZAMBIQUE FOR FY05 ELIGIBILITY AND FUNDING, 
NOTING THAT MOZAMBIQUE NEEDED TO DEMONSTRATE FULLY 
TO ALL THAT THE ELECTIONS WERE TRANSPARENT. 
(COMMENT: THIS WAS A REFERENCE TO THE ONGOING 
DISPUTE BETWEEN THE EU AND THE NATIONAL ELECTIONS 
COMMISSION OVER ELECTION OBSERVER ACCESS TO 
PROVINCIAL AND NATIONAL-LEVEL VOTE COUNTING. END 
COMMENT.) 
 
6. (U) THE MEETING WITH PRESIDENT CHISSANO WAS 
ONLY ONE OF THE HIGHLIGHTS OF THE VISIT. OTHERS 
INCLUDED: 
-- MINISTER OF TOURISM FERNANDO SUMBANA. THE 
MINISTER MET WITH THE TEAM PRIOR TO THEIR 
DEPARTURE FOR THE NORTH. HE DESCRIBED 
MOZAMBIQUE\'S TOURISM STRATEGY AND EXPRESSED HIS 
PLEASURE THAT MOZAMBIQUE\'S MCA PROPOSAL INCLUDED 
THE TOURISM SECTOR AND RELATED INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROJECTS. HE ALSO ATTENDED A DINNER IN CEO 
APPLEGARTH\'S HONOR HOSTED BY THE AMBASSADOR. 
-- PRIVATE SECTOR. THE TEAM DISCUSSED THE 
POTENTIAL FOR AND CONSTRAINTS TO POVERTY-REDUCING 
ECONOMIC GROWTH IN MOZAMBIQUE WITH INDIVIDUALS 
REPRESENTING THE PRIVATE SECTOR IN A VARIETY OF 
SETTINGS: A MEETING IN MAPUTO WITH MEMBERS OF 
CTA\'S INFORMAL \"STEERING COMMITTEE\" FOR THE 
PROPOSAL; THE DINNER HOSTED BY AMBASSADOR LA LIME; 
A LUNCH IN MAPUTO; A DINNER IN PEMBA THAT INCLUDED 
THE GOVERNOR OF CABO DELGADO; AND LUNCH ON ILHA DE 
MOZAMBIQUE. PARTICIPANTS FOR THESE EVENTS 
INCLUDED MEMBERS OF CTA\'S LEADERSHIP AND 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM BUSINESS SECTORS SUCH AS 
AGRICULTURE/AGRIBUSINESS, TOURISM (INCLUDING GAME 
RESERVES), AQUACULTURE, BANKING, LAW, AND PRIVATE 
CONSULTING. 
-- DONORS. DURING A DONOR BREAKFAST, CEO 
APPLEGARTH NOTED THE MCC\'S WILLINGNESS TO WORK 
WITH OTHER DONORS, INCLUDING POSSIBLY CO-FUNDING 
OTHER DONOR PROGRAMS. 
-- SITE VISITS. ALL OF THE SITE VISITS WERE TIED 
IN SOME WAY TO MOZAMBIQUE\'S PROPOSAL AND OFFERED 
THE TEAM INSIGHT INTO THE PROPOSED PROGRAM\'S 
OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS. WHILE IN THE 
NORTH, THE TEAM VISITED TWO OF MOZAMBIQUE\'S 
POSSIBLE TOURISM DESTINATIONS, IBO ISLAND AND ILHA 
DE MOZAMBIQUE. ALSO ON THE AGENDA WAS A TOUR OF 
NACALA PORT AND AIRPORT - THE PORT IS PROPOSED AS 
THE SITE OF AN EXPORT PROCESSING ZONE, AND THE 
AIRPORT IS ONE OF SEVERAL AIRSTRIPS SLATED FOR 
UPGRADES - AND A VISIT TO THE MIRANDA CASHEW 
PROCESSING PLANT. WHILE IN MAPUTO, THE TEAM 
TOURED MAPUTO PORT, AND HEWKO AND HARRINGTON 
VISITED CITRUM, A CITRUS FARM THAT, LIKE MIRANDA, 
IS EXPORTING TO EUROPEAN AND OTHER MARKETS. 
-- PRESS EVENTS. POST ARRANGED A NUMBER OF PRESS 
EVENTS DURING THE VISIT. A PHOTOGRAPHER FROM THE 
PORTUGUESE-LANGUAGE ECONOMIC MONTHLY \"TEMPO\" 
ACCOMPANIED THE TEAM ON THE TRIP NORTH. ON THE 
EVENING OF 21 OCTOBER, THE INDEPENDENT TELEVISION 
CHANNEL STV AIRED NINETEEN MINUTES OF A ONE-ON-ONE 
INTERVIEW WITH CEO APPLEGARTH DURING ITS WEEKLY 
BUSINESS ROUNDUP \"ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVES.\" THE 
CONTENT INCLUDED AN EXPLANATION OF THE MCC, THE 
PURPOSE OF THE VISIT, AND ELIGIBILITY AND FUNDING 
CRITERIA. THE PROGRAM HAS A LARGE LEAD-IN 
AUDIENCE AND TARGETS THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND MIDDLE 
CLASS. CEO APPLEGARTH HELD A BREAKFAST WITH 
SEVERAL JOURNALISTS ON OCTOBER 24 AND LATER GAVE A 
FOLLOW-UP INTERVIEW TO STV. STATE TELEVISION 
(TVM) INCLUDED COVERAGE OF THE TEAM\'S VISIT TO 
NAMPULA PROVINCE, AIRING A BRIEF INTERVIEW DURING 
THE TOUR OF THE MIRANDA CASHEW PLANT. 
-- POST Q AND A. A STAFF BRIEFING FOR THE TEAM 
EVOLVED INTO A QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION THAT 
WAS CONTINUED LATER ON THE FIRST DAY OF THE VISIT 
AT CEO APPLEGARTH\'S REQUEST. THIS ADDED GREATLY 
TO POST\'S UNDERSTANDING OF MCC ISSUES. 
 
7. (U) COMMENT: CEO APPLEGARTH SUCCEEDED IN 
INCREASING MCC FAMILIARIZATION WITH MOZAMBIQUE, 
BROADENING MOZAMBICANS\' UNDERSTANDING OF THE MCA 
AND MCC, AND RAISING PUBLIC AWARENESS OF THE 
COUNTRY\'S PROPOSAL. MOZAMBICANS AND POST LOOK 
FORWARD TO WORKING WITH MCC STAFF AS EVALUATION OF 
MOZAMBIQUE\'S PROPOSAL CONTINUES. END COMMENT. 
LA LIME 
"
"22310","11/2/2004 12:02","04MAPUTO1446","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001446 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS, EB/IFD/OIA 
MCC FOR APPLEGARTH, HEWKO, BRIGGS, GAULL 
STATE PASS OPIC FOR SHORE 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, MZ, OPIC, Nyati, Tourism, MCC 
SUBJECT: OPIC-SUPPORTED US INVESTOR IN MOZAMBIQUE BACKS INTO 
EXPENSIVE SETTLEMENT ON LAND DISPUTE 
 
 
Business Confidential Information. Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: On October 28, American investor David 
Herbert and his Danish partner Jorgen Nielsen settled a 
dispute with the Zimbabwean firm Cabo do Mar over rights to 
the land on which their Nyati Beach Lodge is located. They 
agreed to pay usd 650,000 to permanently block execution of 
an October 17 provincial court order declaring that Cabo do 
Mar held usage rights to the land and authorizing eviction 
of current occupants. OPIC had financed Mr. Herbert\'s 
purchase earlier this year of half of the lodge. Before the 
negotiations that led to the settlement, Ambassador La Lime 
had expressed to GRM officials USG concern over the threats 
to a U.S. investment, and OPIC President Peter Watson had 
written the Prime Minister. Mr. Herbert is exploring his 
legal options. Several aspects of this matter are not 
clear, and it provides another example of factors that 
discourage investment in Mozambique. End Summary. 
 
Potter Concession 
----------------- 
2. (U) In 1994, Zimbabwean lodge developer Rex Potter 
purchased the rights for 50 years to a ten-hectare plot of 
beach land on the Sao Sebastiao peninsula in Inhambane 
province from the government (it is not clear whether 
provincial or national) for 30 million meticais, worth about 
usd 2,500 at the time. Mozambican law does not recognize 
ownership of land; it does, however, concede to individuals 
and corporations the right to build on land. The 
improvements made upon that land may be registered as 
private property. Disputes involving conflicting 
concessions are common. 
 
3. (U) In 2001, Mr. Potter and his Mozambican company, Cabo 
do Mar, registered improvements with the Inhambane 
provincial registry and board of deeds, stating that three 
huts and a restaurant had been established. Mr. Potter 
never established a functioning beach lodge on the property, 
however, and Mr. Herbert and his staff state that the 
claimed improvements are an exaggeration at best. 
 
Formation of Sanctuary, Issuance of Nyati Concession 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
4. (U) In 1998, the Ministry of Tourism formed the 
Vilanculos Coastal Wildlife Sanctuary, a land trust 
including the peninsula in which no building could be 
constructed without permission of the government. The 
Sanctuary itself is a private corporation, owned by multiple 
investors, with a certain degree of autonomy to manage the 
area. However, since 1999, the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development has been solely responsible for granting 
land concessions within the Sanctuary lands. 
 
5. (SBU) In November 2002, when Mr. Nielsen was in the 
process of negotiating a deal to buy rights to the land on 
which Nyati Lodge now stands, Cabo do Mar sued the Sanctuary 
to block the deal. The Inhambane provincial judge dismissed 
Cabo do Mar\'s claims after reviewing documents, ruling that 
his court was not the appropriate venue for hearing such a 
case. On November 23, 2002, Inhambane province governor 
Aires Bonfiacio Baptista Aly issued a letter to all parties 
stating that the Sanctuary was the sole owner of the 
property in question and that the planned Nyati Lodge 
project should be encouraged to continue. 
 
6. (SBU) In June 2003, the Sanctuary issued a concession of 
11 hectares to Nyati Beach Lodge Lda., a Mozambican firm 
owned by Nyati Beach APS, a Danish firm owned by Mr. 
Nielsen. It appears that this concession overlaps the 
concession granted by the GRM in 1994 to Mr. Potter. Mr. 
Nielsen started construction of an upscale lodge 
immediately, registered his improvements with the provincial 
registry, and started business in early 2004. 
 
Ruling By New Judge For Potter 
------------------------------ 
7. (SBU) In March 2004, new Inhambane provincial judge Jose 
Sampaio decided to hear Mr. Potter\'s case anew. (Sampaio, 
who had arrived in 2003, previously had served as a judge in 
Cabo Delgado province, where he was best known for having 
been the presiding judge in the 2000 Montepuez incident, in 
which over 100 protestors were jailed after an opposition 
rally protesting the results of the 1999 elections and 
subsequently asphyxiated in a tiny jail cell.) After 
reading the documents and without initiating a formal 
hearing, in March Judge Sampaio ruled in favor of Mr. Potter 
and Cabo do Mar, awarding Cabo do Mar $300,000 in damages 
from the Sanctuary. The Sanctuary intended to appeal the 
case, a process that would likely draw it out by two years 
or more. However, it failed to turn in its $10 filing fee 
with the court until late September, ten days past the 
deadline. According to the Sanctuary, a notice of the fee 
due was not served to the Sanctuary\'s legal representatives 
in Maputo; rather, it was given to a lower-level employee in 
Inhambane who did not act. By failing to appeal on time, 
Sanctuary was out of options. 
 
Herbert Purchase of Stake in Lodge 
---------------------------------- 
8. (SBU) In August 2004, U.S. citizen David Herbert, who 
owns part or all of three other concessions in the 
Sanctuary, purchased 50 percent of Nyati from Mr. Nielsen 
for $225,000 with OPIC financing and began making 
improvements. 
 
Enforcement Order Threatens Eviction 
------------------------------------ 
9. (SBU) On October 17, Judge Sampaio issued a court order 
giving Cabo do Mar the right to occupy the Nyati property. 
On October 20, Rex Potter and Inhambane police showed up at 
Nyati lodge to enforce an immediate eviction. Mr. Herbert 
says this was the first the Sanctuary lawyers or Nyati Lodge 
had heard of the court order. After preliminary talks with 
lodge staff, Mr. Potter agreed to postpone eviction until 
October 28. 
 
Judicial Efforts 
---------------- 
10. (SBU) Mr. Herbert and Nyati Lodge then became directly 
involved for the first time. Mr. Herbert flew to the 
provincial capital, Inhambane city, on October 27 in order 
to seek a dispatch blocking any eviction proceedings on 
lands within the Sanctuary. An Embassy Econ-Pol officer 
accompanied him as an observer. Sanctuary lawyers were not 
present. At the same time, Mr. Herbert and his partner 
sought other support, including from the U.S. and Danish 
governments, in their effort to delay enforcement of the 
eviction order. We understand that the environment 
minister, who is a Sanctuary board member, asked the 
Attorney General to intervene but was told that only a court 
could do so. OPIC President Watson wrote Prime Minister 
Luisa Diogo, and Ambassador La Lime spoke with several 
senior GRM officials, to express concern about this threat 
to a U.S. investment. 
 
11. (SBU) It appeared that Mr. Herbert and Nyati\'s lawyers 
had received no solid information from the Sanctuary about 
the validity of Mr. Potter\'s claims. They did not have a 
copy of Mr. Potter\'s 1994 land concession, a map of the 
concession, or even Judge Sampaio\'s October court order. 
The lack of information was especially puzzling since Mr. 
Herbert had assumed the role of Chairman of the Sanctuary\'s 
board in August 2004. 
 
12. (SBU) Judge Sampaio was not inclined to meet with the 
Nyati lawyers and forced them to wait for several hours. 
Despite what appears to have been pressure by senior 
judicial and government officials, he did not grant the 
delay Mr. Herbert sought. On October 28, he granted a 
dispatch stating that a hearing would be held on the subject 
on November 9. While it could be argued that the dispatch 
prevented any eviction proceedings by virtue of setting a 
hearing date on the matter, it did not explicitly make a 
statement to that effect. 
 
Negotiation and Settlement 
-------------------------- 
13. (SBU) In the afternoon of October 28, the Nyati group 
(plus observing Embassy officer) flew to the town of 
Vilanculos to meet that day with representatives from Cabo 
do Mar. By this time, the Nyati team recognized it was in a 
weak position and was willing to negotiate a settlement with 
Cabo do Mar. Mr. Herbert was particularly concerned by 
reports from Mr. Nielsen that Cabo do Mar had contacted 
Danish media outlets about the possibility of an eviction of 
the mostly Danish guests from Nyati that weekend, a 
potential public relations disaster. 
 
14. (SBU) At the negotiations, Mr. Herbert and his group 
agreed that Cabo do Mar had a valid court order recognizing 
its rights to a piece of land on Sao Sebastiao peninsula 
overlapping with the property subsequently developed by 
Nyati. Cabo do Mar, for its part, acknowledged that it did 
not have legal right to use the buildings of the Nyati 
Lodge, but asserted a right to shut them down, and 
threatened to do so. Mr. Herbert offered to find Cabo do 
Mar an equivalent parcel of property within the Sanctuary, 
but Cabo do Mar was not interested. No deal was reached at 
the table, but a few hours later the parties agreed to 
terms: Mr. Herbert and Mr. Nielsen would pay Cabo do Mar usd 
450,000 up front, plus usd 20,000 per month for the next ten 
months, in return for which Cabo do Mar would not enforce 
the court order in perpetuity. After the deal was struck, 
no eviction took place on October 29. The final agreement 
is being drafted the week of November 1. 
 
Much Remains Unclear 
-------------------- 
15. (SBU) There are a number of murky aspects to this 
matter. The Cabo do Mar partners at the negotiating table 
included a member of the National Assembly from the ruling 
Frelimo party, Eleuterio Marta Felisberto. Mr. Felisberto 
had been working at the Inhambane province land registration 
office in 1994 when Mr. Potter\'s concession was granted. 
Mr. Herbert suspects that the judge\'s decision to reopen a 
case decided by a predecessor and rule in favor of Cabo do 
Mar without a hearing after only examining documents may 
have been influenced by Mr. Felisberto, but he has no proof. 
The Sanctuary\'s failure to pay its appeal fee on time also 
appears to have resulted from the court\'s action in 
informing Sanctuary employees, rather than its lawyers; Mr. 
Herbert at one point alleged that this was the result of 
corruption, but the Sanctuary may have dropped the ball. It 
also is not clear what Mr. Nielsen or Mr. Herbert knew, or 
should have known, about Mr. Potter\'s claim and the judge\'s 
decision against the Sanctuary before Mr. Nielsen sold half 
of the lodge to Mr. Herbert. 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
16. (SBU) Mr. Herbert and Nyati Lodge have not decided what 
legal actions to take next. The most likely is that the 
lodge may sue the Mozambican government for damages, a 
hearing that would be held in an administrative court in 
Maputo. This would be a drawn-out process, but may be a 
viable option since there are precedents of the GRM paying 
damages to aggrieved parties in the wake of disputes caused 
by conflicting government concessions of business or land 
rights. Another would be for Nyati to sue the Sanctuary 
directly. Nyati would like to take legal action of some 
sort against Cabo do Mar as well, but it may not have a 
viable case. Regardless of what steps are taken, the 
developments in this case provide another example of how 
Mozambique\'s legal and judicial systems discourage 
investment. 
LA LIME 
"
"22403","11/3/2004 5:30","04MAPUTO1447","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001447 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S, MCC FOR GAULL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MZ, ZM, Electricity 
SUBJECT: MUGABE VISITS MOZAMBIQUE, CLAIMS ZIMBABWE IS ON 
THE MEND 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Zimbabwean President Mugabe visited 
Mozambique on October 10 - 12, with stops at Cahora Bassa Dam 
and the resort town of Vilankulos. Mugabe told reporters his 
country was overcoming its political and economic crisis and 
announced that Zimbabwe was paying back its USD 8.5 million 
debt to the dam operating company. President Chissano 
accompanied Mugabe to the dam, praising GOZ efforts on 
electoral reform and what he said were recent economic 
improvements. Although GRM officials and mainstream press 
put a positive spin on the visit, independent press articles 
were critical, and some journalists privately described it as 
a staged effort by Chissano to create an impression of 
increased stability in Zimbabwe and by Mugabe to secure 
continued Mozambican support after Chissano leaves office. 
End Summary. 
 
Zimbabwe Makes Payments Despite Crisis 
-------------------------------------- 
2. (U) Zimbabwean President Mugabe visited Mozambique on 
October 10 - 12. He was accompanied by President Joaquim 
Chissano on a visit to the Cahora Bassa Dam, after which he 
traveled to the Indigo Bay tourist center in the resort town 
of Vilankulos, Inhambane. During the three-day visit, Mugabe 
told reporters that his country was overcoming its political 
and economic crisis and that it was paying its overdue debts 
to both the Mozambican port and rail company, CFM, and HCB, 
the concession that operates the Cahora Bossa Dam. 
 
3. (SBU) HCB currently supplies 170 megawatts of electricity 
to Zimbabwe and has transmission capacity to send up to 500 
megawatts. According to local press reports, Mugabe pledged 
that the Zimbabwean electricity company (ZESA) would comply 
with the timetable for paying off its debt to HCB, which 
stands at approximately USD 8.5 million. ZESA intends to pay 
USD 2.25 million a month to HCB. According to an October 11 
press report, HCB confirmed that regular payments had been 
made by ZESA. At least one newspaper has reported in the 
past that the GOZ would like to purchase 25 percent of HCB 
once the GRM buys the Portuguese government\'s 82 percent 
stake. (Comment: Whether or not Zimbabwe could pay for a 
quarter of the dam may be a moot point, as the GRM does not 
appear to be making headway in its effort to buy the 
Portuguese stake before Chissano leaves office in January. 
The sticking point is reported to be HCB\'s $2 billion debt to 
the Portuguese government. End Comment.) 
 
4. (U) Accompanying Mugabe on his visit to the dam, President 
Chissano praised Zimbabwe for meeting its obligations to 
Mozambique despite the enormous difficulties it has been 
facing. He congratulated the Zimbabwean government on what 
he called its improved economic and political outlook. 
Chissano also stated that he was pleased with the reform of 
electoral laws in Zimbabwe, which he asserted were in keeping 
with the spirit of the Southern African Development Community 
guidelines and principles on elections. 
 
5. (SBU) Although GRM officials put a positive spin on the 
visit, some journalists commented privately that the visit 
was orchestrated by Chissano, a close friend of Mugabe, and 
aimed at perpetuating a false impression of stability in 
Zimbabwe. They also asserted that the visit was an effort by 
Mugabe to secure Mozambique\'s continued support and sympathy 
in a post-Chissano FRELIMO government. Some independent 
newspapers carried articles harshly critical of the GRM\'s 
lenient stance towards Mugabe. Articles cited Chissano\'s 
support of the Zimbabwean government in the face of electoral 
violations and economic policies, including agrarian reform, 
that have \"destroyed the economy that, not long ago, was the 
most prosperous in Africa.\" 
 
Comment 
------- 
6. (SBU) Mugabe\'s visit came during Chissano\'s prolonged 
farewell to his country and his international friends. The 
two men share a history of struggle against colonialism that 
has made Chissano reluctant to acknowledge or address 
Mugabe\'s shortcomings. Although we do not believe ruling 
party presidential candidate Armando Guebuza shares 
Chissano\'s personal history and identification with Mugabe, 
we doubt he would be eager to pressure the GOZ. End comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"22581","11/8/2004 9:27","04MAPUTO1474","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001474 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S AND AF/FO 
MCC FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MZ, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT CHISSANO ADDRESSES DIPLOMATIC 
CORPS ON ELECTIONS 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Mozambique wants donor involvement 
and support as it prepares to hold national elections 
on December 1-2. President Chissano told Maputo\'s 
diplomatic corps that the path to democracy in 
Mozambique has been filled with challenges, but the 
process has evolved to the point that Mozambique now 
has credible electoral institutions equipped to carry 
out better and better elections. The President 
welcomed national and international participation in 
the electoral process, but cautioned that there needs 
to be good cooperation and understanding between the 
donors and the electoral organs for the good of the 
elections and the overall process. Comment: It 
appears that the National Elections Commission (CNE) 
may be opening a door to resolving differences with 
the European Union on the conduct of the observation 
effort during the final stages of the vote. The EU 
has not yet reacted to the CNE\'s latest proposal. 
Analysis on the CNE proposal and EU reaction will 
follow septel. End Comment and Summary 
 
2. (U) President Chissano convoked the diplomatic 
corps in Maputo, November 5, for an exchange on the 
electoral process and to offer donors the opportunity 
to address issues that he sensed might need 
clarification. The room was packed. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Democratic Processes Are in Place Now 
------------------------------------- 
3. (U) Stressing that elections represent a process 
more than anything else, Chissano opened his remarks 
to the diplomatic community by tracing the development 
of democracy in Mozambique. He noted several times 
that cultural issues, which were often at odds with 
democratic practices, had to be resolved in a way 
acceptable to all. Despite the challenges, Mozambicans 
today are better prepared to use democratic tools in 
settling differences. Mozambicans, the President said, 
are involved in a national debate, which includes 
civil society. As a result, they are resolving issues 
peacefully through discussion and through consensus. 
Mozambicans, he stressed several times, will never 
again resort to war. Those days are over. 
 
4. (U) The President reminded his audience that 
Mozambique has now held several elections, that it has 
a functioning, if somewhat boisterous, parliament, and 
that last year\'s municipal vote resulted in the 
election of 33 municipal governments. In addition, 
the President continued, the National Elections 
Commission (CNE) and the Constitutional Council are 
now better equipped to continue to organize elections 
and to improve on past performance. An electoral law 
reflecting strong national consensus is in place. 
 
---------------------------- 
Electoral Observers Welcomed 
---------------------------- 
5. (U) As his talk turned toward the December 
elections, the President worried about getting out the 
vote, which has declined significantly from 1994 
levels. He emphasized the need for the process to be 
orderly and free from violence. Mozambique, the 
president stressed, is open to national and foreign 
observers, but it is important that there be good 
understanding between the observers and the national 
electoral institutions for the good of the elections. 
Obviously referring to the ongoing dispute between the 
CNE and the European Union on the modalities for 
observing the elections in Mozambique, the President 
told his audience that he had just been told that the 
disagreements would be resolved using available 
technology. 
 
-------------- 
Donor Meddling 
-------------- 
6. (U) Elections, Chissano noted, have only been 
possible in Mozambique because of external financing. 
The challenge has been enormous, costly not without 
mistakes, he said. Installing multiparty democracy in 
a country where seventy per cent of the population was 
illiterate, where poverty levels were worse than they 
are today, and where there were no roads, no 
television and no phones in many districts has been 
extremely expensive and difficult. As a result, he 
complained, I don\'t like it when somebody reminds me 
that he paid for my jacket. When I hear that, it 
makes me want to take it off. But it is cold, so I 
keep it on. Using humor again, he took another shot 
at donors, this time by referring to an unnamed former 
U.S. Ambassador whom Chissano claims once told him 
that, we have the right to interfere because we pay 
most of the costs. He went on to say that this remark 
had so angered him that he would have returned the 
money had it not already been spent. He concluded his 
jousting by genuinely thanking donors for their 
support. As he did so, he reminded us that 
Mozambicans are not perfect and that mistakes will 
continue to be made, but the important thing is to be 
able to use the experience to build and to improve the 
process. 
 
--------------------------- 
The Need to Stay the Course 
--------------------------- 
7. (U) The president concluded his remarks by 
stressing that it is most important for Mozambique and 
the donor community to stick to established 
priorities, which include improved management of the 
budget, poverty reduction and consolidation of the 
development process. Mozambique is not only about 
reforming institutions. In many cases, such as with 
the justice sector, Mozambicans are trying to build 
institutions where none existed. It is about starting 
with nothing and building something from the bottom 
up. He brought up FRELIMO presidential candidate 
Guebuza by describing him as one who is of the same 
mind as he and as one who would continue Mozambique 
down the path of economic growth and prosperity. He 
asked the donors to work with Mozambique\'s next 
president in a constructive way so that the course of 
stability and economic growth for the country is 
maintained. And finally, he asked donors to please 
step forward, publicly or privately, if they had any 
additional concerns of which he should be apprised. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
8. (SBU) The president was relaxed and spoke with 
minimal reference to his text. He seemed genuine in 
his effort to improve the climate of communication 
between donors and government over the elections. 
Whether the substance of the CNE\'s proposal will 
satisfy the EU or other observer groups is another 
matter. Members of the EU who were present were not 
able to confirm whether the CNE\'s latest proposal 
addressed their concerns. They had not had time to 
study the CNE\'s document, which was released via press 
conference the day before. In recent weeks, the CNE 
has more than once said incorrectly that the issue has 
been settled satisfactorily. After the President 
concluded his remarks the Dutch Ambassador spoke on 
behalf of the EU and thanked the President for his 
openness and willingness to entertain options, which 
she said could open a door to resolving the current 
difficulties. End Comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"22715","11/10/2004 9:22","04MAPUTO1479","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE222244","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001479 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/TFS (BSTEPHENSON), S/CT (TKUSHNER), 
AF/E (MZIMMER), NEA/ARP (TWILLIAMS), IO/PHO (APEREZ), 
PASS NSC (MRUPPERT), TREASURY (JZARATE), AND OFAC 
(RWERNER) 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC, KTFN, EFIN, PTER, PREL, CVIS, ECON, MZ, LVPR 
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE/MOZAMBIQUE: LIST 63 - 
DESIGNATION OF JAMA\'AT AL-TAWHID WA\'AL-JIHAD 
 
REF: STATE 222244 
 
1. (U) This is an Action Request. See para 3. 
 
2. (SBU) On November 8, Econ/Pol Officer delivered 
reftel List 63, talking points, and background paper to 
the Director of Legal Issues and Chief of the Accounts 
Monitoring department for the Banco de Mocambique. The 
Bank is the financial regulatory body for the Republic 
of Mozambique. Bank officials were receptive to taking 
the steps requested, as they have been with previous 
requests of this nature. Before moving forward, 
however, they wanted to know if specific information was 
available tying Jama\'at al-Tawhid wa-al Jihad to 
Mozambique, or Southern Africa in general. 
 
3. (SBU) Action request for EB/ESC: Please provide any 
additional information available that post can share 
with Banco de Mocambique officials. 
LA LIME 
"
"22716","11/10/2004 9:22","04MAPUTO1480","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE222164","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001480 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/TFS (BSTEPHENSON), S/CT (TKUSHNER), 
AF/E (MZIMMER), NEA/ARP (TWILLIAMS), IO/PHO (APEREZ), 
PASS NSC (MRUPPERT), TREASURY (JZARATE), AND OFAC 
(RWERNER) 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC, KTFN, EFIN, PTER, PREL, CVIS, ECON, MZ, LVPR 
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE/MOZAMBIQUE: LIST 62 - 
DESIGNATION OF THE ISLAMIC AFRICAN RELIEF AGENCY 
(IARA), ALL OFFICES WORLDWIDE, AND FIVE SENIOR 
OFFICIALS 
 
REF: STATE 222164 
 
1. (U) This is an Action Request. See para 3. 
 
2. (SBU) On November 8, Econ/Pol Officer delivered 
reftel List 62, talking points, and background paper to 
the Director of Legal Issues and Chief of the Accounts 
Monitoring department for the Banco de Mocambique. The 
Bank is the financial regulatory body for the Republic 
of Mozambique. Bank officials were receptive to taking 
the steps requested, as they have been with previous 
requests of this nature. Before moving forward, 
however, they wanted to know if specific information was 
available tying the Islamic African Relief Agency to 
Mozambique, or Southern Africa in general. 
 
3. (SBU) Action request for EB/ESC: Please provide any 
additional information available that post can share 
with Banco de Mocambique officials. 
LA LIME 
"
"22872","11/16/2004 10:57","04MAPUTO1491","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO1406","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001491 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S - HTREGER 
MCC FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, MZ, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: CORRECTION COPY: MOZAMBIQUE 2004 GENERAL ELECTIONS: OCT 
6 - NOV 15 UPDATE 
 
REFS: A. MAPUTO 1406 
 
B. MAPUTO 1371 
C. MAPUTO 1341 
? 
1. (U) Not for internet distribution. 
 
-------- 
Contents 
-------- 
2. Summary and Comment 
3. Presidential Candidates: And Then There Were Five... 
6. Lists Finalized for Parliamentary Elections 
10. Relative Peace on the Campaign Trail 
12. Media Coverage More Balanced 
14. Comment 
 
------------------- 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
2. (SBU) Five presidential candidates and 21 political parties 
will stand in presidential and parliamentary elections on 
December 1 2, the third in Mozambique\'s history. The ruling 
FRELIMO and RENAMO remain the leading parties, though two small 
parties may take some support from them. Campaigning, which 
began October 17, has proceeded relatively calmly, with fewer and 
less violent incidents than in previous campaigns. Media 
coverage has also been more balanced, with RENAMO presidential 
candidate Afonso Dhlakama and others receiving significant 
coverage even in state-run media. Despite the continuing 
disagreement between the EU and the elections commission over 
observer access (septel), this year\'s elections may be calmer and 
better organized than the two previous Presidential elections. 
End Summary and Comment. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Presidential Candidates: And Then There Were Five... 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
3. (U) The Constitutional Council accepted five of the eight 
presidential nominations for the December 1 - 2 presidential 
elections. The five candidates are Armando Guebuza, FRELIMO (the 
ruling party); Afonso Dhlakama, RENAMO; Raul Domingos, Party for 
Peace, Development and Democracy (PDD); Carlos Reis, Mozambique 
National Union (UNAMO); and Yaqub Sibindy, Independent Party of 
Mozambique (PIMO). Three candidates were rejected because they 
did not present the required 10,000 valid supporting signatures 
from registered voters. The three were Neves Serrano, 
Progressive Liberal Party of Mozambique (PPLM); Joaquim Nhota, 
Democratic Liberal Party of Mozambique (PADELIMO); and Jose 
Massinga, National Democratic Party (PANADE). None of the three 
had been expected to have any effect on the election. 
 
4. (SBU) The two main candidates, Armando Guebuza of FRELIMO and 
Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO, both are under pressure to win. 
FRELIMO liberated the country from the Portuguese and has ruled 
since independence in 1975, and some Mozambicans continue to see 
little distinction between the party and the government. As a 
result, a loss by Guebuza, who has less personal popularity than 
eighteen-year President Joaquim Chissano but has been campaigning 
for months, would be an historic defeat. If Dhlakama loses for 
the third consecutive time, RENAMO members could demand that he 
resign as leader of the party, which he has led since it was a 
guerrilla group fighting the FRELIMO government in the sixteen- 
year civil war. 
 
5. (SBU) The two main candidates also face a potential loss of 
votes to small party candidates. Following gains made during the 
2003 municipal elections, PIMO candidate Yacub Sibindy could take 
votes from FRELIMO in the predominantly Muslim areas of Nampula, 
Cabo Delgado and Zambezia. PDD\'s Raul Domingos, a longtime 
RENAMO stalwart who was the party\'s negotiator in the 1992 peace 
accords, may walk away with RENAMO votes among the central 
provinces of Sofala, Manica, Tete and Zambezia, where his Sena 
tribe is strong. Carlos Reis has attracted less support and has 
so far limited his campaigning to Zambezia. (Nampula and 
Zambezia are the country\'s most populous provinces, combining for 
almost 40 percent of registered voters. Maputo city and Maputo 
province together have less than 12 percent.) In theory, if 
Guebuza and Dhlakama receive almost equal support, the other 
candidates could get enough so that neither receives 50 percent, 
forcing a runoff. There has been little discussion of and no 
preparations for this possibility, however. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Lists Finalized for Parliamentary Elections 
------------------------------------------- 
6. (U) Voters will have to choose among a long list of parties in 
the parliamentary elections, as 21 political parties and 
coalitions have met the conditions to stand. All 250 
parliamentary seats are at stake in the December general 
elections; 248 in Mozambique and two in the emigrant 
constituencies of Africa and Europe. This resulted from the 
decision of the National Elections Commission (CNE) to register 
voters in Africa and Europe for the first time and allow them to 
vote for presidential candidates and elect legislators. In 1999, 
the 250 seats were split 133 for FRELIMO, which received 48.88 
percent of vote, to 117 for RENAMO, which received 38.55 percent 
of the vote. 
 
7. (U) The number of parliamentary seats gained by each party is 
based on the proportion of votes won in each province. For 
example, if FRELIMO wins 50 percent of the vote in Nampula, which 
has 50 seats available, the party will gain 25 seats in 
parliament. A party or coalition must win at least 5 percent of 
the national vote in order to gain a seat; if it does not, its 
votes are not counted in the proportional allocation of seats in 
each province. The Democratic Union of Mozambique (UDEMO) took 5 
percent of the vote and 9 seats in 1994, while no single small 
party gained the 5 percent need to win a seat in 1999. The PDD 
and PIMO won individual seats in five municipal assemblies in the 
November 2003 municipal elections and stand the best chance of 
the small parties of winning Assembly seats. 
 
8. (SBU) On October 22, the CNE confirmed that presidential 
candidates may also stand for seats in parliament. RENAMO party 
members had challenged the validity of the candidacies of Raul 
Domingos (PDD), Yaqub Sibindy (PIMO) and Carlos Reis (PANADE) 
because the three were also standing in the parliamentary 
election. The CNE confirmed, however, that though the law 
prohibits a person from serving as both President and a member of 
parliament, there is no ban on standing for both posts and 
choosing one if needed. Although yet to be put in practice, it 
has long been assumed that losing presidential candidates could 
serve in parliament. Dhlakama has not done this in any of his 
three presidential bids, though some argue that his status would 
be enhanced if he were head of the opposition bench in 
parliament. 
 
9. (SBU) There were some noteworthy developments in the official 
delegate lists released on October 14. Prime Minister Luisa 
Diogo heads the FRELIMO delegate list in Zambezia province and 
current Minister of Transportation Tomaz Augusto Salomo heads 
the list in Manica province. (This does not mean that they are 
not candidates for ministerial positions if Guebuza wins, as 
those chosen as ministers have the option of resigning their 
parliamentary seats.) On the RENAMO side, outspoken senior 
RENAMO member Rahil Khan was left off the delegate list in Maputo 
to make room for new director of the RENAMO election office, 
Eduardo Namburete, described by many as an up-and-comer within 
the Renamo ranks. Since being named to office in July 2004, 
Namburete has accompanied and advised Dhlakama on the campaign 
trail and is believed to be behind RENAMO\'s apparent change in 
campaign tactics away from belittling FRELIMO. Unlike in past 
campaigns, this year Dhlakama has avoided direct criticism of 
FRELIMO and instead has focused what he intends to do as 
president. Another new face on the RENAMO list is Dr. Manuel 
Araujo, a British-trained political scientist. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Relative Peace on the Campaign Trail 
------------------------------------ 
10. (U) Official campaigning by political parties and 
presidential candidates began on October 17 and will run through 
November 28. There have been some reports of political 
intimidation and minor violence, mostly rock-throwing, between 
opposing parties in hotspots like Nampula and Tete. One of the 
more serious incidents occurred on Ilha de Mocambique, off the 
coast in Nampula, where FRELIMO members reportedly attacked the 
home of RENAMO Mayor Gulamo Mamudo. (Note: Ilha was one of the 
five mayorships RENAMO won in the 2003 municipal elections. End 
note.) There was one fatal shooting that may have had a 
political aspect, but the circumstances were not clear, and 
neither party has made it a campaign issue. Nevertheless, 
overall the campaign appears to be running smoothly, with 
significantly fewer and less violent incidents than in previous 
years. 
 
11. (U) Both main contenders in the presidential race, Guebuza 
and Dhlakama, have been active campaigners, visiting cities 
throughout the country and campaigning in potentially hostile 
terrain. Guebuza recently went to Dhlakama\'s home province of 
Sofala, while Dhlakama toured the southern city of Matola, a 
FRELIMO stronghold. Guebuza promises to fight absolute poverty 
and corruption, while rebuilding Mozambique\'s industrial and 
economic infrastructure. Dhlakama often claims in his speeches 
that he will build a genuine rule of law in Mozambique by truly 
separating the state from the ruling party. The PDD\'s Domingos 
is pledging dozens of changes to state services, making education 
reform his top priority. PIMO\'s campaign platform has focused on 
the need to promote moral values, while UNAMO seeks to address 
the development asymmetry between north and south through the 
establishment of a federal system of government. 
 
---------------------------- 
Media Coverage More Balanced 
---------------------------- 
12. (SBU) Press coverage of this year\'s election campaign has 
proved more balanced than in past elections. The public 
television station TVM, traditionally FRELIMO-biased, has been 
giving Dhlakama and other opposition parties significantly more - 
though still not equal - coverage than in previous campaigns. A 
Dhlakama statement espousing the need to separate the party from 
the state, which likely would not have reached the television 
public in the past, was recently aired on TVM, and TVM has aired 
several interviews with a PDD political commission member. Many 
attribute TVM\'s new tone to the public uproar that followed its 
decision not to broadcast a paid advertisement for a book that 
offered a version of the struggle for independence that differed 
from FRELIMO\'s version. TVM staff have privately conceded that 
the order not to broadcast the advertisement came from the 
FRELIMO Central Committee. (Note: Several senior journalists and 
editors from pro-government outlets like \"Noticias,\" TVM, AIM, 
and \"Domingo\" are said to be members of the FRELIMO Electoral 
Campaign Office. End note.) The private television station STV, 
which was not operating during the 1999 campaign, has provided 
balanced coverage of the main parties. In both 1999 general 
elections and the 2003 municipal elections, public-owned Radio 
Mozambique was praised for its balanced reporting. Its coverage 
of the 2004 electoral campaign continues to be objective, and it 
and TVM provide the range of political parties access for party 
messages to voters. 
 
13. (SBU) Despite the headway, some issues remain. Both sides of 
the equation - journalists and political parties -- have lodged 
complaints about access to candidates and media outlets, 
respectively. The privately-owned weekly \"Zambeze,\" which tends 
to be relatively objective and balanced in its reporting, 
recently complained that Guebuza\'s campaign officials refused to 
\"embed\" one of its reporters in a campaign delegation, citing 
logistical limitations. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
14. (SBU) Allegations of fraud are a fixture in Mozambique\'s 
electoral history, and the continuing dispute between the CNE and 
the EU over observer access to vote tabulation (septel) is reason 
for concern. However, with the campaign running relatively 
peacefully, a new electoral law in place (ref C), and increased 
experience in electoral administration, these elections may be 
calmer and better organized than those of 1994 and 1999. End 
comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"22941","11/17/2004 14:56","04MAPUTO1502","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001502 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S - HTREGER 
STATE PLEASE PASS USTR FOR PATRICK COLEMAN 
USDOC FOR RTELCHIN 
PRETORIA FOR USDA/FAS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EAGR, ECON, MZ, Tobacco 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE - REQUEST FOR TARIFF RATE QUOTA FOR TOBACCO 
 
 
1. This is an action request for USTR. See para 3. 
 
2. Below is the text of correspondence received October 14 from 
the International Relations Directorate of the Ministry of 
Industry and Trade, in which the GRM requests that it be allowed 
to export tobacco to the United States under the tariff rate 
quota system. 
Begin Text: 
Dear Ambassador, 
Mozambique has an interest in exporting processed tobacco 
products to the United States. However, the United States 
currently has a tariff rate quota (TRQ) on those processed 
tobacco products that Mozambique will be producing. We are 
kindly requesting your assistance in helping us enter into 
bilateral discussions with the United States to see if there is 
any possibility of obtaining TRQ for tobacco processed in 
Mozambique. 
As you are well aware, exports are of critical importance for 
Mozambique. They will assist in creating jobs, improving our 
economic growth and reducing poverty in our country. One area 
that we feel there is substantial possibility to export is in 
tobacco. 
Tobacco production started in Mozambique in the early 1990s and 
is bringing far-reaching change to parts of the central-northern 
provinces by dramatically improving household incomes and 
introducing modern production techniques that are then 
transferred to other crops. Approximately 128,000 farms depend 
on tobacco production (see table 1). 
TABLE 1 
Distribution of Tobacco Production by Province and Company 
Province Company Number of Farmers 
Niassa JFS 27,303 
STANCOM 7,510 
Cabo Delgado JFS, CANAM 2,050 
Nampula JFS 12,000 
SONIL 8,000 
Zambezia JFS 10,156 
STANCOM 8,500 
Tete MLT 39,000 
DIMON 4,464 
Manica MLT, STANCOM, 
DIMON, TABACO, 9,000 
DE MOCAMBIQUE 
Sofala DIMON 791 
Gaza JFS 22 
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
? 
Mozambique currently does not have the capacity to process 
tobacco beyond the burley and flue-cured stages; thus, tobacco is 
exported raw to Malawi and Zimbabwe for processing before being 
re-exported for final manufacture. There are a few companies 
that are investing millions of dollars to create tobacco- 
processing plants in Northern and Central Mozambique. On such 
factory will begin operations in June 2005 and will have an 
initial capacity of 37,000 tons, expandable up to 52,000 tons by 
2007. This 50 million dollar investment is expected to create 
approximately 1,500 jobs, bring significant value-adding 
advantages and eliminate dependence on the uncertain trade flows 
with Malawi that currently beset the industry. 
In order to ensure the viability of investors that are creating 
tobacco-processing plants in Mozambique, bringing much needed 
capital and jobs to the country, we feel that tobacco TRQ into 
the United States is necessary. 
Our analysis shows that in 2001, over 57,000 Metric Tons of US 
tobacco TRQ was left unfilled. In 2002, approximately 34,000 
Metric Tons of TRQ was left unfilled. And in 2003, there was 
approximately 16,000 Metric Tons of tobacco TRQ left unfilled 
(see Table 2). A significant portion of this is unused TRQ from 
Zimbabwe. In 2001, Zimbabwe did not use 6,704 Metric Tons of 
their quota. Zimbabwe\'s unused quota has continued to increase 
since 2001, reaching 7,067 Metric Tons in 2002 and 7,331 Metric 
Tons in 2003. Given the political and economic hardships in 
Zimbabwe, we feel the unused TRQ in Zimbabwe will continue to 
rise over the years. 
TABLE 2 
Unused TRQ (Metric Tons) 2001 2002 2003 
Total Unused TRQs 57,044 28,136 8,911 
Of Which is Unused EC TRQ 4,763 5,449 6,492 
Other Unused TRQ -4,246 470 574 
Total Unused TRQs 57,044 34,055 15,977 
(Comment: Post cannot reconcile the numbers in this table. End 
comment.) 
? 
REQUESTS FROM MOZAMBIQUE TO THE UNITED STATES 
Given this background, Mozambique kindly requests the following: 
-- To enter into bilateral discussions with the United States on 
Tobacco (specifically those products listed in Table 3). 
-- To understand in greater detail how to obtain part of the 
3,000 Metric Tons of TRQ that falls in the \"Other\" category, and 
if necessary, to receive assistance to export tobacco under this 
\"Other\" TRQ category. 
-- To explore the opportunities of redistributing unused Tobacco 
TRQ to eligible least-developed countries (LDCs) like Mozambique, 
perhaps through new rules that require unused quota to be 
redistributed. 
-- To explore the opportunities of increasing the present TRQ of 
150,000 metric tons by about 20 percent and setting aside this 
increase to new LDC-tobacco producers, like Mozambique. 
-- To explore the opportunities of eliminating the TRQ altogether 
for certain LDCs that meet certain eligibility (perhaps similar 
to that of the Millennium Challenge Corporation, of which 
Mozambique is a potential beneficiary). 
TABLE 3 
Harmonized System (HS) Tobacco Products in which Mozambique 
Request TRQ 
HS NUMBER HS DESCRIPTION 
2401.10.63 Tobacco, not stemmed or stripped, not or not over 35 
percent wrapper tobacco, flue-cured burley, etc., described in 
additional US note 5 to chap 24 
2401.20.33 Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed/stripped, 
n/threshed or similarly n/threshed or similarly proc, not or 
n/over 35 percent wrapper, des. in addl US note 5 to ch. 24 
2401.20.85 Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed/stripped, 
n/threshed or similarly processed, not from cigar leaf, described 
in addl US note 5 to chap 24 (eligible under AGOA) 
2401.30.33 Tobacco refuse, from other tobacco, for cigarettes, 
described in addl US note 5 to chap 24, tobacco stems, not cut, 
ground or pulverized 
2401.30.35 Tobacco refuse, from other tobacco, for cigarettes, 
described in addl US note 5 to chap 24, tobacco stems, cut, 
ground or pulverized 
2401.30.37 Tobacco refuse, from other tobacco, for cigarettes, 
described in addl US note 5 to chap 24, not tobacco stems 
2403.10.60 Smoking tobacco, whether or not containing tobacco 
substitutes, other, to be used in cigarettes, described in addl 
US note 5 to chap 24 
2403.91.45 \"Homogenized\" or \"reconstituted\" tobacco, not 
suitable for use as wrapper tobacco, to be used in cigarettes, 
des. in addl US note 5 to chap 
2403.99.60 Other manufactured tobacco, tobacco substitutes, 
tobacco extracts or Essences, to be used in cigarettes, described 
in addl US note 5 to chap 
Your assistance would be greatly appreciated. 
Sincerely, 
Luis Eduardo Sitoe 
National Director 
End Text. 
 
3. Action Request: Post requests guidance from USTR on how to 
respond to this request from the Mozambican government. 
LA LIME 
"
"22983","11/18/2004 12:08","04MAPUTO1507","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001507 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR AF/S TREGER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MZ, Elections 04, FRELIMO, RENAMO 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE - NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AMENDS THE 1990 
CONSTITUTION 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (U) On November 16, by a rare unanimous vote, RENAMO 
deputies joined their FRELIMO counterparts in approving a 
long list of amendments to the 1990 constitution. The 
majority of the changes were clarifications of existing 
principles and statutes. The significant amendments are as 
follows. 
-- Term of Office: A sitting president will be able to serve 
a second consecutive term, but will not (unlike under the 
1990 Constitution) be able to serve a third consecutive term. 
However, an individual will be able to serve a third term if 
the third term is separated in time from the second term by 
at least one term in office by someone else. (Note: The 
amendment does not address the issue of serving four or more 
terms. End note.) 
-- Constitutional Council: The Constitutional Council, set 
up in 2003 to verify whether laws and decrees are in keeping 
with the Constitution and to validate election results, will 
have new powers. Its opinions will no longer be merely 
recommendations but decisions of law without appeal. In 
addition, its mandate will include investigating the legality 
of new political parties. 
-- Council of State: In time of war or a national emergency, 
the president will be able to solicit advice from what will 
be a new advisory body known as the Council of State, made up 
of the prime minister, any former presidents of the Republic 
or the Assembly, the runner-up in the most recent 
presidential election, and 11 \"personalities of recognized 
merit\" - four chosen by the president and seven by the 
Assembly. The president can choose to ignore the advice 
given, however. 
-- Ombudsman: The Ombudsman (a new governmental position) 
will have the responsibility of investigating abuses by state 
officials. This individual will be elected by a 2/3 majority 
of members of the National Assembly. 
-- Provincial Assemblies: Provincial assemblies are to come 
into existence by 2008. FRELIMO was against having them, 
arguing that the country could not afford the cost of these 
bodies, but RENAMO insisted on their creation. The president 
currently appoints the governors of the provinces. 
Provincial assemblies therefore would presumably give greater 
power and a degree of autonomy to provincial governments. 
Details on the assemblies, including how they will be 
financed, have been left to future legislation. 
-- Dual Nationality: Previously one had to renounce one\'s 
former nationality to acquire Mozambican citizenship through 
residence. Now this will no longer necessary -- one will be 
able to be a dual national under Mozambican law. 
 
2. (SBU) Comment: The amendments only come into force upon 
the validation of the results of the upcoming December 1-2 
general elections. Conveniently for FRELIMO, this means that 
the Constitutional Council\'s view of the election will not 
yet have any legal effect on the outcome. The inclusion of 
the runner-up in the presidential election in the Council of 
State is a clear sop to Dhlakama, in case RENAMO loses. 
There was little suspense during the Assembly session; both 
parties had worked out a consensus beforehand in committee 
meetings. Since modifying the Constitution requires a 2/3\'s 
majority in the Assembly, and FRELIMO holds 133 seats against 
RENAMO\'s 117, securing support on both sides of the aisle 
meant that the changes were essentially quite modest. The 
most ambitious and therefore contentious modification appears 
to have been the creation of provincial parliaments. No 
wonder, then, that details on them remain to be worked out 
later. 
LA LIME 
"
"23147","11/22/2004 14:56","04MAPUTO1519","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001519 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S - HTREGER, EB/TRA, EB/CBA - DWINSTEAD, 
AND AF/PD - RSEVER, JBARNES 
STATE PASS TO OVERSEAS PRIVATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION 
JOHANNESBURG FOR FCS - RDONOVAN, JVANRENSBURG 
USDOC FOR RTELCHIN 
MCC FOR SGAULL AND TBRIGGS 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
PASS USTR FOR PCOLEMAN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Commerce 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE - VISITING CORPORATE COUNCIL ON 
AFRICA (CCA) PRESIDENT PLEDGES TO PROMOTE U.S. TRADE 
AND INVESTMENT 
 
 
1. SUMMARY. On November 10-11, a high-level Corporate 
Council on Africa (CCA) delegation visited Mozambique 
to learn about possibilities for U.S. investment. The 
delegation met with a senior GRM official and several 
local businesspeople to get a flavor for the most 
promising investment areas. CCA and the U.S. Mission 
plan to work closely together to encourage more U.S. 
trade and investment in Mozambique. CCA will begin this 
effort by raising Mozambique\'s profile in the U.S. as 
an investment destination and by leveraging an expected 
early visit to the U.S. by the winner of Mozambique\'s 
December 2004 presidential election. The Mission and 
CCA have set as a goal attracting one or two new U.S. 
firms to invest and succeed in Mozambique in 2005. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
A TASTE OF DOING BUSINESS IN MOZAMBIQUE 
--------------------------------------- 
2. On November 10 and 11, Stephen Hayes, President of 
CCA, and Tim McCoy, Director of Overseas Programs, CCA, 
visited Mozambique on a fact-finding mission to learn 
about investment opportunities and meet key contacts in 
the government and business community. This was CCA\'s 
first visit to Mozambique since the mid-1990\'s. 
 
3. On November 10, the CCA delegation, accompanied by 
the Ambassador, USAID Deputy Director, USAID enabling 
environment team leader and econ/poloff visited the 
city of Beira, the country\'s second largest. The 
delegation sounded out several private sector leaders 
on investment opportunities and obstacles, and how the 
GRM and the business community are working together to 
improve the current business climate. The business 
leaders represented included the heads of two central 
region business associations as well as the presidents 
of several local companies: Mobeira - a flour mill 
owned by the U.S. firm Seaboard Corporation, Belita - a 
Mauritian-owned and operated garment factory exporting 
to the U.S. under AGOA, Delta Trading, and TCT 
Forestry. The businessmen identified as areas of 
opportunity for U.S. investment tourism, agriculture 
and agro-processing, seafood (primarily prawns and 
lobster), energy, and timber processing. Asked about 
the lack of participation by Mozambican firms in the 
U.S. market, they replied that firms are afraid to 
participate in the U.S. market due to its enormous 
market size and consequent large-scale demand for goods 
(COMMENT: Mozambique faces serious supply constraints 
when operating in the global economy, including limited 
production capacity, lack of skilled labor, poor 
infrastructure, and lack of access to finance. END 
COMMENT). 
 
4. While in Beira, the delegation visited Belita, the 
only garment factory in Mozambique exporting to the 
U.S. under AGOA. Belita exports sweatshirts, t-shirts, 
and polo shirts to Vanity Fair, Chaps, FUBU, and Lee. 
Sales from January to October 2004 totaled 
approximately USD 1.4 million, and are expected to 
reach USD 2.2 million by the end of the year. Belita 
buys almost all of its primary material (fabric, 
labels, zippers) outside of Mozambique. Belita\'s parent 
company, the Palmar Group, located in Mauritius, 
handles all marketing, communication, and logistics for 
the sale of Mozambican-produced garments. In January 
2005, Belita expects to open a jeans-production plant 
in Maputo. Belita will source all denim from Southern 
Africa. Over 1,000 staff will be employed and AGOA 
sales to the U.S. are expected to increase. 
 
5. The CCA delegation took the occasion to visit Beira 
port, one of the three busiest ports in the country. 
The port director of operations noted that port 
activity has decreased 20 percent due to the Zimbabwean 
economic crisis (COMMENT: The Beira Corridor is an 
important trade route for goods moving in and out of 
Zimbabwe. END COMMENT). Mozambique\'s principal exports 
through Beira are sugar, cotton, timber, and prawns. 
 
6. On November 11, in Maputo, the delegation met with 
the Minister of Industry and Commerce, Carlos Morgado. 
Morgado told them that he would like to see one 
American firm invest successfully in Mozambique in the 
near future, paving the way for others to follow suit. 
(COMMENT: In 2003 Morgado explored an opportunity for 
American Axle to buy Mozambican-made axles. This would 
mean a purchase commitment with Mozambique\'s largest 
revenue-producing firm, Mozal, which has been extremely 
successful in smelting aluminum for aluminum ignot 
export. However, following Morgado\'s 2003 visit to 
Detroit, American Axle\'s management changed and since 
then nothing substantive has arisen from the idea. END 
COMMENT). Morgado suggested that if CCA were to adopt 
Mozambique as a \"focal point\" and sell Mozambique as an 
attractive investment destination, he would guarantee a 
strong GRM commitment to a creating a successful 
business relationship between U.S. companies and 
Mozambican partners. CCA President Hayes expressed his 
view that the key is to get one or two carefully 
identified small businesses interested in Mozambique, 
establish partnerships accordingly, and create small 
wins in the trade relationship. 
 
7. Morgado advocated partnerships involving timber 
and/or sugar processing and processing of jams or 
concentrates. He said he strongly believed that U.S. 
companies can bring value and innovation to Mozambican 
products. Hayes committed to sending a follow-up CCA 
team to Mozambique in 2005. He added that CCA would be 
looking for ways to market Mozambique in the U.S., and 
that he hoped CCA could identify and send one or two 
U.S. businesses to Mozambique to explore specific 
opportunities. Longer term, he hoped CCA would be able 
to produce an investment guide on Mozambique. As part 
of the discussion, Hayes asked Morgado the status of 
the U.S. - Mozambique Bilateral Investment Treaty 
(BIT). Morgado stated that he would request that the 
PM allow the treaty to circulate through the Council of 
Ministers on November 15 (COMMENT: Post understands 
that the treaty has circulated through the Council of 
Ministers and will be sent to the PM for signature and 
approval on November 23. This date is critical, as 
Mozambican general elections are scheduled for December 
1-2. END COMMENT). 
 
8. Also noteworthy, the CCA delegation met with 
officials and members of the Confederation of 
Mozambican Business Associations (CTA), a group 
working to improve the business climate in Mozambique. 
CTA representatives emphasized that the time is right 
to create linkages and business relationships between 
Mozambique and the U.S. They acknowledged that 
Mozambique would need more outside advice and training 
to take better advantage of AGOA. In the afternoon, the 
delegation met with U.S. firms operating in Mozambique 
- including Coca-Cola, KPMG, PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 
Caterpillar, Mobil, and Colgate-Palmolive. 
 
--------------- 
PRESS COVERAGE 
--------------- 
9. The CCA visit generated substantial and positive 
press coverage. A press conference given by Hayes 
prompted stories on STV Mozambique (a private 
television station, which interviewed Hayes), Radio 
Mozambique (the official radio network with nationwide 
reach), and several daily and weekly publications. The 
stories stressed Hayes\' commitment to bringing more 
U.S. investment to Mozambique - especially in the areas 
of tourism, seafood, agriculture/agro processing, and 
transportation. Local press noted that trade between 
the U.S. and Mozambique is very small; only USD 8 
million in Mozambican exports went to the U.S. in 2003. 
Hayes admitted that businesspeople in the U.S. remain 
uninformed about investing in Mozambique, but made a 
commitment to increasing awareness of Mozambique\'s 
investment potential among the U.S. business community 
(CCA members particularly). 
 
-------------------- 
ANTICIPATED OUTCOMES 
--------------------- 
10. Following a productive visit, the Ambassador and 
CCA President Hayes agreed on ways to strengthen the 
U.S. - Mozambican trade relationship. To raise 
Mozambique\'s profile in the U.S. as an investment 
destination, the CCA will feature Mozambique in an 
upcoming issue of its publication, The Africa Journal. 
With a new Mozambican president in place after the 
December general elections, the Mission will encourage 
an early visit to the United States, where he will be 
able to meet with key CCA members and a business 
audience regarding specific opportunities for 
investment in Mozambique. This visit may coincide with 
the annual CCA summit that will take place in June 
2005. Another possibility would be a planned Millennium 
Challenge Corporation (MCC) dinner. Hayes promised the 
CCA would reach out to its membership and beyond 
regarding opportunities uncovered in the Mozambique 
visit (sugar, irrigation, and construction, in 
particular). Finally, a follow-up CCA team will visit 
Mozambique on a thorough fact-finding mission in 2005. 
As stated by Hayes to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, CCA\'s goal is to \"attract one or two 
investors to Mozambique in 2005\". All sides agreed 
that building the trade relationship should begin with 
small steps. One or two American successful investors 
in Mozambique in the next year would set a positive 
precedent for future cooperation. 
LA LIME 
"
"23149","11/22/2004 15:41","04MAPUTO1520","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE242995","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L MAPUTO 001520 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S - HERB TREGER 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/22/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, MZ, ZI, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE - FM SIMAO ON MUGABE AND ZIMBABWE\'S 
2005 PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS 
 
REF: STATE 242995 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Helen La Lime for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: Foreign Minister Simao told the Ambassador 
that he believes the Zimbabwean opposition party Movement for 
Democratic Change (MDC) will participate in the March 
parliamentary elections. However, the MDC is growing weaker, 
several factions have emerged and some are questioning Morgan 
Tsvangirai\'s leadership. He disagreed that Zimbabwe remains 
 
SIPDIS 
stagnant in economic crisis; instead, \"things are getting 
better.\" In any case, peace and stability are more important 
than democracy at this time for Zimbabwe -- a theme he 
repeated several times during the meeting. End summary. 
 
2. (C) On November 18 the Ambassador delivered reftel 
demarche on March 2005 parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe to 
Foreign Minister Simao. (Note: A request to meet with 
President Chissano on this topic is pending. end note.) The 
Ambassador outlined for Simao our view of Zimbabwe\'s 
difficult circumstances, including reduced trade with the 
region and the consequent negative impact on the Beira 
corridor and Mozambique\'s economy as a whole. She stressed 
that upcoming parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe, should 
they follow SADC guidelines, would moderate the country\'s 
political climate, improve stability, and thereby return the 
country to a path of prosperity. Mozambique has an important 
role to play in encouraging Zimbabwe\'s leadership to make the 
March elections free and fair, she told Simao. 
 
3. (C) FM Simao responded by characterizing the USG view of 
Zimbabwe as \"highly pessimistic.\" Instead, \"things are 
getting better,\" he insisted. There has not been much 
violence lately. Inflation, which used to run as high as 600 
percent per year, is now down to 200 percent. Food shortages 
have been overcome and food production has begun to rebound. 
As evidence, he pointed out that the Zimbabwean government 
not long ago told the World Food Program (WFP) to cease food 
deliveries. (Comment: In fact, we understand that in the 
last several days the Zimbabwean has asked the WFP for more 
food aid. End comment.) The Zimbabweans are paying for 
electricity deliveries from Cahora Bassa dam in a timely, 
regular manner. 
 
4. (C) He told the Ambassador that discussions between the 
MDC and ZANU-PF have broken down in the past several months 
because dissension has fractured the MDC and there is no 
longer anyone with whom the government can negotiate who 
represents the party as a whole. According to Simao, the MDC 
has splintered into three groups: trade unions, farmers (who 
now realize that there can be no going back on land seizures) 
and intellectuals. Talks have been stymied because these 
three \"cannot agree on a common platform.\" He said that he 
recently spoke with the Zimbabwean Minister of Justice, who 
told him that the government decided there was no value to 
continuing talks with MDC negotiators who do not represent 
the party. Describing Tsivangirai as an articulate leader 
with clear ideas, nevertheless he has heard that some of 
those around Tsivangirai are now questioning his authority. 
 
5. (C) Still, Simao believes that the MDC will not boycott 
the March parliamentary elections. Tsivangirai assured 
several others in the Mozambican government earlier that the 
MDC would take part, he reported. However, the MDC would no 
longer contest by-elections because of recent repeated 
losses. The parliamentary elections will by no means be 
perfect, Simao repeated several times, but in his view they 
will be much better than the last ones. SADC will send 
observers. 
 
6. (C) Throughout the hour-long meeting Simao returned again 
and again to stress that the Zimbabwe government must not be 
\"pushed\" to improve its behavior and, more generally, that 
peace and stability are \"most important.\" \"Three years ago 
Zimbabwe was on the brink of war,\" he said. And if war had 
come, there would have been no respect for democracy, nor 
human rights, and many would have been killed. \"We are not 
pushing,\" he admitted. Instead, rather than risk creating 
enemies of its neighbors, such as happened in the case of 
Malawi during the civil war, at times of strain it is better 
to treat one\'s neighbors \"with understanding.\" Some foreign 
NGO\'s are doing \"more than they should,\" are interfering, 
something that occurs in Mozambique too, he added. The cost 
of democracy must not be chaos, reforms must not break 
society. Democratic change must be gradual, in 5-10 year 
timeframes. \"We are not in the Olympic games.\" 
 
7. (C) Comment: Though the discussion focused on Zimbabwe, 
Simao clearly was thinking of Mozambique as well. 
LA LIME 
"
"23175","11/23/2004 9:35","04MAPUTO1522","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001522 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/EPS, AF/S - HTREGER 
USAID FOR AFR/DP/PAB 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, MZ, SSH 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE FY 2004 SELF-HELP PROGRAM (SSH) 
FUNDS AWARDED TO 12 PROJECTS 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: This cable lists the 12 proposals that 
were awarded funds for FY 2004, totaling USD 57,350. 
Projects are located in 6 different provinces. All 
agreements have been signed and implementing 
activities are underway. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------ 
SSH Projects 2004 
------------------ 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-001 
Grantee - Associacao Agro-Pecuaria de Mafufine 
Project - Water Well and Cistern 
Dollar Amount - USD 4,500.00 
Location - Mafufine, Magude District, Maputo 
Province 
Discussion - Grantee, an agricultural association, 
will build a well, a cistern with a pump system, and 
a watering place for cattle breeding. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-002 
Grantee - Grupo de Poupanca de Nonequetho 
Project - Supply hammer mill 
Dollar Amount - USD 4,500.00 
Location - Xalawe, Nampula Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a farmers\' saving group, will 
buy a hammer mill (high-speed machine that uses 
hammers and cutters to crush, grind, chip, or shred 
solid waste) for the community of Xalawe. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-003 
Grantee - Manda Wilderness Project 
Project - Improve Health Clinic 
Dollar Amount - USD 8,400.00 
Location - Cobue, Niassa 
Discussion - Grantee, a community association, will 
purchase the necessary construction materials to 
rehabilitate the Cobue Health Clinic. 
? 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-004 
Grantee - Irmas Missionarias de S. Carlos Borromeo 
Scalabrinianas 
Project - Build Water Well 
Dollar Amount - USD 11,000.00 
Location - Ressano Garcia, Maputo Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a Catholic missionary group, 
will purchase construction material to build a well 
of 130-140 meters to provide the center with access 
to clean water. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-005 
Grantee - Associacao Mocambicana para Apoio e 
Desenvolvimento da Crianca Orfa 
Project - Supply three sewing machines 
Dollar Amount - USD 700.00 
Location - Gaza Province 
Discussion - Grantee, an association that helps 
orphaned children, intends to purchase three sewing 
machines for women to generate income by making 
clothing and uniforms for the community. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-006 
Grantee - Escola Primaria Completa de Mahlazine 
Project - Provide carpentry and metalwork equipment 
Dollar Amount - USD 5,000.00 
Location - Mahlazine, Maputo Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a secondary school, will 
purchase basic practical material for carpentry and 
metalwork classes for students\' use. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-007 
Grantee - Escola Primaria Completa de Milange 
Project - Construction of a classroom 
Dollar Amount - USD 6,700.00 
Location - Milange District, Zambezia Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a secondary school, will build 
a quality classroom to improve conditions and 
accommodate new students. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-008 
Grantee - Associacao de Defesa do Meio Ambiente 
Project - Build an Environmental Library 
Dollar Amount - USD 8,000.00 
Location - Beira, Sofala Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a local environmental 
association, will rehabilitate space to create an 
environmental library and resource center. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-009 
Grantee - Associacao dos Camponeses de Vulalo 
Project - Irrigation pump 
Dollar Amount - USD 580.00 
Location - Milange, Zambezia Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a farmers\' association, will 
improve the agricultural production capacity of 
local farmers by buying an irrigation pump. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-010 
Grantee - Associacao de Produtores Agricolas de 
Chilumba 
Project - Irrigation pump 
Dollar Amount - USD 580.00 
Location - Milange, Zambezia Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a farmers\' association, will 
improve the agricultural production capacity of 
local farmers by buying an irrigation pump. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-011 
Grantee - Associacao Agricola e Comercializacao de 
Simbe 
Project - Irrigation pump 
Dollar Amount - USD 590.00 
Location - Milange, Zambezia Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a farmers\' association, will 
improve the agricultural production capacity of 
local farmers by buying an irrigation pump. 
Project Number - SSH-04-656-012 
Grantee - Escola Secundaria Francisco Manyanga 
Project - Provide chemistry, biology, physics and 
lab materials 
Dollar Amount - USD 6,800.00 
Location - Maputo Province 
Discussion - Grantee, a public secondary school, 
will purchase basic lab equipment for students\' use 
in physics, chemistry, and biology classes. 
LA LIME 
"
"23178","11/23/2004 11:04","04MAPUTO1524","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE248093","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001524 
 
SIPDIS 
AF/S - HTREGER 
IO/UNP 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, SU, MZ, UNGA 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: PROMOTING THE EU RESOLUTION ON THE 
HUMAN RIGHTS SITUATION IN SUDAN 
 
REF: STATE 248093 
 
On November 23 economic/political section chief delivered 
reftel demarche to Antonio Macateve, Chief of the 
Multilateral Affairs Department, Directorate of International 
Organizations and Conferences, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
Macateve replied to the demarche by saying that, despite the 
GRM\'s support for the African Union peacekeeping effort in 
Darfur, his government usually did not find it useful to 
\"point the finger\" at an African government over human rights 
violations. His government usually abstained from voting on 
such human rights violations. He implied that the GRM would 
abstain on the upcoming EU resolution on Sudan. 
LA LIME 
"
"23184","11/23/2004 12:12","04MAPUTO1525","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001525 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR ECA FOR ASSISTANT SECRETARY PATRICIA 
HARRISON; AF/PD FOR LKOENGETER; AF/S FOR HTREGER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, OEXC, OIIP, PINR, KISL 
SUBJECT: FIRST EVER IFTAR WITH MOZAMBICAN ISLAMIC 
LEADERS 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: Maputo PAS organized an Iftar at the 
Ambassador\'s residence that took place the final 
Friday of Ramadan, November 12. Nine prominent local 
Muslim leaders, representative of several different 
communities of Mozambique\'s sizeable Muslim minority, 
were invited and attended, including clerics, 
businessmen and NGO activists. After the Ambassador 
spoke, one of the most prominent Muslim clerics in 
Mozambique gave unprompted remarks for several minutes 
thanking the Ambassador for taking the first steps to 
bridge the divide between the local American and 
Muslim communities. END SUMMARY. 
 
NINE MUSLIM LEADERS 
2. The nine attendees included: Aminuddin Mohammed, 
president of the Islamic Congress of Mozambique who 
writes a weekly religion column in \"Savana\", an 
influential independent weekly; Cassimo David of the 
Mozambican Council of Theologians, a former 
International Visitor participant; other business and 
NGO representatives from both Mozambique\'s Asian 
Islamic community and native Macua community; and two 
key figures in Muslim women\'s groups. Embassy 
representatives met with most of the invitees prior to 
the event to put the outreach efforts into context. 
 
EMBASSY ZAKAT DONATIONS 
3. On the morning prior to the Iftar, the Embassy 
delivered food baskets as a \"zakat\" offering to ten 
poorer mosques located in Maputo and surrounding 
areas. The baskets included bulk quantities of staple 
foods such as corn meal. Mission personnel visited 
the mosques in advance of the delivery to make 
contacts and arrange logistics. They followed up with 
personal delivery of the baskets, which included a 
card to the leader of each mosque. 
 
IIP\'S \"MUSLIM LIFE\" SUCCESS 
4. While guests were arriving, PAS played an 
abridged and translated version of IIP\'s \"Muslim Life 
in America\" slideshow. The slides, while not 
provoking questions immediately, helped set an upbeat, 
respectful tone for the rest of the evening. During 
supper, the PAO engaged in a conversation with a high 
school teacher of Arabic and the Koran, who had 
studied for seven years in Libya. The teacher admitted 
to having been uncomfortable with the idea of 
attending the Iftar and was defensive about his Libyan 
education. He specifically noted his appreciation of 
the slideshow, however, and proceeded to ask about 
American Muslims. 
 
IMAM SPEAKS, WELCOMES IFTAR GESTURE 
5. The Ambassador presented prepared remarks 
welcoming the guests; she noted her own previous 
experience in predominately Muslim Morocco and 
underscored the historical role that Islam has played 
in Mozambique. Immediately afterward, Mohammed gave 
several minutes of unprompted remarks, thanking the 
Ambassador for taking the first steps to bridge the 
divide between the local American and Muslim 
communities. To be sure, his comments had a modest 
political overtone, acknowledging his (and the local 
Muslim community\'s) disagreement with certain aspects 
of American foreign policy without going into 
specifics. Nevertheless, he reiterated his 
receptiveness to the positive message conveyed by the 
Iftar. 
 
A MISSION-WIDE EFFORT 
6. The Iftar, though coordinated by PAS, resulted 
from the combined efforts of the Mission. Personnel 
from several sections of the Department of State and 
USAID, Mozambican and American alike, gave freely of 
their time and experience to make this unprecedented 
event work. From day one of planning, the Ambassador 
communicated the significance of outreach, a message 
reinforced consistently throughout the planning 
process. Perhaps the most important element turned out 
to be the extraordinary contributions of several 
Muslim members of the Mission, whose advice and 
judgment proved critical. 
 
7. COMMENT: By any measure the Iftar was a success. 
The mere fact that our carefully selected guests 
appeared at all at this first-ever Embassy Iftar would 
be one measure of success. But more happened: a key 
imam\'s unprompted generous acknowledgment communicated 
the respect with which the Muslim community viewed the 
Ambassador\'s gesture, no small feat. In the process, 
the Mission made a number of excellent contacts and 
generated significant goodwill, helping to reduce 
tensions between the communities. 
LA LIME 
"
"23347","11/29/2004 4:35","04MAPUTO1533","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE242995","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001533 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S AND AF/FO 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/29/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, MZ, ZI, LY 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT CHISSANO ON MUGABE AND MARCH 2005 
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 242995 
 
B. MAPUTO 1520 
Classified By: Ambassador Helen La Lime for reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: President Chissano believes that Mugabe is 
interested in improving relations with the US, although still 
deeply suspicious of US and UK intentions. He will be 
receptive only if approached without hostility or 
preconditions. Mugabe might be willing to relinquish power 
before elections in 2008, if, by doing so, he would not be 
seen as giving in to outside pressure, if a strong successor 
could be identified, and if the opposition no longer 
threatened to split the country apart. Chissano considers 
opposition leader Morgan Tsivangirai too extreme to lead 
Zimbabwe. He thinks Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) observers will limit any critique of March 
parliamentary elections to a SADC-internal \"peer review\" 
process rather than go public. End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador, accompanied by econ/pol chief 
(notetaker), met with President Chissano to deliver the 
demarche requested in ref A on upcoming parliamentary 
elections in Zimbabwe (March 2005) and to elicit Chissano\'s 
view of Zimbabwe\'s political crisis. She outlined the dire 
economic impact of Mugabe\'s policies and how his 
authoritarian rule jeopardized the opportunity provided by 
upcoming parliamentary elections. What could be done to find 
a way forward?, she asked. 
 
3. (C) After considering the question silently for a moment, 
President Chissano began by saying that he had met with 
Mugabe several weeks earlier and Mugabe appeared to him to 
want to improve relations with the US. But he remains 
suspicious, Chissano added. To approach him, one must do so 
as a friend. Chissano then reminded the Ambassador that when 
he first met with President George H.W.Bush, he had just 
finished visiting Qadhafi in Libya. Subsequently he met with 
Qadhafi several times and in his meetings suggested that 
Libya ought to improve relations with the West. He said that 
Qadhafi was resistant but later came round, mainly through 
Qadhafi\'s contact with middleman Tiny Rowland of the British 
mining company Lonrho. Chissano was careful to deny that he 
played a major role in the Libyan thaw, but offered Libyan 
relations as an example of an approach that might work with 
Mugabe. After all, he added, Mugabe is no Saddam: he has no 
weapons of mass destruction, he\'s no terrorist and his power 
is hobbled by internal politics. Mugabe might be receptive, 
he argued, depending on the proper approach. And if a 
dialogue with the US (or the UK) could begin in which he did 
not feel threatened or uncomfortable, other SADC 
representatives would find dealing with him much easier, too. 
? 
4. (C) Although Mugabe was largely alienated from the UK 
government, Chissano thought that he continued to have, 
ironically, good relations with Margaret Thatcher and perhaps 
a few others in the English establishment. He doubted that 
there was anyone Mugabe felt comfortable with in the current 
U.S. administration, but wondered it there might be someone 
from earlier administrations, possibly a Democrat, who could 
serve as a useful interlocutor. 
 
5. (C) Turning to the March 2005 parliamentary elections, 
Chissano informed the Ambassador that Mugabe told him he had 
received a letter from Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) 
leader Morgan Tsivangirai, but that he decided he would not 
respond until after the ZANU-PF congress (now underway). 
Moreover, with the MDC losing by-elections and its support on 
a downward slide, according to Chissano, there did not seem 
to Mugabe much urgency to negotiating now. Mugabe\'s own 
party, ZANU-PF, was in the midst of squabbles over 
identifying his successor, Chissano noted, a complication 
that also blocked dealing with the MDC. 
 
6. (C) Chissano emphasized that the SADC observer guidelines 
agreed upon in August at a SADC meeting in Mauritius stressed 
\"observe - yes; monitor - no.\" Pressed by the Ambassador to 
explain what this meant, Chissano said that monitoring 
implied more involvement than observing, something that 
hinted subtly of \"control.\" \"Control is a bad word, don\'t 
you think?\" he asked rhetorically. He explained that SADC 
observers would likely limit any critique of the elections to 
a \"peer review process,\" which we take to mean that SADC 
criticism of the election process in Zimbabwe would remain 
behind closed doors while any public statement would likely 
be positive. 
 
7. (C) In Chissano\'s opinion, Mugabe might be willing to 
leave before his term ends in 2008. But to leave early, four 
conditions first would have to be met: 1) his departure could 
not be seen as the result of \"foreign\" pressure, 2) ZANU-PF 
must unite around a chosen successor, 3) this successor must 
be someone who would not divide the country and 4) the 
opposition must be willing to behave responsibly rather than 
threaten civil war. Regarding the final requirement, 
Chissano thought Morgan Tsivangirai did not fit the bill. 
Although he admitted he had never met him, Tsivangirai seemed 
to him someone who \"dropped from the clouds,\" a trade 
unionist who came out of nowhere. He is too extreme, 
Chissano said, even to the left of Mugabe. He is not 
sufficiently mature, he\'s never been elected to parliament 
and therefore those in parliament have no respect for him. 
Chissano considers him not good for the stability of 
Zimbabwe, but rather a divider like President Gbagbo of Cote 
d\'Ivoire. Nevertheless, the MDC has other capable figures 
who could play a constructive role, he added. 
 
8. (C) As the hour was ending, President Chissano informed 
the Ambassador that he would be visiting Zimbabwe and several 
other countries in the region in coming weeks. Meanwhile he 
would consider carefully our demarche and look further for 
ways to improve the situation in Zimbabwe. The Ambassador 
interjected that we very much want to find a way forward. 
\"Don\'t bite him,\" Chissano joked, he\'s not Saddam Hussein. 
He reiterated then that, when discussing his own retirement 
from office with Mugabe recently, Mugabe said that it was 
still too early for him to retire, that he still needed \"to 
arrange things.\" He didn\'t see how Mugabe could continue on 
in power after 2008, when he would be 84, Chissano continued. 
 
9: (C) Comment: President Chissano again and again emphasized 
that Mugabe would not respond to pressure, but that an 
approach could work if done in a non-confrontational manner. 
He suggested that he would try to be helpful in this regard, 
but did not offer other specifics as to how. Chissano had no 
one in mind but several times mentioned that he thought 
Mugabe could be approached by someone from the U.S. He 
expressed a willingness to continue a dialogue with us. 
LA LIME 
"
"23369","11/29/2004 11:26","04MAPUTO1538","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","04MAPUTO1494","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001538 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE PASS TO MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION 
STATE FOR AF/S AND AF/FO 
MCC FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/27/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MZ, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE 2004 GENERAL ELECTIONS: ELECTION EVE 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO 1494 
 
B. MAPUTO 1474 
C. MAPUTO 1406 
D. MAPUTO 1371 
Classified By: Ambassador Helen La Lime for reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
1. (C) Campaigning for Mozambique\'s December 1 - 2 general 
elections has ended, and there is no consensus as to what 
outcome is likely. The negotiations between the National 
Elections Commission and the European Union appear to have 
ended with the release of a new electoral process directive 
that sets the level of observer access at the tabulation 
phases. The changes do not meet EU demands for full 
transparency, but they do appear to reduce the space for 
manipulation. Similarly, vote tabulation software appears to 
have been made more secure, though RENAMO continues to 
express concern. The two main parties are accusing each 
other of planning various dirty tricks. Former President 
Carter has arrived to lead the Carter Center observation 
effort. Post does not expect major problems on the voting 
days, though isolated incidents and some confusion are 
inevitable, as are RENAMO claims of fraud. Once the voting 
is complete, attention will shift to the provincial and 
national levels of tabulation, which are expected to last 
until the December 17 deadline for publication of results. 
End Summary. 
 
------------- 
Campaign Ends 
------------- 
2. (C) The official campaign period ended December 28. 
FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza and RENAMO candidate Afonso 
Dhlakama drew enthusiastic crowds to their events, though it 
is not clear how many were attracted by T-shirts and other 
handouts. Guebuza\'s rallies have included large numbers of 
government workers and officials, and many observers assume 
that FRELIMO is using public resources. Mrs. Guebuza has 
played a visible campaign role, making her the first 
candidate\'s wife to do so. Dhlakama has made many 
unrealistic promises of the prosperity that would result if 
he is elected. He also claimed in a recent interview that if 
the election is not democratic, he would govern by force in 
the provinces where he wins a majority, though it is 
difficult to imagine him attempting to do so. Unlike in the 
1999 election, candidates from three other parties are in the 
race. One, Raul Domingos of the Party for Peace, Development 
and Democracy (PDD) appears to be attracting support. In the 
absence of reliable polls (polls are prohibited during the 
campaign, and the few pre-campaign polls were not credible), 
it is not clear what result is likely. 
 
3. (C) Domingos\' apparent success has led some observers to 
raise the possibility of a runoff. In 1999, running only 
against Dhlakama, incumbent President Chissano only managed 
to get 52 percent of the votes. It is conceivable that 
Guebuza and Dhlakama could split most of the vote with 
Domingos receiving five percent or so, which would mean that 
no candidate would receive the 50 percent needed for a 
first-round victory. According to electoral law, a runoff 
must take place within 21 days from the date the National 
Elections Commission (CNE) publishes the first round results, 
set by law for December 17. Despite claims that a runoff 
would not be difficult logistically, a UNDP source at the 
Electoral Administration Technical Secretariat (STAE) 
admitted during a November 18 donor group meeting that no 
planning or preparation has taken place to support a second 
round. There are more than 10 million registered voters and 
12,000 polling stations throughout the country, so it is 
unclear how another round could occur on schedule. The 
source implied that there may be wiggle room in the law, 
predicting that any runoff would not be held before 
mid-February. 
 
--------------------------------- 
CNE Sets Terms of Observer Access 
--------------------------------- 
4. (C) On November 18, the CNE effectively closed the door to 
further negotiations on observer access with the issuance of 
a new directive, Deliberation 77. (Ten of the CNE\'s 18 
members represent FRELIMO, while the others represent RENAMO. 
Many of the recent electoral process decisions have been 
taken by the FRELIMO majority over the opposition of the 
RENAMO representatives.) The directive caught many close to 
the dispute by surprise. According to a source at the Dutch 
Embassy, the negotiations, though admittedly stalled, had not 
been abandoned by the EU and they were unaware the CNE was 
planning new directives. Deliberation 77 is an improvement, 
in that press and observers are provided access to the 
reclassification of null and protested ballots, as well as a 
computer link to view final tabulation data. However, the 
access granted still falls short of full transparency sought 
by the European Union, the Carter Center and Commonwealth 
observers. In addition to these groups, there also will be 
observers from the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) member states and embassies resident in Maputo, 
including 17 from post. (See reftels.) Former President 
Carter arrived in Maputo on November 28 to head the Carter 
Center\'s observation mission. 
 
5. (C) Deliberation 77 also confirms that there will be two 
official parallel quick counts by the STAE -- one at the 
provincial level and one in Maputo -- both completed on the 
basis of polling station result sheets (editais). 
Deliberation 77 states that the provincial count \"prevails, 
in general,\" over the Maputo count. However, the CNE may 
overrule provincial count decisions in all parts of the 
tabulation process. Any such decisions would be carried out 
by the CNE without public access, though the RENAMO CNE 
members would presumably be present, and it is unclear if the 
CNE will later publish a full list of changes made to 
provincial counts. On a positive note, unlike years past, 
copies of editais from individual polling stations will not 
be faxed to the CNE in Maputo for the parallel count but will 
be hand-carried by two people, each representing one of the 
two major parties. (Note: RENAMO\'s objection to faxing 
editais was upheld by the CNE, based on experience from the 
2003 municipal elections where a FRELIMO STAE technician in 
Beira was caught tampering with editais before they were 
faxed. End note.) 
 
6. (C) However, as in past elections, the CNE has again ruled 
that polling station results excluded from the provincial 
count due to errors, often minor human ones, will be 
reconsidered by the CNE without public access. In the 1999 
elections, more than 1800 editais, or 11 percent of the 
total, were excluded from provincial totals and sent to 
Maputo for reconsideration by the CNE. That year, RENAMO 
walked out in protest during the time-consuming and often 
contentious reconsideration process, leaving FRELIMO CNE 
members to make final judgments. In the end, the CNE 
accepted about one-third of the problem editais, rejecting 
the remaining two-thirds as unusable. This meant that over 
300,000 votes cast for president were not counted. (Note: 
Various international organizations conducted parallel 
calculations that suggested the excluded editais came from 
areas supporting RENAMO. However, no recalculation indicated 
that the final result would have changed in favor of 
Dhlakama. End note.) 
 
-------------------- 
New Polling Stations 
-------------------- 
7. (SBU) Some diplomats and international donor 
representatives are also concerned with the recent addition 
of polling locations. Voters in Mozambique may only cast 
ballots at their designated polling station, usually the site 
where the individual registered to vote. STAE has recently 
added new polling locations for this year\'s general 
elections, in some cases miles away from existing sites. 
Despite civic education campaigns informing voters of 
adjustments in locations, the changes are likely to 
disenfranchise some voters. 
 
------------------ 
Watching the Count 
------------------ 
8. (SBU) There is also the issue of observer access at the 
provincial and national tabulation phases, where the records 
of votes from each polling station will be added and disputed 
or invalid votes reviewed. Although the CNE spokesperson 
recently assured the press that journalists, party 
representatives, and observers could pull up through a 
computer link any edital from any polling station and compare 
it to their own copy, it is still unclear whether this will 
indeed be possible. Not all provinces will be equipped with 
computer links for observers, and in practice, provincial 
election officials will have a considerable amount of leeway 
in what observers may do. In addition, the database will not 
provide details on missing editais -- the result of slow data 
entry, perhaps, or the more troublesome excluded editais. 
Also, limitations in data collected by observers and party 
representatives means that there will be discrepancies 
between the provincial final results and the observer data, 
opening the window for manipulation. The CNE has only 
recently approved the software used to tabulate the editais - 
reportedly over RENAMO objections. After a very quick audit, 
which appears to have resulted in changes to make the system 
somewhat more secure, the system was presented to the 
parties, observers, and the press on November 27. 
 
9. (SBU) Both FRELIMO and RENAMO will conduct detailed 
parallel counts, as will the National Electoral Observatory 
(an NGO) helped by the Carter Center. Organizations involved 
in the parallel counts are confident that, if they have the 
information they need before the election to choose their 
sample sites, their counts will be no more than two percent 
off the actual results. With this proviso, manipulation in 
anything but a close race ought to be easily detected. 
 
------------------ 
Mutual Accusations 
------------------ 
10. (C) As the voting approaches, FRELIMO and RENAMO have 
accused each other of plotting various misdeeds. President 
Chissano told the Ambassador during their Nov. 24 meeting on 
Zimbabwe (septel) that RENAMO was readying disruption tactics 
to use during the voting. He said he had learned that RENAMO 
would urge all its supporters to cast their ballots on the 
first day of voting, December 1. Then, on December 2, party 
activists would stage \"disturbances\" to scare off other 
voters, most of them presumably FRELIMO backers. Separately, 
RENAMO has claimed that there is a plot to kill Dhlakama, and 
RENAMO called embassies to report that police had fired tear 
gas at Dhlakama supporters at RENAMO\'s Nov. 28 
end-of-campaign rally. Also, RENAMO continues to object to 
nearly all CNE decisions relating to the elections process, 
and the CNE has accused RENAMO of instructing its 
participants in the process to block the use of the vote 
tabulation software. Post has not heard independent 
confirmation of any of the various allegations. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
11. (SBU) Post expects routine problems at polling places on 
the voting days, mainly of a logistical rather than an 
intentional nature. We also expect RENAMO to claim fraud 
regardless of how widespread these problems are. Once the 
voting is complete, attention will shift to the provincial 
and national levels of tabulation, which are expected to last 
until the December 17 deadline for publication of results. 
LA LIME 
"
"23381","11/29/2004 12:59","04MAPUTO1539","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Maputo1446","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001539 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS, EB/IFD/OIA, E 
MCC FOR APPLEGARTH, HEWKO, BRIGGS, GAULL 
STATE PASS OPIC FOR SHORE 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, MZ, Nyati, Tourism, MCC 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN ATTORNEY GENERAL REFERS NYATI LODGE CASE 
TO HIGH COURT 
 
Ref: Maputo 01446 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Business Confidential 
Information. Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (SBU) On November 25, Attorney General Joaquim Madeira 
referred to the High Court of Mozambique a motion by 
Vilanculos Coastal Wildlife Sanctuary to suspend an October 
court order by Inhambane provincial judge Jose Sampaio that 
authorized expropriation of the Nyati Beach Lodge. The 
Lodge is co-owned by American investor David Herbert, who 
has received OPIC support for his investment. The Attorney 
General also recommended that the High Court suspend the 
provincial judge\'s earlier decision, which had enabled the 
Zimbabwean company Cabo do Mar to attempt several failed 
expropriations of Mr. Herbert\'s property based on an earlier 
land rights claim. Reftel provides details on the dispute. 
On November 23, Ambassador La Lime had met with the Attorney 
General to seek prompt action on the matter. The Attorney 
General had indicated that he would refer the case to the 
High Court with a recommendation to suspend the order. 
 
2. (SBU) The Attorney General\'s move represents a positive 
step for Mr. Herbert in his efforts to protect his 
investment in the lodge. Over the past month, Mr. Herbert 
and his legal teams had made several unsuccessful attempts 
to obtain an order from Judge Sampaio suspending enforcement 
of his October order. Based on his perceived vulnerability, 
Mr. Herbert and his team had negotiated a $650,000 
settlement with Cabo do Mar on October 28 in exchange for 
Cabo do Mar\'s agreement never to evict them. This 
settlement has been drafted but has not been signed, and 
Cabo do Mar has responded by upping its cash demands. It 
also attempted to take over Nyati Lodge on November 17 and 
again on November 20, each time with a private security 
force in tow. The Cabo do Mar security forces were fended 
off without incident, but Mr. Herbert believed that, without 
a favorable decision by the Attorney General, he probably 
would have been forced to meet Cabo do Mar\'s demands in 
order to keep his business. 
. (SBU) A referral to the High Court does not end the legal 
dispute between Cabo do Mar and Mr. Herbert. The High Court 
often takes months to decide cases, and Cabo do Mar is 
likely to attempt further evictions in the meantime. Mr. 
Herbert and his legal advisors believe that the Attorney 
General\'s decision to issue a recommendation along with the 
referral should help them, but admit that this is not always 
the case. Post believes that Mr. Herbert eventually will 
probably end up paying some form of settlement to Cabo do 
Mar in order to settle the issue of overlapping land claims. 
In any case, the Attorney General\'s decision should 
strengthen Mr. Herbert\'s position in his dealings with Cabo 
do Mar. 
LA LIME 
"
"23569","12/3/2004 10:34","04MAPUTO1566","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO1564","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001566 
 
SIPDIS 
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP 
SENSITIVE 
FOR AF/FO AND AF/S 
MCC PASS TO BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, MZ, Elections 04, Guebuza, FRELIMO, RENAMO 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN GENERAL ELECTIONS: VOTE COUNTING 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO 1564 
 
B. MAPUTO 1554 
C. MAPUTO 1538 
Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (U) Vote counting began at polling stations last night and 
continued in the morning hours today. Initial results as 
reported by state-owned Radio Mozambique early this morning 
indicate FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza holds a healthy 
lead with RENAMO\'s Afonso Dhlakama running second and PDD\'s 
Raul Domingos in a distant third. In past elections, Radio 
Mozambique reported counts from urban, more FRELIMO-leaning 
areas first, only later incorporating results from the rural 
RENAMO-leaning areas. It is unclear at this time how much 
ground Dhlakama will gain as votes from rural polling 
stations are considered. 
 
2. (U) Embassy observers continue to report individual 
polling stations\' results, which generally track with those 
reported in the morning press. Numbers from Tete province, 
where Dhlakama won 59.6 percent of the vote in the 1999 
presidential elections, indicate Guebuza holds the lead. 
Tete is an area where there have been reports of FRELIMO 
intimidation during the campaign and previous election years. 
Embassy observers also reported lower presence of RENAMO 
party delegates (observers) in some polling stations during 
these elections. Embassy observers in Nampula and northern 
Sofala provinces report Dhlakama leads in some districts 
where he won in 1999, but the vote appears closer than 
expected. Unofficial reports from the Mozambican observation 
effort affiliated with the Carter Center also suggest a 
healthy Guebuza lead. 
 
3. (SBU) Though RENAMO has made some claims of fraud, these 
allegations appear to be more isolated and less prevalent 
than in past elections. Also, in a change from past 
behavior, a high ranking RENAMO party official admitted to 
the Embassy political specialist to losing a district in Cabo 
Delgado, that many thought would go RENAMO. In the past, 
RENAMO would more likely have claimed fraud rather than admit 
defeat. 
 
4. (SBU) An EU representative told donor representatives this 
morning that the EU still was not sure how much access 
National Elections Commissions (CNE) officials would allow EU 
observers at the provincial and national tabulation stages 
over the next several days. If the access is not what the EU 
is seeking, it will not give an unqualified endorsement of 
the process. 
 
5. (SBU) We expect provincial-level tabulation of results 
from individual polling places to begin today. Several 
observer missions, including the EU and the Carter Center 
have planned press conferences for tomorrow. 
LA LIME 
"
"23714","12/7/2004 14:46","04MAPUTO1584","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04MAPUTO713","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001584 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S - HTREGER and DRL/IL - JHARPOLE 
LABOR FOR ILAB - BYOUNG, PWHITE, AZOLLNER, SHAHN 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO - JCOLLINS 
COMMERCE FOR RTELCHIN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EINV, ECON, MZ 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR FY 2005 LABOR SECTOR SUPPORT IN 
MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: a. MAPUTO 713 
 
b. 03 Maputo 1275 
 
1. This is an Action Request. See paragraph 8. 
 
2. SUMMARY. The Mission, the Mozambican Minister 
of Labor, labor unionsfederations, and private 
sector leaders would like continued USG support for 
labor projects in Mozambique in FY05. In 
particular, there is an urgent need to continue the 
USDOL-funded \"Improving Industrial Relations in 
Mozambique\" project that provides labor mediation 
training and support to union groups, government 
officials, union groups, and the private sector 
employers. END SUMMARY. 
 
3. In 2003-2004, the Mission, in coordination with 
USDOL - ILAB, State - DRL/IL, and the regional labor 
officer, organized several successful events on 
labor issues in Mozambique. These events included 
training courses on labor mediation and industrial- 
based bargaining, an HIV/AIDS prevention- in- the- 
workplace program, a visit by the Director and 
Deputy Director of the Federal Mediation and 
Conciliation Service (FMCS), an 80-person seminar on 
improving labor relations in Mozambique, and 
authorship of the book, \"Labour Relations in 
Mozambique.\" The USG\'s assistance to the GRM comes 
at a critical time, as the Mozambican labor law is 
under revision. In addition, during this period the 
USG supported The USG provided and continues to 
provide significant support to this effort via 
recently implemented programs and through its 
support of CTA, a confederation of business 
associations pushing policy change in the legal 
system in order to create a more attractive business 
and investment climate (Ref A). 
? 
4. During this period the USG, specifically 
USDOL/ILAB, supported labor mediation training for a 
group of 30-40 representatives from the private 
sector, labor unions, and the government supported 
an 80-person seminar on improving labor relations in 
Mozambique. The seminar was s taught by FMCS 
personnel, who visited Mozambique on four separate 
occasions. Those receiving the training were solely 
from the capital city, Maputo. Although some of 
those trained took their knowledge \"on the road\" to 
train employees in the central provinces of Sofala 
and Manica, without funds or adequate teaching 
skills, this effort was minimal. Nevertheless, the 
program has received high praise repeatedly from the 
Minister of Labor, leaders of the commercial 
arbitration center (CACM), union leaders and 
members, and employers (Ref B). The timing of the 
labor arbitration training was key, as it coincided 
with dialogue on labor law reform. 
 
4. The GRM is currently considering further 
revisions of the Mozambican labor law. Areas under 
discussion for revision includeSeveral areas of the 
law are being discussed, including provisions on 
hiring foreign labor, the system of labor 
inspections, and the need for labor arbitration 
centers. However, to date the The only proposed 
bill receiving unanimous support from the tripartite 
group (government, unions and the private sector 
deals with employers, and unions) sets forth the 
creation of a public and several private labor 
arbitrationmediation centers. Currently Under the 
current labor law, only a limited number of labor 
disputes areis subject to arbitration, and then 
viaand under procedures that neither employers nor 
unions seem to find particularly attractive. 
Moreover, eEven though the law provides for their 
creation, at present no labor arbitration courts 
have been ever been set up. This has led to the 
creation of This has allowed a substantial backlog 
of labor cases awaiting decisions. bottleneck of 
labor litigation to develop, and many cases are left 
for years without resolution. Mozambique compares 
unfavorably in this regard with other countries its 
competitors in the region on this issue, all of 
which have functioning labor courts and well- 
developed alternative dispute resolution (ADR) 
forums. 
? 
5. It appears likely that If the Ministry of 
Labor\'s current dialogue is an indication of future 
action, the GRM will approve thea e the draft labor 
mediation bill and implement new labor legislation 
by late 2005. The GRM then will require assistance 
in establishing new Because it will be a key 
addition to the new system, the structure of labor 
mediation centers and the training of mediators must 
be given proper attention. 
The groundwork that the USDOL has set through its 
labor mediation training (facilitated by FMCS), 
\"Improving Industrial Relations in Mozambique\" is an 
excellent forum for fostering the development of 
formal labor mediation in Mozambique. 
 
6. The 2003 USDOL-funded program, \"Improving 
Industrial Relations in Mozambique\" received high 
praise repeatedly from the Minister of Labor, 
leaders of the commercial arbitration center (CACM), 
union leaders and members, and employers (Ref B). 
The training consisted of four FMCS visits by 
excellent instructors that instructed a group of 
thirty private sector, government, and union 
representatives on industrial-based bargaining and 
labor dispute resolution. These group trained was 
solely from Maputo. 7. Comment: Changes to permit 
liberal access to labor arbitration in Mozambique 
are long overdue, however progress is being made. 
There now is a clear opportunity for the USG to 
support the GRM in making the transition to a labor 
system that includes labor mediation practices for 
employers and workers in government, unions, and the 
private sector. The groundwork that the USDOL has 
already laid through its labor mediation training 
seminar (para 4 above) is excellent preparation for 
further developing labor mediation in Mozambique. 
In July, the Ambassador visited with USDOL/ILAB 
staff to demonstrate the Mission\'s desire to see the 
program continue. 
 
8. Action Request: Mission requests USDOL continue 
funding for the \"Improving Industrial Relations in 
Mozambique\" program. Mission also requests guidance 
from DRL/IL regarding the availability of Department 
resources to support training in labor mediation. 
Cognizant of the legislation changes likely to be 
made, it is an opportune time to continue with 
training for a wider group of government, union, and 
private sector representatives. The formerly trained 
group took some of their knowledge \"on the road\" to 
train employees in the central provinces of Sofala 
and Manica, but without funds or adequate teaching 
skills, this effort was minimal. 
 
7. Changes to permit liberal access to labor 
arbitration in Mozambique are long overdue, however 
progress is being made. There is a clear 
opportunity for the USG to support the GRM in making 
the transition to system that includes labor 
mediation and be successful in this effort. To the 
extent resources are to be made available, it would 
be best used to continue training labor mediators 
and arbitrators - both in Maputo and in other major 
cities across the country. 
 
8. Action Request: Mission requests USDOL consider 
the request to continue the \"Improving Industrial 
Relations in Mozambique\" program. Mission also 
requests guidance from DRL/IL regarding the 
availability of resources to support the labor 
mediation effort. 
LA LIME 
"
"23715","12/7/2004 14:50","04MAPUTO1585","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001585 
 
SIPDIS 
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP 
SENSITIVE 
FOR AF/FO AND AF/S 
MCC PASS TO BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, MZ, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN GENERAL ELECTIONS: PROVINCIAL 
TABULATION DELAYED 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1572 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (U) Although the provincial vote tabulation should have 
begun December 3, as of December 6, it had started in only 
Nampula, Zambezia and Sofala provinces. According to 
National Elections Commission (CNE) spokesman Filipe 
Mondlate, data entry and tabulation should begin December 7 
in another two -- Gaza and Inhambane -- and Maputo city. 
Mondlate attributed delays to continuing heavy rains, 
particularly in the north of the country, as well as issues 
with installation of tabulation software. By law, provincial 
tabulation must be completed by Thursday, December 9. 
Considering these widespread delays, it is unlikely this 
deadline will be met. (Comment: Missing the deadline will 
not be considered a major issue and will not jeopardize the 
election. End Comment.) As of early afternoon on December 7, 
tabulation had not yet begun at the national level. 
 
2. (U) The CNE also announced on December 6 its decision not 
to reschedule voting in areas where polling stations did not 
open due to delays in delivery of voting materials because of 
heavy downpours. The CNE said that the law only permitted 
rescheduling in situations in which voting had been 
interrupted, and it also noted the relatively small number of 
voters affected. This decision will affect 24,943 registered 
voters in 43 polling stations in Tete and Cabo Delgado 
provinces. 
 
3. (SBU) While it appears clear that Guebuza has won handily, 
international election observers remain concerned about the 
reclassification of initially invalid votes (nulos). In 
1999, roughly ten percent of votes were nulos, with roughly 4 
percent ultimately reclassified as valid. If the percentages 
are similar this year, there could be approximately 350,000 
nulos and 140,000 could be reclassified. Observers from the 
European Union, the Carter Center and other international 
missions were called to the CNE on December 6 to witness the 
start of the reconsideration process. However, according to 
an EU mission source, observers were provided an explanation 
of the process and then asked to leave before the 
reconsideration began. Reconsideration is being carried out 
by teams of two officials, one each representing FRELIMO and 
RENAMO. The source also stated that the CNE did not plan to 
provide a final report on the reclassification process, 
including what criteria were used, as requested by the 
observer missions (ref B). 
 
4. (SBU) It also remains unclear to what extent the CNE will 
accomodate the desire of the EU and the Carter Center for the 
CNE to make public the reasons for its decisions on polling 
station results excluded at the provincial level. These 
decisions are not expected to begin until later this week. 
LA LIME 
"
"23798","12/9/2004 5:18","04MAPUTO1587","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L MAPUTO 001587 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR AF/FO AND AF/S 
STATE PASS MCC FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/08/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, MZ, RENAMO 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN GENERAL ELECTIONS: RENAMO ALLEGES 
IRREGULARITIES 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1585 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Helen La Lime for reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
1. (C) Senior RENAMO advisor Artur Vilankulu, accompanied by 
two other RENAMO officials, called on the Ambassador on 
December 8 to express concern over alleged irregularities in 
the December 1 - 2 general elections. The three were in the 
midst of making the rounds of various foreign embassies with 
their complaints. Vilankulu claimed that many RENAMO 
adherents were deliberately excluded during the voter 
registration phase and that there were numerous cases of 
votes for RENAMO being spoiled by polling station staff. 
Further, he said, RENAMO party representatives (by law 
entitled to observe voting and counting) were driven out of 
some polling stations, leaving predominantly FRELIMO polling 
station staff free to spoil otherwise valid RENAMO ballots. 
Vilankulu referred to statements by RENAMO chief Dhlakama 
that he would not encourage any violence, but then warned 
that tensions were high and that RENAMO party officials would 
be unable to control their supporters if they chose to take 
to the streets. (Comment: Considering RENAMO\'s surprisingly 
weak showing, post believes it is highly unlikely that RENAMO 
supporters will take to the streets in significant numbers. 
End Comment.) 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador immediately responded to the warning 
of violence, stressing to the RENAMO officials that she hoped 
their supporters would not respond in this way. She reminded 
them that they as leaders of the party play an important role 
in managing tension. Vilankulu quickly replied that he 
really did not expect violence. Pointing to findings by many 
observer groups, including the Embassy\'s, and to the National 
Observatory\'s parallel vote tabulation (PVT), the Ambassador 
asserted her belief that Guebuza\'s apparent clear lead 
reflected the will of those who voted, even if there had been 
irregularities in some areas. Although Vilankulu did not 
acknowledge that Dhlakama had lost, neither did he contest 
the Ambassador\'s statement. The Ambassador encouraged RENAMO 
to actively seek to position itself as a positive and 
constructive political movement. 
 
3. (SBU) Separately, press reports continue to emerge over 
alleged ballot stuffing at some polling stations in the 
provinces of Tete and Niassa. In Changara district, Tete 
province, voter turnout reached an incredible 96 percent 
across the district\'s 95 polling stations (the national 
average is around 40 percent). Polling station counts 
indicate that 64,562 valid votes went to Guebuza compared to 
919 to Dhlakama. Commentators claim that, in addition to the 
high turnout, the low Dhlakama figure is suspicious, given 
that in 1999 he garnered 5,337 votes in the district. RENAMO 
claims its official observers were driven out of the district 
both this year and in 1999, leaving RENAMO unable to observe 
vote counting at the polling station level where ballot 
stuffing would likely occur. The Carter Center and European 
Union observer missions are both closely following these 
allegations and have urged election officials to investigate 
and take action against any violation of electoral law (refs). 
LA LIME 
"
"23873","12/10/2004 7:34","04MAPUTO1603","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001603 
 
SIPDIS 
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP 
SENSITIVE 
FOR AF/FO AND AF/S 
MCC PASS TO BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, MZ, Guebuza, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN GENERAL ELECTIONS: PARALLEL VOTE 
TABULATION GIVES WIN TO GUEBUZA 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1587 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (U) On December 9 the Carter Center-supported National 
Electoral Observatory released its parallel vote tabulation 
(PVT). The PVT, based on a sample of 775 individual polling 
station results collected by 1600 observers, gives FRELIMO\'s 
Guebuza 63.6 percent of the presidential vote, with RENAMO\'s 
Dhlakama garnering a mere 31.7 percent. FRELIMO came out the 
winnner in the parliamentary races too, with 60 percent 
compared to 29 percent for the RENAMO-UE coaltion. No other 
party reached the five percent threshold of parliamentary 
votes needed to qualify to win seats in the National 
Assembly. According to the Carter Center, the PVT has a 
three percent margin of error. Within this margin it should 
accurately represent the actual vote. The Observatory\'s 
report, however, points to the need to investigate anomalous 
voter turnout in Changara, Tete province (refs). 
 
2. (SBU) Later on December 9, during a radio interview with 
the BBC, Dhlakama rejected the validity of the PVT, asserting 
it was based on fraudulent data. Dhlakama also called for 
new elections, with President Chissano to remain in office 
another 6 months until the results of a repeat election could 
be \"sorted out.\" Dhlakama claimed massive fraud, citing 
cases of intimidation, ballot stuffing, and manipulation of 
polling results during the tabulation process. (Comment: 
Though ballot stuffing appears to be a plausible explanation 
for the unlikely results in Changara and in one or two other 
places, we have not received credible reports of widespread 
intimidation or of tampering with the tabulation process. 
End comment.) 
 
3. (SBU) Under law, provincial election results should have 
been announced by December 9. No province met this deadline. 
Vote tabulation at the national level, with partial results 
from the provinces, began in Maputo on December 8. However 
it was halted shortly after it began due to technical 
difficulties and was not resumed until late in the afternoon 
of December 9. 
LA LIME 
"
"23981","12/13/2004 13:38","04MAPUTO1606","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04MAPUTO713","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001606 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S - HTREGER and DRL/IL - JHARPOLE 
LABOR FOR ILAB BYOUNG, PWHITE, AZOLLNER, SHAHN 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RLO JCOLLINS 
COMMERCE FOR RTELCHIN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EINV, ECON, MZ 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR FY 2005 LABOR SECTOR SUPPORT IN MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: a. MAPUTO 713 
 
b.03 Maputo 1275 
 
1. This is an Action Request. See paragraph 8. 
 
2. SUMMARY. The Mission, the Mozambican Minister of Labor, 
labor unions, and private sector leaders would like continued 
USG support for labor projects in Mozambique in FY05. In 
particular, there is an urgent need to continue the USDOL- 
funded \"Improving Industrial Relations in Mozambique\" project 
that provides labor mediation training and support to 
government officials, union groups, and the private sector. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
3. In 2003-2004, the Mission, in coordination with USDOL 
ILAB, State - DRL/IL, and the regional labor officer, 
organized several successful events on labor issues in 
Mozambique. These events included training courses on labor 
mediation and industrial-based bargaining, an HIV/AIDS 
prevention-in-the-workplace program, a visit by the Director 
and Deputy Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation 
Service (FMCS), an 80-person seminar on improving labor 
relations in Mozambique, and authorship of the book, \"Labour 
Relations in Mozambique.\" In addition, during this period the 
USG supported a confederation of business associations pushing 
policy change in the legal system to create a more attractive 
business and investment climate (Ref A). 
 
4. During this period the USG, specifically USDOL/ILAB, 
supported labor mediation training for a group of 30-40 
representatives from the private sector, labor unions, and the 
government. The seminar was taught by FMCS personnel, who 
visited Mozambique on four separate occasions. Those 
receiving the training were solely from the capital city, 
Maputo. Although some of those trained took their knowledge 
\"on the road\" to train employees in the central provinces of 
Sofala and Manica, without funds or adequate teaching skills, 
this effort was minimal. Nevertheless, the program has 
received high praise repeatedly from the Minister of Labor, 
leaders of the commercial arbitration center (CACM), union 
leaders and members, and employers (Ref B). The timing of the 
labor arbitration training was key, as it coincided with 
dialogue on labor law reform. 
 
5. The GRM is currently considering revisions of the 
Mozambican labor law. Areas under discussion for revision 
include provisions on hiring foreign labor, the system of 
labor inspections, and the need for labor arbitration centers. 
However, to date the only proposed bill receiving unanimous 
support from government, unions and the private sector deals 
with labor arbitration. Currently only a limited number of 
labor disputes are subject to arbitration, and then via 
procedures that neither employers nor unions find attractive. 
Moreover, even though the law provides for their creation, at 
present no labor arbitration courts have been set up. This 
has led to the creation of a substantial backlog of labor 
cases awaiting decisions. Mozambique compares unfavorably in 
this regard with other countries in the region, all of which 
have functioning labor courts and well-developed alternative 
dispute resolution (ADR) forums. 
 
6. It appears likely that the GRM will approve the labor 
mediation bill and implement new labor legislation by late 
2005. The GRM then will require assistance in establishing 
new labor mediation centers and training mediators. 
 
7. Comment: Changes to permit liberal access to labor 
arbitration in Mozambique are long overdue, however progress 
is being made. There now is a clear opportunity for the USG 
to support the GRM in making the transition to a labor system 
that includes labor mediation practices for government, 
unions, and the private sector. The groundwork that the USDOL 
has already laid through its labor mediation training (para 4 
above) is excellent preparation for further developing labor 
mediation in Mozambique. In July, the Ambassador visited with 
USDOL/ILAB staff to demonstrate the Mission\'s desire to see 
the program continue. 
 
8. Action Request: Mission requests USDOL continue funding 
for the \"Improving Industrial Relations in Mozambique\" 
program. Mission also requests guidance from DRL/IL regarding 
the availability of Department resources to support training 
in labor mediation. 
LA LIME 
"
"23985","12/13/2004 14:47","04MAPUTO1607","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE227856","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 MAPUTO 001607 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR CA/EX, AF/EX, AF/S, OIG/ISP, M/FSI/SPAS, CA/VO, 
CA/FPP, CA/OCS 
JOHANNESBURG FOR RCO BACA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT, CVIS, CASC, KFRD, ASIG, AFSI, MZ, MPP 
SUBJECT: CONSULAR NARRATIVE FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: STATE 227856 
 
The following are Embassy Maputo\'s responses to the 
questions posed in REFTEL. 
 
Management: 
A) Please identify the following: 
- Consular Section Chief name, ETD, direct office 
telephone number and e-mail. 
Leyla L. Ones, September 2006 (rotation to 
Political/Economic section), (258) 1 492797 ext. 3434, 
onesll@state.gov 
- Deputy Consular Section Chief name, ETD, direct office 
telephone number and e-mail. 
Not applicable. 
- Back-up Consular Officer name (if this is a one-officer 
consular section), direct office telephone number and e- 
mail. 
James Potts, (258) 1 492797 ext. 3423, pottsjh@state.gov 
- Consular Section Fax number (please provide both IVG 
numbers and standard phone numbers including country and 
city codes). 
Tel: 258 (1) 492797, Fax: (258) 1 490448; IVG line 8 887 
3434/36/47 
 
B) Do you have sufficient staff to meet consular MPP 
objectives? 
Yes. The consular section comprises one American Foreign 
Service Officer, and two Foreign Service nationals. The 
current staffing pattern is adequate to meet MPP objectives. 
 
C) Do you have sufficient space to meet consular MPP 
objectives? 
While space is inadequate and work efficiency suffers as a 
result, Post can still meet MPP objectives. The 3-member 
consular staff currently occupies a space - consisting of 
two small rooms and a cubbyhole - of less than 35 square 
meters. This space accommodates furniture, consular 
equipment for all NIV, ACS, and cashier functions, large 
safes for storage of controlled items, A-Z files, ACS vault, 
general storage of consular handouts/brochures, tax guides, 
voting materials, office supplies, and all NIV, ACS, and IV 
case archives. 
Insufficient space allows for only one public-service window 
for all NIV, ACS and cashier functions, resulting in delays 
in visa processing and the provision of other consular 
services. Because cash payments, NIV intake and 
interviewing/fingerprinting must be done at the same window, 
it is not unusual for ten visa applicants to wait for up to 
three or four hours to be interviewed. Additionally, as 
American Citizen Services are provided during all hours of 
Embassy operation, should a U.S. citizen request assistance 
during visa hours, the use of the single window for ACS 
effectively halts all NIV processing. This leads to further 
delays, hampering efficiency, interrupting workflow and 
compromising customer service. Having only one consular 
window also forces the consular chief of section to leave 
her office to deal with the public in the foyer of the 
Embassy (which also serves as the NIV waiting room). In 
sum, the efficiency, quality and accuracy of consular work 
is undermined by these space and design limitations. impact 
on improving workflow. 
Post addressed the issue of inadequate space and poor design 
in Maputo 1493, a cable sent in response to CA\'s Consular 
Improvement Initiative. In this same cable, Post requested 
funds and OBO assistance in redesigning and possibly 
expanding the consular section. 
 
D) Describe any management practices (such as off-site fee 
collection, use of a user pays call center, courier 
passback, post hosted web appointment system, business 
programs) that post has instituted in the past year. Are 
these management practices effective? Also, please list any 
management practices that have been discontinued in the past 
year, citing reasons for their termination. 
Given the relatively low volume of consular cases at Post, 
the consular section does not have off-site fee collection, 
a call center, courier passback, a web-based appointment 
system, or any special business programs. However, the 
consular section strives continually to develop better 
management systems within the limitations of our resources 
and physical space. The recent installation of a teller 
window intercom/paging system - in October 2004 -- has 
improved workflow and efficiency, as consular staff no 
longer has to physically leave the section in order to call 
the next NIV applicant waiting in the Embassy foyer. While 
it is difficult to be efficient with only one teller window 
available to serve the public, fee collection is handled as 
promptly and capably as possible, with one FSN working as 
the cashier, and the other in data-entry. Currently, 
prospective NIV applicants must call the consular section 
directly to make appointments, which often results in the 
chief of section interrupting work to respond to these 
routine phone calls if the FSNs are otherwise occupied. To 
enhance section productivity, Post is now exploring the 
option of setting up a dedicated automated NIV appointment 
telephone line with voicemail. Additionally, through 
information and links posted on the Embassy\'s website, and a 
telephone outreach campaign to local business and government 
contacts, Post is encouraging use of the electronic visa 
application form (EVAF) to help speed up data entry time for 
NIV processing. While the consular section has seen only a 
handful of EVAFs to date, we hope to see an increase in its 
use during the next fiscal year. 
 
E) Please advise whether and why post might benefit from a 
Consular Management Assistance Team (CMAT) visit. (By 
year\'s end, CMAT\'s will have visited since their inception 
nearly 60 posts. If a CMAT visited your post over the past 
year, please summarize any benefits and what steps, if any, 
could be taken to further enhance the productivity 
of CMAT visits.) 
While there is no doubt that Post would currently benefit 
from a CMAT visit to evaluate new ways to boost efficiency 
and offer innovations on existing management techniques, a 
future CMAT visit may be more appropriate if timed to 
correspond with the completion of a possible consular 
section expansion/construction project - currently proposed 
but not approved. Future CMAT feedback on improving 
consular operations in a newly designed workspace would be 
very useful. 
 
Systems: 
F) Do you have the equipment you need to meet consular MPP 
objectives? (If you believe you do not, describe the 
equipment you need and efforts you have made to obtain it.) 
A 3-member Harris Orkand team recently completed a 10-day 
visit to Post in which new computer hardware (computer and 
CRBA/NIV printers) and system upgrades were installed. 
Technical problems that had long plagued the consular 
section were successfully addressed. Consular systems are 
now operating more smoothly, particularly since the Parser 
was moved into the consular section and can be easily reset 
by the chief of section without having to call upon the 
services of IPC/IMS. 
Emergency passport equipment is inadequate, however, and 
Post has written the department requesting a new passport 
lamination machine. Post currently relies on the old glue- 
pot and daisy wheel method of emergency passport production 
for the older Z-series passports. This type of passport does 
not meet currently security standards, and should no longer 
be produced given the current elevated U.S. threat level. 
 
G) How would you rate your consular section\'s satisfaction 
with automated consular systems (excellent, good, average, 
poor)? Are there any unresolved software or hardware issues? 
How do you rate the training of post personnel both within 
the consular section and in Management/IM on the use and 
support of Consular systems (excellent, good, average, 
poor)? What types of assistance would you need from the 
next training and refresher teams coming from the consular 
systems division to assist consular system users? Please 
also comment on the quality of assistance provided by the CA 
Overseas Help Desk. 
As mentioned above, Post recently benefited from an Orkand 
visit during which hardware was replaced and upgraded, and 
new versions of consular software were installed. The 
consular chief, FSNs, back-up consular officer, and 
alternate \"emergency\" consular officer (with a commission 
from her last assignment) received thorough training 
sessions on upgraded consular applications. Overall, Post\'s 
satisfaction with automated consular systems can be 
characterized as good. Post continues to experience mild 
problems with CLASS namechecks \"freezing\" or showing 
\"errors,\" but consultations with IT people show that this is 
related to Post\'s server and not linked to faulty consular 
equipment or systems. 
Post would like to see more user-friendly and accurate 
applications of the Ad Hoc Reporting Tables. When the 
consular section chief recently generated an F-77 report 
using Ad Hoc, the information reflected in the report was 
glaringly incorrect. Post sent an inquiry to the CA Support 
Desk and was informed that many reports used in Ad Hoc are 
often inaccurate and therefore should not be used. There 
also don\'t seem to be any dependable training manuals for Ad 
Hoc, and the general approach recommended by CA systems 
personnel is experimentation and \"tinkering around\" with the 
program to see what it can (and cannot) do. 
Post is highly satisfied with the timely responses and 
quality of the work and effort put forward by the CA 
Overseas Help Desk. No matter what time of the day the 
consular section calls upon the Help Desk\'s expertise, the 
assistance received is invariably professional and time- 
sensitive. The Help Desk also does a good job in following 
up on written inquiries, often writing back to make sure the 
problem was solved, or that the advice dispensed was on- 
target. 
 
H) Some posts have recently begun scanning 2-D barcodes to 
input DS-156 information into consular systems. Please 
comment on other forms you would like to see automated and 
explain why. 
Post has no specific recommendations regarding automation of 
other consular forms. 
 
ACS: 
I) What aspects of your ACS work are the most demanding? 
It is a challenge to keep the warden system current and 
accurate, and even more challenging to make sure the Embassy 
is reaching out effectively to the more than 600 American 
citizens dispersed widely in a country twice the size of 
California. Post relies primarily on e-mail to distribute 
Warden messages, as many U.S. citizens do not have cell 
phones or even landline telephones. Having only one 
dedicated consular officer makes it difficult to conduct the 
kind of hands-on outreach that would be ideal for American 
citizens. Ideally, the consular chief would be able to 
travel upcountry at least three times a year to meet with 
Embassy wardens and to conduct town hall meetings on issues 
of concern to American citizens. This type of physical 
outreach would have been particularly useful in the months 
preceding the U.S. presidential and general election in 
November 2004 in order to increase the number of people 
using the Federal Write-In Absentee Ballot. 
 
J) Describe the impact that added responsibilities for 
provision of victim\'s assistance as well as reporting 
requirements (for example, in death cases and for serious 
crimes) have had on your workload. 
Regarding victim\'s assistance, additional responsibilities 
for service and reporting have not had significant impact on 
Post\'s consular workload. However, the provision of 
emergency services to American citizens - such as welfare 
and whereabouts cases, assistance in criminal cases, traffic 
accidents, etc. - is difficult in a country where there is 
an absence of standardized regulations and inconsistent 
application of existing laws. Rendering assistance to 
American citizens will become a more critical issue, as 
incidences of crimes against foreigners appear to be rising. 
 
Visas: 
K) What aspects of your NIV work are the most demanding? 
The high prevalence of third-country national (TCN) 
applicants makes NIV processing more protracted, both in 
terms of intake and interviewing. Frequently, security 
advisory opinions are required for TCNs, which further 
extends the time required to process individual cases. Many 
applicants do not know how to fill out the DS-156 or DS-157 
forms and this hampers workflow on NIV days as FSNs often 
spend a great deal of time providing assistance - sometimes 
question by question. 
 
L) Describe the impact that post-9/11 changes in NIV 
processing, such as special processing requirements, SEVIS, 
etc. have had on your workflow, including the amount of time 
it takes to conduct an interview. 
Third country national interviews warrant intense scrutiny 
and therefore take longer, even if applicants purport to be 
long-time residents of Mozambique. As Mozambican passports 
and residency permits can be obtained through illegal 
channels, extensive interviews must be conducted to 
ascertain the bona fides of TCNs. Regarding SEVIS, very few 
students seem to know about the new fee, and are asked to 
reschedule their interviews after payment. The consular 
chief is working with the Public Affairs office on outreach 
programs to inform prospective students of NIV requirements. 
 
M) Please comment on the impact that the fingerprinting 
requirement has had on consular space, processing time, and 
relations with your host country. 
The introduction of the fingerprinting requirement has been, 
on balance, well received by the host country. Applicants 
have adapted quickly to fingerprinting and it has not had 
significant impact on NIV processing. 
 
N) What aspects of your IV work are the most demanding? 
(Discussion should address any backlogs and their causes). 
While Post does not process IV cases, the consular chief 
spends a significant amount of time explaining the IV 
process to prospective applicants, providing forms, and 
responding to general and specific inquiries covering a 
broad spectrum of IV areas (from adoption to family-based 
petitions.) Post forwards the I-130 forms, supporting 
documents, and case notes from preliminary interviews to 
Consulate General Johannesburg for processing and 
adjudication. This system sometimes presents a challenge as, 
in case of delays, confusion, or unreceived documents, 
applicants will often hold Post responsible and direct their 
frustration toward Post consular staff. As a result, Post 
has requested that Johannesburg send to Maputo duplicate 
copies of all packet 3\'s dispatched to Mozambique-based 
applicants. 
 
O) If applicable, please describe the impact of the DV 
program on your workload. 
Not applicable. 
 
P) What percentage of your NIV and IV applicants are third 
country nationals (TCNs)? From what countries are they? Do 
they speak a different language than post\'s designated 
language? If so, how do you communicate with them? 
Approximately 22% of NIV applicants are TCNs. The countries 
representing the largest number of applicants, beginning 
with the most prevalent, are Nigeria, South Africa, Guinea, 
Pakistan, India, Brazil, Congo, and Tanzania. Post has also 
processed applications for nationals of China, Cuba, and 
Lebanon. As consular staff has a combined knowledge of six 
languages, communication with TCNs is generally not a 
problem. 
 
Passport: 
Q) Discuss how your post has been affected by the Overseas 
Photodigitized Passports program (OPDP) deployed in 2003. 
Please note any major adjustments you have had to make to 
workflow or staffing. Has the number of emergency passports 
issued at post decreased? If so, by how much? 
Post has received high praise from American citizens on the 
new Overseas Photodigitized Passports program. The speedy 
turnaround appears to have had a significant impact on the 
issuance of emergency passports at post. Given that most 
American citizen applicants are residents of Mozambique and 
not tourists, virtually all applicants can wait 7-to-10 days 
to receive their new passport from the United States and, 
thus, do not need temporary emergency passports. The new 
procedures have had no significant impact on Post\'s workload 
and staffing. 
 
Fraud Prevention: 
R) Briefly summarize the types of fraud most frequently 
encountered at post and programs in place to combat that 
fraud, including use of investigation resources, tracking 
systems, electronic tools, liaison and information sharing. 
If post has conducted a validation study, what was learned 
from it? Are you satisfied with the level of fraud 
prevention training for officers and FSNs? If not, what do 
you believe you need to support your efforts in this area? 
Do you conduct in-house fraud training? If so, who is the 
targeted audience and how often is it done? Do you conduct 
fraud training for non-Embassy consular contacts? If so, 
who is the targeted audience and how often is it done? Do 
local authorities effectively prosecute document vendors and 
smugglers? 
Imposter fraud is the most frequently encountered type of 
fraud at Post. Mozambican nationality and identity 
documents (as well as residency permits) are easily obtained 
on either the black market, or by bribing immigration 
officials. Consequently, TCNs posing as Mozambicans - or 
long-time residents of Mozambique - are able to apply for 
nonimmigrant visas with genuine Mozambican passports or 
residency permits. A thorough NIV interview must be 
conducted with all applicants to assess Portuguese language 
ability, knowledge of the country, professional and 
educational background, and economic ties. Document fraud 
is less prevalent but more difficult to detect as official 
documents often lack uniformity and/or security features, 
and even legitimate documents are often of poor quality - 
printed with dot matrix printers or handwritten. 
Post is expanding anti-fraud efforts by strengthening ties 
with key local contacts in immigration and other areas, and 
is in the process of putting together Post\'s first 
Mozambique anti-fraud guide as a key element of the new 
officer training handbook, another new endeavor currently 
being undertaken. 
 
General: 
S) Describe country conditions that affect your ability to 
provide consular services (infrastructure, fraud, political 
setting, etc.). 
Mozambique\'s vast territory and absence of adequate 
infrastructure, both in terms of transportation and 
communication networks, present challenges to providing 
emergency and non-emergency services to American citizens. 
Legitimate Mozambican identity and nationality documents, as 
well as residency permits, can be obtained through bribes 
offered to local officials, adding another dimension of 
difficulty in NIV adjudication. Mozambique\'s borders are 
porous and poorly monitored due to an underpaid and ill- 
equipped police force, and it is difficult to obtain illegal 
immigration information from local officials since 
statistics are rarely tracked and cases seldom investigated. 
 
T) Describe any other issue not raised in the preceding 
questions that you believe to be significant to the consular 
section\'s effectiveness in handling its responsibilities. 
None. 
LA LIME 
"
"24010","12/14/2004 4:56","04MAPUTO1609","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MAPUTO894","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001609 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S HTREGER AND EB/TRA 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
JOHANNESBURG FCS FOR RDONOVAN, JVANRENSBURG 
USDOC FOR RTELCHIN 
MCC FOR SGAULL, TBRIGGS 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER ECONOMIC WRAP-UP: MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: A. MAPUTO 894 
 
B. MAPUTO 712 
C. MAPUTO 340 
D. MAPUTO 1519 
Sensitive but Unclassified Business Confidential Information. 
Not for Internet Posting. 
 
-------- 
CONTENTS 
-------- 
Foreign Investment 
2.CVRD wins Moatize mine concession 
3.Sasol to explore more natural gas fields 
Macroeconomics 
4. French debt relief under HIPC 
Agriculture 
5. Cotton production at 80,000 tons in 2004 
Business 
usiness 
6. Buzi Sugar Corporation taken over by Maragra 
7. Coke defrauded 
8. Mozambican-assembled jeans to be exported under AGOA 
 
1. (U) The Mozambique monthly economic cable is jointly produced 
by the Embassy and USAID. 
 
------------------- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
------------------- 
2. (U) On November 12, the Brazilian mining giant Companhia Vale 
do Rio Doce (CVRD) was awarded the Moatize mines exploration 
concession (Ref A). CVRD is investing USD 122 million for the 
initial phase of development, a feasibility study, scheduled for 
18 months. The firm seeks to market 15-16 million tons of coal 
per year. Recent studies suggest that the mines possess 2.4 
billion tons of coal reserves. CVRD also plans to build a 1500 
megawatt coal-fired power station in Tete province close to the 
mines. According the country\'s official news agency, AIM, the 
bulk of the coal will be exported primarily to Brazil. As part 
of its bid, CVRD agreed to give the GRM five percent of the 
shares in the Moatize mining company and make an additional ten 
percent available to private investors. It is unclear how CVRD 
will choose to move the coal to the coast for export (the mines 
are located 250 miles inland). Just this year, Rites and Ircon 
(India) was awarded the concession to reconstruct and manage the 
Sena railway line for a period of 25 years (Ref B). The line 
originates at Moatize and ends at the port of Beira. Use of the 
Sena line is a possible option. However, Beira port is 
relatively shallow and presently cannot accommodate Cape-size 
vessels. Mozambique\'s only deep-water port, Nacala, roughly 
1,000 miles up the coast from Beira, could be used instead as the 
export port for Moatize coal; this would entail constructing 
about 100 miles of new rail line mostly in Malawi, to connect 
with the existing Malawi-Nacala line. Separately, an American 
firm, American Commercial Lines International (ACLI), is 
interested in developing a barge service to carry coal down the 
Zambeze River to an off-shore transfer point near the coastal 
town of Chinde. CVRD is expected to start production in 2009. 
 
3. (U) The GRM and Sasol, the giant South African oil and gas 
company, will enter into an agreement soon allowing further 
exploration of offshore natural gas fields in the central part of 
Mozambique. Earlier SASOL found large reserves of natural gas in 
the Pande and Temane fields in Inhambane province and began 
exporting natural gas to South Africa by pipeline in 2004 (Ref 
C). The entire undertaking was estimated at USD 1.2 billion and 
is considered one of Mozambique\'s top two mega-projects (second 
only to the MOZAL aluminum investment). Sasol will explore the 
offshore sites in partnership with Mozambique\'s National 
Hydrocarbon Company. 
 
--------------- 
MACROECONOMICS 
--------------- 
4. (U) The government of France further reduced Mozambique\'s debt 
by 21.5 million euros. This is the second debt reduction 
agreement signed between France and Mozambique. France is 
working to annul the total bilateral debt (in the amount of 444 
million euros) owed to it in accordance with the Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. Ministry of Planning and 
Finance officials state that this cancellation of debt will allow 
the GRM to make progress implementing poverty red 
uction programs 
in Mozambique, the state\'s number one priority. 
----------- 
AGRICULTURE 
----------- 
5. (U) Farmers produced and sold nearly 80,000 tons of raw cotton 
to local production factories in the 2003-2004 agricultural 
campaign. According to the Mozambican Cotton Institute, another 
7,000 tons will be sold to local firms before the end of the 
year, making it possible for Mozambique to export 87,000 tons of 
cotton in 2004. This is a huge spike from 2003, when only 54,000 
tons were sold on the global market. 
 
-------- 
BUSINESS 
-------- 
6. (U) The GRM formally handed over the Buzi Sugar Corporation to 
its new owner, Marracuene Sugar (also known as Maragra), which 
now owns 100 percent of the old Buzi estate. Maragra intends to 
rehabilitate the Buzi factory with new equipment and start 
producing alcohol. The rehabilitation and reopening of Buzi is 
expected to create a significant number of local jobs, 
stimulating the surrounding economy. A Maragra spokesman states 
that the company will seek to hire ex-Buzi employees and build a 
housing community on the estate. Mozambique\'s National Sugar 
Institute expects the market for sugar to remain soft until the 
EU opens its market to developing countries in 2009. 
 
7. (SBU) Several major businesses are reportedly closing their 
accounts with Banco Internacional de Mocambique (BIM) and 
reopening with Standard Bank due to illegal actions involving 
Ministry of Finance officials and BIM employees. In July, Coca- 
Cola paid 5-6 billion meticais (roughly USD 250,000) in VAT to 
the Ministry of Planning and Finance. After receiving a signed 
and stamped receipt from the Ministry, Coca-Cola received a phone 
call requesting the same July VAT payment. A Coke contact says 
that when the firm declared that it had paid and received the 
receipt, the Ministry said it had no record of the payment. Upon 
visiting the Ministry of Finance to identify the employee who 
processed the receipt, Coca-Cola could not find that person and 
the Ministry declared the receipt fake. Several days later the 
USD 250,000 was withdrawn from Coke\'s account, culprit unknown. 
Coke repaid the USD 250,000 to the Ministry of Finance. However 
Coke, plus many other big firms including Sasol, Mozambique 
Electricity, and others, are pulling their accounts from BIM due 
to the recurring problems that exist with the bank\'s shady 
operations. The discovery of corruption by Ministry of Finance 
officials is not new news, as the press is vocal about claims 
that Finance is one of the most corrupt ministries (particularly 
the Customs Department) in Mozambique. 
 
8. (U) Econ/poloffs and the President of the U.S.-based Corporate 
Council on Africa (CCA) visited Belita, the only garment factory 
in Mozambique exporting to the U.S. under AGOA. Belita exports 
sweatshirts, t-shirts, and polo shirts to Vanity Fair, Chaps, 
FUBU, and Lee. Sales from January to October 2004 totaled 
approximately USD 1.4 million, and are expected to reach USD 2.2 
million by the end of the year. Belita buys almost all of its 
primary material (fabric, labels, zippers) outside of Mozambique. 
Belita\'s parent company, the Palmar Group, located in Mauritius, 
handles all marketing, communication, and logistics for the sale 
of Mozambican-produced garments. In January 2005, Belita expects 
to open a jeans-production plant in Maputo. Belita will source 
all denim from Southern Africa. Over 1,000 staff will be 
employed, and Belita\'s AGOA sales to the U.S. are expected to 
increase (Ref D). 
LA LIME 
"
"24118","12/15/2004 13:34","04MAPUTO1616","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 001616 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR AF/FO AND AF/S 
PASS MCC FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, MZ, Elections 04, DHLAKAMA 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN GENERAL ELECTIONS: RENAMO LEADER 
DHLAKAMA CONTINUES TO REJECT RESULTS 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1603 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR HELEN LA LIME FOR REASONS 1.4 (b/d) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary and Comment: RENAMO\'s Dhlakama continues to 
reject provincial tabulation figures, which show a clear 
Guebuza victory in the presidential election and a strong 
FRELIMO win in parliamentary races. Despite the release of 
an independent parallel vote count largely corroborating the 
partial and non-official results that have been announced so 
far, Dhlakama insists the voting was fundamentally 
fraudulent. While some of RENAMO\'s allegations are 
plausible, others are not credible, and only Dhlakama and 
those around him are claiming that irregularities made the 
difference. The national-level count is going slowly. There 
is increasing likelihood that the National Elections 
Commission (CNE) will miss the December 17 deadline and 
instead announce final results some time next week. End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) RENAMO presidential candidate Afonso Dhlakama repeated 
his call for new elections during press conferences December 
10 and 14, again alleging widespread fraud and intimidation 
of his supporters during the December 1 - 2 general elections 
(refs). At the December 14 event, he was joined by the 
fourth- and fifth-place presidential candidates, neither of 
whom received one percent of the vote. Notably absent was 
apparent third-place finisher Raul Domingos, who was 
considered a more serious candidate than the other two. 
 
3. (C) Meanwhile, Dhlakama continues to publicly disparage 
the findings of the Carter Center-backed National 
Observatory\'s parallel vote tabulation (PVT), which indicate, 
based on a random sampling of polling places, that FRELIMO\'s 
Guebuza won 64 percent of the ballots for president and the 
party did similarly well in parliamentary races. Late last 
week, National Observatory members met with Guebuza and 
delivered the PVT report, but Dhlakama\'s people said Dhlakama 
was unavailable, leaving them to drop the report off at his 
office instead. Carter Center representative Nicolas Bravo 
(protect) met with Dhlakama on December 10 in an effort to 
explain the report\'s findings. However Dhlakama remained 
adamant that the PVT report was based on \"forgeries.\" Bravo 
told emboff December 14 that it is not in the Carter Center\'s 
mandate to lead the effort to persuade Dhlakama. Instead, he 
said that he is urging the National Observatory to meet 
personally with Dhlakama to try to convince him of the 
validity of the outcome. 
 
4. (C) On December 13 RENAMO delivered to the Embassy a copy 
of its report to the European Union Observation Mission 
(EUOM), which details a wide range of alleged irregularities. 
One fundamental RENAMO complaint throughout the report is 
that its party delegates (official observers) were allegedly 
expelled from and/or denied access to polling stations 
throughout the country, leaving the door open for widespread 
fraud by FRELIMO. (Comment: Although results in a few 
districts suggest some ballot-stuffing, none of the several 
domestic and international observer missions saw anything 
indicating the carefully-planned, nationwide effort that 
RENAMO alleges.) In the document RENAMO also claims that its 
voter base was deliberately disenfranchised through the 
switching of voter rolls at polling stations in RENAMO areas. 
Journalist and Mozambique scholar Joseph Hanlon, who has 
been reporting on events here for more than two decades, has 
circulated a detailed review of the document\'s allegations, 
their credibility, and the number of votes that might have 
been affected by the various irregularities. He wrote that 
Guebuza\'s lead was so overwhelming that even if Dhlakama\'s 
plausible charges proved to be true, and making very generous 
estimates of the number of votes affected, Dhlakama would 
still be roughly half a million votes behind if 
irregularities were corrected. (Note: Latest (December 15) 
figures show that, in fact, Dhlakama would be 700-800,000 
votes behind. The irregularities could matter for the 
parliamentary races, however, as they could cost RENAMO 
several Assembly seats. End Note.) 
 
5. (C) No province was able to meet the December 9 provincial 
deadline for announcing results. Inhambane, the first 
province to publish figures, did so on December 10, and by 
December 14 all but two provinces had reported in. According 
to press reports, the tallies so far from the provinces give 
Guebuza roughly 2 million votes to Dhlakama\'s one million. 
However, official tabulation at the national level remains 
substantially behind schedule. Despite press reports to the 
contrary, the president of the Electoral Administration 
Technical Secretariat (STAE) admitted privately to the Carter 
Center\'s Bravo that CNE would not meet the December 17 
deadline to announce final national results. 
 
6. (C) Comment: Dhlakama\'s berating of the voting process is 
accompanied by wholly unrealistic demands, such as that the 
entire Mozambican population be re-registered and the 
international community fund new national elections in six 
months\' time. This posturing by one who seems to be only 
trying to postpone the inevitable appears increasingly 
ridiculous to many Mozambicans, we believe. Dhlakama and 
some of those close to him may still feel that he would have 
won had the process been flawless, but we have heard nothing 
to suggest that anyone else, including most of the RENAMO 
rank and file (many of whom did not vote) thinks so. End 
Comment. 
LA LIME 
"
"24127","12/15/2004 14:28","04MAPUTO1617","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE248093","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001617 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR DRL:SCHECHTER, AF/RSA:HOUSTON, AND AF/S:TREGER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, MZ, Demarche, UN 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: DEMARCHE ON UN HUMAN RIGHTS 
RESOLUTIONS IN PLENARY 
 
REF: A) STATE 259878, B) STATE 248093 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Handle Accordingly 
 
1. (SBU) On December 15 Emboff delivered ref A demarche 
urging the GRM to oppose any potential motions for non- 
action in the UN plenary session on previously approved 
resolutions critical of the human rights situation in 
Iran and Turkmenistan. In the meeting, the MFA Director 
for UN Affairs, Antonio Macheve, stated that Mozambique 
would likely abstain from any such motion, but could not 
give a definitive answer. Such an action would be 
consistent with Mozambique\'s action on the original Iran 
and Turkmenistan resolutions, in which Mozambique 
abstained on each, he said. 
 
2. (SBU) Mr. Macheve said his government believes that 
UN human rights resolutions are random and overly 
politicized in nature, and therefore has adopted a 
default position to abstain from most human rights- 
related UN resolutions. Mozambique would, however, vote 
for or against a UN human rights resolution if a 
\"concrete case\" were made. In the MFA\'s opinion, the 
Sudan and Zimbabwe non-action resolutions earlier this 
month met such criteria because each government is 
ostensibly working to solve their problem within 
regional institutions (such as the African Union) of 
which Mozambique is a part. Therefore Mozambique voted 
for the non-action motions of Sudan and Zimbabwe. He 
added that such a \"concrete case\" for Iran and 
Turkmenistan would be harder to make, but did mention 
that the Organization of the Islamic Conference group 
would likely approach Mozambique over Iran and 
Turkmenistan. 
LA LIME 
"
"24195","12/16/2004 14:16","04MAPUTO1623","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001623 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
FOR AF/S:HTREGER, AF/PD:RHARPER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, OPRC, MZ, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN GENERAL ELECTIONS: DRAFT USG STATEMENT 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Deliberative Process. Handle 
Accordingly. 
 
1. (U) Embassy provides below for the Department\'s approval a 
draft USG statement for use once the results of Mozambique\'s 
December 1-2 presidential and legislative elections are 
announced by the National Elections Commission (CNE). We 
expect the results to be announced on or soon after the 
December 17 deadline. Post will inform the Department by 
cable of the announcement. Issuance of the statement as soon 
as possible after the results are announced would maximize 
its impact. 
 
2. (SBU) Begin draft statement text: 
The United States congratulates President-elect Armando 
Emilio Guebuza and all new and returning members of the 
Assembly of the Republic of Mozambique on their selection in 
the presidential and parliamentary elections of December 1 
and 2, 2004. We commend the more than 60,000 polling station 
workers in towns and villages around the country, who by 
performing their duties with great dedication and competence 
exhibited the strong commitment of the Mozambican people to 
the democratic process. We urge the authorities to 
investigate all allegations of irregularities and take action 
against those responsible for any violations of law. 
The United States salutes President Chissano for stepping 
aside so that others may come forward, after his accomplished 
stewardship as the nation\'s leader. In this spirit, we urge 
all Mozambicans to join hands and work for the good of the 
country. 
We look forward to working with President-elect Guebuza and 
members of his government in helping combat the terrible 
scourge of HIV/AIDS and in promoting the development of 
Mozambique. 
End text. 
LA LIME 
"
"24196","12/16/2004 14:18","04MAPUTO1624","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE259661","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001624 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S - HTREGER, OES/ETC - HLEE, EB/TPP/ABT - 
RSINGH 
USDA FOR FAS/BIG - JPPASSINO 
USDOC FOR RTELCHIN 
PRETORIA FOR AG ATTACHE - SREYNOLDS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, ETRD, EAGR, EAID, MZ 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE: UPDATE ON BIOSAFETY DEVELOPMENTS 
 
REF: A. STATE 259661 
 
B. MAPUTO 01174 
 
1. On December 13 emboff and econ/commercial assistant met 
with Calisto Bias, Director of Plant Development, National 
Institute of Agronomic Investigation (INIA) to learn about 
Mozambique\'s recent biosafety developments. INIA is a key 
participant in an inter-ministerial commission that addresses 
biosafety concerns and formulates legislation regarding the 
protection of biodiversity. Biosafety regulations have been 
drafted, which are expected to be approved in mid-late 2005, 
according to Bias. He was reluctant to disclose specific 
information, but emphasized that the new rules would, in 
contrast to the total ban currently in effect, allow for the 
import of some living modified organisms (LMOs) and 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs). (Note: At present the 
distribution within Mozambique of LMOs and GMOs is not 
permitted. Import of LMO food aid is allowed for transit to 
neighboring countries or, in the case of wheat, provided that 
it is milled prior to being distributed locally.) Bias added 
that biosafety legislation is being developed in accordance 
with the spirit of the Cartagena Protocol. 
 
2. In January 2005 commission members will participate in a 
closed seminar on the harmonization of biosafety regulations 
among Lusophone countries. In May the Ministry of 
Agriculture will send someone to the Second Meeting of the 
Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. Several INIA 
representatives will also attend. 
 
3. Comment: Mozambique currently has very little agricultural 
trade with the US. Rather than closing the door tighter, the 
GRM is now in the process of easing the entry of certain LMO 
and GMO products. One factor in the GRM\'s acceptance of GMOs 
is its interest in using GMO cotton seeds to improve local 
cotton production. Mozambique welcomes Title I - Food for 
Progress commodity donations. If a Title I program is 
granted to Mozambique in 2005, we expect no GMO-related 
conflicts (Ref B). 
LA LIME 
"
"24222","12/17/2004 3:56","04MAPUTO1625","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE211525","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001625 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S - HTREGER, EB/OIA - MROCHE, L/T FOR ZYLMAN 
COMMERCE FOR RTELCHIN 
MCC FOR SGAULL, TBRIGGS 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR PCOLEMAN, JSHRIER, AND DWEINER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECIN, ETRD, EINV, ECON, MZ, BIT 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE RATIFIES THE U.S.-MOZAMBIQUE BILATERAL 
INVESTMENT TREATY 
 
REF: A. STATE 211525 
 
B. EMAIL 9/1/04 FROM TIMOTHY BORN (MAPUTO) RE 
US/MOZAMBIQUE BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY 
 
1. On December 14, Luis Sitoi, advisor to the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce, informed the Embassy that the 
Mozambican Council of Ministers ratified the U.S.-Mozambique 
Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) during the week of Dec 6. 
The text of the BIT has been sent for publication in 
Mozambique\'s \"Boletim de Repulica\" (equivalent to our Federal 
Register). 
 
2. Post awaits a note verbale formally announcing the GRM\'s 
ratification of the BIT. When we receive the note, we will 
obtain and send to the Department the text of the GRM 
instrument of ratification for L/T review. Embassy also will 
present the GRM with U.S. proposed language for the exchange 
of ratifying instruments. 
LA LIME 
"
"24234","12/17/2004 9:24","04MAPUTO1627","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE254401","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 001627 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR INL/C, AF/S, DS/IP/AF, DS/IP/ITA 
JUSTICE FOR OIA AND AFMLS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PTER, KSEP, SNAR, KTFN, EFIN, MZ, KCOR 
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY REPORT 
(INSCR), MONEY LAUNDERING AND FINANCIAL CRIMES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 254401 
 
1. Below are post answers to INSCR questions pertaining 
to money laundering and financial crimes, organized in 
response to the subheadings provided in State 254401. 
 
General Questions 
---------------------- 
2. Mozambique is not a regional financial center. Money 
laundering is fairly common and local authorities 
believe that narcotics proceeds have helped finance the 
recent proliferation of new restaurants, shopping 
centers, hotels, and mosques in the country, especially 
in the capital. These businesses reputedly conceal 
profits made by those importing hashish, heroin, and 
synthetic drugs from South Asia (often via Tanzania) 
and, to a lesser extent, cocaine from South America via 
Brazil. Most narcotics are destined for South African 
and European markets; Mozambique is not a significant 
consumption destination and is rarely a transshipment 
point to the United States. Local organized crime 
controls narcotics trafficking operations in country, 
with recent immigrants from Pakistan and India playing a 
prominent role. Money laundering in the banking sector 
is also considered to be a serious problem; in recent 
years, prominent public figures in the Central Bank, the 
law enforcement community and the media have been 
murdered for investigating fraud and money laundering in 
these institutions. Despite these problems, there are no 
known links between Mozambique-based drug traffickers, 
money launderers and the financing of terrorists. 
 
3. The financial sector is not experiencing any reported 
increase in crimes such as money laundering, but very 
few instances of laundering are formally reported or 
investigated. Black markets for smuggled goods and 
financial services are widespread, dwarfing the formal 
retail and banking sectors in most parts of the country, 
making it difficult to determine when and where 
laundering of narcotics money takes place. Local 
officials are often directly involved with drug 
trafficking and the laundering of profits, including the 
ex-chief of the Criminal Investigative Police and 
several of his top officers who are now awaiting trial 
in Inhambane province on narcotics trafficking charges. 
Evidence of money laundering was cited by the government 
as a reason for arresting these officials in 2003, but 
they are being prosecuted for narcotics trafficking, not 
money laundering. 
 
Laws and Regulations to Prevent Money 
Laundering/Terrorist Financing 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
4. Money laundering has long been a criminal offense in 
Mozambique, but criminal charges and prosecutions for 
money laundering have been rare because the law had not 
been narrowly defined until enactment of the 2002 Anti- 
Money Laundering Act. Implementing regulations for most 
components of this law were only issued in September 
2004, with more regulations forthcoming in 2005. The law 
contains specific statutes related to narcotics 
trafficking, but covers a wide range of laundering 
sources and agents. No money laundering arrests have 
taken place in 2004, nor have any prosecutions taken 
place. Since implementing regulations for the 2002 law 
were only recently issued, it is too early to tell how 
well the law will work. 
 
5. According to the 2002 law, banks and exchange houses 
must immediately record and report to the Attorney 
General\'s office any cash transaction valued at 441 
times the national minimum wage, which amounts to about 
$18,000. In addition, exchange houses are required to 
turn in records of all transactions on a daily basis. 
All credit card transaction attempts over $5,000 must be 
reported also, and can only be processed with approval 
from the Bank of Mozambique, i.e. the Central Bank. 
Banks and exchange houses are required to keep 
transaction records for 15 years (Article 15 of 2002 
law). Financial institutions are required to report any 
suspicious transactions immediately to the Attorney 
General\'s office (Article 16). The Attorney General, in 
turn, is required to determine within 48 hours whether 
to permit the transaction (Article 19). Individual 
bankers who cooperate with law enforcement authorities 
in good faith receive protection under the 2002 law 
(Article 21). Secrecy laws exist in Mozambique but do 
not apply in the case of suspected money laundering 
(Article 17). 
 
6. The 1996 Money Exchange Act requires any individual 
carrying more than $5,000 over the border to file a 
report with Customs. Taking more than $5,000 in local 
currency out of the country is prohibited. The 2002 Anti- 
Money Laundering Act includes due diligence provisions 
that make both respective bankers and banks responsible 
if financial institutions launder money (Article 27). 
Money laundering controls apply to all formal non- 
banking financial institutions, including exchange 
houses, stock brokerages, casinos and insurance 
companies. Cash couriers must meet cross-border currency 
requirements, but usually fall outside the scope of anti- 
money laundering law because they generally work in the 
informal sector. 
 
7. Mozambique has not explicitly criminalized the 
financing of terrorism. Its 1991 Crimes against the 
Security of State Act criminalizes terrorism, but it 
does not address financing. The 2002 law does list 
terrorism finance as a serious crime subject to the 
scope of the law, but elaborates no further (Article 4). 
The same law codifies Mozambique\'s long-standing 
authority to identify, freeze, seize and/or forfeit the 
assets of those charged with financial crimes, including 
terrorist finance (Articles 5 and 6). Financial 
institutions do not have access to the list of 
individuals and entities included on the UN 1267 
Sanctions Committee or the USG lists; these lists are 
distributed only to the Central Bank, the Attorney 
General, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
Authorities in these institutions have not positively 
identified any of the agents on these lists operating in 
Mozambique, and therefore no assets have been 
identified, frozen, or seized. 
 
8. Authorities acknowledge that alternative remittance 
systems are common in Mozambique, many of which operate 
in exchange houses that, on paper, are heavily regulated 
but in fact can easily avoid reporting requirements. 
There are no serious legislative, judicial, or 
regulatory measures being considered to address this 
problem. Charitable institutions must receive approval 
by the Ministry of Justice before receiving a charter, 
and are subject to investigation by the MOJ thereafter. 
There is no evidence of the MOJ seriously investigating 
any charities at this time. 
 
9. In October 2002, the Council of Ministers ratified 
the 1999 International Convention for the Suppression of 
the Financing of Terrorism. 
 
Offshore Financial Centers and Free Trade Zones 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
10. Mozambique is not considered an offshore financial 
center. Many local businessmen use offshore banking in 
nearby countries, such as Mauritius. There are no free 
trade zones in Mozambique. 
 
International Cooperation 
-------------------------------- 
11. Mozambique is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention 
and has signed the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti- 
Money Laundering Group Memorandum of Understanding. The 
government has also signed the 2000 UN Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime, but has not 
ratified it. The Mozambican government has enacted 
significant anti-drug and anti-money laundering laws as 
a means of enforcing these commitments. Mozambique has 
entered a series of formal agreements with neighboring 
countries to share financial information required by law 
enforcement bodies. Cooperation with the United States 
on these matters has taken place on an informal basis. 
 
Asset Forfeiture and Seizure Legislation 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
13. The 2002 Anti-Money Laundering Act contains 
provisions authorizing seizure and forfeiture of assets, 
including legitimate businesses used to launder money. 
In such a case, the Central Bank would be responsible 
for the initial tracing of assets and the Attorney 
General would be responsible for freezing and 
confiscating assets. The Attorney General also has 
authority to auction off confiscated assets and to 
distribute proceeds to a range of parties. Despite this 
legal framework, the institutions authorized to 
implement the law do not have an established system for 
identifying and freezing narcotics-related assets, and 
no assets have been seized to date under the 2002 Anti- 
Money Laundering Act. 
 
14. Mozambican law does allow for both civil and 
criminal forfeiture. An example of civil forfeiture 
would be the seizure of cash in excess of the $5,000 
limit from an individual who tried, secretly, to carry 
this amount across the border. The seized funds would be 
referred by Customs to the Central Bank. Appeals then 
could be made directly to the Bank. Private financial 
institutions are more closely regulated by criminal 
forfeiture acts, as listed in the 2002 law and its 
predecessors, but are also subject to civil suits. 
Financial institutions also have the right to file a 
civil suit against the government for loss of business 
in cases of unreasonable suspension, a provision that 
will likely discourage enforcement of the law. 
 
15. Mozambique faces many other obstacles to enforcement 
of its money laundering and drug-trafficking laws. These 
include resource constraints affecting the Attorney 
General\'s office and the Criminal Investigative Police 
and significant corruption of the latter. Investigative 
prosecutors at the Attorney General\'s Anti-Corruption 
Unit often receive threats of physical violence from 
organized crime. In 2001, Antonio \"Siba-Siba\" Macuacua, 
Chief of Banking Supervision at the Central Bank, was 
murdered in the stairwell of a bank that had been under 
investigation. The environment for effective 
prosecution of criminal cases, financial or otherwise, 
has improved little since then. 
LA LIME 
"
"24235","12/17/2004 9:25","04MAPUTO1628","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001628 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S 
STATE PASS USTR FOR PATRICK COLEMAN AND AUSTR LISER 
USDOC FOR RTELCHIN 
PRETORIA FOR USDA/FAS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EAGR, ECON, MZ, Tobacco 
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF COMMERCE PRESSES CASE FOR TARIFF RATE 
QUOTA ON TOBACCO 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - DELIBERATIVE PROCESS 
REF: MAPUTO 01502 
Action request in Paragraph Four 
 
1. (SBU) On December 16, Ambassador La Lime met with GRM 
Minister of Industry and Commerce Carlos Morgado at 
Morgado\'s request to discuss the Mozambican government\'s 
October 14 request for tariff rate quota on several 
varieties of tobacco (request letter text in reftel). The 
Minister referenced the steep drop in tobacco production in 
Zimbabwe, and inquired about the possibility of transferring 
TRQ to Mozambique. He also asked for a formal response from 
the USG to the five specific requests posed in the October 
letter. Morgado emphasized the development impact of the 
country\'s tobacco industry and stressed the importance the 
government placed on this issue. 
 
2. (SBU) The GRM has made the request because of the rapid 
increase in tobacco production over the last few years, with 
backing by U.S.-owned companies. In particular, Universal 
Leaf Tobacco has dramatically increased production of flue- 
cured and burley tobacco in Mozambique, and is in the 
process of completing a factory in Tete province with the 
capacity to process 37,000 tons of tobacco in the 2005 
harvest season. Another American company, Dimon, Inc., 
plans to start construction of a tobacco processing plant in 
another province next year. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment: The Minister\'s decision to raise the issue 
with the Ambassador elevates the profile of the issue, 
indicating that this is not just a major issue for American 
tobacco companies, but for the Mozambican government in 
general. End Comment. 
 
4. (U) Action Request: Post requests a response we can share 
with Minister Morgado to the request reported in reftel. 
LA LIME 
"
"24433","12/21/2004 15:36","04MAPUTO1639","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001639 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR AF/FO AND AF/S 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, MZ, Elections 04 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN GENERAL ELECTIONS: GUEBUZA ELECTED 
PRESIDENT, FRELIMO RETAINS PARLIAMENT 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1616 AND PREVIOUS 
 
1. On December 21 Mozambique\'s National Elections Commission 
(CNE) announced the results of the December 1-2 general 
elections: FRELIMO Secretary General Armando Guebuza has won 
the race for president, capturing 63.74 percent of the valid 
national vote and FRELIMO has returned to Parliament with a 
strong majority, winning 160 seats, up from its current 133. 
RENAMO leader and Guebuza\'s opponent in the presidential 
contest, Afonso Dhlakama, won only 31.74 percent of the votes 
- a significantly worse showing than in 1999 when he received 
48 percent of the vote, losing to current President Chissano. 
The three other candidates in the presidential race hardly 
mattered at all. Raul Domingos (a former senior RENAMO 
official) won 2.63 percent; Yaqub Sibindy received 0.91 
percent and Carlos Reis claimed 0.87 percent. In Parliament, 
the 90 seats not won by FRELIMO were taken by RENAMO. None 
of the 21 other parties on the ballot received the threshold 
level of five percent of the national vote needed to qualify 
for a seat. FRELIMO\'s total was 7 seats short of the 167 
needed to be able to amend the constitution. 
 
2. Voter turnout was surprisingly light, roughly 45 percent, 
well down from 74 percent in the 1999 elections. It appears 
that many RENAMO and some FRELIMO voters stayed home. 
 
3. Technically, the results are not official until the 
Constitutional Council validates them, although this is 
little more than a formality. Under the Mozambican 
constitution this body, made up largely of prominent FRELIMO 
or FRELIMO-leaning citizens, must \"analyze\" the election 
votes, taking into account appeals and complaints. Despite 
reported irregularities (see previous reporting), we 
anticipate a quick endorsement of the CNE-announced results, 
probably in early January. No date has been set for an 
inauguration, but we have heard January 14, 15 and 18 as 
possibilities. 
 
4. We will provide more analysis of the 2004 elections septel. 
DUDLEY 
"
"24502","12/22/2004 16:17","04MAPUTO1643","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE246969","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001643 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S - TREGER, EB/TPP/ABT/ATP - HUDAK 
PRETORIA FOR AG ATTACHE - REYNOLDS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EAGR, ETRD, MZ 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE PREPARES TO HOST G-8/NEPAD-SPONSORED 
AGRICULTURAL MEETING 
 
REF: SECSTATE 246969 
 
1. Econ/Poloff met with Dr. Firmino Mucavele, Economic 
Counselor to the President, on December 21 to discuss 
Mozambique\'s preparation for the Comprehensive African 
Agricultural Development Plan (CAADP) regional planning 
meeting in Maputo on February 15-18. Dr. Mucavele is the GRM 
point of contact for this event. Representatives from twelve 
southern African nations will take part in the meeting. 
Mozambique has invited the national directors of agriculture 
ministries, farmers\' organizations, agro-business 
representatives, agricultural and economic research 
institutes, and major banks involved in agri-business, as 
well as Southern African Development Community (SADC) 
officials. In addition, the GRM has extended invitations to 
the the following organizations: G-8 governments, the 
European Commision (EC), OECD, the World Bank, the African 
Development Bank and the World Food Program. The meeting will 
focus on technical implementation of CAADP in Southern Africa. 
 
2. Dr. Mucavele can be reached at 258-1-485-480 (landline), 
258-82-310-818 (cellular),and/or mino@zebra.uem.mz. 
DUDLEY 
"
"24562","12/23/2004 14:32","04MAPUTO1645","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 001645 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
FOR AF/S TREGER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, MZ, Elections 04, DHLAKAMA 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE - DHLAKAMA DENOUNCES ELECTION RESULTS, 
APPEALS FOR CALM 
 
REF: MAPUTO 1639 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - handle accordingly. Not for 
internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) On December 23, a day after the National Elections 
Commission (CNE) declared Armando Guebuza and his party, 
FRELIMO, the winners in the presidential and parliamentary 
elections (reftel), Afonso Dhlakama, leader of the main 
opposition party RENAMO, held a press conference in Maputo in 
which he denounced the elections as fraudulent but appealed 
for calm. Reading from a prepared text, Dhlakama alleged 
that the reasons for his and RENAMO\'s losses were the 
exclusion of voters in RENAMO areas from the registration 
process, deliberate confusion with regard to polling places 
and voter lists, use of intimidation tactics by the police, 
ballot box stuffing, tampering with RENAMO ballots, and 
finally the \"introduction of more than one million votes\" for 
FRELIMO in computerized tabulations at the national level. 
(Comment: The last accusation is particularly lacking in 
credibility, as the final results were very similar to the 
parallel vote tabulation (PVT) carried out by the National 
Observatory and backed by the Carter Center. The PVT relied 
on local vote records from a representative sample of polling 
places and so was independent of any actions at the national 
tabulation level. End comment.) Dhlakama said that none of 
the 90 RENAMO deputies elected to the Assembly would take 
their seats, adding that he would not join the State Council 
in a position awarded the runner-up in the presidential race 
because he was not the runner-up. He appealed for calm, 
however. Answering a reporter\'s question, he promised that 
neither he nor any RENAMO member would resort to fighting 
over the outcome. 
 
2. (SBU) Over the past several days there have been reports 
of heightened concern over the reaction of RENAMO to the 
election announcement, although we have not heard of any 
significant demonstrations or protests. According to sources 
in CNE, the Commission postponed by a day announcing the 
election results because of the threat of demonstrations. 
Meanwhile, a small group of religions leaders (Catholic, 
Protestant, and Muslim) plan to call on President Chissano, 
president-elect Guebuza and Dhlakama to urge Dhlakama to keep 
any protests peaceful and urge Chissano and Guebuza to have 
the police react with restraint to any peaceful protests. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment: Although Dhlakama and his aides have been 
saying that they may not be able to control their rank and 
file, we have seen little evidence of tension. Dhlakama\'s 
reaction is quite similar to the stance he and RENAMO took 
after losing the 1999 elections by a much narrower margin, 
under circumstances in which irregularities had a much 
greater potential to affect the outcome. At that time, 
several weeks after he threatened to boycott the Assembly, 
RENAMO deputies took their seats. Bad feeling over the 
election simmered on, however, and eleven months later a 
demonstration in northern Mozambique turned violent. We do 
not believe tensions here are as serious this time; at this 
moment, with the streets busy with holiday shoppers, such a 
turn of events is difficult to imagine. 
 
4. (SBU) Separately, the European Union observer mission, the 
Carter Center, and the National Observatory all have held 
press conferences or issued statements this week on the 
electoral process. The organizations were very critical of 
many irregularities, including results in some polling places 
that seemed to be the result of ballot stuffing. However, 
all emphasized that the irregularities did not affect the 
outcome of the presidential election, though some said they 
had affected the distribution of a few seats in the Assembly. 
DUDLEY 
"
"24678","12/28/2004 12:07","04MAPUTO1653","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 001653 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/S, AF/EPS, EB/IFD, AND EB/CBA 
DEPT PLS PASS AID FOR /AFR/SA AND EGAD 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - E BARBER, USED/IMF, AND USED/IBRD 
USDOC FOR 3131/ITA/ANESA/KBRENNAN/JMATHESON 
USDOC FOR 4510/ITA/MAC/OA/JDIEMOND 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, MZ, World Bank, IMF 
SUBJECT: IMF AND MOZAMBIQUE AGREE ON 2005 PROGRAM 
UNDER PRGF 
 
 
(U) Sensitive but unclassified - not for Internet 
Posting - protect accordingly. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: An IMF Mission visited Mozambique 
from 8-24 September 2004 to review progress under the 
PRGF and to advise the GRM regarding the 2005 budget. 
Agreement was reached ad referendum on a Letter of 
Intent (LOI) for 2005. However, the GRM then changed 
the 2005 budget methodology, including so-called own 
revenues (e.g. hospital fees) in the budget, 
necessitating a rework of the 2005 program. 
Subsequent to this change, the GRM concluded the 
concessioning of the Moatize coal fields, 
necessitating a further revision. The GRM and the IMF 
now appear ready to finalize the LOI, and the GRM is 
ready to submit the budget to Parliament. The IMF 
came away generally quite satisfied with macro 
developments and structural conditions but noted some 
slippage in completing structural benchmark actions. 
GDP growth will be 7.8 percent in 2004, and 7 to 7.5 
percent in 2005. Inflation is being brought down to 
11 percent in 2004, and in 2005 will be further 
reduced to 8.5 percent. Exports are up and forex 
reserves cover nearly six months of imports. Interest 
rates have declined. The private sector enabling 
environment, the legal and judicial sector, and 
HIV/AIDS are the areas of most concern for the Fund. 
The IMF commended GRM management of the economy in the 
run-up to the 1-2 December national elections. The 
Fund encouraged donors to give more in order that the 
Millennium Development Goals might be achieved. A 
study of land as collateral for bank loans, the 
creation of a Central Revenue Authority, VAT refund 
delays, SISTAFE launch problems, and better 
harmonization between the IMF and the Budget Support 
donors rounded out the discussion. End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Background: This message concerns the IMF\'s 
first review of progress under the Poverty Reduction 
and Growth Facility (PRGF) for Mozambique which was 
approved on 9 July 2004. A Fund Mission visited Maputo 
from 8-24 September 2004, and returned to Washington 
thinking that it had essentially completed the review 
ad referendum. However the draft 2005 budget which 
was the basis of the 2005 macroeconomic program was 
subsequently revised quite substantially to include 
considerable amounts of revenue and expenditure which 
had been \"off budget,\" often referred to as \"own 
receipts.\" While this broadening of the coverage of 
the budget was welcomed, it meant that the 
macroeconomic program had to be reworked. Then the 
GRM concessioned the Moatize coal field to the 
Brazilian conglomerate CVRD for USD 123 million which 
led to a further reworking of the program. In early 
December, the GRM was pushing to get Fund agreement so 
that the 2005 budget and the annual economic and 
social plan could be finalized and sent to parliament. 
The IMF would then finalize the PRGF consultation 
paper with a 2004 date on it, but the Board review 
target date of 19 January 2005 is likely to slip to 
February. While some of the 2005 and out year numbers 
will be changed, we understand that 2004 performance 
continues on track, and the overall concept of the 
2005 program is essentially the same as described in 
the debriefing reported below. The PRGF is a small 
program (USD 16.6 million over three years) designed 
to support the authorities\' reform program along with 
minimal balance-of-payments support. The Fund 
Mission, headed by Mr. Juan Carlos Di Tata, was timed 
to provide counsel to the GRM as their 2005 budget was 
being shaped. The IMF visit coincided with the Mid 
Year Review (MYR) of progress in economic and social 
development activities of the GRM. The MYR is 
conducted jointly by the 15 Program Assistance 
Partners (a.k.a. the G-15) and the GRM. The Fund team 
met with the donors several times during the mission 
in an effort to coordinate with the MYR. 
 
3. (SBU) Macro performance 2004 is on track with the 
program. Real Gross Domestic Product is on a path to 
7.8 percent growth in 2004. Prices, as measured by 
the Maputo index, have risen 12 percent from a year 
ago, and the 11 percent target for 2004 is still 
expected to be obtained. There is a shortfall in 
customs revenue which has been compensated for by 
expenditure cuts. Monetary growth has exceeded its 
target due to an accumulation of reserves, and a 
broadening of application of bank reserve requirements 
in June has served to slow somewhat the growth of M2 
money supply. Exports are up strongly as Mozal\'s 
stage II aluminum refinery is now on stream, and 
natural gas exports to South Africa via the SASOL 
pipeline have begun. Interest rates on loans continue 
to decline; from a 37 percent annual rate at the end 
of 2002, bank loan rates are now down to 24 percent. 
Deposit rates are now in the 11 percent range, so 
there is now a zero real rate being paid on deposits 
rather than the negative real rate in the recent past, 
as inflation has dropped. The mega projects (Mozal 
and the Sasol gas pipeline) have had a major impact on 
the balance of payments; Mozal II has boosted exports 
some 60 percent and imports of raw materials 
(especially alumina) have also risen dramatically. 
 
4. (SBU) Structural conditions and benchmarks for 2004 
are reported to be generally positive with some 
shortfalls. The conditions regarding submission of 
the draft general tax law to parliament, the 
strengthening of the Bank of Mozambique\'s balance 
sheet by shifting IRS external debt to the Treasury, 
and close monitoring of the performance of the 
country\'s largest bank, Banco Internacional de 
Mozambique (BIM) have been met. Indeed, BIM was 
described as both profitable and prudential. However, 
benchmarks performance was described as mixed. 
Specifically, submission to the parliament of the law 
to create the Central Revenue Authority (CRA) was two 
weeks late, budget reporting using the computerized 
government accounting system \"SISTAFE\" is delayed, and 
the strategy for resolving difficulties with two small 
banks is only half complete. However, regulations to 
implement the new financial law have been drafted, the 
micro-finance regulations are being prepared, and the 
feasibility study to divest GRM holdings in BIM should 
be ready by year\'s end. 
 
5. (SBU) For 2005, the Fund projects generally 
favorable performance. Real GDP will grow in the 7 to 
7.5 percent range while price inflation will slow to 
8.5 percent. Aid flows will continue rising, reaching 
USD 820 million, up from USD 740 million in 2004. 
Fiscal policy will hold steady, with the domestic 
primary deficit unchanged at 3.3 percent of GDP. The 
government\'s wage bill, a point of contention in the 
review a year ago, will appear to go up as a 
percentage of GDP because of a change in 
classification of expenditures. Moreover, government 
proposes to add 10,000 new employees in priority 
sectors, 5000 of which in education alone, so the Fund 
expects that nominal wages and salaries for the public 
service will increase less than inflation. 
 
6. (SBU) Structural developments expected in 2005 
include approval of the CRA law by the parliament, and 
the issuance of implementing regulations. Delays in 
the implementation of SISTAFE mean the first budget 
execution report generated by the new system will be 
for the first quarter of 2005. The Fund will provide 
technical assistance in monetary and exchange rate 
management and in bank supervision management. 
Reviews of the largest four banks leading to their 
transition to international accounting standards (IAS) 
will be completed by end 2004, paving the way to IAS 
adoption in early 2005. A draft law clarifying and 
improving the foreign exchange regime will be 
submitted to parliament in the second half of 2005. 
The GRM will strengthen the balance sheet of the 
central bank over the three year period 2005-2007 by 
issuing securities to the central bank. 
 
7. (SBU) Private sector problems were given 
considerable emphasis in Mr. Di Tata\'s presentation. 
He deplored the high cost of doing business in 
Mozambique and welcomed the issuance of new business 
license regulations during the IMF\'s visit. He called 
attention to delays with customs clearances, both 
import and export. He is counting on the 
establishment of a \"dry port\" at Ressano Garcia, on 
the border with the Republic of South Africa and the 
principal entrepot for overland commercial traffic. 
He noted that the private sector believed that the 
decree of December (2003) liberalizing the use of ex- 
pat labor in Mozambique was working well, but he 
called for further labor sector reforms, particularly 
in severance compensation and work regulations, in a 
new draft law to be presented to parliament by the end 
of 2005. Di Tata is also expecting continued progress 
in privatizing the state airline LAM, the telephone 
company TDM and its cell phone spin-off MCel, as well 
as water supply companies and the ports and railways 
conglomerate CFM. 
 
8. (SBU) Public sector reform is of vital importance 
and implementation is seen as a long term program of 
the World Bank. The Fund is concerned with the 
linkage of wages to productivity in the public sector. 
The Fund is also following closely the development of 
a new decree regulating public sector procurement 
under the SISTAFE law. 
 
9. (SBU) Land tenure regulations came up near the end 
of Mr. Di Tata\'s presentation. In the GRM\'s letter of 
intent to the Fund for the new PRGF, Government 
announced plans to issue a decree to regularize 
property rights in urban areas before end-July 2004. 
The draft decree was taken up in the Council of 
Ministers, and it was decided that further studies 
were needed and that the final decision would be put 
off until after the December 2004 election. Mr. Di 
Tata also called attention to the letter of intent\'s 
commitment to undertake a Poverty and Social Impact 
Analysis (PSIA) to study land tenure issues with a 
view to facilitating the use of land as collateral to 
access bank credit. Earlier Mr. Di Tata had asked 
bilateral donors to finance the PSIA, and several, 
including Ireland, the Netherlands, Germany, and USAID 
have expressed willingness to do so. 
 
10. (SBU) Short takes: Limited progress was reported 
for reform of the judicial sector. Statistics for the 
real sector of the economy will be improved. The 
National Statistics Institute will undertake a labor 
force survey in September 2005. The GRM will prepare 
a new PRSP (PARPA in Portuguese) for February 2006. 
 
11. (SBU) The following points were offered during 
the Q and A: 
-- the drop in customs revenue is not very large; 
-- the flow of budget funds to the provinces will 
catch up in the second half of the year; 
-- SISTAFE has been delayed but by the end of 2005, 
60 percent of the budget will be covered by the new 
system; 
-- the Fund had no time to examine the discrepancies 
between the Budget Execution Report and the mid-year 
report to the parliament on implementation of the 2004 
Economic and Social Plan; 
-- as a follow up to the Safeguards Mission of the 
IMF, a Statistics Mission is working with the central 
bank to reconcile monetary statistics; 
-- donor timing of budget support disbursements is 
better in 2004 than in 2003, and the amount is holding 
steady at 13.5 percent of GDP; 
-- to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, the 
Fund is encouraging donors to provide more assistance 
into sound activities commensurate with GRM\'s 
absorptive capacity, and the Fund is not concerned 
with reducing aid dependency in the short- and medium- 
term as long as macroeconomic stability is not 
affected in a negative way; 
-- GRM management of the economy in the run-up to 
elections has been very good in terms of stability, 
maintenance of the program, structural reforms, and 
macro management-- Di Tata said \"good job\"; 
-- there has been some appreciation of the real 
effective exchange rate as a result of forex reserve 
accumulation and the corresponding issuance of 
government paper (T-bills) and the Fund is encouraging 
greater use of forex reserves instead -- the 
accumulated appreciation in 2004 now is at about 6.5 
percent. [According to the Standard Bank of South 
Africa\'s branch in Maputo, the appreciation has been 
10.7 percent against the USD, 2.0 percent against the 
ZAR, and 7.2 percent against the EURO for the 12 
months ending September, 2004]. 
-- The appreciation of the metical does not bode well 
for Mozambique\'s traditional exporters. 
-- VAT refund delays are a problem and arise to some 
extent from the undertakings to waive VAT for flood 
reconstruction projects but the Fund is not getting 
too involved. Di Tata remarked that some refund 
claims were not justified. In give and take on this 
point it was opined that the system of refunds is too 
complicated and that the VAT authorities can always 
find a fault with any refund application. Concern was 
expressed that the GRM \"budget\" for refunds was too 
low compared with legitimate refund obligations. The 
IBRD\'s Peter Moll, attached to the IMF Mission, 
believes that the GRM can meet the 60 day refund 
target and perhaps lower it. The tripartite VAT 
Refund Task Force, agreed to in the GRM/G-15 Joint 
Review in March-April 2004, is still to be convoked. 
-- the Fund does not consider Mozambique\'s external 
or internal debt position to be a problem at present; 
-- the Fund agrees that there is some validity to the 
need to simplify and perhaps reduce income tax rates, 
and a Fund Fiscal Affairs Department Mission was 
examining this question while the PRGF Mission was in 
Maputo. However, there is no consideration being 
given to reducing the VAT rate of 17 percent; 
-- trade issues are being led by the World Bank, the 
top tariff rate will come down to 20 percent (from 25 
percent) in 2006, and there will be no major changes 
in trade policy in 2005; 
-- the Swiss Ambassador and chair of the G-15 budget 
support donors (USAID is an observer) looked for 
increased harmonization of the IMF with the G-15, 
commented that the G-15 concerns were not with macro 
performance but with [1] the private sector, [2] the 
judicial sector, and [3] the banking system and bank 
supervision. Mr. Di Tata agreed with [1] and [2], did 
not fully agree with [3], and added [4] HIV/AIDS; 
-- the head of French Cooperation challenged the IMF 
to \'harmonize\' more closely with the work of the G-15 
budget support donors. Di Tata threw up his hands and 
asked what the Fund should do differently. The G-15 
wants earlier and better budget projections and better 
leadership from the Ministry of Plan and Finance 
(MPF). The Mid Year Review and the IMF Mission were 
plagued by last minute and inadequate presentations by 
the GRM. The IBRD member of the Mission said the MPF 
doesn\'t have the sector expertise necessary for the 
job. 
 
12. (SBU) Comment: The IMF team was clearly pleased 
with performance to date but noted some reluctance on 
the part of the authorities to commit for the new 
administration that is expected to take office in 
January 2005. The Fund noted that it was the GRM\'s 
purpose in seeking the new PRGF to commit the new 
administration to follow on with the reform process. 
We are pleased with the IMF\'s concern about the needs 
of the private sector and will work closely with the 
Resident Representative to pursue the achievement of 
the liberalization agenda that we share. End comment. 
DUDLEY 
"
"24736","12/29/2004 15:06","04MAPUTO1658","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MAPUTO 001658 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS, EB/TRA, CA/OCS 
POSTS FOR CIVAIR OFFICERS 
DAKAR FOR FAA JONES 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, SNAR, KCRM, MZ, SA 
SUBJECT: NEW MOZAMBICAN AIRLINE RAISES SAFETY AND SECURITY 
QUESTIONS 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Business Confidential and Law 
Enforcement Information - Handle Accordingly. Not for 
Internet Distribution. 
Action Request for EB/TRA and CA/OCS in paragraph 13. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: In August 2004, Air Corridor became 
Mozambique\'s first private commercial airline to operate 
nationwide, breaking the monopoly that the government-owned 
Linhas Aereas de Mocambique (LAM) had maintained since 
independence. Air Corridor has injected much-needed 
competition in Mozambique but has raised eyebrows since it is 
an entirely new company whose true ownership and finances are 
not well known. Furthermore, Air Corridor\'s quality of 
equipment and maintenance capacity pose significant safety 
and security questions. Pending Department guidance on next 
steps, Embassy Maputo will not be using Air Corridor for 
official travel. End Summary. 
 
Business Basics 
--------------- 
2. (U) Air Corridor is a small but ambitious Mozambican 
start-up airline. After starting flight operations on 
August 7, 2004, it is now flying daily from its home base 
in Nampula (northern Mozambique) to Maputo and the 
provincial capitals of Beira, Quelimane, and Pemba, with 
once-weekly service to Tete and Lichinga planned for 
January 2005. Management hopes to begin international 
service to Johannesburg, Dar es Salaam, and Nairobi in 
2005, but does not have approval from the host governments 
yet. The airline currently only has one airplane, a 26- 
year old Boeing 737-200 which it has wet leased from 
Phoenix Aviation, a Russian-owned company based in the 
United Arab Emirates. With the wet lease, Phoenix also 
provides Air Corridor with four Russian and Kazakhstani 
pilots and maintenance operations based in Nampula. To 
expand operations, the company plans to switch from wet 
leasing to dry leasing in mid-2005, and plans to acquire 
two additional Boeing 737s by dry lease. This arrangement 
would require Air Corridor to directly hire its own pilots 
and provide its own maintenance equipment. Air Corridor is 
not currently a member of the International Air Transport 
Association (IATA), but has inspections planned and hopes 
to secure membership in early 2005. 
 
3. (SBU) The new airline has been responsible for a steep, 
immediate, across-the-board cut in airfares within 
Mozambique. Prior to Air Corridor\'s arrival, air travel 
had long been prohibitively expensive for most consumers. 
For example, roundtrip coach class flights on LAM from 
Maputo to the northern provincial capitals of Nampula and 
Pemba had cost over $500. Air Corridor is now charging 
4,300,000 meticais ($210) for roundtrip flights from Maputo 
to Nampula and slightly more for Maputo-Pemba. LAM has had 
to respond in kind, though its prices are still 10-15% 
higher than Air Corridor fares. Air Corridor is currently 
operating at roughly 45-50% occupancy, and its management 
admits that it will lose over one million dollars in its 
first year of operation. If it has the finances to survive 
such losses, Air Corridor could develop into a serious 
competitor in the domestic and perhaps regional market. 
 
Ownership Group 
--------------- 
4. (SBU) The source of those finances is a serious 
question, however, with potential security ramifications. 
The actual owners of the company are difficult to identify. 
According to CEO Momade Aquil Rajahussen, 95 percent of Air 
Corridor\'s shareholders are Mozambican, with additional 
shareholders based out of India, Sri Lanka, and the United 
Arab Emirates. The Grupo Gulamo, a corporation owned by 
members of Mozambique\'s prominent Gulamo family, owns the 
majority of shares in Air Corridor. Mr. Aquil serves not 
only as CEO of Air Corridor but also as Director General of 
Grupo Gulamo. Mozambican law enforcement officers and even 
the Gulamo-affiliated travel agency used by Air Corridor 
believe that the Mozambican ownership content is much less 
than what Mr. Aquil states. The Omani owner of the five- 
star Pemba Beach Hotel has been mentioned as a principal 
shareholder. 
 
5. (SBU) The Gulamos are third-generation Mozambican 
citizens of Pakistani descent who run a wide range of 
business interests throughout the country, particularly 
import-export businesses of electronics, food, and 
clothing, and also agricultural investments. The family is 
active in the Islamic community, donating funds to build or 
reconstruct several mosques throughout the country, among 
other initiatives. The Gulamo family is associated with a 
moderate form of Islam. This is reflected in Air 
Corridor\'s head office in Nampula, which features many 
women in mid-to-high ranking positions and a very relaxed 
dress code. 
 
6. (SBU) Local authorities have long suspected the Gulamo 
Group of being involved in drug trafficking, and sources in 
Maputo\'s police criminal investigation unit (PIC) tell us 
that they suspect Air Corridor will be used to aid 
smuggling operations. Rasul Gulamo, a cousin of Mr. Aquil 
who owns the prosperous Moti rental car company in Nampula, 
was caught smuggling 40 tons of hashish into Mozambique in 
1995, and then 12 tons in 1998. (He was eventually 
released without trial.) Rasul is not a partner in Grupo 
Gulamo, however, and there are no publicly known cases of 
drug smuggling by the Gulamo Group. Nevertheless, the 
Gulamo family\'s increasing wealth and evident political 
connections have kept trafficking suspicions alive. PIC 
and officials from potential competitor airlines (TAP, SAA) 
also find it suspicious that Air Corridor has purchased its 
own tractor and baggage handling equipment, instead of the 
leasing arrangement it uses for other assets, because they 
say this could facilitate smuggling operations. Air 
Corridor management, for its part, said that the LAM- 
affiliated Mozambique Airport Handling Services had tried 
to overcharge them for services, which led them to buy 
their own equipment. 
 
Safety and Reliability 
---------------------- 
7. (SBU) Air Corridor\'s safety record has also been left 
open to question, thanks to a series of incidents that made 
the local papers. On August 10, Air Corridor\'s Boeing 737 
and a smaller plane from the local charter service 
Transairways came within minutes of landing on the same 
airstrip at Maputo airport. A similar incident happened 
with LAM at Beira airport on August 26, with the LAM 
Embraier 120 incurring some damage to the undercarriage 
upon landing. It is difficult to know who is really at 
fault in these cases. Antonio Pinto, director of 
Mozambique\'s civil aviation authority, defended Air 
Corridor in an early December meeting, telling Emboff that 
the first incident was Transairways\' fault, despite press 
coverage to the contrary, and that its pilot has been 
suspended. The second incident he blamed on faulty 
equipment in the LAM plane. 
 
8. (U) On December 14, the Air Corridor suffered a further 
setback when a bird apparently was sucked into the left- 
side engine of its Boeing 737 on a flight from Nampula to 
Beira, creating considerable damage. The 55 passengers 
were dropped off in Beira without incident, and the 
airplane has been awaiting repairs in Beira since then. 
Phoenix Aviation, responsible for repairs under terms of 
the lease, has had difficulty acquiring a replacement 
engine from the United States, which will delay repairs 
until January. In the meantime, Air Corridor has entered a 
short-term lease with Inter-Link Airline of South Africa to 
use an 80-seat DC-9 for regular operations. Daily flights 
resumed again on December 17. 
 
9. (U) The incident underscores concerns about Air 
Corridor\'s ability to maintain a 26-year old Boeing 737-200 
that flies up and down the length of the country seven days 
per week. According to Air Corridor\'s CEO, the wet lease 
arrangement with Phoenix Aviation not only provides 
maintenance equipment in Nampula, but also provides a 
replacement aircraft of the same model upon reaching 750 
flight hours. If, however, Air Corridor decides to expand 
operations by obtaining further aircraft on a dry lease, as 
is planned, it is unclear how the airline could carry out 
quality maintenance operations for additional aircraft 
unless it is able to secure a route to Johannesburg. 
 
10. (SBU) Air Corridor\'s safety rests largely on the 
capacity of Phoenix Aviation to provide timely maintenance, 
responsible pilots, and sound equipment. Unfortunately, 
post\'s knowledge of the company is limited. According to 
internet sources, Phoenix Aviation is a Russian-owned 
outfit based out of Sharjah Airport in the United Arab 
Emirates. Phoenix operates a fleet of over twenty Boeing 
737s, 767s, Ilyushin Il-18s, and Antonovs, most of which 
are leased to other airlines. Companies now leasing from 
Phoenix include Air Somalia, Kam Air (Afghanistan), Muscat 
Aviation Services (Oman), and Bismillah Airlines 
(Bangladesh). Internet sources also claim that Phoenix may 
have been involved in arms smuggling operations in Africa 
in the 1990s, while under different ownership. Mr. Aquil 
states that Phoenix is now a UN contractor working in Sudan 
and elsewhere, but post could not confirm this. The 
airline has a couple of safety blemishes on its record, 
including a belly landing of an Ilyushin-18 cargo plane in 
Sri Lanka in February 2004. In 1994, a Phoenix Aviation 
Boeing 737-200 crashed in England, killing five people. 
 
Why Air Corridor? 
----------------- 
11. (SBU) Even if Air Corridor manages to resolve its 
safety and financing issues, observers question why the GRM 
civil aviation authority would approve the untested Air 
Corridor as the only competitor for LAM in Mozambique\'s 
domestic market. Established airlines such as South 
African Airways (SAA) and TAP Air Portugal, which both run 
international flights into Maputo and Beira, are seen as 
more worthy competitors. Mr. Pinto has argued, in 
response, that Mozambican law only permits Mozambican-owned 
companies to operate in the domestic market (in conflict 
with its Yamoussoukro Decision commitment to enact an Open 
Skies Agreement with all substantially African-owned 
companies). International airlines such as SAA, TAP, and 
Air Mauritius have expressed an interested in acquiring 
majority or significant minority shares of LAM when it is 
privatized, but were never were interested in working in 
partnership with a start-up Mozambican company. Outside 
sources suspect that certain government officials may have 
received an ownership share in Air Corridor, but no one has 
evidence to support such an allegation. 
 
Future Outlook 
-------------- 
12. (SBU) Air Corridor may become a successful, stable 
airline in the future. It is difficult, however, to say 
whether and how Air Corridor can withstand months, perhaps 
years of heavy losses caused by its low fares and middling 
occupancy rates. If Air Corridor survives, we expect that 
rumors of drug smuggling and corruption will continue to 
follow the company, especially since its ownership and 
financing sources are unknown. Above all, we are concerned 
that the company\'s plans for expansion raise additional 
significant air safety questions that are beyond post\'s 
ability to easily answer. 
 
13. Action Request: Post requests Department guidance on 
next steps. Pending receipt of guidance, we will not be 
using Air Corridor for official travel. Requested guidance 
includes criteria for authorizing official travel on new 
airlines and also guidelines for potential advisories to 
American citizens. Also, post believes that any additional 
information that info addressees can provide about Phoenix 
Aviation would be useful. 
DUDLEY 
"
"24847","1/3/2005 11:05","05MAPUTO1","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","05Maputo712","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000001 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S TREGER AND EB/TRA 
PRETORIA FOR JRIPLEY 
JOHANNESBURG FCS FOR RDONOVAN, JVANRENSBURG 
USDOC FOR RTELCHIN 
MCC FOR SGAULL, TBRIGGS 
PASS USAID FOR AA/AFR AND AFR/SA 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, MZ, Monthly Econ Digest 
SUBJECT: MOZAMBIQUE - DECEMBER ECONOMIC WRAP-UP 
 
REF: Maputo 0712 
 
-------- 
CONTENTS 
-------- 
Business 
2. KMPG\'s \"Top 100 Businesses\" 
Foreign Investment 
3. Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) Ratification 
4. Potential American and European Tourism Investment 
Transportation 
5. Credit Agreements Signed Sena Railway Line 
Industry 
6. New Cement Factory Opens Up 
7. Corridor Sands Factory Under Construction in 2006 
Energy 
8. Electrification of Nampula Province 
Macroeconomics 
9. State of the Economy in 2004 
 
1. (U) The Mozambique monthly economic cable is jointly 
produced by the Embassy and USAID. 
 
-------- 
BUSINESS 
-------- 
2. (U) KPMG\'s annual ranking of the top 100 revenue- 
producing companies in Mozambique found Mozal, the 
Australian-owned aluminum smelter, again to be number one. 
Mozal\'s revenue in 2003 totaled nearly USD 380 million (net 
profits were USD 21 million). Hidroelectrica Cahora Bassa 
(HCB), the 80 percent Portuguese government-owned, 20 
percent Mozambican government-owned company that operates 
Cahora Bassa Dam, came in at number two, with revenues 
reaching USD 248 million. Several parastatals remain in 
the top 10 such as Mozambique Electricity (EDM), 
Mozambique Telecommunications (TDM), and Mozambique Ports 
and Railways Company (CFM). Six of the top 100 firms have 
American ties and were ranked as follows. Coca-Cola ranked 
at 18 (USD 43.5 million in revenues), Mobil Oil at 19 (USD 
42 million in revenues), Mobeira (subsidiary of Seaboard 
Corporation) at 22 (USD 29 million in revenues), Avis Rent- 
a-Car at 51 (USD 9 million in revenues), Colgate Palmolive 
at 64 (USD 5 million in revenues), and KPMG at 83 (USD 4 
million in revenues). 
 
------------------ 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
------------------ 
3. (SBU) On December 8 the Council of Ministers ratified 
the U.S.-Mozambique Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT). 
(Note: The USG ratified the treaty in December 1998. End 
Note.) The Embassy is working with the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs to schedule a date for the exchange of ratification 
instruments. 
 
4. (SBU) According to local media, the Minister of Tourism 
announced recently that European and American investors are 
interested in spending nearly USD 250 million to develop 
tourism in northern Mozambique. The funding will be used 
to build infrastructure in the Niassa Reserve (a Kruger 
Park-sized wildlife reserve) and on the beaches and the 
islands along the coast of Cabo Delgado, Zambezia, and 
Nampula provinces. Tourism operators will cater generally 
to high-end clientele, due to the expensive prices of 
international travel to Mozambique and within the country. 
The investors are looking to transform the military airport 
of Nacala into an international airport, according to the 
Minister. (COMMENT: Tourism development in northern 
Mozambique is a primary component of the GRM\'s Millennium 
Challenge Account (MCA) proposal. The Minister of Tourism 
likely is taking into account potential MCA investment in 
the above-mentioned figures. END COMMENT.) 
 
-------------- 
TRANSPORTATION 
-------------- 
5. (U) On December 16 the GRM, the World Bank, the 
Mozambique Ports and Railways Company (CFM), and the Beira 
Railways Company (CCFB) and the Indian firm Rites and Ircon 
signed credit agreements for the reconstruction of the Sena 
Railway Line and rehabilitation of parts of the Machipanda 
Railway Line (see reftel for further details). The World 
Bank will lend USD 104.5 million to the GRM for the 
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the railway lines. 
The World Bank will loan an additional USD 5.5 million to 
CFM to help build the parastatal\'s institutional capacity 
(training, management, etc). A third agreement was 
formalized between the Director of Rites and Ircon 
International and CFM, stating that Rites and Ircon, as the 
lead concessionaire to the Sena reconstruction effort, will 
invest USD 55 million. The Sena project calls for the 
restructuring of the entire Sena line, acquiring new 
locomotives and rolling stock, and installing a new 
communications and security system. Reconstruction of the 
line is expected to take three and a half years. (COMMENT: 
The Sena line is expected to play a vital role as a route 
for coal shipments when coalmines at the massive Moatize 
deposits are opened. END COMMENT) 
 
-------- 
INDUSTRY 
-------- 
6. (U) A new cement factory with the capacity to produce 35 
tons of cement per hour opened up in the northern port city 
of Nacala. The private investment, made by the ARJ Group 
Cement Nacala Lda, will employ 80-100 national and foreign 
workers. Construction of the factory began in 2002, and 
the total investment so far has been nearly USD 12 million. 
The factory, outfitted with modern equipment from Germany 
and India, is only the second cement factory to operate in 
northern Mozambique. With the increasing pace of 
construction in the northern provinces, the new factory 
comes as a welcome resource for builders and investors. 
 
7. (U) The Corridor Sands Project, operated by Western 
Mining Corporation (Australia), will begin construction of 
a titanium-smelting factory in Gaza province in early 2006. 
The mega- project will involve an investment of USD 500 
million for the initial production of some 400,000 tons of 
titanium dioxide slag per year. The project will require 
the relocation of over 4,000 people living in the area. 
Relocation efforts will begin in June 2005. 
 
------ 
ENERGY 
------ 
8. (U) The Cahora Bassa electricity network will extend to 
cover all of Nampula province, the country\'s most populous, 
in 2006. Mozambique Electricity (EDM) is lengthening the 
north-central electricity line and electrifying rural 
areas. Parts of Nampula already benefit from Cahora Bassa 
power, allowing hospitals and health centers to operate 24 
hours and night classes to take place at local schools. 
 
-------------- 
MACROECONOMICS 
-------------- 
9. (U) On December 30, the governor of the Central Bank, 
Adriano Maleiane, delivered an end-of-the-year statement on 
the performance of the Mozambican economy. GRM targets for 
2004 were an eight percent growth in the GDP and an 
inflation rate of 11 percent. The Central Bank estimates 
that the overall 2004 GDP growth rate will reach eight 
percent, helped by significant construction projects, such 
as the completion of railway lines linking major parts of 
the country, and the inclusion of mega-projects such as 
Mozal\'s aluminum smelter expansion and the Sasol natural 
gas pipeline. Recent projections indicate that the 2004 
inflation rate will register around 11 percent. Measured 
through November 2004, monetary expansion was 9.2 percent, 
against a target of 15 percent for 2004. Commercial 
interest rates by banks fell slightly, but still remain 
high, registering 24 percent in November 2004 (as compared 
to 28 percent in December 2003). Appreciation of the 
Mozambican currency, the metical, was 16.4 percent 
(measured through November 2004). The Current Account 
position improved by 37 percent compared to the same period 
in 2003. This was mainly the result of a significant 
increase in exportation of goods, whose value was more than 
USD 1 billion. The increase in imports was small. The 
strengthening of the Current Account is largely due to the 
expansion of Mozal and the exportation of natural gas from 
Mozambique to South Africa. Mozambique benefited from the 
cancellation of debt worth USD 331.7 million (measured 
through September 2004) principally reflecting Brazil\'s 
pardoning of debt through the Heavily Indebted Poor 
Countries (HIPC) initiative. The GRM\'s economic growth 
targets for 2005 are a GDP growth rate of eight percent, a 
single-digit inflation rate, monetary expansion of 14.5 
percent or less, and a 15 percent growth of credit in the 
economy (more information to be reported septel). 
DUDLEY 
"
"24852","1/3/2005 11:58","05MAPUTO2","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000002 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS, KFRD, MZ, Trafficking in Persons 
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING OF BANGLADESHI CITIZENS IN MOZAMBIQUE 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: In early December, 34 Bangladeshi 
nationals were apprehended by Mozambican police under 
charges of illegal immigration after having flown into the 
country from the Comoros Islands on a chartered airplane. 
Mozambican newspapers reported that the Bangladeshis were on 
their way to South Africa to seek employment, and were being 
trafficked by a man identified as \"Satar.\" Press reports 
intimate that corrupt immigration and police officials in 
Nampula, Mozambique may have been involved in both the 
issuance of the entry visas and the subsequent detention of 
the Bangladeshi nationals. Post understands that immigration 
by South Asians into and through Mozambique continues to 
increase. End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The group of Bangladeshis flew into Nampula city 
airport on an aircraft belonging to Servico Aereo Regional 
(Regional Air Service). When contacted later by a 
journalist, the director of this small airline, \"Mr. Mario,\" 
said the airplane had been chartered by a Comoros Islands- 
based company called Royal Aviation. 
 
3. (U) All 34 Bangladeshis obtained visas from immigration 
officials at the Nampula airport. It is not known if Satar 
had a hand in arranging for the visas in advance of the 
Bangladeshis\' arrival, but there are allegations that 
immigration officials may have been bribed. According to 
news reports, Satar is said to have told police officials 
that this was not the first time he had trafficked 
Bangladeshi laborers to South Africa, and that he earns a 
commission for delivering such groups. 
 
4. (U) Satar had arranged to transport the group of 
Bangladeshis south towards the South African border in 
rental cars. It is not clear how or under what 
circumstances the detentions occurred, but half the group 
was detained in Nampula city, and the other 17 were 
apprehended in Inhambane province, approximately 700 km away 
from the South African border, Ressano Garcia-Komatipoort. 
How the group was planning to cross into South Africa is 
unknown, but in other cases of trafficking reported by the 
International Organization for Migration, illegal immigrants 
have been reported to either be smuggled across the border 
in vehicles or boats, or have attempted to cross by foot. 
 
5. (U) After one week of detention in a Nampula city prison 
facility, 17 Bangladeshis were repatriated via the Comoros 
Islands on the same charter aircraft that had earlier flown 
them to Mozambique. The other half was waiting for resources 
to be made available to fund a second flight. A newspaper 
report said that Mozambican officials were considering 
sending the 17 remaining Bangladeshi nationals to Malawi 
where the Bangladeshi Embassy could assume responsibility 
for repatriating them. Post has been unable to find out what 
became of the 17 Bangladeshis remaining in Nampula city. 
 
6. (U) The key questions underlined by press reports are why 
and how the Bangladeshi nationals were detained by police 
when Mozambican Immigration had granted the group valid 
entry visas. Both the Mozambican National Police and 
Immigration are refusing to comment, both sides suggesting 
that the other is responsible for the situation and should 
therefore be releasing to the public an official account. 
One newspaper report suggests that the police detained the 
Bangladeshis despite their being in possession of valid 
visas after the group refused to pay a bribe. 
 
7. (SBU) Recent telephone conversations with a contact in 
the Office of Immigration in Maputo and an informal contact 
in Nampula city confirm what Post wrote in a January 2004 
cable (04 Maputo 112) regarding immigration trends of South 
Asians in Mozambique: the numbers of Pakistani, Indian and 
Bangladeshi nationals coming to Mozambique are rising. While 
there are many established South Asian communities in 
Mozambique - particularly in Nampula province - significant 
numbers of these nationals continue to seek ways to 
illegally enter South Africa. The South Asians who are not 
able to obtain a visa to enter Mozambique generally enter 
the country through land routes in Malawi and Tanzania, and 
also use boats (embarking from Tanzania) to go ashore in 
Cabo Delgado and Nampula provinces. 
 
8. (SBU) Post\'s contact in the office of immigration in 
Maputo acknowledges the problem of corruption among visa 
officials in general, but particularly in more remote areas 
of Mozambique. For the right sum, it is not difficult for 
third country nationals to obtain either a Mozambican 
passport or residency permit. This is apparent on the visa 
line, where Post has seen probable imposters applying for 
visas using genuine Mozambican identity documents. 
 
9. (U) A recent article published on December 21, draws 
attention to the growing misuse of 30-day Mozambican tourist 
visas, which are routinely granted by Mozambican immigration 
officials both at the land borders and at airports, often 
with minimal scrutiny or interviewing. In the same article, 
Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Tourism Vitoria Dias 
Diogo acknowledged that the ease with which foreigners can 
obtain Mozambican visitor\'s visas may create opportunities 
for gain and profit for those harboring ill intentions 
regarding immigration law, and said the issue would be 
reexamined by the Tourist Commission. 
"
"24893","1/4/2005 12:11","05MAPUTO7","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MAPUTO 000007 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR H DPARKS, AF/S TREGER, AF/EX HEFFERMAN, 
EB/IFD/ODF, AND EB/TRA, 
USAID FOR AFR/SA DMENDELSON AND LPA/CL - SWILLIAMS 
USDOC FOR RTELCHIN 
MCC FOR SGAULL, TBRIGGS 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KHIV, KMCA, ECON, ETRD, MZ, Scenesetters, MCC 
SUBJECT: SCENE-SETTER FOR VISIT OF STAFFDEL MCLEAN TO 
MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: A. Maputo 1645 NOTAL 
B. Maputo 1001 NOTAL 
C. Maputo 1183 NOTAL 
Sensitive but Unclassified Handle Accordingly. Not for 
Internet Distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) Introduction and Summary: Your visit to Mozambique 
will provide an opportunity to gain a better understanding 
of the U.S. contribution in the fight against HIV/AIDS and 
Mozambique\'s Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) concept 
paper. You are arriving just after presidential and 
legislative elections. President Joaquim Chissano will be 
succeeded within several weeks by President-elect Armando 
Guebuza, who is also from the FRELIMO party. We expect 
Guebuza will re-shuffle the cabinet and appoint new 
governors. This means that some of the individuals you 
will encounter or hear about might not be in office for 
long. This message provides background on the elections, 
trade and investment, HIV/AIDS, poverty reduction, and 
other topics. End Introduction and Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
MOZAMBIQUE AND DEMOCRACY 
------------------------ 
2. (SBU) Mozambique is rightly considered a post-conflict 
success story. Since the signing of the 1992 Rome Peace 
Accords, which ended sixteen years of civil war, Mozambique 
has made significant progress on stabilization and 
democratic development. FRELIMO has been the ruling party 
in Mozambique since independence. FRELIMO\'s former military 
opponent, RENAMO, has been the main opposition party. In 
November 2003 Mozambique held municipal elections, which 
resulted in a major win for the ruling party, FRELIMO, and 
were generally regarded as free and fair. In December 
2004, Mozambique held its third multi-party presidential 
and legislative elections since independence. Armando 
Guebuza, the FRELIMO candidate, won the presidency by a 
wide margin, and FRELIMO candidates won most of the seats 
in the National Assembly. Although the elections were 
marred by irregularities, they were not significant enough 
to affect the outcome of the presidential election. (ref 
A). Guebuza will replace Joaquim Chissano, who has ruled 
Mozambique since 1986, early in the new year. 
 
3. (SBU) During November 2003 municipal elections, FRELIMO 
won all but four of the country\'s 33 races for mayor. 
RENAMO\'s four mayoral wins and five city council wins gave 
it, for the first time, a governing role at any level. All 
of the RENAMO wins were in the central and northern 
provinces, and included the important port cities of Beira 
and Nacala. 
 
4. (SBU) FRELIMO will return to Parliament with a strong 
majority 160 out of 250 seats -- up from its current 133 
and just seven short of the two-thirds majority needed to 
amend the constitution. A coalition of RENAMO and several 
small parties won the 90 remaining seats (Comment: As of 
January 3, it is unclear whether RENAMO or its allied 
parties will seat representatives in Parliament. RENAMO, 
particularly, has denounced the elections as unfair and has 
vowed not to participate in Parliament. It made the same 
boycott threat in 1999 but changed its mind after several 
weeks and joined Parliament. End comment.) The voter 
participation rate was only around 45 percent. Several 
local, regional, and international observer groups, 
including the Carter Center, monitored the elections. The 
Presidency of the European Union said that the elections 
were carried out in a \"generally successful and peaceful\" 
manner, and \"broadly conducted along the lines of 
internationally established standards\". The EU publicly 
stated that irregularities should be investigated and 
resolved in accordance with the law. The Carter Center 
made similar comments. 
 
--------------------------------- 
A WORD ON PRESIDENT-ELECT GUEBUZA 
--------------------------------- 
5. (SBU) Although Guebuza reportedly is more nationalistic 
and less flexible than is Chissano, he has indicated 
recently that he is likely to continue current government 
policies. During his trip to the United States in July, 
where he attended the Democratic National Convention and 
met with U.S. officials, Guebuza repeatedly said he favored 
maintaining a strong Mozambique-U.S. relationship and 
stressed that he would honor commitments with donor 
communities and international financial institutions 
(IFIs). A businessman himself, as a result of his party 
and government positions, Guebuza has a good understanding 
of business and economic concerns and has close ties to the 
private sector community. Guebuza has, on occasion, called 
for the \"Mozambicanization\" of businesses (Ref B), which 
has sparked some concern among foreign investors both 
existing and potential. Guebuza acknowledges the extensive 
US commitment to helping Mozambique overcome the challenges 
of poverty and HIV/AIDS. He comes across as serious and 
intelligent. 
 
----------------------------- 
THE STATE OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
----------------------------- 
6. (U) Recovering from a devastating civil war, 
Mozambique\'s macroeconomic reforms and success in 
attracting large investment projects have given the country 
an average GDP growth rate of eight percent from 1992-2004, 
the highest in Africa over this time period. This growth 
is from a very low base; per capita GNP for 2004 is 
projected at around USD 290. Foreign direct investment, 
exports, and revenue collections all have seen notable 
increases, and the government continues to privatize state 
firms, albeit at a slower pace than in the late 1990\'s. 
 
7. (U) Maintaining this high rate of growth hinges on 
several major foreign investment projects (aluminium, 
natural gas), continued economic reform, and the growth of 
the agriculture, transportation, and tourism sectors. 
The inflation rate for 2004 was around 11 percent, in line 
with the levels of recent years. 
 
8. (SBU) The Mozambican business climate needs improvement. 
Generally sound macroeconomic policies and high-level 
commitment to attracting business mask a bureaucracy that 
remains at times unresponsive to the needs of corporations, 
especially small-to-medium-sized enterprises. Obtaining 
permits takes time, corruption is problematic, and the 
legal system is antiquated and cumbersome. Although 
revisions are being considered, the labor law remains 
extremely inflexible and an impediment to foreign 
investment. Land title is granted in the form of leases; 
private ownership of land is not allowed. Donors are 
working extensively with the GRM to modernize and improve 
the commercial code, labor law, business registration 
process, tax system, and land ownership policy. Although 
reform is moving in the right direction, it will take 
several years before significant impediments to investment 
are removed. Mozambique\'s road network is quite limited 
and in poor condition along many stretches, although major 
repair work is underway. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
COMMERCIAL OPPORTUNITIES AND MEGA-PROJECTS 
------------------------------------------ 
9. (U) Mozambique offers substantial investment and 
commercial opportunities in energy generation (hydropower, 
coal, and gas), transportation (road construction, rail and 
port services, airport construction, and air transport), 
resource extraction (natural gas, minerals, timber, and 
fishing), aquaculture, agriculture/horticulture (cereals, 
cashews, cotton, sugar, vegetables, flowers, and citrus; 
light industry), and tourism. In December 2004, the 
Government of Mozambique ratified the U.S.-Mozambique 
Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) that was signed in 1998 
and ratified by the U.S. in 2001. 
 
10. (U) Several mega-projects, funded by outside investors, 
are important contributors to Mozambique\'s rapid economic 
growth. These enterprises include the MOZAL aluminum 
smelter (an Australian investment), the newly inaugurated 
SASOL gas pipeline (South Africa), and soon-to-be 
operational mining and heavy sands projects in Gaza and 
Nampula Provinces (Australia and Ireland). The GRM works 
closely with large investors by creating government- 
investor task forces to address concerns about working in 
the Mozambican business environment. The GRM is very 
responsive to these investors and has created several 
\"special economic zones\" and \"export processing zones,\" 
some located in poor and under-developed areas. 
Mozambique\'s mega-projects account for 2-3 percentage 
points of the country\'s GDP growth and a much larger share 
of its export growth. 
 
-------------------------- 
THE FIGHT AGAINST HIV/AIDS 
-------------------------- 
11. (U) HIV/AIDS: Mozambique is at a critical stage in its 
efforts to stem the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In Southern Africa, 
Mozambique presents both the greatest challenges and 
possibly the greatest opportunity to become the next 
Uganda-like success in turning around the HIV/AIDS threat. 
We have made considerable efforts to ensure that the 
Emergency Plan For AIDS Relief is seen as a collaborative 
approach to addressing the epidemic by working closely with 
the government, other donors, and domestic and 
international NGOs. Mozambique is the only country to be 
both a focus country under the Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief and eligible to receive FY04 and FY05 MCA funding. 
(NOTE: We will send via email a more detailed briefing on 
U.S. activities to combat HIV/AIDS in Mozambique. END 
NOTE.) 
 
----------------- 
MCA IN MOZAMBIQUE 
----------------- 
12. (SBU) Mozambican government officials, civil society 
leaders, and private sector groups are generally aware of 
the MCA and Mozambique\'s FY04 and FY05 eligibility for the 
program. MCC representatives have visited Mozambique on 
three occasions since Mozambique was selected as part of 
the first group of 16 eligible countries in May 2004, with 
MCC CEO Applegarth visiting in October. Mozambique 
submitted a concept paper to the MCC in late September that 
is focused on the private sector and the northern region. 
The government entrusted the CTA, a confederation of 
business associations and also the private sector 
representative on Mozambique\'s MCA Technical Group, with 
the responsibility for drafting Mozambique\'s concept paper. 
Although the CTA and the Mozambique-US Chamber of Commerce 
have circulated the concept paper widely both in public 
meetings around the country and on the internet, the 
government has not yet officially released it. There has 
been some press coverage, particularly around the MCC 
visits, but as yet no in-depth presentation and analysis of 
the concept paper by the media. The MCC provided feedback 
on Mozambique\'s concept paper in late November, and a 
dialogue has been developing since then with responses to 
the initial feedback now being produced. 
 
13. (U) In brief, the Mozambique concept is expected to 
\"promote business, investment, and employment\". The 
program will reduce poverty and spur growth by lowering 
costs and risks of doing business in Mozambique while 
improving the competitiveness of the private sector. The 
four priority areas are: 
- policy reform to improve the trade and business 
environment, 
- business development assistance to increase trade and 
competitiveness of firms, 
- infrastructure improvements to facilitate trade and 
reduce transaction costs, and, 
-select education, health, and sanitation initiatives to 
improve social conditions in Northern Mozambique. 
The concept paper states that the program has the potential 
to create 5,000 direct jobs, 1.7% incremental GDP growth, 
and a reduction in poverty from 54 percent to 45 percent 
after 10 years. The budget for the proposed program is USD 
148 million. 
DUDLEY 
"
"24977","1/5/2005 15:26","05MAPUTO23","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","05STATE926","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000023 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR (TWATKINS) 
AF/S - TREGER 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOMC, KSEP, MZ, ETCC 
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN OFFICER - MOZAMBIQUE 
 
REF: STATE 00926 
 
Post designates econ/poloff Loren Dent as Mozambique\'s Blue 
Lantern officer. Designee may be reached at 258-1-492-797, 
ext 3422 (landline), 258-1-490-114 (fax) and 
dentln@state.gov. Ms. Dent\'s estimated departure date from 
post is July 2005. 
DUDLEY 
"
"24997","1/6/2005 7:55","05MAPUTO25","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Maputo1539","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000025 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EPS, EB/IFD/OIA 
MCC FOR BRIGGS AND GAULL 
STATE PASS OPIC FOR WATSON AND SHORE 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, MZ, Nyati, OPIC, Tourism 
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH PRESIDENT-ELECT GUEBUZA ON OPIC- 
SUPPORTED NYATI BEACH LODGE INVESTMENT 
 
Refs: A) 2004 Maputo 1446; B) 2004 Maputo 1539 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Business Confidential 
Information. Not for Internet Distribution 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: OPIC-supported investor Dave Herbert 
continues to be under threat from a claimant to the land on 
which his Nyati Beach Lode is located. It appears that 
plans by the claimant to take possession of the lodge and 
evict guests on December 31 were frustrated when the 
Minister of Interior told the provincial police not to 
enforce a recent court order. On January 4, Charge, OPIC 
Senior Advisor to the President and Director of African 
Affairs Marysue Shore, and Herbert informed President-elect 
Armando Guebuza of developments. Guebuza was sympathetic 
but noncommittal. Herbert expects that until the High Court 
(currently on vacation until March) rules, the plaintiffs 
would continue to attempt to take possession of the lodge. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Reftels describe background of the case involving 
OPIC-supported investor Dave Herbert. On December 30, 
Herbert learned that the plaintiff who is seeking to obtain 
control of his Nyati Beach Lodge had received an order from 
an Inhambane judge allowing him to use the provincial police 
to enforce an earlier judgment that gave the plaintiff 
rights to the land on which the lodge stands. This order 
was issued even though in late November the Attorney General 
made a formal recommendation to the High Court that the 
judge\'s earlier ruling be overturned. Herbert understood 
that the plaintiff planned to use the police to evict guests 
from the lodge and take possession on December 31. Herbert 
alerted OPIC, which alerted post. Charge informed Foreign 
Minister Leonardo Simao, who expressed concern and promised 
to call the Attorney General and the provincial governor. 
The following day, Herbert told post that as a result of his 
own team\'s efforts, the Minister of Interior had told the 
Inhambane police chief not to enforce the judgment. Herbert 
expected the situation to remain calm for a few days but 
that, until the High Court ruled, the plaintiffs would 
continue to attempt to evict him. 
 
3. (SBU) On January 4, Charge, Shore, and Herbert met with 
President-elect Guebuza to bring him up to date on Herbert\'s 
difficulties and OPIC\'s concern. Shore opened the meeting 
by saying that in his meetings in Washington last summer, 
Guebuza had asked to be kept informed about the progress of 
OPIC-supported investments. Guebuza appeared to be familiar 
with some of the issues involved. Herbert explained the 
situation and emphasized his interest in following the law. 
He stated that the law had not been followed in the process 
to date, but that the Attorney General recognized the 
problems and supported his side in the case. He 
particularly cited the Attorney General\'s recommendation to 
the president of the High Court that the Inhambane court 
judgment be overturned (ref b). Herbert also noted the 
damage an eviction would do to tourism in Mozambique, 
emphasizing that he employs 70 Mozambicans at Nyati Beach 
Lodge and a total of 300 at his properties in Mozambique. 
Shore highlighted the importance of a quick High Court 
decision and expressed concern that the president of the 
High Court had apparently not seen the Attorney General\'s 
recommendation over a month after it had been sent to the 
court. She also explained that OPIC had suspended new 
lending projects in Mozambique. 
 
4. (SBU) Guebuza was sympathetic but noncommittal, saying 
that he was sorry to hear about the situation but that he 
was not sure what he could say. He said he had some 
information but did not think he had it all, especially the 
details of the various court documents. He advised Herbert 
to be patient, and he noted that there were different 
interpretations of the law, which was why courts existed. 
He cited his limitations as not yet being in office but said 
he would \"go through\" the matter. He also told Shore that 
he was very interested in having OPIC investment, which he 
said sent a good signal to other investors. 
 
5. (SBU) Herbert and Shore met on January 4 with lawyers 
representing Nyati Lodge, the Vilanculos Coastal Wildlife 
Sanctuary, OPIC, and Minister of Environment John Kachamila, 
who is on the Sanctuary\'s board. Herbert told post on 
January 5 that his legal team planned to file additional 
appeals to increase the pressure on the Attorney General, 
but he acknowledged that it would not be appropriate to 
pressure the High Court directly. 
DUDLEY 
"
"25073","1/7/2005 11:24","05MAPUTO51","Embassy Maputo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000051 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR AF/S 
DEPT PASS TO MCC WASHINGTON DC 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/07/2010 
TAGS: KDEM, MZ, PGOV, PREL, Elections 04, RENAMO 
SUBJECT: RENAMO TO APPEAL LEGISLATIVE RESULTS TO 
CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL 
 
REF: 04 MAPUTO 1645 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Classified by Charge James Dudley, Reason 1.4(D) 
 
1. (C) Summary and Comment: After the CNE denied its 
challenge to the election results, RENAMO will appeal to the 
Constitutional Council. Party elections director Eduardo 
Namburete told Charge that Dhlakama would stop emphasizing 
his (comment: unrealistic) belief that he had won the 
presidential election and would appeal only the legislative 
election results. If the Council rejects the appeal out of 
hand, RENAMO will refuse to take its seats in the National 
Assembly. Charge encouraged the party to reconsider and 
responded to claims that RENAMO might not be able to control 
its unhappy public by saying that any resort to violence 
would be irresponsible. Namburete,s estimate that fraud 
cost RENAMO 35-40 seats in the Assembly is wildly 
unrealistic. Post believes that the Council will deny 
RENAMO,s appeal and that RENAMO will in the end take its 
seats in the Assembly. End Summary and Comment. 
 
2. (SBU) On January 5, the National Elections Commission 
(CNE) denied RENAMO,s challenge to the results of the 
December general elections as expected. On January 6, RENAMO 
elections director Eduardo Namburete and two colleagues 
called on the Charge and econ/pol section head to explain 
RENAMO,s plan to make its last appeal, to the Constitutional 
Council, on January 7. The meeting was part of the 
delegation,s visits with several embassies on instructions 
from RENAMO leader Afonso Dhlakama. The Council must respond 
to RENAMO\'s claim within five days of submission, though it 
has up to 40 days from the date the election results were 
announced (Dec. 21) to announce its overall verdict on the 
elections. 
 
3. (SBU) Namburete reported that Dhlakama still believes that 
he won the race for president, but \"in the interests of 
peace,\" and recognizing that international and domestic 
observers believed otherwise, had decided to stop emphasizing 
this and would have the party appeal only the legislative 
elections. Namburete estimated that fraud had cost the party 
35-40 seats in the National Assembly. If the Council threw 
out the claims \"without comment,\" as he said the CNE had 
done, RENAMO would refuse to take its seats in the Assembly 
and would protest peacefully. 
 
4. (SBU) Namburete argued that returning to Parliament would 
be tantamount to accepting the validity of the elections, 
something that RENAMO could not do. He said that after the 
1999 elections (note: which were much closer, and also marred 
by allegations of fraud) RENAMO played along at the urging of 
the international community and returned to Parliament to 
avoid an open rupture with FRELIMO. Namburete explained that 
this tactic had gotten the party nowhere. He promised that 
RENAMO would urge all of its members to act in accordance 
with the law in the event the Council rejected its claims, 
but warned that the party would have difficulty controlling 
\"the people.\" 
 
5. (SBU) Namburete gave the impression that he expected some 
of the smaller party representatives who had won seven seats 
in coalition with RENAMO to take their seats. He also 
indicated that some or all of these representatives could be 
convinced to vote with FRELIMO; if all did, FRELIMO would be 
able to change the Constitution, a situation that Namburete 
described as meaning a return to a one-party dictatorship. 
 
6. (SBU) The Charge welcomed the news that Dhlakama would 
deemphasize his belief that irregularities had prevented him 
from winning the presidency. He expressed doubt about 
RENAMO,s estimate of the number of seats being affected and 
encouraged the party to release to the press its own parallel 
count and its analysis that irregularities had cost it 35-40 
seats. He urged Namburete and RENAMO to reconsider the 
threat to boycott the Assembly, noting that RENAMO would be 
giving up its voice on legislation. Econ/Pol section head 
added that voters who elected RENAMO,s 83 members of the 
Assembly might also feel that the party was not representing 
them. Charge emphasized that any resort to violence in 
demonstrations or elsewhere would be irresponsible. 
 
7. (C) Comment: The Constitutional Council is responsive to 
FRELIMO and likely will reject most, and possibly all, of 
RENAMO\'s claims, many of which are implausible. Although 
Namburete said the CNE rejected RENAMO,s claims without 
comment, press reports indicate that the CNE did throw out 
some of the most implausible vote tally sheets and referred 
some for possible prosecution. Namburete\'s estimate that 
RENAMO should have received 35-40 additional seats, almost 
enough to give it control of the Assembly, is a fantasy. 
Observer missions and independent journalists have charged 
that irregularities likely increased FRELIMO,s 
representation in the Assembly, but none has said that this 
affected more than a few seats. 
 
8. (C) Comment continued: Post doubts that RENAMO will carry 
out the threat to boycott the Assembly; it did not do so 
after the much closer 1999 elections despite making a similar 
threat. If the party,s deputies do not take their seats 
within 45 days of the opening of the Assembly, they will lose 
their salaries and benefits and the party will lose financial 
benefits. The argument that the party might not be able to 
control unhappy supporters also seems implausible, as much of 
RENAMO,s base apparently did not even bother to vote. On 
January 9, RENAMO will hold a meeting of its central 
committee and a rally in its stronghold of Beira. This 
should shed some light on Dhlakama,s and the party,s 
strategy for responding to their poor electoral showing. End 
Comment. 
DUDLEY 
"
"25289","1/12/2005 15:15","05MAPUTO73","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","05SECSTATE269653","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000073 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
STATE FOR S/CT AND IO. 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PREL, MZ, Demarche 
SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM ACTION GROUP (CTAG): DEMARCHE ON 
THE 12 COUNTERTERRORISM CONVENTIONS AND PROTOCOLS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 269653 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Handle Accordingly. Not 
for Internet Distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) On December 30, Emboff delivered Counter- 
Terrorism Action Group (CTAG) talking points to Fernando 
Chomar, an officer at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
responsible for security-related issues. Mr. Chomar was 
familiar with the November 2004 CTAG meeting and was 
aware that Mozambique had not yet adopted Convention C - 
Convention of the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the 
Purpose of Detection. He appeared to have some 
knowledge of the substance of the convention. He said 
that the National Assembly had no plans to ratify the 
convention anytime soon, and that it was not on MFA\'s 
radar screen, but also said that Mozambique had no 
substantive objections to the convention of which he was 
aware. Mr. Chomar wanted to consult with his 
supervisors before giving a definitive answer, but 
expressed that he thought it might be possible to move 
toward ratification in 2005. 
LA LIME 
"
"25290","1/12/2005 15:15","05MAPUTO74","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE272351","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MAPUTO 000074 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, TRGY, PREL, AORC, XA, MZ, ASEC, IAEA, Demarche 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON ADDITIONAL PROTOCOL TO IAEA SAFEGUARDS 
 
REF: A) 2004 SECSTATE 204095; B) 2004 SECSTATE 272351 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Handle Accordingly. Not 
for Internet Distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) On December 30, Emboff delivered demarche and 
talking points to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
urging Mozambique to adopt the Additional Protocol to 
the comprehensive standards of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA). The MFA official receiving the 
demarche, Fernando Chomar, an officer responsible for UN 
security-related issues, was not familiar with the IAEA 
protocol. After reviewing the documents, he expressed 
support for the general principle of the protocol but 
wondered what steps and costs would be necessary to 
comply with protocol commitments. He agreed to consult 
with us on the issue again early in 2005. 
 
2. (SBU) Prior to delivering this demarche, post had 
consulted with the embassies/high commissions of other G- 
8 members listed in the authorizing cable, with hopes of 
co-delivering the demarche. None of the other missions 
we contacted - United Kingdom, Italy, and France - were 
familiar with the IAEA protocols at all, so we 
eventually delivered the demarche solo. 
LA LIME 
"
"25311","1/13/2005 4:58","05MAPUTO75","Embassy Maputo","UNCLASSIFIED","05State248715","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 MAPUTO 000075 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR EB/CBA - WINSTEAD, AF/S TREGER, and AF/EPS 
COMMERCE FOR RTELCHIN 
JOHANNESBURG FOR FCS RDONOVAN 
DURBAN FOR FCS - LKOHRS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, BTIO, ECON, ETRD, ABUD, MZ, BFIF 
SUBJECT: Mozambique\'s FY05 BFIF Proposal 
 
REF: A. State 248715 
 
B. Dent-Winstead email on 01/10/05 with Mozambique 
Entrepreneurship Forum Draft Agenda Attachment 
 
1. Post requests funding in the amount of USD 30,223 under 
the Business Facilitation Incentive Fund (BFIF) for FY05. 
2. In order of priority, we propose the following three 
projects for FY05: 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Project 1: Mozambique Entrepreneurship Forum 
--------------------------------------------- 
A. Justification: Mozambique lacks a healthy and well- 
developed small-to-medium-sized (SME) business environment. 
The lack of skilled labor, technological know-how, 
knowledge of export markets, and less than supportive 
government policies in labor, commerce, and finance 
(including customs) are considerable barriers for national 
and international investment. Although Mozambique is 
eligible for AGOA, it only exports USD 2 million of 
garments and seafood to the U.S. under AGOA each year. In 
order to further develop the Mozambican business 
environment and encourage a stronger trade relationship 
with the U.S., Post proposes a Mozambique Entrepreneurship 
Forum in March of 2005 (Ref B). 
The purpose of business development assistance through an 
entrepreneurship forum is twofold: to convince incoming 
government officials to continue with policy reform that 
will create a strengthened business climate and to 
demonstrate ways to increase the competitiveness of 
companies (existing and new) so that they may take 
increasing advantage of an improved business environment 
and begin to export. 
Mozambique\'s program will show the USG commitment to 
assisting the development of a business environment 
conducive to private sector growth. The government of 
President-elect Armando Guebuza will be in its initial, 
formative stages, and therefore, relatively open to policy 
reform discussions at the forum. Post also believes that 
private sector entrepreneurs would greatly benefit from 
technical assistance provided at such a forum. In this 
regard, much of the two-day seminar will focus on 
highlighting entrepreneurial success stories in Africa, 
including a few in Mozambique. 
B. Planning Milestones: Post has already enlisted the 
support of the U.S. Department of Commerce (USDOC), USAID 
Mozambique, and the Global Competitiveness Trade Hub in 
Gaborone, Botswana in planning an entrepreneurship forum. 
Planning milestones are as follows: 
+ Late January Confirm program agenda and contact 
presenters and forum moderator 
+ Early February Draft participant invitations, secure 
forum location, contract translation services, and confirm 
presenter participation 
+ Late February Send-out participant invitations 
+ Early March Confirm number of participants, draft 
opening speech to be given by the Ambassador, secure all 
presenter travel arrangements 
+ March 17 Mozambique Commerce Desk Officer arrives, AGOA 
Advisor from Global Competitiveness Hub arrives 
+March 17-21 Consultations for USDOC Desk Officer and 
AGOA Advisor; begin forum set-up; presenters arrive 
+March 22-23 Conduct Entrepreneurship Forum 
C. Performance Metrics/Anticipated Outcomes: Post expects 
officials, local businessmen, and prospective entrepreneurs 
will gain a greater knowledge of financial and technical 
assistance resources available to them in Mozambique. They 
will learn how various businesspersons were successful 
getting started in Mozambique and in other parts of Africa. 
In talks with U.S. and other international buyers, they 
will learn how to locate and work with specific export 
port 
markets. Proposed indicators to measure impact of the 
forum are listed below. 
+ Exports by sector 
+ Investment (foreign and national) 
+ Policy reforms approved (laws passed) 
+ Policy reforms implemented and corresponding procedures 
improved (service levels, time to complete requirements, 
e.g., days to start a business) 
+ Demand (number of clients) for business development 
assistance services 
D. Estimated Costs: Estimated Cost for the Mozambique 
Entrepreneurship Forum is approximately USD 15,000. 
+ USD 5100 Travel for three entrepreneurs from Gabon, 
Uganda, and Kenya to Maputo (USD 1700 per person x 3 people 
= USD 5100). 
+ USD 3000 USDOC Desk Officer Travel to Mozambique; Desk 
Officer will speak about finding markets in the U.S. and 
opportunities under AGOA 
+ USD 2220 Lodging (6 presenters x USD 185 x 2 nights = 
USD 2220) 
+ USD 1026 M&IE (6 presenters x USD 57 x 3 days = 1026) 
+ USD 1000 Simultaneous translation equipment 
+ USD 300 Translator 
lator 
+ USD 600 Conference space at the Hotel Avenida, Maputo 
+ USD 1000 Evening Reception featuring informational 
booths by USDOC, Global Competitiveness Hub Gaborone, 
International Finance Corporation (IFC), Technoserve, 
Corporate Council on Africa (CCA), and local banks 
+ USD 1200 Miscellaneous Expenses including printing 
program agendas, written translation services, etc. 
F. Leveraging Funding The Mozambique Entrepreneurship 
Forum will be a two-day event. The Department of State 
will host the first day of activities and the Global 
Competitiveness Hub in Gaborone, Botswana, will fund and 
host the second day of activities. The Hub has already 
submitted a proposal for funding the travel of two buyers 
from the United States. Additionally, the Hub will 
contract a consultant (proposed Phyllis Jones, former 
AUSTR under the Clinton administration) to provide a 
workshop on creating a business plan, marketing products, 
finding export markets, and other strategic business 
information to forum participants. USAID Mozambique is 
committed to funding in-country travel of specific 
participants whose presence at the forum will add 
significant value. This includes cashew producers in 
Nampula City that export to the U.S. (NOTE: USAID will 
only pay for in-country participant travel. In-country 
participant per diem is listed in the estimated cost budget 
above. END NOTE) USDOC has provided significant input to 
the proposed agenda and Post believes USDOC representation 
at the forum is critical. (NOTE: USDOC desk officer 
travel is requested in the estimated cost budget above. 
END NOTE) The Corporate Council on Africa (CCA) will travel 
to Mozambique and participate in the forum. 
G. Outcome/Success Criteria: The Entrepreneurship Forum 
will prove successful if working businessmen and aspiring 
entrepreneurs take advantage of financial and technical 
assistance resources available to them. Likewise, the 
seminar will be successful if the GRM continues current 
investment-friendly reforms of commercial, labor, and 
financial policies. 
H. Follow-up Strategy: Post will follow up with the host 
government by continuing to support commercial reforms to 
promote a more business-friendly environment. Post will 
manage this effort by supporting the Confederaao das 
Associaoes Econmicas de Moambique (CTA), a confederation 
of business associations that works directly with the GRM 
on legal reform. Post will also follow up with the local 
business community by gauging the request for financial and 
technical assistance. Additionally, Post will keep the 
business community informed of opportunities under AGOA and 
economic support available under various USG agencies. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Project 2: Commercial Outreach and Export Promotion 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
A. Justification: Mozambique has ten provinces, with a 
capital city located in the southernmost province. The 
The 
capital is far-removed from important commercial and 
political activity in the central and northern regions. 
Foreign firms operating in Mozambique are in need of home 
country support and outreach. Communication between firms, 
the GRM, and the diplomatic community is critical to 
improvement of the business climate. Additionally, Post 
outreach to commercial associations, entrepreneurs, 
agricultural institutes and organizations, and industry is 
critical to introducing U.S. products and programs to an 
audience generally uninformed about U.S. opportunities and 
the U.S. market. 
B. Planning milestones: Post will make two trips to key 
provinces in the central and northern regions. 
Econ/poloffs will visit U.S. businesses and meet with 
farmers, businessmen, entrepreneurs, academics, and 
commercial associations to discuss U.S. export 
opportunities and incentive programs such as AGOA. 
Discussions will focus on how Mozambique can specifically 
benefit from AGOA and how specific sectors such as 
agriculture, construction, and aquaculture may benefit from 
U.S. technology and market offerings. In December 2004, 
Mozambique qualified for Category 9 under AGOA. It is an 
opportune time to spread the word about how Mozambique can 
take advantage of this added export incentive. 
Furthermore, Post would greatly benefit from consultations 
at regional FCS, USDA, and U.S. Trade Development Agency 
(USTDA) offices in Johannesburg and Pretoria. Post\'s Econ 
Section works closely with all of these agencies on various 
issues such as joint research for commercial inquiries, 
Gold Key Service requests, and local trade shows and 
exhibitions. Through consultations, Post would gain greater 
insight into commercial resources and contacts, allowing 
for more effective U.S. product promotion and program 
efforts in Mozambique. 
Planning milestones for travel are as follows: 
+Sofala/Manica/Tete Provincial Travel (central region) 
April 2005. Travel will include the following site visits: 
-Port of Beira, Mozambique\'s most active port 
-Commercial Association of Sofala (ACIS); represents 30 
businesses operating in Sofala, two of which have U.S. ties 
-Mobeira flour-producing mill owned by the U.S. 
corporation Seaboard 
-Belita currently the only textile and garment factory 
operating under AGOA 
-Agricultural Institute of Chimoio 
-Coca-Cola Bottling Factory, Chimoio 
-Vilmar Rose Plantation, exporting to the European market 
-Pescamar Fishing Association largest in Mozambique 
-Zambeze River Valley Authority responsible for the 
development of the central region of Mozambique 
-Cahora Bassa Hydroelectric Company country\'s second 
largest revenue-producing company; supplies energy to South 
Africa and Zimbabwe 
-Technoserve American NGO lending technical assistance to 
agricultural and tourism projects 
+Zambezia/Nampula/Cabo Delgado Provincial Travel (northern 
region) July 2005. Travel will include the following 
site visits: 
-Port of Nacala Mozambique\'s only deepwater port; U.S. 
investment with OPIC financing 
-Indian Ocean Aquaculture Prawn aquaculture farm with 
limited U.S. investment; plans to export to the U.S. 
-Moma Heavy Sands Project a mineral sands mega-project by 
Kenmare Resources (Irish) 
-Business Centers, Inc. U.S.-owned and managed business 
consulting firm 
-Miranda Cashews successfully growing, processing, and 
exporting cashews with Technoserve assistance 
Post recommends the following training/consultation travel: 
+Consultations at FCS, FAS, and USTDA Johannesburg/Pretoria 
C. Performance Metrics/Anticipated Outcomes: Post 
anticipates that businesses across Mozambique will be well 
informed about exporting to the U.S. under AGOA. 
Additionally, the business community will be briefed on 
U.S. financing opportunities with agencies like OPIC, 
USTDA, and Ex-Im Bank. U.S. businesses in Mozambique will 
rely on Post\'s assistance with difficult issues plaguing 
the business-operating environment (VAT repayment, business 
registration process, judicial process, and others). Post 
will disseminate information on investment opportunities in 
Mozambique to firms in the U.S. Performance indicators 
include: 
+ Exports to the U.S. under AGOA 
+ Demand (number of clients) requesting USTDA, OPIC, and 
Ex-Im information and assistance 
+ Number of commercial inquiries received at Post (by U.S. 
businesses looking to invest in Mozambique and Mozambican 
businesses looking to work with firms in the U.S.) 
+ Number of issues resolved for U.S. businesses (VAT 
repayment, business registration procedures) 
D. Estimated Costs: Estimated Cost for commercial outreach 
and export promotion is USD 13,838. 
+Sofala/Manica/Tete Provincial Travel 
USD 4604 - Total for Econ/Poloff and Commercial FSN 
USD 1700 - Transportation ($600/person for air travel and 
USD 500 total for car rental) 
USD 2904 - Per diem (lodging and M&IE at $242/day, 6 days) 
+ Zambezia/Nampula/Cabo Delgado Provincial Travel 
USD 6956 - Total for Econ/Poloff and Commercial FSN 
USD 2600 - Transportation($900/person for air travel and 
USD 800 for car rental) 
USD 4356 - Per diem ($242/day, 9 days) 
+ Johannesburg/Pretoria Consultation Travel 
USD 2278 Total for Econ/Poloff and the Commercial FSN 
USD 1000 - Round-trip airfare ($500/person) 
USD 1278 Per diem ($213/day, 3 days) 
F. Leveraging Funding: Post has not leveraged funding from 
other agencies regarding the commercial outreach and export 
promotion project. 
G. Outcome/Success Criteria: Commercial outreach will be 
successful if Mozambican exports to the U.S. increase, 
particularly under AGOA. Outreach will also be successful 
if commercial work generates greater U.S. investment in 
Mozambique. 
H. Follow-up Strategy: Post will continue to conduct an 
AGOA digital video-conferencing (DVC) series between U.S. 
buyers and USG agencies and Mozambican officials and the 
business community. DVCs in 2003-2004 focused on the 
handicraft and textiles/garments sector. DVCs in 2005 will 
focus on more competitive sectors in Mozambique, such as 
agriculture/agro-processing and fisheries. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Project 3: Regional Econ/Comm Officer Conference - 
Gaborone 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
A. Justification Post would like to send the Econ/Comm 
officer to attend the regional Economic/Commercial officer 
training in Gaborone at the Global Competitiveness Hub on 
March 30-31, 2005. Econ/Poloff would benefit by learning 
about different economic, commercial, and trade resources 
and contacts available in the region. 
B. Planning Milestones: 
+ March 30-31 Econ/Poloff attends regional 
econ/commercial officer training 
+ April/May Econ/Poloff meets with various business 
groups, including the U.S.-Mozambique Chamber of Commerce, 
local business associations, and officials from the 
Ministry of Industry and Commerce to speak about economic, 
trade, and financial assistance in the region 
C. Performance Metrics/Anticipated Outcomes Econ/Commoff 
will be more effective in communicating the objectives and 
availability of USG economic and trade-related resources 
when speaking with local businesses and government. 
Additionally, Post\'s increased knowledge of contacts and 
resources in the region could lead to more economic and 
trade-related programs in Mozambique. Specific performance 
indicators are as follows: 
+ Increased number of businesses referred to USG agency 
contacts (FCS, USTDA, Ex-Im Bank, OPIC) 
+ Increased number of joint economic and trade-related 
programs in Mozambique(involving Post, the Hub, and FCS) 
D. Estimated Costs: 
USD 1385 Total for Econ/Poloff to attend training 
USD 800 - Round-trip airfare 
USD 585 Per diem ($195/day, 3 days) 
F. Leveraging Funding: Post has not coordinated with other 
agencies to leverage funding for this proposed project. 
 
3. POC for the above-mentioned activities is Econ/Poloff 
Loren Dent. She may be reached at 258-1-492-797, ext. 3422 
22 
and at dentln@state.gov 
LA LIME 
"