
"24927","1/5/2005 4:22","05DARESSALAAM13","Embassy Dar Es Salaam","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

050422Z Jan 05
","UNCLAS DAR ES SALAAM 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR AND AF/E 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: KOMC, ETTC, TZ 
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN ACTION OFFICER FOR TANZANIA 
 
REF: A) STATE 000926, 
 
     B) 2004 DAR ES SALAAM 01942 
     C) 2004 STATE 205022 
 
1. (U) Per reftel A, post resubmits contact information 
for the designated officer responsible for oversight of 
the Blue Lantern Program in Tanzania.  This information 
was originally sent in September in reftel B, in 
response to reftel C. 
 
Name: Jefferson Smith 
Position: Pol-Econ Officer/Second Secretary 
Telephone: 255-22-2668001, x4521 
Fax: 255-22-2668238, 255-22-2668373 
Email: SmithJD@state.gov 
ETD: August 2005 
 
OWEN 
"
"25154","1/10/2005 11:43","05DARESSALAAM42","Embassy Dar Es Salaam","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DAR ES SALAAM 000042 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E, AF/RSA, AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  1/6/15 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, TZ, UNSC 
SUBJECT:  TANZANIA GEARS UP FOR SECURITY COUNCIL SEAT 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY CHARGE D\'AFFAIRES MICHAEL S. OWEN FOR REASON 
1.4 (D). 
 
1.  (C)  Summary:  Senior officials at the Foreign Ministry 
acknowledged to Charge that Tanzania\'s upcoming term on the 
UNSC will pose daunting challenges for its woefully thin 
staff.  The GOT will focus on African issues, and will take 
its lead on most issues from the AU, but is eager to 
cooperate and receive information from the US.  The GOT 
also plans to raise refugees and post-conflict issues, and 
will propose a special UNSC session on Africa.  Tanzania 
will push for more Security Council sessions to be held 
outside of New York, and will staunchly oppose any dilution 
of Africa\'s role if the UNSC is enlarged.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U)  Charge met on January 5 with Ambassador Liberata 
Mulamula, Director for Multilateral Affairs, in the Foreign 
Ministry, to discuss Tanzania\'s upcoming term on the 
Security Council.  Mulamula, who served in Tanzania\'s New 
York mission 2000-2004, said the GOT has dispensed five 
additional officers to its New York mission in anticipation 
of the increased workload.  The MFA has also set up a 
Security Council unit that will be headed by Ambassador M. 
B. Njiko, and will report directly to Mulamula.  She said 
there are five officers in the SC unit, one of whom, 
Mbwelwa Kairuki, was recently in the Department for SC 
briefings, and who joined us for the meeting. 
 
3.  (C)  Mulamula acknowledged that the MFA is feeling 
\"overwhelmed\" by the magnitude of the workload it will be 
facing with during its two years on the Council.  She 
lamented the severe personnel shortage in the MFA, saying 
that allocating five additional officers to New York and 
five others to the MFA\'s SC unit put a severe strain on the 
remainder of the Ministry, but was still not sufficient to 
meet the tasks ahead.  She said it was highly unlikely 
additional officers would be allocated to SC duties, and 
added \"I hope we haven\'t bitten off more than we can chew.\" 
 
4.  (C)  Realizing the MFA\'s capacity constraints, Mulamula 
said the GOT was in the process of establishing clear 
priorities on which issues would receive the most time and 
energy.  The GOT would focus primarily on African issues, 
she said, because the GOT is representing \"not just 
Tanzania, but all of Africa\" on the Security Council.  She 
said the GOT would rely on close consultations in AU and 
other African fora to establish positions built on \"African 
consensus.\"  She noted as an example the upcoming AU Peace 
and Security Council meeting on Cote d\'Ivoire and DRC, to 
be held in Gabon January 10-11, as the type of forum in 
which the GOT would develop its priorities and positions. 
Mulamula also said the GOT would welcome \"information and 
support\" from the US, noting that as the United Republic of 
Tanzania, the GOT delegation would be seated next to the US 
delegation. 
 
5.  (C)  Asked if there were any specific issues the GOT 
planned to push of its own accord, Mulamula said there was 
great interest in pressing for increased support from the 
international community in post-conflict situations in 
Africa.  Too often, she said, the international community 
played a helpful role in conflict resolution, only to pull 
back thereafter and allow conflicts to re-ignite.  She said 
Tanzania, which hosts over 400,000 refugees, would also 
raise refugee issues and push for reform of international 
refugee policy.  Mulamula said the GOT would also push for 
a special UNSC session on Africa, and for more sessions 
held outside of New York, citing the recent UNSC session 
held in Kenya. 
 
6.  (C)  Charge asked about Tanzanian views on Security 
Council reform.  Referring to an old OAU position calling 
for two African nations to have permanent seats on the SC, 
Mulamula said the GOT still supports the call for two 
African seats, but realizes this is unlikely.  If there is 
enlargement of the SC, then Tanzania would staunchly oppose 
any dilution of the African share, and would push hard for 
at least one permanent seat.  This would most likely go to 
South Africa or Nigeria, she said, and the decision should 
be made by consensus within the AU.  Mulamula said the GOT 
would be willing to consider other options, such as 
rotating four-year membership for selected African nations. 
 
7.  (C)  Comment:  With Foreign Minister Kikwete an active 
presidential candidate and Deputy Minister Shareef seeking 
re-election to parliament this year, much of the 
responsibility for the MFA\'s stewardship of Tanzania\'s term 
on the Security Council will fall to Mulamula.  Although 
she has considerable experience, the troops are thin in the 
perpetually understaffed MFA.  The GOT is likely to rely 
heavily on AU consensus positions in developing its 
positions and priorities within the Council, but will also 
welcome input from the US.  End Comment. 
 
OWEN 
"
"25310","1/13/2005 4:38","05DARESSALAAM57","Embassy Dar Es Salaam","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 DAR ES SALAAM 000057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/E AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: 1/11/15 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, TZ 
SUBJECT: Mkapa\'s New Year\'s Greeting Warns Diplomats 
on Electoral Assistance 
 
 
Classified by Pol-Econ Chief Judy Buelow for reason 
1.5(b) 
 
REF: A)04 Dar es Salaam 2602, B)04 Dar es Salaam 2600 
C)04 Dar es Salaam 2341, D) 04 Dar es Salaam 1935 
 
1. (C) Summary: At his traditional New Year Sherry 
party for the diplomatic community, President Mkapa 
briefly outlined a list of development programs and 
regional international initiatives, but Tanzania\'s 
upcoming elections were the real highlight of this 
year\'s speech.  In an apparent effort to pre-empt any 
international criticism of next October\'s elections, 
President Mkapa asserted that last year\'s local 
elections were successful and demonstrated 
overwhelming popular support for the ruling CCM party. 
Echoing remarks Zanzibari President Karume had made 
days earlier, Mkapa voiced what appears to be the new 
CCM party line: that foreign donors should not assume 
the CCM has to cheat to win the 2005 general 
elections.  End summary 
 
Development and Diplomatic Priorities 
------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) The President\'s sherry party, held this year on 
January 7, is an annual tradition in which the 
President informs assembled Ambassadors of Tanzania\'s 
development priorities and international initiatives. 
The 2005 speech began on a somber note, as President 
Mkapa asked attendees to observe a moment of silence 
to commemorate victims of the tsunami disaster.  Mkapa 
called for the establishment of a tsunami early 
warning system for the Indian Ocean. 
 
3.(U) During 2005, President Mkapa said Tanzania would 
consolidate its economic reforms and strengthen public 
institutions.  The focus would be on investing in 
infrastructure such as roads and bridges, and on 
addressing the special needs of the large informal 
sector.  President Mkapa thanked the Norwegian 
government in particular for its assistance in 
implementing the Property and Business Formalization 
Program.  Health and education programs also got a 
mention.  President Mkapa said that the Tanzanian 
Government would focus on its HIV/AIDS Care and 
Treatment Plan for 2005.  He thanked the Clinton 
Foundation, President Bush\'s Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief and the Global Fund for their assistance. 
 
4. (U) President Mkapa also briefly outlined 
Tanzania\'s foreign policy priorities for the coming 
year.  He reiterated Tanzania\'s commitment to 
deepening regional integration through both SADC and 
the EAC.  He voiced Tanzania\'s support of various 
peace processes.  He opined that the Dar es Salaam 
Declaration was the best foundation for peace in the 
Great Lakes region, and he lamented that the ink on 
the agreement had barely dried before tensions 
escalated between Rwanda and the DRC.  Mkapa welcomed 
the peace agreement between the Sudanese government 
and the SPLM, and called for the international 
community to meet the challenge of resolving the 
conflict and providing humanitarian assistance in 
Darfur.  Perhaps as a gesture toward the Palestinian 
ambassador, who is the doyen, Mkapa eulogized Yasser 
Arafat with some eloquence and at some length, and 
said that Tanzania\'s thoughts and prayers would be 
with the Palestinian people as they elected a leader 
who \"will take forward . . .the peaceful struggle for 
an independent, stable and secure Palestine coexisting 
peacefully with the State of Israel.\"  President Mkapa 
concluded by thanking all countries for their 
overwhelming support for Tanzania\'s candidacy for the 
Security Council. 
 
An Election Year Warning 
------------------------ 
 
5. (C) Mkapa\'s speech will be most remembered, 
however, for its focus on the general elections, now 
set for October 30, 2005.  While he emphasized his 
support for ongoing electoral reforms, Mkapa also 
attempted to pre-empt foreign criticism of the coming 
year\'s campaign by declaring that the ruling CCM party 
was strong, popular, and did not have to cheat to win 
elections.  Mkapa said that the November 2004 local 
elections demonstrated Tanzania\'s commitment to 
developing democratic leadership at the grassroots 
level, and that the elections generated \"unprecedented 
interest and passion.\"  (Comment: This 
characterization of the local elections might have 
surprised some of the assembled diplomats who had 
observed low voter turn-out, poor organization and 
short tempers at many the urban polling places.  See 
reftel B.)  President Mkapa noted that 350,000 
elective positions, all on the Tanzanian mainland, 
were contested in the local elections.  While returns 
from a few of the more remote areas were still 
trickling in almost two months after the elections, 
the overall results of the elections had just been 
compiled.  President Mkapa reported an astounding 
tally for the CCM:  96.6 percent of the vote went to 
ruling party candidates; with the CUF party in second 
place with 1.49 percent of the votes on the Tanzanian 
mainland.  The remaining sixteen registered political 
parties each received less than one percent of the 
vote. 
 
6. (U) Mkapa reiterated his support for political 
reforms during the nine years of his administration, 
and said he would consolidate those reforms during his 
final year in office.   He gave a nod to the \"spirit 
of the Muafaka,\" the bipartisan agreement between the 
CCM and the CUF that mandates electoral reforms on 
polarized Zanzibar.  Mkapa called for efforts to 
strengthen political institutions and for a binding 
code of political conduct to guide partisan behavior 
during the campaign and voting. 
 
The New CCM Party Line 
---------------------- 
 
7.(C) Although his speech touched on strengthening 
democratic institutions, Mkapa clearly is placing most 
of his energy into strengthening the ruling CCM party. 
In an implied warning to the assembled diplomats, he 
said \"I strongly discourage the notion that if CCM 
wins, it has rigged the elections . . .CCM is very 
strong.  We do not need to rig.  We have more to gain 
by winning peacefully, fairly and squarely.\" 
 
8. (U) Mkapa\'s remarks appear to be the final 
confirmation of CCM\'s new party line.  Mkapa\'s speech 
echoed the sentiments voiced by Zanzibari President 
Karume just a few days earlier, when Karume 
inaugurated the new headquarters for the Zanzibar 
Electoral Commission (ZEC).  On that occasion, Karume 
decried foreign \"meddling,\" saying that some foreign 
observers believe an election is free and fair only if 
an opposition party wins it.  Karume had also 
reiterated the discredited accusation that one British 
diplomat had observed voter registration on Pemba 
without the knowledge of the ZEC or the Zanzibar 
government.  (In fact, a half-dozen diplomatic 
missions, including the US Embassy, sent observers at 
the invitation of the ZEC and the Foreign Ministry. 
Please see Reftels A and C).  Karume also advised 
foreign donors (rather unnecessarily) to look at other 
issues, and not only elections. 
 
The Diplomats Take the Measure of the CCM 
----------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) Diplomats sipping sherry on the Statehouse 
terrace after the speech had an opportunity to 
exchange views on the remarks of both Presidents, and 
to speculate what they meant for the CCM\'s election 
campaign.  Diplomats representing the Basket Group 
that had funded the renovation of the ZEC headquarters 
described an uncomfortable situation at the 
inauguration.  Karume had made his unhelpful remarks 
in Swahili, frequently directed an unsmiling gaze 
toward the assembled donors, who only partially 
understood him.  According to some of the diplomats 
who had been present, Karume never even thanked them 
for the building.  The Dutch Ambassador speculated 
that Karume had been misinformed about the diplomatic 
group that had observed voter registration; or perhaps 
Zanzibar government officials were miffed by the way 
the invitations had been issued.  (The Foreign 
Ministry of the Union Government had issued the 
invitations to embassies on behalf of the ZEC.) 
UNDP Country Representative John Hendra observed that 
voter registration was going well nationwide, 
notwithstanding the ritualized hand-wringing over 
foreign observers.  Over 90% of potential voters had 
registered in most districts on the mainland.  On 
Zanzibar, registration teams finished on schedule in 
southern Pemba, then moved to the north.  These teams 
have been registering just under 90% of potential 
voters in most districts, and the violent 
confrontations of the early days of voter registration 
have not been repeated. 
 
10. (C)  Comment: Mkapa\'s New Year\'s speech indicates 
the diplomatic community can generally expect more of 
the same from Tanzania\'s international relations in 
2005.  The Foreign Ministry, short on staff and often 
overwhelmed, will continue to work mostly through 
international organizations and will follow the 
regional consensus, rather than take the initiative on 
most issues.  The Tanzanian Government, heavily 
dependent on foreign assistance, will continue to 
welcome cooperation with donors on various long-term 
assistance projects.  Electoral assistance, however, 
is proving to be the major exception:  Mkapa\'s speech 
represents a clear effort to set election-year limits 
on outside assistance and advice. 
 
11. (C) Comment continued:  The CCM\'s sweep of 96.6% 
of the vote in a field of 17 competitors indicates the 
strength of the ruling party; but it also indicates 
the continuing weakness of multiparty democracy on the 
Tanzanian mainland.  Only on Zanzibar, where the 
opposition CUF is strong, are there prospects for real 
electoral competition in 2005.  The donor community 
has tended to see President Mkapa as an ally in the 
effort to strengthen Tanzanian democratic 
institutions, and to help Zanzibar overcome its 
history of electoral conflict.  Donors believed Mkapa 
was concerned about his legacy, interested in 
promoting a strong democratic transition  nd capable 
of reining in embattled CCM hardliners on Zanzibar and 
preventing their worst excesses.  With his January 7 
speech, however, President Mkapa indicated that he 
would be a CCM partisan first, and a small-d democrat 
second.  Mkapa seems more inclined to support 
hardliners like Karume, rather than rein them in. 
This first week of the New Year opened with a rather 
discouraging display of CCM party solidarity. End 
Comment. 
 
Owen 
"