
"6573","3/20/2003 9:23","03SINGAPORE1099","Embassy Singapore","CONFIDENTIAL","","P 200923Z MAR 03
FM AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8090
INFO USCINCPAC HONOLULU HI
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SINGAPORE 001099 
 
CINCPAC FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2008 
TAGS: PREL;MASS, MOPS, SN 
SUBJECT: \"TELL THEM TO BE MORE CAREFUL:\" IRAQ ANNOUNCEMENT 
RUFFLES SINGAPORE\'S FEATHERS 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: AMB. FRANK LAVIN FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
1.  (C) MFA PERMSEC (2) BILAHARI KAUSIKAN, PLAINLY IRRITATED, 
CALLED DCM AT OOB ON MARCH 20 TO EXPRESS THE MFA\'S CONCERN AT 
MISCHARACTERIZATION OF SINGAPORE\'S POSITION DURING THE STATE 
DEPARTMENT\'S MARCH 19 PRESS BRIEFING.  SINGAPORE DID NOT 
APPRECIATE, HE SAID, PRESS REPORTS IMPLYING THAT IT HAD 
CHANGED ITS STANCE ON MEMBERSHIP IN THE IRAQ COALITION. 
THESE RESULTED FROM THE SPOKESMAN\'S STATEMENT THAT \"THERE IS 
SINGAPORE, THERE IS PORTUGAL, ALL OF WHOM SAID IN THE LAST 24 
HOURS IT IS OKAY TO NAME THEM,\" RESULTING IN AN AFP REPORT 
THAT THE THREE NEWLY LISTED COUNTRIES HAD \"PREFERRED TO KEEP 
THEIR SUPPORT ANONYMOUS.\" 
 
2.  (C) THAT WASN\'T THE CASE, KAUSIKAN REMONSTRATED. 
SINGAPORE HAD ALWAYS MADE CLEAR ITS SUPPORT FOR THE EFFORT TO 
DISARM SADDAM, AND HAD NEVER SAID TO THE U.S. THAT IT DID NOT 
WANT TO BE MENTIONED.  (APPARENTLY, SINGAPORE HAD BEEN 
CONCERNED NOT TO BE LISTED UNDER THE TITLE \"COALITION OF THE 
WILLING,\" BUT WAS HAPPY WITH THE NOMENCLATURE THAT WAS 
FINALLY ADOPED.)  THE SNAFU WAS EMBARRASSING TO A GOVERNMENT 
WHICH HAD GONE OUT OF ITS WAY TO BE STEADFAST IN ITS POLICY 
ON IRAQ; HE BELIEVED IT RESULTED FROM LACK OF COORDINATION 
WITHIN THE USG.  HE INSISTED THAT HIS DEMARCHE BE REPORTED TO 
WASHINGTON.  (DCM OF COURSE AGREED TO DO SO, BUT HAS EDITED 
OUT THE INFLAMMATORY LANGUAGE.) 
 
3.  (C) AFTER CONSULTING THE BRIEFING TRANSCRIPT, THE DCM 
NOTED THAT A LARGE PART OF THE PROBLEM SEEMED TO LIE WITH 
AFP\'S EMBROIDERY OF THE SPOKESMAN\'S WORDS.  HE ASSURED THE 
PERMSEC THAT ANY MISREPRESENTATION OF SINGAPORE\'S POSITION 
WAS TOTALLY INADVERTENT.  KAUSIKAN, MOLLIFIED, EMPHASIZED 
THAT HE WAS NOT ASKING FOR ANYTHING NEW OR DIFFERENT TO BE 
ENUNCIATED BY THE USG ON THIS ISSUE AT THIS TIME.  \"JUST TELL 
THEM TO BE MORE CAREFUL.\" 
 
4.  (C)  COMMENT:  WE SUSPECT THAT THE MFA RECEIVED SOME HEAT 
FROM THE GOS\' SENIOR LEADERSHIP OVER THE PRESS COVERAGE, AND 
KAUSIKAN WAS FEELING THAT HEAT.  THE QUESTION OF WHETHER 
SINGAPORE HAS BEEN \"FORTHRIGHT\" IN ITS SUPPORT FOR WAR IN 
IRAQ IS A POLITICALLY-CHARGED ONE DOMESTICALLY, AS GOS 
CRITICS HAVE LAMBASTED IT FOR \"HIDING\" ITS SUBSERVIENCE TO 
THE U.S. BEHIND A WALL OF OBFUSCATION UNTIL LAST FRIDAY. 
 
 
LAVIN 
"
"16418","4/28/2004 10:13","04SINGAPORE1301","Embassy Singapore","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SINGAPORE1183","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SINGAPORE 001301 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC, INL, EAP/PMBS, L/LEI, S/CT 
JUSTICE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC, EFIN, PTER, KCRM, SN 
SUBJECT: IMF ON SINGAPORE\'S MONEY LAUNDERING AND TERRORIST 
FINANCING REGIME:  GOOD, BUT ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENTS 
 
REF: SINGAPORE 1183 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (U) An IMF assessment praised Singapore\'s framework for 
anti-money laundering and terrorist financing (AML/TF), 
saying it provides a strong framework in terms of the FATF 40 
recommendations and eight special recommendations.  However, 
the IMF said there remain areas requiring attention.  Key are 
limitations on mutual legal assistance and extradition, and a 
lack of customer identification for wire transfers.  The IMF 
recommended that Singapore narrow the range of bases for 
refusal of assistance under its mutual legal assistance law, 
which may limit the effectiveness of the law in supporting 
mutual legal assistance.  The IMF also encouraged Singapore 
to reassess whether a list approach to designating predicate 
offenses serious crimes is the most effective choice, and to 
make extradition for money laundering possible with a wider 
range of countries.  In response, Singapore noted that FATF 
recognizes the list approach, and Singapore is reconsidering 
its list in light of the FATF revised 40 recommendations. 
Singapore said it will implement customer identification 
requirements for wire transfers by the FATF deadline.  End 
summary. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
2. (SBU) The IMF\'s assessment is useful, especially in 
pointing out deficiencies in Singapore\'s Mutual Assistance in 
Criminal Matters Act and recommending changes, particularly 
to narrow the basis for refusing assistance and to reconsider 
its list based approach.  While Singapore is unlikely to 
change its approach, the IMF critique bolsters U.S. efforts 
in the MLAT negotiations to address exactly these same 
points.  Post is sending by email a copy of the IMF 
assessment to EAP/PMBS and L/LEI.  End comment. 
 
IMF Assesses Singapore\'s AML/TF Performance as Good... 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
3. (U) The IMF\'s Financial System Stability Assessment of 
Singapore, carried out between November 2002 and December 
2003, and released in April, concludes that Singapore has a 
sound and comprehensive legal, institutional, policy and 
supervisory framework for AML/TF.  The assessment said 
Singapore has taken systematic and effective steps to address 
many of the recommendations of the last Financial Action Task 
Force (FATF) evaluation, in 1998-1999, and stated that 
implementation measures are well-monitored and generally 
effective. 
 
...But Notes Areas Requiring Greater Attention 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
4. (U) However, the assessment also identified several areas 
that require attention, most notably mutual legal assistance. 
 Stating that Singapore could improve the effectiveness of 
cross-border legal assistance, the assessment observed that 
there are limitations on Singapore\'s ability to provide 
particular kinds of mutual legal assistance, such as bank 
records, restraint of proceeds, and confiscation orders.  The 
assessment team commented that Singapore \"could widen the 
possibilities for providing mutual legal assistance by making 
compulsory measures available absent a treaty, and by 
ratifying the UN Convention Against Transnational Organized 
Crime (the Palermo Convention). 
 
Mutual Legal Assistance 
----------------------- 
 
5. (U) The team also opined that the Mutual Assistance in 
Criminal Matters Act\'s (MACMA) wide range of mandatory and 
discretionary bases for refusing assistance \"may limit the 
effectiveness of the Act in supporting international 
requests\", recommending that Singapore consider narrowing the 
range of bases for refusal of assistance in the MACMA.  In 
addition, the team said Singapore should take measures to 
ensure timely response to mutual assistance requests related 
to terrorist financing, by designating all parties to the 
Financing of Terrorism Convention under its own law 
(Singapore has currently only designated the US and UK). 
Finally, the assessment also urged Singapore to continue 
efforts toward concluding further MOUs between Singapore\'s 
Suspicious Transactions Reporting Office (STRO) and foreign 
counterparts.  In its response to the recommendations, 
Singapore stated that it \"will continue to expedite current 
negotiations\". 
 
6. (SBU)  The IMF noted that in Singapore, predicate offenses 
for money laundering are based on a list approach.  The list 
does not include all those specified in the Palermo 
Convention, which Singapore has signed but not yet ratified. 
The IMF recommended that Singapore ratify the Palermo 
Convention on an expedited basis, urged Singapore to reassess 
whether a list approach is the most effective choice for 
Singapore, stating that an \"all serious crimes approach\" 
would be preferable to a limited list.  The Singapore 
government largely rebuffed the suggestion, saying that FATF 
recognizes the list approach.  However, Singapore said it 
will reconsider its list in light of the revised 40 
recommendations. (Comment:  As noted in Reftel, Singapore is 
working internally on a longer list, consistent with the 
categories of predicate offenses included in the Revised 40 
recommendations.  End comment.) 
 
Other Areas for Work 
-------------------- 
 
7. (U) The assessment team also made suggestions in other 
areas: 
 
 
--  Extradition.  The IMF recommended that Singapore should 
act to make extradition for money laundering available to a 
wider range of countries. 
 
--  Confiscation and Seizure.  The IMF said that while 
adequate powers exist to restrain and freeze assets, specific 
provisions addressing identification and tracing are needed. 
In reply, Singapore said it would review and update the 
current overall scheme for confiscation and seizure. 
 
--  Asset Sharing.  Noting that a treaty relationship may be 
needed for asset sharing, the assessment recommends that 
Singapore consider a formal mechanism for sharing confiscated 
property and also consider extending beyond terrorism 
financing a forfeiture scheme based upon civil law. 
 
--  Wire transfers.  The assessment team said customer 
identification measures for wire transfers need to be put in 
place, and recommended that Singapore impose such a 
requirement within the time frame set forth under FATF 
Special Recommendation VII. In reply, Singapore said 
financial institutions will be required to obtain full 
originator information within the timeframe set out in FATF. 
 
 
8. (U) Finally, the IMF recommended that the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore (MAS) make the provisions of its AML 
regulations more detailed and direct, supplementing current 
statements of principle with firm provisions and explicit 
guidance.  For example, the IMF said MAS should make more 
explicit its regulatory Notices regarding the conduct of 
transactions with those failing to provide complete 
documentation of identity, and make more explicit the duty to 
identify persons authorized to operate accounts in the names 
of legal entities.   MAS should also include in the Notices 
requirements that financial institutions have adequate 
screening procedures to ensure high standards when hiring 
employees.  Replying, Singapore said that it believes that 
the strong compliance culture of Singapore financial 
institutions is evidence of the effectiveness of its policy 
of issuing principles-based Notices, supplemented by thorough 
inspections and follow-up. 
LAVIN 
"
"21697","10/18/2004 7:17","04SINGAPORE3001","Embassy Singapore","CONFIDENTIAL","02SINGAPORE4218","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SINGAPORE 003001 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/18/2014 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, PHUM, SN 
SUBJECT: SINGAPORE\'S OPPOSITION 
 
REF: 02 SINGAPORE 4218 
 
Classified By: Amb. Franklin L. Lavin, Reasons 1.4 (b)(d) 
 
1. (C) Summary and Comment: Singapore\'s political opposition 
is disunited, dispirited, and incapable of offering a 
credible alternative to the ruling People\'s Action Party 
(PAP).  Along with the internal problems and institutional 
obstacles that have stunted its development, the opposition 
has also been consistently outmaneuvered by the PAP\'s 
pragmatism, which has made it difficult to develop a coherent 
ideological critique of its policies.  There are few rewards 
for joining the opposition and the PAP has successfully 
co-opted some of its brightest critics.  While the PAP has 
the ineffective opposition it wants, Singapore\'s sterile 
political culture has also robbed it of the risk-taking, 
creativity and entrepreneurship that the PAP recognizes 
Singapore will need if it is to continue to thrive.  End 
Summary and Comment. 
 
The Few, the Unhappy Few 
------------------------ 
 
2. (C) Singapore\'s political opposition is disunited, 
dispirited, and incapable of offering a credible alternative 
to the ruling People Action Party (PAP), which has utterly 
dominated the political scene for almost four decades.  Along 
with a host of minor parties, there are four main opposition 
parties: the Workers\' Party, the Singapore People\'s Party, 
the National Solidarity Party, and the Singapore Democratic 
Party.  In the last general election in 2001, the opposition 
won 2 seats out of 84 and 25 percent of the popular vote in 
the districts it contested.  In fact, in most of the 
multi-member electoral districts, the opposition didn\'t field 
any candidates at all.  (Note: There are nine single member 
districts and 14 multi-member districts.  End Note.)  The 
opposition parties only contested 29 seats as part of a 
deliberate strategy of trying not to challenge the PAP\'s 
eventual victory.  The logic was that more people would be 
willing to vote for a select few opposition candidates if 
they were assured that the PAP would still be in power. 
 
3. (SBU) Opposition parties are small in size and have 
limited financial resources.  For example, the Workers\' Party 
has only about 500 members, according to its Chairman Sylvia 
Lim.  It has no permanent staff and must rely on volunteers, 
who cover a variety of issues and don\'t have the depth to 
specialize.  The party relies on dues (USD 2 per year), small 
donations, and the sale of its newspaper \"The Hammer.\" 
Despite its name, the Workers\' Party has limited contacts 
with Singapore\'s trade unions.  The National Trades Union 
Congress is closely allied with the PAP.  In fact, the NTUC 
website actually trumpets the \"benefits of symbiotic ties\" 
between the PAP and NTUC.  In December 2002, a union 
affiliated with the NTUC sacked and expelled a branch 
chairman because he had taken a leadership position in an 
opposition party (reftel).  Opposition parties have made 
little, if any, headway with other social organizations in 
Singapore. 
 
Who Will Take Up the Challenge? 
------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) The biggest challenge to the development of the 
opposition in Singapore is the PAP\'s highly successful track 
record.  It has consistently delivered peace, stability, and 
rapid economic growth for four decades, while avoiding 
corruption and mainly avoiding cronyism.  It maintains close 
contacts with all levels of Singapore society and seeks 
feedback -- on its terms -- on how government policies are 
working.  Besides active constituency contacts by MPs and 
other politicians, the PAP and the government also rely on a 
very extensive grassroots intelligence network which provides 
\"very complete, analytical and frank assessments of the 
public\'s thinking about government policies,\" according to a 
senior ethnic Malay leader.  Even without the checks that a 
vibrant press or opposition would provide, the PAP has also 
been able to avoid the pitfalls of corruption, which would 
tarnish its reputation.  Furthermore, in a small city state 
susceptible to external shocks and surrounded by much larger 
neighbors, few people are willing to trade the able and 
experienced hands of the PAP for the untested opposition. 
 
5. (C) Given its bleak prospects, what makes someone join the 
opposition?  Singapore People\'s Party MP Chiam See Tong 
observed that most members join because they have been hurt 
by some PAP policy.  Examples include people dissatisfied 
with the compensation awarded them for land expropriated by 
the government or those who have been forced to pay 
government fines.  (Comment: The PAP is sometimes derisively 
said to stand for \"Pay and Pay.\"  End Comment.)  Others, such 
as Sylvia Lim, find something intrinsically wrong with the 
PAP\'s domination of the political scene.  Academics and 
opposition figures note that university students are hardly 
bastions of idealism or critical views, though.  Most 
students are focused on launching their careers rather than 
on political protest.  The opposition doesn\'t seek power and 
doesn\'t consider itself a credible alternative to the PAP. 
Its goal is to serve as a modest check on the PAP\'s power, to 
prevent corruption. 
 
The Silent Treatment 
-------------------- 
 
6. (C) Limited coverage by the mass media, which carefully 
hews to the government line, frustrates opposition figures. 
The press occasionally runs an article noting opposition 
criticism of a government policy or an angry letter to the 
editor, but these are few and far between.  (Comment: The 
docile press even draws the scorn of some members of the 
elite.  One senior MFA official reportedly threatened to 
demote any official he found reading the Straits Times.  End 
Comment.)  Long time opposition stalwart Joshua Benjamin 
Jeyaretnam (\"JBJ\") told us that friends often ask him why he 
has been so quiet recently.  He tells them he has been 
active, but the media just doesn\'t cover it.  Due to this 
limited media coverage, the Workers\' Party sends its 
volunteers door to door to meet voters and its one MP holds 
weekly sessions with his constituents. 
 
Friendly Fire 
------------- 
 
7. (C) While the PAP is extremely disciplined and presents a 
common front to the outside, the opposition is divided and 
sometimes feckless.  As one opposition MP noted, they have 
too many leaders and not enough followers.  Some of the 
parties have authoritarian streaks and revolve around a 
single personality, several academics observed.  At the same 
time, the media is eager to jump on the foibles and missteps 
of the opposition.  Steve Chia, a young Non-Constituency MP 
(NMP) from the National Solidarity Party, was publicly 
embarrassed last December after his wife revealed that he had 
taken photographs of their maid topless. 
 
8. (C) The PAP prevails by its pragmatism and ruthless 
pouncing on misstatements by opposition members by suing them 
for defamation.  This tactic has forced several figures into 
bankruptcy and prevented them from running for public office. 
 For example, during the 2001 election, opposition figure Dr. 
Chee Soon Juan followed then Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong 
around at campaign events using a bullhorn to ask him about 
an alleged $17 billion loan to Indonesia.  The courts 
subsequently ruled he defamed Goh.  Damages haven\'t been 
awarded yet as Chee has drawn out the judicial process -- he 
missed one hearing scheduled some six months in advance 
because he reportedly was visiting relatives in Taiwan. 
 
Ideology?  Not in Singapore 
--------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) A unique aspect of the Singapore political system is 
the almost complete absence of ideology.  Seemingly 
controversial issues such as free trade, the death penalty, 
and military service are not issues here.  Rational 
pragmatism reigns supreme and the PAP has done a masterful 
job of adopting any ideas or policies that it thinks will 
work for Singapore, even if the ideas come from the 
opposition.  MP Chiam See Tong told us he spent years pushing 
for smaller class sizes in schools and longer compulsory 
education, which the PAP eventually adopted without 
attributing it to Chiam.  This environment has made it 
difficult for the opposition to launch any sustained 
critiques of government policy and has created a parallel 
lack of ideology in the opposition itself. 
 
Taboo Subjects 
-------------- 
 
10. (C) Even though Singaporean society is an amalgam of 
Chinese, Malay and Indian groups, ethnic and religious 
cleavages have not been used to foment political activity. 
The PAP has worked hard to prevent this possibility from 
becoming a reality.  Citing race riots in Singapore in the 
1960\'s, the PAP has decreed any political discussion of race 
or religion to be out of bounds, or \"OB\" in Singapore\'s 
political parlance.  For example, in August, PM Lee Hsien 
Long announced an easing of the requirement for police 
permits for indoor gatherings, unless they touched on 
sensitive issues such as race and religion.  The PAP uses 
government housing policy to discourage the development of 
minority districts by setting racial quotas for each block of 
apartments. 
 
Stacking the Deck 
----------------- 
 
11. (C) The PAP makes full use of the powers of incumbency to 
hamper the opposition.  In 2001, it called a snap election 
with only 16 days notice and at the same time announced a new 
electoral map which had been extensively gerrymandered.  The 
PAP has also consolidated most single member districts -- the 
opposition has had some success in the past in knocking off 
weak individual PAP candidates -- into five- or six-member 
Group Representative Constituencies (GRCs).  (Note: Parties 
have to field teams of five or six candidates, which is much 
more difficult for the opposition.  The PAP justifies the 
GRCs on the grounds that they promote minority participation 
in parliament since every GRC slate must include at least one 
ethnic Malay or Indian.  End Note.)  As noted above, the 
ruling party also keeps a close hold on the media and uses 
defamation suits to batter opposition members.  The PAP uses 
an array of carrots and sticks for the voters.  The PAP has 
offered subsidized housing upgrades to opposition wards that 
switched to the PAP and threatened to leave new subway stops 
in opposition districts closed. 
 
If You Can\'t Beat Them ... 
-------------------------- 
 
12. (C) The PAP has co-opted some of the government\'s best 
and brightest critics, using an array of scholarships, 
positions and sinecures at its disposal.  For example, 
Raymond Lim founded the Roundtable, a civic policy discussion 
group.  The PAP later recruited him to run for parliament in 
2001 and he is now the Acting Second Minister for Finance and 
Second Minister of State for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 An opposition figure commented that the PAP\'s successful 
co-optation strategy has fomented mistrust in the opposition 
camp by causing them to suspect each other\'s motives.  The 
PAP has also used Non-Constituency MPs (NMPs) to bring in 
fresh views and specialized talent into the parliament. 
(Note: NMPs are chosen by a special government committee, 
serve for two and a half years and have restricted voting 
rights.  End Note.)  The NMPs give representation to various 
social groups in Singapore and can critique government 
policies.  They also have the effect of crowding out the 
elected opposition by taking on some of its legitimate role 
in the political process. 
 
Creativity by Fiat 
------------------ 
 
13. (C) Recognition is growing here that Singapore\'s 
continued economic competitiveness and prosperity will be 
hampered by its lack of risk-taking entrepreneurs and 
creative industries.  At an intellectual level, the PAP 
recognizes this is a problem.  It is unclear, however, if it 
will loosen its tight grip on the levers of economic and 
political control to create a more hospitable environment for 
creativity.  On the one hand, PM Lee has publicly been 
exhorting Singaporeans to be more daring and to speak up.  On 
the other, government officials express their disdain for the 
\"messy\" style of democracy in the West or Taiwan.  At the 
same time, PM Lee has said the government will not subsidize 
start-up ventures (which have little access to venture 
capital much less bank financing), while the government 
investment holding company, Temasek, continues to use its 
vast financial resources to gobble up major Singaporean 
companies.  (Note: Temasek is run by Ho Ching, wife of PM 
Lee.  End Note.) 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
14. (C) In contrast to the PAP\'s phalanx of bright ministers 
and MPs, the opposition lacks dynamic figures adept at 
working the system or winning over public opinion. 
Opposition figures appear more interested in bemoaning their 
fate than planning how to build viable organizations. 
Furthermore, the opposition makes careless mistakes with the 
facts and uses tactics that backfire badly.  There are 
undercurrents of dissatisfaction in Singaporean society -- 
such as among older workers concerned about job security. 
However, they haven\'t reached a critical level beyond the 
PAP\'s ability to handle or that the opposition could exploit. 
 
15. (C) Without a charismatic leader to galvanize the 
opposition or a sustained economic slump that would shake 
people\'s trust in the PAP, the opposition is unlikely to make 
progress toward becoming a credible alternative.  Entering 
opposition politics offers few rewards and many possible 
problems.  One opposition figure compared Singapore to the 
movie The Matrix -- though everything looks fine on the 
surface, serious problems lurk beneath.  The PAP has exactly 
the isolated and ineffective opposition that it wants.  What 
the PAP fails to grasp, however, is that Singapore\'s lack of 
risk-taking and its dearth of creativity and entrepreneurship 
are in fact the logical results of its sterile political 
culture. 
LAVIN 
"
"21858","10/21/2004 5:46","04SINGAPORE3027","Embassy Singapore","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SINGAPORE 003027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, IN, SN 
SUBJECT: INDIAN ECONOMY: THE VIEW FROM SINGAPORE 
 
 
1. Summary.  On October 15, 2004 visiting Economic Officer 
Brian Briscombe  -- who was wrapping up a week-long trip to 
Delhi, Mumbai and Hyderabad -- and embassy officers held a 
series of meetings with private sector analysts to discuss 
the Indian economy.  While all expressed optimism about 
India,s future prospects, they also acknowledged serious 
problems, near-term resolution of which will be necessary if 
India is to continue to grow at its current pace.  The 
Singapore-based analysts identified the financial system, the 
government deficit, and the lack of political commitment to 
free market economics as key obstacles to India,s future 
economic growth.  Singapore\'s trade with India grew 54 
percent in the first half of this year -- faster than with 
any other partner -- and the Singapore government is taking 
an active approach to boosting trade and investment links. 
End summary. 
 
Liberalization 
-------------- 
 
2.  All of the analysts agreed that the GOI needs to further 
liberalize its trade and investment regimes in order to 
maintain the country,s current high rate of growth. 
According to Sailesh Jha of Credit Suisse-First Boston, India 
is \"early cycle,\" i.e., it is currently experiencing the 
burst of growth common after the initial introduction of 
broad based liberalization (similar, he said, to the 
situation in Southeast Asia in the early to mid-1990s), but 
it will need to do much more to make high growth rates 
sustainable.  He noted that average tariff rates are still 
quite high, as is government involvement in the economy. 
While some technocrats recognize that further liberalization 
is necessary, politics make adoption and implementation of 
further reforms difficult. Dominique Dwor-Frecaut of 
Barclay,s Capital said that no one in India is actively 
advocating freer markets or more incentives to attract 
foreign direct investment, because of political 
sensitivities.  While liberalization will continue, it 
remains a very slow process, she said.  Arjuna Mahendran, 
Chief Economist and Strategist, Credit Suisse, echoed 
Dwor-Frecaut\'s sentiments when comparing China\'s and India\'s 
respective economic performance.  He noted that, if faced 
with a choice, Indians would prefer to maintain their current 
political institutions (and by extension their \"more 
democratic way of life\") than to \"sacrifice\" these in pursuit 
of more rapid and consistent economic growth (as in the case 
of China). 
 
3.  Dwor-Frecaut noted that the rapid rise in importance of 
India\'s services sector is not due only to the competitive 
advantage of its skilled workforce and English language 
ability, but also because the services sector developed too 
quickly for bureaucrats to stifle it through over-regulation, 
as they did with manufacturing.  She identified the country\'s 
labor laws in particular as a critical area for reform in 
order to attract FDI in a broader range of sectors.  Jha said 
that India will need to develop its manufacturing sector to 
create needed jobs, and argued that the idea that India can 
dominate services and leave manufacturing to China is wrong. 
China will become increasingly competitive with India on 
services, he said, as English language skills there continue 
to improve, and India can compete on manufacturing: it has 
many of the managerial and technical skills that are 
increasingly scarce in China. 
 
The Financial System 
-------------------- 
 
4.  All of our interlocutors agreed that the financial sector 
will constrain future growth.  State-owned commercial banks 
prefer to invest in government debt or government-owned 
corporations rather than lend to domestic businesses. 
Sailesh Jha argued that so far, this crowding out of domestic 
investment has not been a serious problem as domestic firms 
do have access to external capital sources, although this 
could change if global demand for emerging market debt dries 
up.  Dwor-Frecaut noted, however, that while larger firms 
have the option to seek external financing, smaller firms do 
not.  As a result of this lack of access to credit and 
stifling government regulations, small domestic investors are 
being forced into the large informal sector.  She argued that 
the GOI will not be able to make needed reforms and privatize 
the state-owned commercial banks until the government is less 
dependent on the banks to finance its deficit. 
 
5.  Van Anantha-Nageswaran of the Libran Fund was more 
upbeat.  He argued that while balance sheets are currently 
too \"healthy\" for the public sector banks to be shaken out of 
their complacency and encouraged to undertake risk-base 
lending to the private sector, private banks are starting to 
gain some market share and are doing some risk-based lending 
to domestic business themselves.  While he said the 
government could be doing more to promote the emergence of 
private banks, it is happening slowly on its own, injecting a 
bit more competition into the financial system.  This trend 
is still nascent, he said, but it could ultimately force 
public banks to rethink their way of operating. 
 
The Fiscal Deficit 
------------------ 
 
6.  None of the analysts were particularly alarmed about the 
budget deficit, although they do consider it a vulnerability 
for the Indian economy in the medium term.  Jha said that in 
the short term (12-18 months) it is \"irrelevant,\" because it 
is not impinging on the liquidity of the financial system or 
pushing up interest rates.  Both Jha and Anantha-Nageswaran 
noted that because the mix of government debt is changing -- 
the GOI relies increasingly on domestically-issued debt and 
continues to be able to refinance at low interest rates -- 
there is little chance of an external crisis.  Jha and 
Anantha-Nageswaran also said that the government,s 
expectations of a shrinking deficit were somewhat 
unrealistic.  Jha said that Delhi,s hope of widening the tax 
base in the services sector would be difficult to implement, 
and Anantha-Nageswaran argued that there had been little 
improvement in the government,s political will to increase 
tax collection, with most gains in revenue coming from 
administrative efficiencies rather than policy changes. 
 
7.  Jha said that the deficit becomes more worrying over the 
medium term; if inflation continues to pick up and there is 
no monetary tightening by the government, the deficit could 
pose a risk to growth.  He argued, however, that the 
government can always spend its considerable reserves in a 
cash crunch.  Anantha-Nageswaran emphasized that the quality 
rather than the quantity of the deficit is worrisome; if the 
GOI was spending on infrastructure and education, the deficit 
would be less worrisome because it would contribute to growth 
and hopefully a virtuous cycle which would allow India to 
grow out of the deficit.  Instead, India,s infrastructure is 
famously poor, and the government is spending not on 
infrastructure and other capital investments, but on the 
administrative costs of maintaining a large bureaucracy. 
P.K. Basu, Managing Director, Robust Economic Analysis, 
similarly lamented the inadequate level of investment in 
infrastructure, noting that one of the Indian economy\'s 
brightest stars -- the software industry centered around 
Bangalore -- has been so successful in part because it has 
limited infrastructure investment needs beyond office space, 
electricity and optical fiber.  Other industries, he 
stressed, are not so lucky. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  Although they recognize the many challenges for India\'s 
economic development, all of the analysts we spoke to believe 
that India will continue to deliver a high growth story. 
Their enthusiasm is shared by the Singaporean business 
community and the government, who hope to capitalize on 
India\'s growth and expanding ties to East Asia.  India has 
become Singapore\'s fastest growing trading partner, with 
two-way trade increasing by 54 percent in the first half of 
the year.  In typical Singaporean fashion, the GOS is leaving 
little to chance, and is actively promoting economic links 
with India, in part to balance out its reliance on ties to 
the U.S. and China.  The GOS hopes to complete negotiations 
of the Singapore-India Comprehensive Economic Cooperation 
Agreement by next year, and Temasek, the GOS\'s investment 
holding company (run by Ho Ching, wife of Prime Minister Lee 
Hsien Loong), has become one of India\'s largest private 
equity investors, funneling close to $1 billion into the 
Indian economy in less than a year and opening its first 
office outside Singapore in Mumbai, according to recent press 
reports.  Not content to be a silent partner, Singapore also 
offers the GOI plenty of advice. Singapore\'s Trade and 
Industry Minister, for example,  who is in New Delhi this 
week to attend the India ASEAN Business Summit, made a speech 
on October 20 urging India to conclude FTAs with ASEAN 
countries to quicken its integration with Southeast Asia, and 
said that the GOI needs to remove non-tariff barriers, adopt 
mutual recognition of standards and investment guarantee 
pacts, and streamline new business registration procedures in 
order to encourage investment. 
 
 
LAVIN 
"
"22720","11/10/2004 10:09","04SINGAPORE3211","Embassy Singapore","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SINGAPORE 003211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, PGOV, CH, SN 
SUBJECT: SINGAPORE-BASED EXPERTS WEIGH IN ON THE ASIAN 
ECONOMY 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Southeast Asia is better positioned than 
in recent memory to face the challenges presented by a 
slowdown in the global economy, especially in China, 
according to several Singapore-based economists and financial 
analysts.  These economies inevitably will feel the pain of a 
downturn, especially a slump in electronics exports, but 
ongoing restructuring and outsourcing, particularly in 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, will help mitigate the risks 
involved.  All of the analysts were skeptical about the 
sustainability of China\'s high growth, but differed on how 
serious its economic problems were.  The most pessimistic 
argued that China\'s \"hard landing,\" caused by over-investment 
and the bursting of several sectoral bubbles, would result in 
no more than 3 to 5 percent GDP growth in 2005.  Southeast 
Asia\'s substantial foreign exchange reserves would help 
cushion the impact of China\'s economic woes.  A hard landing 
might actually benefit Southeast Asia, one analyst argued, as 
global investors shifted their focus back to the region as a 
place better equipped to absorb investment.  That said, 
Southeast Asian economies, largely restructured since the 
1997 financial crisis, remain vulnerable to the risks of 
overexposure to China.  Of particular concern is that China 
continues to follow the more volatile pre-1997 growth model 
discarded by its neighbors.  One analyst warned that faced 
with a severe slowdown, China might no longer behave as 
\"graciously\" with its neighbors as it is now when its economy 
is still in an upturn.  End summary. 
 
2.  (U) Post took advantage of recent visits by a number of 
INR analysts to organize a conference entitled, \"The Asian 
Economy:  Internal Changes, External Challenges.\"  The 
all-day conference brought together a number of 
Singapore-based Asia-watchers who spoke on topics ranging 
from how global trends are affecting Asia to the impact of 
Asian economic trends on the global economy and, in 
particular, China\'s role in the region. 
 
The Global Economic Slowdown: Not all News is Bad for Asia 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
3.  (U) Asia\'s trading nations face new challenges due to a 
convergence and tightening of a number of variables that 
underpin the global economy.  Manu Bhaskaran (Head of 
Economic Research for Centennial Group Holdings) singled out 
a number of cyclical demand drivers at play in this scenario: 
 weakening demand among the OECD and China; a rise in global 
interest rates; a tightening fiscal policy in the U.S.; a 
sharp decline in global excess liquidity since 2000; an end 
to the housing boom in many economies; and rising oil prices. 
 Not surprisingly, Bhaskaran explained, most major economies 
were forecasting slower growth for 2005.  For Asian countries 
in particular, Bhaskaran predicted an increase in the 
frequency of economic shocks related to electronics exports 
resulting from the industry\'s shorter cycles, price 
volatility and slumping global demand. 
 
4.  (U) Not all the news is bad, however, Bhaskaran said. 
Structural positives also exist, most visibly in terms of 
global competitive pressures that require companies to 
restructure in order to increase returns.  Outsourcing, he 
argued, was still at an early stage, with far more relocation 
of production to come.  Regionally, he cited the reemergence, 
or \"returning to normal,\" of Southeast Asia -- particularly 
Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand  -- where economies have 
begun to grow again.  This has triggered a new investment 
cycle, particularly in infrastructure.  India\'s growing 
competitiveness in manufacturing was also an encouraging 
development in terms of this overall restructuring process, 
Bhaskaran said. 
 
Shifting Trade, Investment and Consumer Debt Patterns 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
5.  (SBU) China\'s rise as an economic powerhouse has changed 
the nature of Asia\'s economies.  Acknowledging that the 
movement of trade surpluses (with the U.S. and the EU) from 
the rest of Asia to China is an old story, beginning in Hong 
Kong as early as 1993, Clifford Tan (Director, Asia-Pacific 
Economic and Market Analysis, Citigroup) noted that this 
trend was having a significant impact on the region; all the 
major Asian economies were now running surpluses with China, 
the direct result of supplying the raw materials and 
semi-finished inputs that China\'s industries require.  Tan 
cited Japan, South Korea and Taiwan for having leveraged the 
China platform most effectively to advance their own growth. 
Japan, he said, was particularly successful, with Japanese 
companies achieving the world\'s highest rates of returns on 
their Chinese investments.  The resulting increase in cash 
flows were in turn fueling increased capital expenditures in 
Japan and further Japanese investments in the region. 
 
6.  (SBU) With the Asian Financial Crisis and its related sea 
of bad debts a thing of the past, cash was again flowing into 
Southeast Asia, observed Tan.  With so much attention focused 
on China, however, the resulting slack in corporate demand 
for domestic and intra-regional investment was being picked 
up by rising consumer demand instead.  This phenomenon, Tan 
said, was amplified by a \"dearth of ideas in corporate Asia\" 
about what to do with all the liquidity (except to reinvest 
it in China).  Manu Bhaskaran similarly noted the trend 
towards increasing consumer debt in Southeast Asia.  He saw 
this development as a double-edged sword, reflecting a degree 
of resiliency in these economies, but also the potential for 
a consumer debt crisis if the borrowing binge continued 
unabated, much as what happened in South Korea. 
 
China\'s Economy:  Careful With That Landing 
------------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) All of the conference\'s speakers were skeptical 
about the sustainability of China\'s high growth, but differed 
on how serious China\'s economic problems were.  Manu 
Bhasakaran questioned how China, with its \"hubris-generated\" 
growth, could avoid a hard landing (which he defined as a 
drop to 4-5 percent GDP growth).  It was too late for China\'s 
leaders to orchestrate a soft landing, he explained:  \"Bad 
lending has financed bad investment.\"  China\'s primarily 
supply-sided growth had fueled a number of sectoral bubbles 
that continued to feed off further excessive lending.  In the 
absence of sufficient data, Bhaskaran observed, it was 
difficult to predict when China\'s economy would slow, or how 
Chinese leaders would respond to inevitable social 
disruptions. 
 
8.  (SBU) PK Basu (Managing Director, Robust Economic 
Analysis) lambasted China\'s \"horrible\" growth model.  With 
asset growth exceeding 20 percent the past two years and 
non-performing loans (NPL) equivalent to 40 to 50 percent of 
GDP, Basu claimed that these levels far exceeded anything 
reached in Southeast Asia in the run-up to the 1997 financial 
crisis or in Japan.  The Chinese leadership\'s focus on the 
NPL problem offered a glimmer of hope, Basu contended, but 
the overall momentum and pervasiveness of NPLs in the economy 
would nonetheless be extremely difficult to slow down without 
harsh administrative measures.  The most bearish of the 
speakers, Basu forecasted a hard landing for China in 2005, 
with GDP growth of only 3 to 4 percent (note:  other speakers 
argued that China\'s economy was still performing well enough 
to achieve growth rates between 7 and 9 percent.)  Southeast 
Asia would not escape unscathed, Basu said, but healthy 
foreign exchange reserves would help cushion the blow (as 
they would in China).  Additionally, Southeast Asia stood to 
benefit from China\'s hard landing as global investors shifted 
their focus back to the region as a place better equipped to 
absorb investment. 
 
9.  (SBU) Clifford Tan said he was \"very concerned\" about the 
China growth model and that much of the economic \"street\" 
research on China was \"doggedly compromised,\" leaving 
important questions unanswered.  The situation was 
exacerbated, he explained, by the many international 
investment banks jockeying for China\'s IPO business and 
restrained in their criticism of Beijing.  Most Southeast 
Asian countries were forced to scramble for a new growth 
paradigm in the wake of the 1997 financial crisis, having 
been jolted into the realization that the old growth model 
was too risky in the long run, Tan explained.  China, on the 
other hand, continues to the adhere to this old model, 
grabbing growth-related low hanging fruits where it can. 
Whereas Southeast Asia was allowed to continue along this 
path for more than two decades, Tan admonished that the 
financial markets, having been burned so severely before, 
would not be so forgiving this time with China, perhaps 
giving China the \"thumbs down\" within another 5 years or 
less.  Tan said that Southeast Asia would feel considerable 
pain during this process given its increasing dependence on 
the Chinese economy as a driver for its own growth. 
 
10.  (SBU) Van Anantha-Nageswaran (President, Libran Fund) 
worried that strong China-led export growth in Southeast Asia 
was postponing needed economic reforms.  Yit Fan Wong 
(Managing Director, Country Risk Management, DBS Bank) argued 
that the impetus for economic reform in Southeast Asia -- 
company delistings, consolidations, better accounting, 
political reforms -- was not so much dampened by \"China 
exhuberance\" factors, as driven by the earlier experiences of 
the 1997 financial crisis.  The problem with absorbing excess 
cash flow, Wong said, was that Southeast Asian companies were 
still overly cautious, reluctant to borrow and more focused 
on cutting costs and increasing productivity.  Set against 
this backdrop, Wong explained, China had been very careless 
about its investment returns and its costs were rising.  With 
a 1997-style crisis looming in China, Southeast Asian 
countries might reverse direction and begin moving away from 
closer proximity to China\'s economic orbit over the next 
three to five years.  Under this scenario, Wong advised, 
China might no longer behave as \"graciously\" with its 
neighbors as it is now when its economy is still in an 
upturn.  This could translate into very different economic 
and political relations with other countries in the region. 
LAVIN 
"
"23115","11/22/2004 9:37","04SINGAPORE3294","Embassy Singapore","CONFIDENTIAL","04SINGAPORE3027","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SINGAPORE 003294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, ETRD, SN, IN, EAIR 
SUBJECT: SINGAPORE PLAYS THE INDIA CARD 
 
REF: A. SINGAPORE 3027 
 
     B. STATE 171140 
 
Classified By: Amb. Franklin L. Lavin, Reasons 1.4(b)(d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: Singapore is actively cultivating a closer 
political, military, and economic relationship with India. 
The GOS values India\'s \"strategic weight\" and hopes it can 
balance China\'s rising influence in the region.  Singapore\'s 
defense cooperation with India has taken off this year, with 
the first-ever joint air exercise; new army exercises are 
planned for next year.  Both countries are on the verge of 
signing a \"Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement,\" 
covering investment, services, and trade.  Bilateral trade 
and investment have also been growing rapidly in the last 
several years and more Indian firms are using Singapore as a 
regional base.  Singapore has had temporary bouts of \"India 
fever\" before, but this time the substance matches the 
rhetoric.  End Summary. 
 
Making Friends 
-------------- 
 
2. (C) Singapore is actively cultivating a closer political, 
military, and economic relationship with India, which will 
serve a number of different goals.  As a small country with 
large neighbors, Singapore tries to draw in outside powers 
(such as the U.S.) to give them a stake in Singapore\'s 
future.  It also seeks a broad range of defense contacts and 
exchange opportunities for its armed forces and is especially 
interested in gaining access to training grounds given 
Singapore\'s limited territory.  For its economic development, 
Singapore can not rely on its small domestic market and has 
to gain and secure access to foreign markets for trade and 
investment.  It also wants to bolster its role as a regional 
hub for trade, transport, and financial services.  From the 
Singapore perspective, India offers a potential strategic 
counter-balance to growing Chinese influence in Southeast 
Asia, a defense partner, a large potential trade and 
investment market, and a user of Singapore\'s trade and 
financial services. 
 
(Another) Strategic Partner 
--------------------------- 
 
3. (C) India is valued for its \"considerable strategic 
weight,\" according to Minister of Defense Teo Chee Hean.  One 
MFA official noted that Singapore hopes India can contribute 
to regional peace and stability and use its weight to balance 
China\'s growing economic and political clout in the region. 
Singapore has also encouraged its ASEAN partners to look to 
India as a source of \"geopolitical balance\" for Southeast 
Asia and it took the lead in bringing India into the ASEAN 
Regional Forum (ARF).  The GOS is also concerned about 
China\'s ability to dominate future regional groupings, such 
as the proposed East Asia Community, and would prefer to 
expand the membership to include India, among others.  In 
addition to its own bilateral FTA (see para 8 below), 
Singapore is an enthusiastic supporter of the ASEAN-India FTA. 
 
Accelerating Links 
------------------ 
 
4. (SBU) Singapore\'s interest in India dates back to the 
early 1990\'s, according to academic and MFA contacts.  During 
the Cold War, bilateral ties were limited due to India\'s 
close ties with the Soviet Union and its support for 
Vietnam\'s occupation of Cambodia, which ASEAN opposed.  After 
those impediments were removed, Singapore-India relations 
started to improve.  In 1994, then Prime Minister Goh Chok 
Tong visited India, the first of five visits over ten years. 
Indian PM Narasimha Rao returned the favor in 1994 and 
announced India\'s growing interest in Southeast Asia in his 
\"Look East\" policy.  After that fast start, however, there 
was little progress on deepening ties until the last two 
years. 
 
Defense Ties Take Off 
--------------------- 
 
5. (C) In 2003, India and Singapore signed a Defense 
Cooperation Agreement to facilitate personnel exchanges, 
visits, and training exercises.  Both armed forces have 
conducted joint naval exercises for the last decade, but the 
scope of cooperation has expanded rapidly this year.  In 
October, the Singapore Air Force (RSAF) held its first air 
exercise with India.  Dubbed Sindex-04, the twenty day 
exercise in Gwalior, India included six F-16 C/D jets from 
Singapore and Su-30s, Mirage 2000s, Mig-29s and Mig-27s from 
India.  Chief of Staff (Air Staff) BG Ng Chee Khern told the 
Embassy that Sindex-04 was the foundation for a long-term 
relationship with India.  The Indian Air Force plans to 
earmark an air base in Jaipur, in northern India, for the 
RSAF to carry out flight training and exercises but it would 
not be a permanent facility for the RSAF, according to a 
press report. 
 
6. (C) During an October visit to India, Deputy Prime 
Minister Tony Tan announced that the two armed forces would 
conduct their first army exercises in India early next year. 
Singapore is always interested in training opportunities in 
other countries, noted one MFA official.  India\'s Deputy High 
Commissioner, Ravi Bangar, told us that India welcomes the 
chance to practice in different environments and with 
different types of equipment to promote inter-operability. 
He added that there would be more ship visits by Indian naval 
vessels and a joint naval exercise next year in the South 
China Sea. 
 
Law Enforcement 
--------------- 
 
7. (C) India and Singapore established a joint working group 
on terrorism and organized crime in 2003 (chaired at the 
PermSec level), according to Bangar.  Furthermore, both sides 
are close to signing a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty on 
criminal cases.  Bangar said the negotiations went very 
smoothly with near completion in only three rounds of talks. 
(Comment: The two sides share a common legal heritage since 
they were both UK colonies and, at one time, Singapore was 
administered from India.  This undoubtedly helped the talks 
and it is likely that the treaty is not as comprehensive as 
the one we are negotiating with Singapore.  India was 
comfortable with Singapore\'s list-based approach to limiting 
crimes covered under the agreement, said Bangar.  End 
Comment.) 
 
Trade Agreement Coming Soon 
--------------------------- 
 
8. (C) In 2002, Singapore proposed an FTA with India and last 
year the two sides initiated negotiations for a 
\"Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement\" (CECA), which 
covers investment and services in addition to trade.  After 
ten rounds of talks, the press reports, they expect to sign 
the final agreement in the near future.  (Note: Singapore 
Minister for Trade and Industry Lim Hng Kiang recently told 
the Ambassador they were not so close, commenting completion 
could take another six months.  End Note.)  The remaining 
stumbling block is the protection of foreign investment in 
India.  An MFA official complained that India\'s tariffs were 
still too high and it was overly protective of its petroleum 
sector, but these were not deal breakers.  Given Singapore\'s 
role as a major transshipment point, both sides eventually 
agreed that goods shipped from Singapore would have to have 
at least 40-percent value added to qualify for special 
treatment. 
 
Growing Trade and Investment Ties 
--------------------------------- 
 
9. (U) Bilateral trade and investment have grown rapidly in 
the last several years, with India now Singapore\'s 12th 
largest trading partner.  In 1993, bilateral trade was only 
USD 1.6 billion.  In 2003, it reached USD 4.5 billion and 
grew 16.2 percent compared with 2002.  Through September, 
this year\'s bilateral trade has already exceeded the total 
for all of 2003.  Singapore has consistently run a trade 
surplus with India (USD 1.6 billion in 2003), with top export 
items overwhelmingly high-tech related. 
 
10. (C) With USD 1.3 billion in investments, Singapore 
reportedly is one of India\'s larger foreign investors. 
During a November visit to Singapore, GOI Trade Minister 
Kamal Nath said he expected an additional USD 2 billion in 
investment by Singapore next year in technology, 
manufacturing, financial services, and aviation.  As reported 
in Ref A, Temasek Holdings has made a big splash in the India 
market, especially in the past year.  The GOS-owned 
investment arm, run by Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong\'s wife 
Ho Ching, has plowed more than USD 500 million into Indian 
firms, according to press reports.  It has taken minority 
stakes in banks, pharmaceutical firms, a hospital chain, and 
a major rice exporter.  Manish Kejriwal, managing director of 
Temasek\'s India office said they were concentrating on 
companies and sectors that would be proxies for the Indian 
economy and those companies that could leverage India\'s 
competitive advantages.  Given its political links, Temasek\'s 
aggressive move into the Indian market may be intended to 
encourage more risk-averse investors to follow.  Smaller 
firms have been put off by India\'s high tariffs and red tape 
and have usually looked to China first. 
Gateway to SE Asia 
------------------ 
 
11. (U) Singapore is marketing itself as a gateway to 
Southeast Asia and beyond for Indian firms, pointing to its 
financial and professional services, sound legal environment, 
use of English, support network for expatriates, and 
convenient air links.  Emblematic of this rapidly increasing 
interdependence, a new USD 100 million undersea fiber-optic 
link between Singapore and Chennai came on-line November 3, 
increasing Singapore\'s total connectivity to India by 60 
percent, according to press reports, and strengthening its 
position as an Asia-Pacific telecoms hub. 
 
12. (U) Some 1,500 Indian firms are operating in Singapore, 
up from 300 in 2001.  Most of the firms are relatively small 
operations and the expat Indian business community has not 
coalesced to form its own chamber of commerce.  Despite 
Singapore\'s ethnic Indian community, firms from India do not 
have significant business interactions with them, noted 
Bangar.  The firms from India deal more frequently with 
ethnic Chinese Singaporeans or other multinationals.  There 
are approximately 70,000 Indian nationals working in 
Singapore.  While the majority are in blue collar positions, 
perhaps 30-40 percent are professionals.  Singapore is thus 
an important source of remittances for India.  India High 
Commission First Secretary C. Rajendiran noted that more 
Indian banks are entering the Singapore market aggressively 
to provide remittance services, which in the past they 
ignored. 
 
13. (U) Still other indicators show diversifying ties.  In 
August, Meghmani Organics became the first Indian firm to 
list on the Singapore stock exchange.  It raised USD 16.5 
million and the offer was over-subscribed three times. 
Several other firms are reportedly looking at raising capital 
through Singapore Depository Receipts.  The Delhi Public 
School opened a branch school in Singapore in April 2004 to 
cater to children of Indian professionals.  It has 900 slots 
and follows in the footsteps of the Indian Central School 
established in 2002, which already has 700 students. 
 
14. (U) Air links have also been growing, despite the lack of 
an open skies agreement.  Singapore International Airways 
(SIA) has increased its service to India from 23 flights a 
week in 2003 to 38 in 2004.  It now has daily flights to 
Chennai and New Delhi, 12 flights a week to Mumbai, and three 
a week to Bangalore, Calcutta, and Amritsar.  (This still 
falls short of its level of service to China.  For example, 
SIA has five daily flights to Guangzhou and Hong Kong, as 
well as three daily flights to Shenzhen and Shanghai.) 
Singapore is also a growing destination for tourists from 
India.  Approximately 400,000 Indian tourists visit every 
year.  Although their average stay is relatively short, they 
are some of the highest per capita spenders, Bangar claimed. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
15. (C) Singapore has had bouts of \"India fever\" before, 
which faded when the substance failed to match the rhetoric. 
In the last two years, however, Singapore and India have made 
concrete progress in deepening their relationship -- in 
defense cooperation, investment, and trade.  The GOS is 
sending a concerted message that India is both wanted and 
needed in Southeast Asia to balance the rising influence of 
China and to further expand regional economic prosperity.  A 
more robust Singapore-India relationship also serves USG 
interests.  It will demonstrate to ASEAN members that India 
is a credible alternative economic and defense partner that 
they can turn to in the face of China\'s growing power. 
LAVIN 
"