
"23944","12/13/2004 0:10","04TRIPOLI27","Embassy Tripoli","CONFIDENTIAL","","O 130010Z DEC 04
FM USLO TRIPOLI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0028
INFO AMEMBASSY ALGIERS IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY CAIRO IMMEDIATE 
EU MEMBER STATES
AMEMBASSY RABAT IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY SOFIA IMMEDIATE 
USLO TRIPOLI 
AMEMBASSY TUNIS IMMEDIATE 
","C O N F I D E N T I A L TRIPOLI 000027 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  12/12/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, BU, LY, XA, XF, XI 
SUBJECT: (C) BULGARIAN MEDICS UPDATE 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Gregory L. Berry, Chief of Mission, USLO, 
Tripoli. REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
 
1. (C) Status of Medics:  The five Bulgarian medics sentenced to 
death for infecting over 400 Libyan children with HIV-tainted 
blood in a Benghazi hospital are being kept relatively secluded, 
the Bulgarian Embassy\'s Dimitar Dimitrov told us December 7. 
Dimitrov personally speculates this is because members of a 
Committee on Prison Reform (possibly part of a Libyan initiative 
to review internal procedures in a number of areas, including 
prisons) have been visiting the prison and the prison 
authorities do not want committee members to have contact with 
the Bulgarians.  Libyan authorities turned Dimitrov away on 
December 7 when he tried to visit the medics; in the past, 
prison authorities had allowed Dimitrov to visit more or less 
whenever he wished.  Meanwhile, the Palestinian doctor who also 
received the death sentence has been moved to newer area of the 
Abu Salim Prison where all six are being held.  Libyan 
authorities allowed his family (four sisters and mother) to 
visit him within the past few days; his mother had not seen him 
for some time, since a prison guard insulted her and she refused 
to return to the prison. 
 
2.  (C) State of Appeal: The medics\' appeal case is now pending 
with the Neeaba Office (which means \"prosecution\"), a 
consultative body within the Supreme Court that reviews all the 
evidence for a trial and appeal, examines the case profile, and 
prepares a report that is presented to judges for review, 
Dimitrov reported. Libyan prosecutors are still protesting the 
acquittal of one of the Bulgarians, a doctor who is married to 
one of the convicted medics.  According to Dimitrov, the 
acquitted doctor could be asked to return to prison, which could 
cause serious problems since he is currently living in the 
Bulgarian Embassy in Tripoli.  (Note:  The doctor remains in 
Tripoli because of his wife, and because Libyan authorities have 
refused to grant him an exit visa to leave Libya pending the 
outcome of the appeal.  End note.) 
 
3.  (C) Bulgarian Embassy Reaction to Recent Libyan Public 
Statements:  The Bulgarian government was surprised by the 
December 5 news reports of Libyan FM Shalgam\'s statement that 
Libya would review the death penalty for the Bulgarian medics if 
Bulgaria provides compensation to the victim\'s families, 
Dimitrov said.  He reiterated Bulgaria\'s position that payment 
of compensation is not an option, since Bulgaria will not agree 
to deal directly with the families, and because it is an 
admission of guilt.  The Bulgarians view Qadhafi son Saif 
al-Islam\'s statement in a December 9 New York Times article that 
\"no one is going to execute anyone\" as unofficial. 
 
4.  (C) Libyan Demands to EU:  Ramadan Al Fituri, head of the 
association representing the families of the 426 HIV-infected 
children, presented settlement demands to the European 
Commission representatives currently visiting Libya.  According 
to Dimitrov, the families want the Bulgarian government to build 
a hospital and provide compensation, medical care and full 
support for the children for the rest of their lives.  Dimitrov 
says the Bulgarian government did not directly receive a copy of 
the letter. 
 
 
BERRY 
"
"24024","12/14/2004 9:49","04TRIPOLI28","Embassy Tripoli","CONFIDENTIAL","04TRIPOLI26","O 140949Z DEC 04
FM USLO TRIPOLI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0029
INFO AMEMBASSY ALGIERS IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY CAIRO IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY LONDON IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY PARIS IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY RABAT IMMEDIATE 
USLO TRIPOLI 
AMEMBASSY TUNIS IMMEDIATE 
","C O N F I D E N T I A L TRIPOLI 000028 
 
 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR ZEYA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  12/12/2014 
TAGS: EPET, ECON, PREL, LY 
SUBJECT: (C) U.S. OIL COMPANIES PERSEVERE IN LIBYA 
 
REF: TRIPOLI 0026 
 
 
1. (C)  Oasis/Oxy Update:  The oil majors were in Tripoli the 
week of December 6 for yet another Libyan economic conference 
(reftel).  The former Oasis partners (Marathon, Amerada Hess, 
ConocoPhillips) are continuing their negotiations with the NOC 
for re-entry into the Libyan oil market, as is Occidental. 
ConocoPhillips told us that they have initialed an agreement 
with the Libyans for re-entry to the Libyan oil market based on 
the arrangement they had before pulling out in 1986.  Conoco 
characterized the agreement as \"not good,\" but said the company 
views it as \"dues-paying\" in order to return to the Libyan 
market.  Occidental, on the other hand, seems to be hanging 
tougher with the Libyans.  In a November meeting in Libya, 
Occidental CEO Ray Irani told Libyan PM Shukri Ghanem that the 
agreement proposed by the Libyans would cost Occidental USD 200 
million, something he could not justify to the shareholders. 
Occidental has offered an alternative to the Libyans; although 
it has received no response so far, Oxy seems willing to wait it 
out for a while.  Marathon, like ConocoPhillips, appears more 
willing to pay a price for re-entry into the Libyan oil market. 
 
2. (C)  EPSA IV Update:  Meanwhile, American and non-American 
oil companies are awaiting the results of the first EPSA IV bid 
round.  Winning bids are supposed to be announced on January 19, 
but there are rumors that the announcement could be delayed 
(NFI).  Tariq Hassan-Beck, director of planning for the National 
Oil Company (NOC), has said publicly that the NOC is already 
working on the round two bidding package, which could take place 
in the first half of 2005.  \"We\'re learning from round one,\" he 
commented; but provided no details.  Shortly thereafter, Poe 
Legette, partner, described some of the legal problems 
encountered in the EPSA IV process, including the fact that 
contracts must be approved by the General People\'s Committee and 
overall uncertainty about which laws apply under which 
circumstances. 
 
3. (C) Azzam Messalatti, chairman of the NOC\'s upstream 
negotiation committee, mentioned that the NOC is also working on 
Development and Production Sharing Agreements (DPSAs) which 
would be similar to the EPSAs, but focused on development rather 
than exploration.  This is the first that we and some of the 
American companies have heard of this.  Messalatti also briefly 
mentioned a Libyan \"Gas Master Plan,\" which he said has been 
approved in response to an increase in demand for natural gas. 
The plan includes upgrading facilities and developing fields. 
 
4. (C) COMMENT:  The U.S. oil companies are clearly looking at 
Libya as a place where they expect to be doing business in the 
future.  ConocoPhillips already has an office here; Amerada 
Hess, Chevron-Texaco, and Exxon-Mobil are all in the process of 
signing leases for office space in downtown Tripoli and are 
bringing in country managers for Libya.  Some of the U.S. oil 
companies commented privately (as they have in the past) that 
it\'s not clear that the way the EPSA IV round was run will 
result in the best foreign partners for Libya.  According to 
them, the process doesn\'t really allow for consideration of the 
bidder\'s experience and quality of technology.  The only time 
such factors could have been considered was in the qualifying 
round, but given that 68 out of 120 companies qualified, some 
companies wonder how much weight was given to those aspects of 
the bidding process.  Of course, the U.S. companies have a 
personal interest in cutting down the amount of competition, and 
their edge is clearly in the experience and technology they can 
bring to development of Libyan oil fields, not necessarily in 
being the ones offering the sweetest financial deal to the GOL. 
END COMMENT. 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24174","12/16/2004 10:36","04TRIPOLI31","Embassy Tripoli","CONFIDENTIAL","04PARIS8864","O 161036Z DEC 04
FM USLO TRIPOLI
TO AMEMBASSY PARIS IMMEDIATE 
SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0037
INFO AMEMBASSY ALGIERS IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY CAIRO IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY CARACAS IMMEDIATE 
EU MEMBER STATES
AMEMBASSY RABAT IMMEDIATE 
USLO TRIPOLI 
AMEMBASSY TUNIS IMMEDIATE 
","C O N F I D E N T I A L  TRIPOLI 000031 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  12/16/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, FR, LY, VE 
SUBJECT: (C) CHIRAC VISIT TO LIBYA MODESTLY SUCCESSFUL, BUT NOT 
HAPPY 
 
REF: PARIS 8864 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Gregory L. Berry, Chief of Mission, U.S. Liaison 
Office, Tripoli, Libya. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  French Embassy DCM Maurice Dabdoush (please 
protect) December 15 confirmed rumors circulating around Tripoli 
that Jacques Chirac\'s November 24-25 visit to Libya was not a 
happy experience.  While the French President accomplished his 
most important goal - that of simply showing up here, as his UK, 
Spanish, Italian, and German counterparts have done in the past 
year - there were no major breakthroughs in foreign policy or 
business contracts.  Libyan \"game-playing\", including a surprise 
welcome ceremony in front of Qadhafi\'s bombed-out house from the 
1986 raids and trying to invite Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez 
along to the state dinner, irritated Chirac and cost a certain 
amount of good-will, Dabdoush said.  End summary. 
 
The Rumors 
----------------- 
 
2. (C) Dabdoush and newly-arrived French Ambassador to Libya 
both departed Libya within hours of Chirac.  By then Tripoli was 
abuzz with rumors that the visit had gone poorly.  The take of 
many here, including the British embassy, was that Chirac\'s 
efforts to \"ingratiate\" himself with the Libyans after the 
coolness of recent years and the ill grace with which the UTA 
dispute was resolved had failed.  The diplomatic community and 
the media interpreted the fact that Chirac\'s welcoming ceremony 
was held at Qadhafi\'s former house in the Bab al-Azizia 
barracks, which suffered a direct hit in the U.S. 1986 bombing 
and is now a shrine to the 1986 \"martyrs of imperial 
aggression\", as a slap in the face to the U.S. by both the 
Libyans and French.  Many were also scratching their heads over 
the November 24 state dinner, which the Libyans advertised as a 
double bill in honor of both Chirac and Venezuelan President 
Hugo Chavez, who was also in town, but which only Chirac 
attended. 
 
The Irritations 
------------------- 
 
3.  (C) When we finally caught up with Dabdoush December 15, he 
confirmed that neither he nor his ambassador had been recalled, 
as some here had speculated, but instead had returned to France 
to recuperate from the stress of the visit.  From the GOF\'s 
standpoint, the visit was a moderate success, Dabdoush said; 
Chirac can now say he\'s visited Libya, as so many of his 
European counterparts have done recently, and spent quality time 
with Qadhafi, as reported reftel.  However, disorganization and 
constant Libyan \"game-playing\" with the schedule irritated 
Chirac and cast a pall over the visit.  Notable irritations 
included: 
 
-- Qadhafi gave an interview to Le Figaro the day before 
Chirac\'s arrival, in which he criticized Libyan actions in Cote 
d\'Ivoire, infuriating Chirac. 
 
-- On the morning of Chirac\'s arrival, Libyan Protocol invited 
diplomatic heads of mission to a state dinner in honor of both 
Chirac and Chavez.  This was news to the Chirac\'s advance party, 
who passed it the President before his departure.  Chirac 
categorically refused, stating that he would have a quiet dinner 
with the Ambassador \"over a bottle of wine\" in that case (note: 
alcohol is illegal in Libya).  The Libyans disinvited Chavez, 
but Dabdoush told us that Chavez\'s security guards later got 
into a shoving match with some French ministers in the elevator 
of the Mehari Hotel, where the dinner took place. 
 
-- Chirac had no intention of visiting the 1986 bombed-out 
house, according to Dabdoush.  The French advance team had 
agreed that the welcoming ceremony would take place in the Bab 
al-Azizia barracks so that Qadhafi would attend, but the 
ceremony was supposed to happen in another part of the barracks, 
Dabdoush asserted, showing us the initial site scenario diagrams 
to illustrate his point.  Chirac felt ambushed, and made his 
displeasure felt by his icy demeanor during the ceremony and his 
subsequent refusal to put an inscription in the guest book, 
where other heads of state, mostly African, have gone on for 
pages about the injustice done to the Libyans in 1986. 
 
-- The Libyans ambushed Chirac again on November 24 by trying to 
get him to lay a wreath at a monument for victims of 1986; 
Chirac refused. 
 
What Was Accomplished 
------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Besides actually showing up, not much, according to 
Dabdoush; the five cooperation agreements signed during the 
visit were merely window dressing, and no significant business 
contracts were concluded.  Although Qadhafi made his 
now-standard plea for military sales, the GOF will respond with 
caution, Dabdoush predicted; while the EU arms embargo has been 
lifted, certain sales are still tightly controlled under the 
so-called \"toolbox\" arrangement.  France will stick to these 
prohibitions.  Notably, the subject of Abdullah Sanoussi did not 
come up; Dabdoush said that the Libyans \"know better now\" than 
to press for clemency, which he believes Chirac is not inclined 
to give in any case.  (Note:  Sanousi was convicted to life in 
prison in abstentia for the UTA bombing; the French were enraged 
when Qadhafi rehabilitated him, after years spent under house 
arrest, and made him chief of military intelligence.)  Dabdoush 
thought the Libyans have done a \"fair\" job in keeping Sanoussi 
out of the public eye, as they have requested. 
 
Chirac and Qadhafi 
---------------------------- 
 
5.  (C) Chirac and Qadhafi do not enjoy warm relations, Dabdoush 
said.  They first met in 1976; to Dabdoush\'s knowledge, the last 
time they saw each other was during the Five Plus Five Meeting 
in 2003 in Tunis, when Chirac was irritated (again) after 
Qadhafi fell asleep during Chirac\'s speech. 
 
Comment 
-------------- 
 
6.  (C) Chirac\'s visit brought to mind, as so often here, a 
phrase that has become almost a technical term in the diplomatic 
corp:  Libya\'s unmatched \"wackiness factor.\"  The Canadians are 
awaiting PM Martin\'s visit with some trepidation, especially 
after Saif al-Islam demanded an apology for Canada\'s 
participation in international sanctions on Libya in the 1980s 
and \'90s.  End comment. 
 
BERRY 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"25120","1/9/2005 9:32","05TRIPOLI4","Embassy Tripoli","CONFIDENTIAL","05TRIPOLI36","O 090932Z JAN 05
FM USLO TRIPOLI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0062
INFO AMEMBASSY ALGIERS IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY CAIRO IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY LONDON IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY PARIS IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY RABAT IMMEDIATE 
USLO TRIPOLI 
AMEMBASSY TUNIS IMMEDIATE 
","C O N F I D E N T I A L  TRIPOLI 000004 
 
 
STATE PASS TO COMMERCE FOR DAVID ROTH 
USTR FOR DOUG BELL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  1/8/2015 
TAGS: ECON, PGOV, LY 
SUBJECT:  LIBYA ON LINE POISED FOR GROWTH 
 
REF: TRIPOLI 00036 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Gregory L. Berry, Chief Of Mission, USLO, Tripoli 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
 
1. (C) Summary: Director and Founder of Libya On Line (LOL), 
Moawiya Maghur, describes the genesis and fast growth of Libya\'s 
most weighty Internet portal, and estimates that more than 20 
per cent of Libyans under the age of 35 access the Internet on a 
regular basis. LOL offers a range of products, from technical 
consulting and product design to online marketing and assistance 
with trade shows. LOL\'s sponsors include Coca Cola and British 
Airways, drawn by circulation figures that surpass those of 
local newspapers, and reach a more affluent audience.  End 
Summary. 
 
20% of Libyan Youth Are Connected 
--------------------------------------------- - 
2. (C) Econoff met 1/6 with LOL\'s director, Moawiya Maghur, son 
of former Libyan Foreign Minister Kamal Maghur, at the Tripoli 
offices of Libya On-Line. Maghur\'s premises serve as combined 
company headquarters and Internet cafi, which LOL uses as a 
marketing tool for its various services, including software 
development, networking, web hosting and domain name 
registration. Maghur says LOL, which employs 15 men and women 
(the majority of whom are young, female, and by Tripolitanian 
standards, extremely liberally-dressed), has registered 2000 
domain names in 2004, and is currently hosting 600 sites. LOL 
employs two individuals whose job it is to read and provide 
English language translations of Libyan press and television 
programs. With regard to the Libyan cyber market as a whole, 
Maghur estimated that 5% of the total population uses the 
Internet, but that the figure was considerably higher, perhaps 
20-25% among those under 35, and those living in Tripoli. \"We 
even get a lot of older people, in their mid to late sixties, 
coming in here and chatting or video-conferencing with their 
children and grandchildren abroad,\" Maghur said. \"Of course,\" he 
continued, \"the Internet offers a way of livening up one\'s 
social life a bit. As was the case in Jordan in the early 90\'s, 
for example, many young people here use the Internet as a means 
to get to know each other without having to be seen in public.\" 
In addition to its Gargaresh location, LOL operates a cyber cafi 
at Tripoli International Airport.  Maghur says that business is 
good, particularly in the area of networking services. LOL has 
run into some problems marketing, the same issues that plague 
most high-profile businesses in Tripoli: \"We bought a 3000 LD 
(about 2500 USD) sign for the front, and they came and took it 
down. They said the sign needed to be in Arabic.\" 
 
Libya On-Line: Libya\'s Principal Portal 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
3. (C) The showpiece of LOL is its eponymous Internet portal, 
Libya On Line, which Maghur\'s brother started on a shoestring 
budget in Ottawa, Canada, as a means of introducing people in 
North America to Libya and its culture. Libya On-Line contains 
an impressive set of information on Libyan tourist sites, 
government institutions, and private businesses, as well as a 
\"Yellow Pages\" directory of 2000 contacts. Maghur says he 
originally worked with Libyan Chamber of Commerce to develop the 
directory, but that the Chamber was so difficult to work with 
that he pulled out of the agreement after a year, at a financial 
loss: \"We entered into an agreement with them to organize a 
trade expo; we printed CDs and brochures for them, and even 
managed part of the event-then during the show, one of their 
employees came by and started screaming, demanding to know why 
we were stealing their name.\" Maghur expects to expand the 
directory using a database of business names collected from a 
friend at the Tripoli land registry, which keeps the names of 
most new Libyan businesses. LOL is sponsored by Coca Cola, Puma, 
British Airways, Afriqiya, and Libtra Tours, a member of the 
Hosni Bey Group (refcable). LOL gets about 45,000 hits a month, 
compared with 33,000 a month three years ago. 
 
The Genesis of Libyan e-Commerce: 
------------------------------------------- 
4. (C) While others scoff at the idea that there are any 
\"e-businesses\" in Libya, Majhur says it is no joke, that LOL, 
through its Canada parent Visions, has helped create e-commerce 
capabilities for a number of local firms and artists, using 
Canada-based payment systems. Maghur gave as case in point a 
website for a singer (Maghur wouldn\'t give us the name, but a 
reliable source indicates it is likely Sheb Jilani, the \"most 
self-important\" of rising Libyan musical talent), who wanted to 
sell his CDs direct to the international market. \"We sold about 
500 of these, and he came back to us a bit later and said he\'s 
worth a hundred times as many. We gave him back the CDs, and he 
tried to do it himself. Within a month, there were pirated 
copies of the CD all over Tripoli (one has to wonder if LOL had 
anything to do with this).\" Maghur works with Libyan graphic 
artists to put their work on line, and is in the process of 
organizing a competition for Libyan singers, replete with 
internet voting and prizes. LOL also manages trade events, 
through affiliates. LOL will launch a sister site, \"Tijara\" 
(trade), in three months, focusing on providing useful 
information for foreign businesses, including Arabic 
translations of foreign press (the portal is bilingual, 
Arabic-English). 
 
5. (C) Comment: Moawiya Maghur is among perhaps a half-dozen 
private businessmen we have met whose projects and business 
sense have impressed us as \"out of the ordinary\". Some of the 
others include Buraq Air\'s CEO Mohammed Bubeida, Mohammed 
Gherwash, head of Winzrik Tours, and Hosni Bey, of the Hosni Bey 
Group (refcable). All of these individuals are foreign-educated. 
The personalities appear to be such that they would succeed in 
even a significantly more competitive market. End Comment. 
 
--Cairo Please Post to Site-- 
 
BERRY 
"