
"15843","4/9/2004 6:06","04VILNIUS395","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE73149","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 000395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PREL, PHUM, LH, Trip Reports-Administation Officials, Trip Reports-Administration Officials 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA EXPRESSES INTEREST IN THE CD INITIATIVE 
IN EAST TIMOR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 73149 
 
1. (U) WE DELIVERED TO LAURYNAS JONUSAUKAS, FIRST SECRETARY 
OF MFA\'S AMERICA\'S DIVISION, ON APRIL 7, 2004, REFTEL POINTS 
AND A COPY OF CHILEAN AMBASSADOR BIANCHI\'S LETTER ON THE 
COMMUNITY OF DEMOCRACY\'S INITIATIVE IN EAST TIMOR. 
    JONUSAUKAS EXPRESSED INTEREST IN THE INITIATIVE, AND SAID 
THAT THE GOL WOULD DECIDE THIS WEEK WHETHER TO PARTICIPATE IN 
THE MAY DELEGATION. 
MULL 
"
"20315","9/2/2004 14:19","04VILNIUS1065","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04VILNIUS937","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001065 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/OHI, EUR/NB 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, SOCI, CASC, LH, HT19 
SUBJECT: AMERICAN RABBI CONTENDS LITHUANIAN PROPERTY 
RESTITUTION NOT KOSHER 
 
REF: VILNIUS 937 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Escalating discord within Lithuania\'s 
Jewish community has surpassed the bounds of a religious 
dispute and threatens to become a fight over community 
property.  At the center of the dispute is Rabbi Sholom Ber 
Krinsky, an American citizen, who publicly contends that 
Jewish community leaders refuse him the title of Chief 
Rabbi in order to exclude him from the process by which 
Lithuania will restitute Jewish communal property. 
Privately Krinsky told us he faults the USG for supporting 
what he believes is a \"corrupt and nontransparent\" 
restitution process.  Krinsky and his supporters have 
challenged the authority of both the secular Jewish 
community leader and other rabbis.  Vilnius police are 
investigating allegations that Krinsky disturbed the peace 
at the synagogue in Vilnius; the synagogue remains closed. 
We continue to offer Krinsky consular assistance, while we 
resist Krinsky\'s efforts to entangle us in his dispute with 
Lithuania\'s Jewish community.  The USG continues to 
encourage the GOL to advance the restitution process and we 
remain confident that the process is transparent and fair. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
Krinsky: \"It\'s All About Restitution\" 
------------------------------------- 
2. (SBU) The Jewish Community of Lithuania, under the 
leadership of chairman Dr. Simonas Alperavicius and in 
coordination with an international committee of Jewish 
organizations, has been in protracted negotiations with the 
GOL to restitute former Jewish communal property seized 
during the Nazi and Soviet occupations of Lithuania. 
Research on restitutable property has slowed the GOL- 
supported process.  Controversy within the Jewish community 
has now spotlighted the restitution issue as Rabbi Sholom 
Ber Krinsky, an American citizen who heads the local branch 
of Chabad Lubavitch, has demanded to be included in the 
decision making process.  Publicly and privately Krinsky, 
who for most of 2004 has been unsuccessfully battling for 
recognition as the Chief Rabbi and leader of the Jewish 
religious community (reftel), now contends that his 
controversy is in fact about property restitution.  Krinsky 
claims that Alperavicius wants to exclude him from the 
restitution process, although he (Krinsky) is \"the only 
person who has done anything to advance Jewish religious 
life in Lithuania during the last ten years.\"  Krinsky 
argues that he should have a position on the board of the 
foundation that will make decisions about who benefits from 
the GOL\'s restitution of property and claims that he 
personally should also be a beneficiary of the process. 
 
3. (SBU) The foundation board, as currently envisioned, 
will comprise six local representatives and six 
representatives from interested international groups.  From 
Lithuania, we expect the board to include the heads of the 
three largest religious communities of Vilnius, Kaunas, and 
Klaipeda, as well as three prominent members of the 
national Jewish Community of Lithuania (two from Vilnius 
and one from Siauliai).  Alperavicius will represent the 
Vilnius religious community.  Neither Krinsky nor Rabbi 
Chaim Burshtein, the country\'s other resident rabbi (hand- 
picked by Alperavicius), are Lithuanian citizens, and 
neither will have seats on the board.  Nonetheless, 
international and local interlocutors have assured us that 
Krinsky\'s Chabad Lubavitch will be eligible to receive 
property, as will all other Jewish institutions in 
Lithuania. 
 
Righteous Warrior or Criminal? 
------------------------------ 
4. (SBU) Krinsky and his followers have been waging a 
public campaign against Alperavicius since August 1, 
distributing anti-Alperavicius literature at many community 
events and taking out advertisements in local newspapers. 
Krinsky twice visited the Embassy within the last few 
weeks, seeking \"political\" support.  During an August 25 
meeting at the embassy, he became belligerent (for which he 
later apologized) and accused the USG of being \"party to a 
crime\" for \"driving the restitution issue,\" which he 
described as \"corrupt and nontransparent.\"  (NOTE: We had 
previously met with Krinsky to discuss property 
restitution, among other issues, on March 23.  Krinsky, at 
that time, never expressed concern about the process or 
plans for disbursing property.  END NOTE.) 
 
Criminal Allegations and Investigation 
-------------------------------------- 
5. (SBU) The MFA notified us by diplomatic note August 27 
that Vilnius police are conducting an investigation 
regarding allegations that Krinsky criminally disturbed the 
peace in an August 1 incident at the synagogue, and that 
Krinsky had asked that an Embassy representative 
participate during his questioning.  Krinsky had not 
informed us of this request during our meetings with him on 
either August 17 or August 26.  A consular representative 
will attend Krinsky\'s hearing, although we have made it 
clear to all parties that this consular official cannot act 
as a legal representative or advocate.  The charge of 
criminal disturbance of the peace carries a penalty of up 
to two years imprisonment. 
 
Other Consular Assistance 
------------------------- 
6. (SBU) Krinsky, his wife, and an associate ran afoul of 
private security guards who forcibly removed them from the 
synagogue at the conclusion of a concert on August 25. 
The following day, Krinsky informed us of his removal.  We 
provided him with lawyers and physicians lists.  We also 
encouraged Krinsky to file a police report if he felt his 
removal from the synagogue had been unlawful, and to 
contact us immediately if the police were unwilling to 
accept such a complaint.  Krinsky said that he would likely 
file a complaint but that he really considered this a 
political matter and was not at this time seeking consular 
assistance. 
 
Comment 
------- 
7. (SBU) The dispute within Lithuania\'s Jewish community 
does not appear headed for a rapid conclusion.  Attempts at 
international mediation have failed, and Alperavicius and 
Krinsky seem ready for a prolonged fight.  Krinsky\'s public 
activism -- repeatedly confronting his opposition in public 
fora -- provides fodder for continuing press coverage that 
often features the Jewish community, and the issue of 
property restitution, in a negative light.  Krinsky\'s 
allegations about corruption in the restitution process 
distort the truth on the ground and hurt the prospects for 
concluding government work on the matter.  While we don\'t 
discount the animosity between Alperavicius and Krinsky, 
the regional diversity of the board and participation of 
international institutions encourage us to trust that the 
restitution process will be transparent and fair. 
Restitution negotiations have essentially stalled until 
after the October elections. A new Government may be 
reluctant to tackle this issue if the controversy extends 
not only to the public, concerned about the cost of 
restitution and perceived special treatment of one ethnic 
community, but also to the interested parties. 
 
8. (SBU) Krinsky\'s American citizenship complicates the 
issue and the Embassy\'s role.  We will continue to offer 
consular assistance to Krinsky.  Without entering into the 
middle of a community dispute, we will also continue to 
encourage transparency and fairness in the restitution 
process. 
 
MULL 
"
"20596","9/14/2004 14:46","04VILNIUS1117","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE182790","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND PM/ISO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, MOPS, EAIR, KREC, LH, HT17 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN MINISTRIES WORKING ON EUROCONTROL FEE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 182790 
 
 1. (U) We have approached the MFA at various levels to seek 
an exemption of U.S. military and other U.S. state aircraft 
from air navigation, overflight, and terminal navigation 
fees.  MFA Undersecretary Sarunas Adomavicius promised the 
Ambassador on August 31 to look into the matter, and others 
within the MFA from Department director to working level have 
indicated there is political will to grant the exemption. 
Darius Mereckis of MFA\'s NATO Division said he will 
coordinate with the Ministry of Transportation in order that 
they direct the Lithuanian airport authority not to assess 
such fees against U.S. state and military aircraft and to 
instruct Eurocontrol to cease collection efforts for 
outstanding fees. 
 
2. (U) We will follow up aggressively on this matter at 
different agencies and levels. 
MULL 
"
"21135","9/30/2004 12:20","04VILNIUS1190","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE208511","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001190 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2014 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, ETTC, PHUM, CH, LH, HT8, HT3 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA FIRMLY OPPOSED TO LIFTING ARMS EMBARGO 
ON CHINA 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 208511 
 
     B. SECSTATE 180772 
     C. SECSTATE 137493 
     D. VILNIUS 1074 
     E. VILNIUS 1033 
     F. VILNIUS 852 
     G. VILNIUS 780 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER CHRISTIAN YARNELL 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) The Charge delivered ref A points concerning the 
European Union China arms embargo to Zygimantas Pavilionis, 
MFA Political Director and Director of the EU Department, on 
September 29.  The Charge highlighted the key reasons for the 
maintaining the embargo and high level of concern for this 
issue in the USG. 
 
2. (C) Pavilionis restated Lithuania\'s firm opposition to 
lifting of the arms embargo to China (refs D-G), and affirmed 
Foreign Minister Valionis\'s full agreement.  A veteran EU 
watcher with several years of experience in Brussels, 
Pavilionis characterized calls for lifting the embargo as a 
uniquely \"French issue\" and said that Lithuania had not 
witnessed movement elsewhere within the EU regarding lifting 
the embargo. 
 
3. (C) The Charge, noting a report from other MOFA sources 
that the Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister is planning to visit 
Lithuania, asked Pavilionis to ensure that other Lithuanian 
interlocutors are uptospeed on this issue prior to that 
visit.  Pavilionis agreed. 
 
4. (C) Pavilionis, new to the assignment of Political 
Director, was keen to convey pro-U.S. sentiments. He remarked 
that, if forced to choose between the United States and China 
on this matter, Lithuania\'s support for the U.S. position was 
unequivocal. 
Mull 
"
"21139","9/30/2004 12:58","04VILNIUS1194","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE204758","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001194 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EUR/ERA, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ECIN, EU, TU, LH, HT9 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA SUPPORTS TURKEY\'S EU MEMBERSHIP 
 
REF: SECSTATE 204758 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER CHRISTIAN YARNELL 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) We delivered reftel points regarding support for 
Turkey\'s EU membership and provided non-paper on Turkey\'s 
progress on Copenhagen criteria to the MFA\'s Jurgita 
Apanaviciute on September 27.  Apanaviciute, who is 
responsible for enlargement issues within the MFA\'s European 
Union Department, said that Lithuania supports Turkey\'s 
aspirations to join the EU but remains firm that Turkey must 
meet the same standards and fulfill the same requirements 
(notably the Copenhagen political criteria) as the other 
states that recently joined the European Union.  Recalling 
the September 11 visit to Lithuania of Turkish FM Abdullah 
Gul, she noted FM Antanas Valionis\' public statement of 
Lithuania\'s support under those terms. 
 
2. (C) Apanaviciute said she personally expected that the 
October 6 Commission report would not make a definitive 
recommendation on whether or when to begin accession 
negotiations with Turkey, in order to leave the Council free 
rein to decide the matter in December.  Apanaviciute said 
that Lithuania would likely vote in December in favor of 
beginning accession negotiations, barring any negative 
development on Turkey\'s part. 
 
3.  (C) Charge raised the issue separately with three 
high-level Foreign Ministry officials: Ambassador Rokas 
Bernotas, MFA Multilateral Relations chief; Ambassador 
Arnoldas Milukas, MFA \"Special Missions\" Chief; and EU 
Department Director Zygimantas Pavilionis.  All three 
reaffirmed the GOL\'s strong support for Turkish accession, 
and expressed cautious optimism that Turkey would be invited 
to begin the process soon.  Pavilionis, who knows EU internal 
politics well after several years in Brussels, added that 
France was seeking to impede the process and that others like 
Denmark and the Netherlands also had serious reservations 
about Turkey. 
 
4. (C) Charge also compared notes with Turkish Ambassador to 
Lithuania Kadriye Sanivar Kizildeli.  She expressed 
confidence that the GOL would remain in the pro-accession 
camp.  She said that Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul\'s swing 
through Lithuania earlier this month met Turkish objectives, 
since both President Adamkus and Foreign Minister Valionis 
expressed support for Turkey\'s eventual accession.  She 
expressed apprehension about the refusal of the current 
frontrunner in the upcoming parliamentary election, Viktor 
Uspaskich, to meet with her to discuss the issue.  At the 
same time, however, she doubted that the next government 
would significantly change current policy, and noted her 
confidence in the foreign policy professionals at MFA who 
manage the issue. 
Mull 
"
"21145","9/30/2004 13:49","04VILNIUS1196","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS991","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/RPM 
NSC FOR M. RUPERT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2014 
TAGS: MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PREL, LH, HT48, HT17 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN PARLIAMENT PASSES REVISED INTERNATIONAL 
OPS BILL 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 991 
 
     B. VILNIUS 931 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (U) Summary.  The Lithuanian parliament September 29 
approved a bill raising the ceiling on the number of troops 
deployable in international operations and extending 
authorization of current missions through December 31, 2005. 
The bill mandates that Lithuania deploy an all-volunteer 
force and allows transfer of troops within a region.  It also 
authorizes transfer of Lithuanian troops to the command of 
the United Nations, NATO, or an EU member state without a 
separate parliamentary mandate.  Passage of this bill 
advances an important issue on our bilateral agenda and helps 
ensure Lithuania\'s continued participation in international 
operations.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The Lithuanian parliament (Seimas) in extraordinary 
session September 29 approved a resolution to extend and 
increase Lithuania\'s participation in international 
operations in the Persian Gulf, Central and South Asia, and 
the Balkans, voting thirty (30) in favor, four (4) opposed, 
with four (4) abstentions.  The bill, which President Valdas 
Adamkus sponsored and Defense Minister Linas Linkevicius 
drafted, sets specific deployment ceilings for the three 
regions where the Lithuanian military engages in fourteen 
international missions, authorizing up to 140 military 
personnel in the Balkans, 120 in the Persian Gulf, and 70 to 
Central and South.  It also provides MOD operational 
flexibility to withdraw, deploy, or transfer personnel within 
regions as events dictate, without additional parliamentary 
approval. 
 
3. (U) The Seimas rejected an eleventh-hour bid by a Social 
Democrat MP Algirdas Sysas to reduce Lithuania\'s presence in 
Iraq and Afghanistan, but approved a motion codifying the 
existing practice of deploying an all-volunteer force to 
Lithuania\'s international missions.  The bill also allows 
Lithuania to transfer control of its national forces to an 
UN, NATO or EU-led command without additional parliamentary 
approval. 
 
6. (C) Comment.  The MOD pushed this legislative amendment to 
a vote before the October 10 elections in order to avoid 
having to educate new Seimas members on the issue and the 
legislative history, which could have substantially delayed 
approval.  In so doing, they advanced an issue high on our 
bilateral agenda and reinforced Lithuania\'s assurances of 
continued partnership in critical international operations. 
Mull 
"
"21446","10/8/2004 10:37","04VILNIUS1237","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001237 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, LH, HT2, HT1 
SUBJECT:  THE VIEW FROM ALYTUS:  THE BLOOM IS OFF THE LABOR 
PARTY\'S ROSE 
 
 
1. SUMMARY.  Less than a week before Lithuania\'s 
parliamentary election, few in Alytus doubt that the Labor 
Party will taste electoral success.  However, a growing 
number question the Labor Party\'s populist promises and 
will support Lithuania\'s more tested traditional parties. 
End Summary. 
 
Alytus-Lithuania\'s Youngest City 
-------------------------------- 
 
2.  Alytus, which has more than 72,000 inhabitants, is 
Lithuania\'s sixth largest city and capital of the Dzukija 
region in Southern Lithuania.  Alytus is demographically 
Lithuania\'s youngest city, with more than 88 percent of the 
population working age or younger.  Harnessing the vibrancy 
of its youthful population, Alytus has developed rapidly 
since independence.  Alytus is home more than 2,000 
registered businesses, including some of Lithuania\'s 
largest, such as Alyta (spirits), Astra (machinery and 
spare parts), and Snaige (refrigerators).  Some 69 
businesses, including a major Coca-Cola production 
facility, have foreign direct investment. 
 
Labor Party Strong, But Losing Steam 
------------------------------------ 
 
3. The Labor Party enjoyed electoral success in June\'s 
European parliament elections, garnering 36 percent of the 
Alytus vote.  Few interlocutors believe that Labor will 
replicate its accomplishments October 10 in Lithuania\'s 
parliamentary elections.  The Mayor of Alytus City, 
Vytautas Kirkliauskas, a member of the Arturas Paulauskas- 
led New Union Party, told us that although the Labor Party 
was very popular in June, its popularity has steadily 
decreased.  He went on to say that voters are increasingly 
looking past the populist promises of Victor Uspaskich\'s 
party and scrutinizing the bona fides of the party\'s 
leaders and candidates.  What they have found is a party 
devoid of leaders, who seek change for the sake of change 
and are willing to promise nearly anything to secure 
electoral success.  Voicing New Union wishful thinking more 
that well-grounded political prediction, Kirkliauskas said 
that Alytus voters seek continuity in the Seimas, and will 
vote to keep in place a parliament that has achieved so 
much over the last three years. 
 
4.  Lina Ivoniniene, President of the Alytus NGO 
Information Center told us that the Labor Party has 
charismatic leaders, but it has not developed a strong base 
in Alytus.  Antanas Andriulionis, Chairman of the regional 
chapter of the Industrialists Confederation and recently 
retired General Director of Snaige, believes that the Labor 
Party may secure 30 percent of the vote locally, but that 
the Brazauskas-Paulauskas Coalition will run a strong 
second propelled by the Mayor\'s powerful persuasion. 
 
Active Campaigning-Weak Turnout 
------------------------------- 
 
5. Campaign literature for major political parties and 
independent candidates abounds in Alytus.  Political 
parties have tapped into the large youth base and helped 
create student political groups at the 1,300-strong Alytus 
College.  The leader of a non-partisan student NGO said 
that political parties provided financial support to local 
youth events in exchange for \"unsolicited\" support during 
the event.  The Brazauskas-Paulauskas Coalition, for 
example, provided 7,000 Litai (approximately $2,500 USD) to 
the organizers of an outdoor concert. 
 
6.  Despite the vigorous campaigning, Alytus voters may 
sleep in on October 10 rather than head to the polls. 
Several interlocutors expect a voter turnout of 55 percent. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7. Alytus has successfully discarded its Soviet economic 
and political legacy and transformed itself.  Rapid growth 
and plenty of investment, foreign and domestic, 
characterize the new city.  With all that Alytus has 
achieved, a sizable portion of the population will likely 
find the Labor Party\'s populist platform appealing.  Labor 
should win the plurality in the first round of voting. 
With the Barzauskas-Paulauskas Coalition in positions of 
leadership in Alytus, opposition to Labor may coalesce 
after round one, and the Labor Party may fare less well in 
second round run-offs for single mandate seats. 
 
MULL 
"
"21447","10/8/2004 10:52","04VILNIUS1239","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001239 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, SOCI, LH, HT1 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN CHEESE CAPITAL NODS LEFT, BUT WITH 
LITTLE THOUGHT TO THE ELECTIONS 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: Rokiskis is a town of approximately 16,000 
located in northeastern Lithuania and the capital of a 
productive agricultural region famous for the cheese brand 
that bears its name.  The director of the cheese factory, 
sharing the spotlight with the visiting Prime Minister, was 
the local star of the recent town festival, where cheese- 
related activities overshadowed political events.  Rokiskis 
residents generally express support for left wing parties 
(Social Democrats, Peasants Party, and to a lesser extent 
the Labor Party) in upcoming elections.  Overall, however, 
eligible voters display apathy towards politics and to 
their local candidates in particular.  Political corruption 
scandals and the government\'s focus on foreign policy goals 
have left Lithuania\'s rural electorate cold and led them 
toward politicians who will attend to more basic social 
problems.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Cheese for One and All 
---------------------- 
2. We recently traveled to Rokiskis during the annual town 
festival.  The successful cheese producer Rokiskio Suris is 
the town\'s largest employer, and much of the rural 
population from the surrounding countryside has a hand in 
cheese production. 
 
3. Rokiskio Suris, celebrating 40 years of operations in 
town, dominated the annual town festival.  The public 
flocked to the cheese tasting tents in droves, and the 
company\'s \"VIP\" tent was a cheese-lover\'s banquet. 
Rokiskio Suris Director Antanas Trumpa, a friend of Prime 
Minister Algirdas Brazauskas, overshadowed the town\'s mayor 
and other local politicians and is clearly the city\'s 
dominant public figure.  Rokiskio Suris executives told us 
that 80% of their cheese is now sold abroad, and exports 
account for a growing portion of the company\'s profits. 
Rokiskio Suris does export to small specialty stores in 
Chicago and New York. 
 
Electorate: Leftist Inclinations... 
----------------------------------- 
4. Discussing the upcoming Parliamentary elections, most 
Rokiskis residents we met said that they favor Brazauskas\' 
Social Democrats or Kazimira Prunskiene\'s Peasants Party. 
Brazauskas made a short speech at the festival 
congratulating the town on its birthday, and those in 
attendance responded well to the Prime Minister\'s short 
visit. (Note: Brazauskas was born in the Rokiskis region.) 
Local residents all emphasized that social issues, 
especially pension reform, alcoholism, and rural poverty, 
top the town\'s policy agenda.  The head of the town\'s 
community center opined that the Social Democrats and 
Peasants best address the social agenda and will win the 
Rokiskis vote. 
 
5. According to national polls, the Labor Party is also 
likely to perform well in Rokiskis, although many locals 
suspect the promises of the newly-founded party.  Several 
residents expressed support for rising star Petras 
Austrevicius and for the Liberal Center Party, although one 
woman who is considering voting for Austrevicius could not 
remember the name of the \"urbane party\" (the Liberal 
Center) on whose ticket the candidate is running.  A 
shopkeeper also relished the opportunity to lambast 
supporters of impeached President Rolandas Paksas, whom she 
claimed Rokiskis citizens distrust due to the fact that he 
is a \"westerner.\" 
 
...But Not Politically Inclined 
------------------------------- 
6. The people of Rokiskis, although willing to discuss 
their political views openly, appeared largely apathetic. 
The vast majority of respondents said that they intend to 
vote but are dissatisfied with most of the options and have 
not yet decided for whom they will cast their ballots. 
Some younger residents said that they have no interest in 
political issues and will not head to the polls. 
 
7. Concerning the race for the town\'s lone single mandate 
representative, the head of the town\'s community center 
commented that the local candidates for this year\'s 
elections are rather weak. \"There\'s no one for us to vote 
for,\" she said.  Peasants Party candidate Zenonas 
Akramavicius held a small campaign event parallel to the 
town festival; the event attendees were noticeably older 
citizens, many of whom had come into town from surrounding 
farms.  Although Akramavicius is well known in the town for 
his work on the city council, his own campaign volunteers 
could not explain why he was a good candidate beyond the 
fact that he is a \"good man\" and \"from the Peasants Party.\" 
 
Comment: Social Issues Critical to Election 
------------------------------------------- 
8. Our trip to agricultural Lithuania highlighted that 
social issues, especially demands for a better pension 
system, are critical for the average Lithuanian voter in 
this election.  Traditionally, Lithuania\'s left-wing 
parties focus more on these concerns, but in this election 
all parties are now actively campaigning on similar 
platforms.  Overall, multiple political corruption scandals 
and the GOL\'s focus on pursuing the foreign policy goals of 
NATO and EU accession have wearied the rural electorate. 
In Lithuania\'s cheese capital, at least, politicians will 
have better luck stirring up the fondue than the public\'s 
interest. 
 
MULL 
"
"21456","10/8/2004 12:54","04VILNIUS1243","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, LH, HT1 
SUBJECT: People in the Provincial Town will Vote for Change 
 
-------- 
Summary 
-------- 
 
1. Voters in the small town of Rietavas, in western 
Lithuania, see themselves as microcosm for the nation (if a 
bit more agricultural) and believe their vote in the 
upcoming election will mirror the country\'s vote as a 
whole.  In Rietavas, it appears that the Labor Party will 
win big.  End summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Lithuania on a smaller scale 
---------------------------- 
 
2. Rietavas, a town in the western part of Lithuania, with 
a population of 11,000, boasts an active economic life 
comparable to that in the country\'s larger cities.  With an 
unemployment rate of 5.9 percent, which is just below the 
national average, and 35 percent of the population engaged 
in agriculture, Rietavas is reaping the early rewards of EU 
accession.  The local animal waste products processing 
company enjoys the benefit of 35 million litas from the EU 
pre-accession fund.  Several construction companies are 
registering record growth, echoing the overall boost of the 
construction sector at the national level.  The small town 
even has a college \"Zemaitijos Kolegija,\" which has 
efficiently shifted its focus from agriculture to 
management and economics. 
 
-------------------- 
Political Situation 
------------------- 
 
3. Rietavas is generally an apolitical town, but these 
elections are different, says the director of the 
municipality executive branch Vytautas Diciunas.  It 
suffices to pass by a local store to hear snippets of 
conversation focused on election topics.  At the height of 
the campaign, eight candidates representing major political 
parties are all active contenders.  The list ranges from 
prominent Labor party candidate, former citizen of Rietavas 
and post-soviet bureaucrat, Jonas Jagminas, who is rumored 
to be in the running for the position of minister of 
agriculture, to television journalist, Conservative, and 
carpetbagger, Vitas Klimas, to current MP and Liberal 
Centrist, Audrius Klisonis.  According to a local member of 
the Liberal Center Party, Zigmas Dargevicius, the Labor 
Party and Liberal Center Party candidates have the greatest 
chance of winning.  The director of the municipal 
administration calls Rietavas a litmus test: Predicting the 
vote in Rietavas will provide the national election 
results. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Labor Party is riding to the victory 
------------------------------------ 
 
4. Even opponents of the Labor Party recognize that Labor 
has the best chance of winning.  Its campaign is the most 
active and visible with respect to local media coverage, 
meetings, rallies, and other local events.  Enormous 
financial resources and an effective membership enrollment 
drive have rendered the other parties powerless.  The 
skilled former leaders of the kolkhoz (soviet era 
agricultural collectives), now Labor Party leaders, tell 
the provincial residents what they want to hear. 
 
--------------------------- 
Farmers miss the \"old days\" 
--------------------------- 
 
5. A local farmer told us that he and his neighbors are 
unhappy with the current government.  They expect something 
better from new parties in power.  The Labor Party appeals 
to them as a political new comer with bright promises to 
increase pensions.  Oddly, the Labor Party, while 
representing change and progress, has kindled nostalgia for 
the \"old days,\" and at least one third of farmers plan to 
vote for Labor.  In contrast, personality, not party 
promises, will win the votes of the local intelligentsia, 
says the local librarian.  She will vote for a candidate 
she knows personally who has helped her in the past.  The 
director of the municipal administration confirmed that the 
elite will choose their candidate on the basis of personal 
criteria -- looks or eloquence often win here, he said. 
 
-------- 
Comment 
-------- 
 
6. There is political excitement and hope in Rietavas. 
People in this small provincial town are doing well, but 
want to do better.  They will vote for change (Labor) 
rather than more of the same - even if \"the same\" has not 
been so bad. 
 
MULL 
"
"21460","10/8/2004 13:19","04VILNIUS1245","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001245 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, LH, HT1 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN PRE-ELECTION WATCH: A SMALL TOWN LEANS 
AWAY FROM THE ESTABLISHMENT 
 
 
1.  Summary. An incumbent from the ruling Social Democrats 
is paradoxically running on an anti-establishment platform 
and is likely to win re-election in the town of Anyksciai, 
62 miles west of Vilnius.  Residents are concerned with job 
security, the lack of youth employment options, and rising 
heating costs.  By supporting an independent, the people of 
Anyksciai will register their protest against the local 
party establishment that has so far failed to meet their 
expectations.  End summary. 
 
2.  Anyskciai, a town of 13,000, is a predominantly 
agricultural community.  Voters here traditionally support 
politicians on the right.  The Conservatives, Christian 
Democrats and the Liberal Center Party hold 15 of 25 seats 
on the Regional Council.  Social Democrat Grazina 
Smigelskiene, Peasants party member Antanas Baura, and 
Conservative Saulius Nefas currently represent Anyksciai in 
Lithuania\'s parliament (Seimas).  Recent redistricting will 
leave Anyksciai with one Seimas member following the 
October 10 elections. 
 
3.  Basic economic issues dominate the local political 
agenda.  Mayor Alvydas Gervinskas noted that, at USD 204, 
the average monthly salary in Anyksciai is 40 percent below 
the national average.  The mayor continued to say that many 
citizens are unhappy that they have to commute to work in 
Vilnius, Kaunas and Panevezys, the largest cities in the 
area, in order to find decent salaries.  Young people, 
impatient because they are unable to find adequate salaries 
locally, are migrating to Lithuania\'s large cities or 
abroad.  Renata Gudoniene, the local Business Information 
Center\'s Director, told us that the town has 15 active 
enterprises per 10,000 inhabitants, less than the 
Lithuanian average of 19.  Local residents voiced concerns 
that the recent privatization of one of these businesses, 
the Anyksciu Vynas winery, will lead to further job cuts. 
 
4.  Grazina Smigelskiene, candidate for Seimas re-election 
from Anyksciai, hopes that dissatisfaction with the local 
Council will sway voters to the left and support her 
candidacy.  The Council\'s failure to repair the centralized 
heating system, despite a USD 6.8 million loan for that 
purpose, has kept heating bills high, property values low, 
and triggered an investigation.  Smigelskiene noted that 
heating costs in Anyksciai are the second highest in the 
nation.  Smigelskiene thinks that people are angry that 
life is not better after more than 10 years of 
independence. 
 
5.  Smigelskiene is running for re-election as an 
independent against the wishes of her party, the ruling 
Social Democrats, who are backing another candidate in 
Anyksciai and who have low-ranked Smigelskiene on the party 
list.  Among her opponents, the two strongest are 
businesspersons from the Farmers Party and the Liberal 
Democratic Party.  The Labor Party, riding high in the 
polls nationally, has 400 members in Anyksciai, against the 
Social Democrats\' 300, but is running what many people 
believe to be a lack-luster candidate.  (Note: The Mayor 
expects Smigelskiene to win.) 
 
6.  Comment: A runaway Social Democrat campaigning on a 
platform for change appears to be the front runner in the 
Anyksciai election.  Stealing the thunder of the Labor 
Party, she is arguing for ethics, efficiency, and 
transparency in government and for a better life for those 
at the bottom of the economic ladder.  She will likely 
steal Labor\'s votes, as well. 
 
MULL 
"
"21516","10/12/2004 14:50","04VILNIUS1261","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1221","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001261 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/11/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, LH, HT1 
SUBJECT: LABOR PARTY WINS ROUND ONE OF LITHUANIAN 
ELECTIONS, BUT GOVERNMENT STILL UP FOR GRABS 
 
REF: VILNIUS 1221 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Chief Nancy Cohen 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: Lithuania\'s Labor Party took the greatest 
number of votes in the October 10 first round of 
parliamentary elections, but failed to win enough seats to 
form a government or even ensure their leadership when all 
the votes are in.  The coalition of ruling parties finished 
second, in light voting, with right-wing Conservatives and 
the populist Paksas Coalition beating predictions.  Run-off 
elections for single-mandates October 24 will determine the 
final configuration of Lithuania\'s Parliament (Seimas).  The 
Brazauskas-Paulauskas Coalition is set to best Labor in the 
second round.  With a majority of seats for any party all but 
numerically impossible, leaders and losers are jockeying for 
place in a governing coalition.  The most likely scenario 
would have current Prime Minister Brazauskas head a 
Government of Social Democrats, Labor, and Liberal Center. 
For the USG, such a combination bodes well.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Labor Wins Round One 
-------------------- 
2. (U) Tycoon-turned-politician Victor Uspaskich led his 
young Labor Party to a first-round victory taking nearly 29 
percent of the vote in the October 10 first round of 
parliamentary elections.  As a result, Labor will seat at 
least 22 of the candidates from its party list in the 
141-member Seimas.  The coalition of ruling Social Democrats 
and New Union parties finished second at about 21 percent, 
and Conservatives, performing better than expected, bested 
the Liberal and Center Union for third.  The Coalition led by 
impeached former President Rolandas Paksas outperformed 
expectations, even though the courts have barred him from 
holding office.  Leftist ex-Premier Kazimiera Prunskiene 
fared poorly.  The results were as follow: 
 
Labor Party                              28.60%   22 seats 
Coalition of Algirdas Brazauskas 
   and Arturas Paulauskas                20.66    16 
Homeland Union (Conservatives)           14.58    11 
Coalition of Rolandas Paksas             11.42     9 
Liberal and Center Union                  9.13     7 
Union of Farmers Party and 
   New Democrats (Kazimiera Prunskiene)   7.22     5 
 
Other parties failed to pass the threshold of votes necessary 
to win parliamentary seats in the multiple-mandate contest. 
 
3. (U) The first round of voting determined the allocation of 
70 multiple mandates.  In addition, five candidates, 
including Victor Uspaskich, won majorities in single-mandate 
races, throwing three more seats the way of the 
Brazauskas-Paulauskas Coalition (BPK), one to Labor, and one 
to the otherwise unseated Polish Electoral Action. 
 
Round Two Up for Grabs 
---------------------- 
4. (U) A second round of voting October 24 will decide the 
assignment of the remaining 66 seats.  Labor, having placed 
first or second, will run in 44 of the 66 districts whose 
seats are at stake, but Conservatives, BPK, and Liberal 
Center candidates have reasonable or better chances to win in 
many.  With the runoffs limited to two candidates, it is at 
this point uncertain to whom the also-rans will give their 
support, and how the numbers will add up in the end. 
(Analysis and projections to follow septel.)  Voter turnout 
will play significantly in the final outcome.  Only 46 
percent of registered voters cast ballots in the first round. 
 Even fewer voters will likely head to the voting booth on 
October 24, as it marks the fourth election in Lithuania this 
year. 
 
Coalition Building Ahead 
------------------------ 
5. (U) At the end of this process, neither Labor nor BPK are 
likely to end up with a majority.  Under such a scenario, 
Lithuania\'s Prime Minister will have to form a coalition 
government.  Party leaders will wait until after the second 
round before counting their seats and publicly identifying 
coalition partners, but they are already laying down some of 
the rules and ruling out some possibilities.  Uspaskich 
already announced that he will not form a coalition with the 
Paksas Coalition. 
 
6. (C) A senior advisor to the PM told the Ambassador today 
that Brazauskas favors a coalition with Labor, but only on 
the condition that he retains his current position as PM. 
Under such a scenario, Labor would take over the leadership 
of the government in two years.   There has been talk, 
especially in the Presidency, of a Rainbow Coalition of all 
parties excluding Labor and the Paksas Coalition.  The 
Conservatives, whose numbers would be necessary to form the 
coalition, would have few natural allies in such a 
Government.  It would therefore probably prove short-lived. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
7. (C) The next Government of Lithuania will probably include 
some of the same old faces, including at the top. Uspaskich 
is trying to establish himself as non-threatening -- 
increasingly describing himself as a Centrist and, following 
the elections, saying that the voters chose for 
Western-leaning leadership.  If he completes the make-over in 
time, Brazauskas will likely ask him to dance, and the 
unlikely pair (unimaginable just six month ago) will lead the 
Government as PM and Deputy.  For the USG, such a combination 
bodes well, promising continuity of policy, a stable economy, 
and more assiduous courtship of foreign investors. 
Mull 
"
"21768","10/19/2004 11:55","04VILNIUS1292","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1099","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 VILNIUS 001292 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/OHI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/18/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KNAR, PHUM, LH, HT19 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN POLITICAL LEADERS AFFIRM SUPPORT FOR 
JEWISH PROPERTY RESTITUTION 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1099 
 
     B. VILNIUS 1065 
     C. VILNIUS 657 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Christian Yarnell 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: Meetings we facilitated between American 
Jewish Committee official Andrew Baker and key Lithuanian 
political leaders October 13-17 resulted in a reaffirmed 
commitment to restitute communal Jewish property.  On the eve 
of round two of parliamentary elections, President Valdas 
Adamkus expressed optimism that the next government will 
complete restitution.  PM Algirdas Brazauskas, who has long 
backed Lithuania\'s restitution efforts, reiterated his 
support.  Viktor Uspaskich, leader of the ascendant Labor 
Party, pledged that his party would carry out the current 
government policy.  The Conservative Party\'s Andrius Kubilius 
said he too supported property restitution in principle, but 
hoped to ensure that the process was equitable.  Overall, the 
meetings advanced U.S. interests in achieving a just 
recompense for Lithuania\'s legacy of the Holocaust era.  We 
are well positioned to pursue Jewish communal property 
restitution with Lithuania\'s next government, regardless of 
who leads it.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Background on Jewish Property Restitution 
----------------------------------------- 
2. (U) The Lithuanian government has already restituted much 
of the private property seized during the Nazi and Soviet 
occupations, and has drafted an amendment to the country\'s 
1995 restitution law to enable the return of former communal 
property.  (Note: Lithuania\'s Jewish community did not 
distinguish between secular and religious holdings and 
\"communal property,\" which included, among other things, 
synagogues, schools, and hospitals.)  An international 
committee of Jewish organizations, in coordination with the 
Jewish Community of Lithuania, submitted a list of 
unrestituted former Jewish communal properties in February 
2004.  The list identified over 1000 properties, and archival 
research (nearly complete) indicates that about 200 
properties will qualify for restitution under the envisioned 
amendment to the 1995 law.  Prime Minister Algirdas 
Brazauskas has made clear his support for Jewish property 
restitution.  Despite Jewish community urging that the 
Parliament immediately pass the authorizing legislation, the 
GOL has consistently held that the Jewish community must 
present a final list for restitution and allow the Government 
to research the property claims before it will move to amend 
the law (ref C). 
 
Government: End is in Sight 
--------------------------- 
3. (C) Despite the internal political flux attendant to 
Lithuania\'s current parliamentary election process, we 
encouraged Baker to come forward with a visit to Lithuania in 
a coordinated effort to focus Lithuania\'s political 
leadership on moving the restitution process forward.  Baker 
met with Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas, President Valdas 
Adamkus, Labor Party leader Viktor Uspaskich, and 
Conservative Party leader Andrius Kubilius. 
 
4. (C) Prime Minister Brazauskas, who has been one of the 
strongest supporters for restituting communal Jewish 
property, assured Baker and the Ambassador October 15 of his 
continued support.  While Brazauskas said he could not yet 
say who would head Lithuania\'s new government, he affirmed 
that there seemed to be support across the political spectrum 
for resolving the issue, provided that the Jewish community 
could come to final agreement on the properties that it 
believes merit restitution.  Baker told Brazauskas that the 
Jewish community would be ready to submit its final, verified 
list to the government before the end of November, and 
expressed hope that the new Parliament would act swiftly to 
pass legislation authorizing restitution for those 
properties.  Brazauskas welcomed this commitment, but 
expressed special interest in obtaining support from the 
international Jewish community for what he said would be the 
difficult process of combing through largely damaged and 
missing archives in verifying claims to the property. 
Brazauskas said he also personally supported forming a 
foundation comprised of international and local Jewish 
representatives to manage restituted assets on behalf of the 
local Jewish community once restitution is finally made.  He 
said the government would facilitate the rapid legal 
registration of such a foundation, and be ready almost 
immediately to grant it a substantial financial contribution 
to help begin its work. 
 
Adamkus: Optimistic for Future Success 
-------------------------------------- 
5. (U) Baker, accompanied by the DCM, visited President 
Adamkus October 13.  The President confirmed Baker\'s 
speculation that the government failed to deliver on its 
commitment to forward restitution legislation to Parliament 
out of fear that the issue would become a political football 
in the run-up to the parliamentary elections.  At the same 
time, he said that the GOL\'s commitment to seek communal 
restitution \"has not been retracted.\"   While noting that he 
was in no position to provide a \"100 percent guarantee\" for 
the next government, he pronounced himself \"very optimistic\" 
that the new government would reaffirm the commitment.  He 
explained that this confidence was based in large part on his 
expectation that PM Brazauskas would hold the same post in 
the next government. 
 
Uspaskich: Would Continue Current GOL Progress 
--------------------------------------------- - 
6. (U) Baker and the DCM met October 14 with Viktor 
Uspaskich, the leader of the Labor Party, which took first 
place in the first round of Parliamentary elections.  Baker 
opened by briefing Uspaskich on the issue\'s history, the 
rationale for focusing on communal restitution, the current 
state of play, and the relatively modest sums involved. 
Admitting that his understanding of the issue was 
\"superficial,\" Uspaskich expressed support for the general 
principle of restituting private property to its original 
owners.  He told Baker proudly about local municipality 
efforts in his adopted hometown of Kedainiai to restore and 
maintain two of the town\'s historical synagogues.  On the 
specific matter of nationwide restitution of Jewish communal 
property, Uspaskich was positive, but kept his options open. 
Speaking carefully, he declared \"support for continuity on 
this issue\" and vowed that \"you won\'t have problems with me 
or my party.\"  At the same time, he said that he would want 
to scrutinize any legislation \"for pros and cons\" and said 
that any restitution \"must be carried out correctly.\" 
 
Kubilius: Cautiously Supportive 
------------------------------- 
7. (U) Meeting October 14 with Opposition Conservative Party 
leader Andrius Kubilius, Baker provided a brief history of 
the initiative to draft a legislative amendment authorizing 
Jewish communal property restitution.  He told Kubilius that 
he anticipated the archival work on the list of properties to 
be complete around the end of November and expressed his hope 
that the Seimas would be able to move the legislation along. 
Kubilius said that he had not closely followed this issue, 
supported it in principle, but was uncomfortable with the 
idea that the law would favor one religious group over 
others.  Speculating that groups like the Lithuanian Karaites 
(a religious minority of Turkic descent) might have analogous 
claims, he suggested it would be more practical for the 
amendment to reference restitution of communal religious 
properties, generally, rather than single out the Jews. 
Kubilius offered that a general reference might avoid an 
anti-Semitic backlash.  Baker said that while other groups 
might have claims to property restitution, he suspected that 
their claims might differ from the Jewish community\'s, and he 
said would hate to see time lost to have to redraft the 
legislative text.  We suggested that Kubilius might frame the 
legislative amendment and the Jewish communal property 
restitution program as a model for government action to 
address other communities\' property claims. 
 
8. (C) Kubilius mentioned that many properties identified for 
restitution might be in poor condition, and noted that on 
occasions in the past the Jewish community declined the 
return of dilapidated properties, which remained public 
liabilities.  Baker told Kubilius about the foundation that, 
among other things, would raise funds internationally and 
take on responsibility for restoring or maintaining 
properties.  (NOTE: Baker privately mentioned to us that 
Citibank had recently discovered a prewar bank account worth 
around $50,000 that had belonged to the Lithuanian Jewish 
Community.  Baker is working with Citibank officials to have 
these funds transferred to the foundation once it is 
created.)  Baker agreed with Kubilius that restitution of 
destroyed properties would be highly problematic and remarked 
that a symbolic settlement might be appropriate recognition 
and settlement. 
 
Comment: A Homerun Visit 
------------------------ 
9. (C) The progress on Lithuanian property restitution has 
recently slowed, as Lithuanian leaders addressed their 
parliamentary futures and the Jewish community leaders dealt 
with internecine wrangling (ref B).  Baker\'s well-timed and 
productive meetings with the country\'s major political 
players secured commitments from all sides to proceed with 
the restitution of former Jewish communal property once the 
elections end and the work of the new Government begins. 
Brazauskas appears likely to remain on as PM, putting him in 
a good position to deliver on his commitments.  Even the 
issues raised by Kubilius, which to others might appear 
obstructionist, reflect a genuine concern that the government 
act equitably and a recognition that public perception of 
biased treatment could backfire, derailing the restitution 
program.  The Conservative Kubilius is a strong USG ally, and 
he will likely entertain creative solutions to successfully 
complete restitution.  Following his meetings, Baker noted 
that he feels well-positioned to move forward with the next 
government of Lithuania, regardless of which parties actually 
form it. We agree that Lithuania is now heading for the 
homestretch in realizing communal property restitution.  To 
that end, we will remain engaged with the GOL and Jewish 
Community on this issue, an important and long-term Embassy 
goal, to capitalize on this highly successful visit. 
Mull 
"
"21915","10/22/2004 7:47","04VILNIUS1309","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE150206|04VILNIUS1273","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001309 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DS/PSD/PCB AND OBO/PE/SM/OPB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ABLD, ABUD, AFIN, AMGT, ASCH, ASEC, HT32 
SUBJECT: CORRECTED RESPONSE FOR VILNIUS PHASE III 
OVERSEAS SCHOOL SECURITY 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 001273  B. STATE 150206 
 
1.  Ref A reported that there were no primary or 
secondary schools that do not receive grants from the 
Department of State but which are attended by U.S. 
citizens abroad.  That is incorrect. 
 
2. Vilnius has two private schools with American Embassy 
dependents attending.  The Vilnius International School 
admits children for pre-school to first grade.  The school 
opened in September 2004.  There are 40 students attending 
this school. One Embassy dependent and 11 other U.S. 
passport holders attend this school as students or 
teachers.  The Montessori Method Central School is for pre- 
school students only.  There are 30 students attending this 
school.  This school has one Embassy dependent attending 
and no other U.S. passport holders attending. 
 
3. The Vilnius International School is interested in the 
soft target initiative.  They are interested in obtaining 
Shatter Resistant Window Film (SRWF) and a Public Address 
system.  The school is obtaining cost estimates for these 
items.  For planning purposes DS and OBO can use the 
following cost estimates: 
 
SRWF:$25,000 
 
PA System: $2,500 
 
These cost estimates are based on the purchase of similar 
items by the American International School. 
 
4. The Montessori Method Central School declined the soft 
target initiative at this time.  They have a limited budget 
and would be unable to make the initial payment to 
contractors and vendors prior to repayment by the grant. 
 
 
 
 
MULL 
"
"21931","10/22/2004 12:59","04VILNIUS1315","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001315 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB (MGERMANO), EUR/ERA AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, PREL, LH, HT25 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN GOVERNMENT SPLIT ON REACTOR CLOSURE 
POSTPONEMENT 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas announced on 
October 21 that the GOL would ask the EU permission to 
postpone the decommissioning of the first of the two Ignalina 
Nuclear Power Plant units.  Brazauskas said regional energy 
supply security justified the delay.  President Valdas 
Adamkus, however, spoke strongly against delaying 
decommissioning, and said that Lithuania must abide by the 
commitments it made to the EU.  The President has called a 
meeting of the State Defense Council for October 26 to decide 
whether the GOL goes forward with the request.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas announced October 
21 that the GOL had decided to ask the European Union to 
allow it to postpone the decommissioning of the first 
Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant (INPP) Unit.  Under its EU 
accession agreement, Lithuania agreed to decommission the 
first unit by December 31, 2004, and the second by the end of 
2009. 
 
3. (U) Brazauskas said postponement is necessary to ensure 
uninterrupted power generation for Lithuanian consumers and 
the surrounding region.  The GOL is especially concerned that 
the delayed opening of a Kaliningrad reactor, expected to 
provide backup to Lithuania in the event of blackouts, calls 
into question Lithuania\'s energy security this winter. 
Current projections are that the Kaliningrad unit will be 
online in November 2005, more than a year behind schedule.  A 
new thermal power station in Riga, Latvia, will eventually 
provide backup to Lithuania\'s energy system as well, but will 
not be on-line before November 2005. 
 
4. (U) Though the Ignalina units are older Chernobyl-designed 
RBMK reactors, the USDOE has provided $10 million worth of 
security upgrades since 1996, and technical assistance from 
European countries and Japan has improved the safety of the 
reactor, extending the nuclear power plant\'s (NPP) 
operational capability beyond its natural lifetime.  The 
GOL\'s Nuclear Advisory Committee, which includes Western 
experts, assured the government last week that a six-month 
extension for Unit I would not adversely impact the NPP\'s 
safety.  In his announcement October 21, Brazauskas said the 
GOL would invite EU experts to meet with their GOL 
counterparts to consider arguments in favor of postponement. 
 
5. (SBU) President Adamkus spoke sharply against postponement 
October 21, telling the press that delaying the closing is 
\"out of the question\" and would counter Lithuania\'s 
international obligations.  Presidential Advisor Nijole 
Zambaite told us that the presidential office has been 
involved in ongoing discussions on postponement, but the 
Government\'s arguments have yet to convince him.  Zambaite 
indicated that Adamkus will hear out the Cabinet\'s arguments 
with an open mind at an October 26 State Defense Council 
meeting, before taking a final stand. 
 
6.  (SBU) Resident EU officials sent mixed messages in 
response to the Prime Minister\'s announcement.  Michael 
Graham, the Head of the EC Representative Office in 
Lithuania, took a hard line on national television, saying 
that Lithuania cannot postpone without first renegotiating 
its accession treaty commitments with the Commission and 
other member states.  His office later clarified to us that 
Brazauskas\'s announcement had taken Graham by surprise, 
because Lithuania had not raised the subject of potential 
postponement during the earlier accession negotiations. 
European Commission Transport and Energy Spokesperson Amador 
Sanchez Rico, reserving judgment, told the press that the 
Commission will review and analyze any GOL request to 
postpone. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7. (U) The GOL decision comes against backdrop of concerns 
over the impact of the plant closing on the local economy 
around Ignalina, and over the past six months a few 
politicians have called for renegotiation of the reactor 
decommissioning.  MP and former presidential candidate 
Kazimiera Prunskiene and former President Paksas\' Liberal 
Democratic Party campaigned on this issue during the recent 
presidential elections.  Prunskiene, who represents the 
reactor\'s district, expressed concern that approximately 68 
percent of the 3,592-member reactor workforce may face 
unemployment when both units shut down, since their highly 
specialized skills are not easily transferable.  On the 
political (and emotional) side, the recent Yukos crisis has 
also inspired renewed discussion of keeping Ignalina open (or 
building a new NPP) to reduce Lithuania\'s energy dependence 
on Russian oil and natural gas. 
Mull 
"
"22006","10/25/2004 15:47","04VILNIUS1323","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS774","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001323 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/24/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, LH, HT1 
SUBJECT: LABOR LEADS LITHUANIAN ELECTIONS; BRAZAUSKAS WILL 
LEAD COALITION-MAKING PROCESS 
 
REF: VILNIUS 774 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Nancy Cohen for reasons 1.4(b) 
and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Victor Uspaskich\'s Labor Party won a 
plurality in the final round of Lithuanian parliamentary 
elections, October 24, but failed to guarantee its place in a 
ruling coalition.  Over the next few weeks, President Valdas 
Adamkus must invite the leader of the winning party or 
coalition to form a government.  Since the law allows the 
President to nominate the leader of a post-election 
coalition, Uspaskich is not the only potential nominee for 
Prime Minister.  Intense political maneuvering will determine 
the configuration of the next government.  Of the two most 
likely unions, one would tilt leftward with Labor and the 
Brazauskas-Paulauskas Party as its core, while the other 
would unite left, right, and center and exclude Labor. 
Numbers and politics dictate that the Brazauskas-Paulauskas 
coalition will be in the Government.  Our best guess is that 
the coalition will opt to choose Labor as a partner, despite 
Adamkus\' efforts to the contrary.  End Summary. 
 
The Final Count: Labor at the Head of the Pack 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2. (U) Lithuania\'s Labor Party took 39 seats of a total 141 
in parliamentary elections that ended October 24.  The 
Brazauskas-Paulauskas Coalition (Social Democratic and New 
Union Parties) came in with 31 seats.  The final tally looks 
like this: 
 
Labor Party                                 39 
Brazauskas-Paulauskas                       31 
Conservatives                               25 
Liberal Center                              18 
Paksas Coalition                            11 
Peasant Party                               10 
Independents                                 7 
 
3. (U) Margins of victory of four to 61 votes in three 
districts have triggered recounts and some independent MPs 
may announce new political allegiance to one party or 
another, but overall numbers will not change dramatically. 
Accusations of vote buying, especially associated with mailed 
ballots, have been widespread, but no party has yet 
challenged the final results or the general fairness of the 
election.  The election will nearly double the number of 
women in Lithuania\'s parliament (Seimas), bringing the total 
to 29 or roughly 20 percent of the chamber\'s membership. 
Labor accounts for most of the new women MPs.  Of the former 
137 sitting members of parliament, only 58 will return in the 
new Seimas. 
 
Next Steps: The Mechanics and Timetable 
--------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) It falls to Lithuania\'s President Valdas Adamkus to 
convene the next parliament and nominate the Prime Minister. 
The first session of the new Seimas should begin between 
November 10 and 15.  The President then has 15 days to 
present formally his choice for PM, and the legislature must 
vote the President\'s candidate up or down within a week.  The 
new Prime Minister has 15 days from confirmation within which 
to propose his Cabinet (with Presidential endorsement) to the 
Seimas, which then has another two weeks to approve the 
slate.  The earliest a new Government could take power is 
November 16; the latest January 6, 2005.  If the Seimas 
rejects the President\'s PM candidate twice, it\'s back to the 
drawing board -- the President can call for new parliamentary 
elections.  (We don\'t foresee that happening, however.) 
 
Coalition Building 
------------------ 
 
Left and Center 
 
5. (C) Since no party or coalition emerged with an outright 
majority, all are wrangling for position in an eventual 
ruling coalition.  The President will interview the 
chairperson of each political party on October 25 to discuss 
coalition options, and the party leaders are meeting among 
themselves to determine viable partnership arrangements. 
 
6. (C) Today, one day after the final vote, a left-tilting 
alliance seems the likeliest outcome.  Immediately after the 
results were in, Uspaskich formed an alliance with Kazimiera 
Prunskiene\'s Peasant Party, picking up an additional ten 
seats.  Uspaskich also announced that, if the Social 
Democrats and New Union join his block, he would accept 
current PM Brazauskas as the Prime Minister, fulfilling the 
PM\'s previously stated condition for an alliance with Labor. 
The center-left coalition Uspaskich outlined would have 
ideological coherence and a solid 80 seats.  Uspaskich said 
he would welcome the center-right Liberal and Center Party to 
the fold in order to obtain the broadest possible coalition 
-- not to mention another 18 seats.  Upon exiting his 
interview with Adamkus later in the day, Brazauskas said he 
was considering an invitation from the Uspaskich-Prunskiene 
alliance to form a coalition. 
 
Rainbow Coalition 
 
7. (C) The most viable alternative to the leftist-centrist 
coalition would embrace political parties of nearly all 
stripes -- except Labor -- and has earned the title \"rainbow 
coalition.\"  As votes were being cast, Vytautis Lansbergis, 
father of the Lithuania\'s independence movement and former 
Conservative party leader, called for such a coalition.  The 
union of leftist Social Democrats and New Union with the 
Liberal and Center Party and Conservatives would achieve a 
majority and keep Uspaskich out of the Government, 
Landsbergis\'s stated goal.  Given the ideological and 
programmatic differences of these parties, however, such an 
alliance would be unwieldy.  Already, these interparty 
differences are complicating its creation, with both Social 
Democrat Brazauskas and Conservative leader Andrius Kubilius 
claiming the right to form a government. Nonetheless, 
President Adamkuspublicly announced today his preference for 
this outcome.  Adamkus arranged a similar alliance with 
Rolandas Paksas in 2000; it proved short-lived. 
 
Minority Government 
 
8. (C) A third option which Brazauskas mentioned upon leaving 
his meeting with the President was to form a minority 
government of Social Democrats, New Union, and Liberal and 
Center parties.  Under this scenario, the Conservatives would 
remain outside the government, but support many government 
initiatives. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (C) Brazauskas, not Adamkus, wields the real power in the 
coalition-building process.  For him, the key question comes 
down to whether the Conservative or Labor Party will be out 
in the cold.  The situation remains fluid, but our best guess 
is that he will opt for Labor as a partner.  Given the 
ideological proximity of Brazauskas, Palauskas, and 
Uspaskich, such a coalition would probably prove more 
programmatically coherent and stable than the alternative. 
The underlying assumption by the established center-left in 
this scenario would be that the experience of governing would 
mature and mellow Labor. 
 
10. (C) Uspaskich\'s early alliance with Prunskiene is an 
unsettling development in the post-election jockeying.  Of 
all presidential candidates in this year\'s May elections, 
only Prunskiene spoke of reducing U.S. influence in Lithuania 
and in Europe (ref A).  On October 5, after signing with all 
other political party leaders a pre-parliamentary election 
joint declaration of commitment to foreign policy goals, 
including strong transatlantic ties and increased cooperation 
with the USG, Prunskiene told the press she might want to 
revisit this goal. 
 
11.  (C) Politics, rather than a hidden agenda against us, 
probably motivates Uspaskich.  We think that he announced his 
alliance with Prunskiene in order to present himself as 
controlling more votes than any other leader when he met 
today with President Adamkus.  If Labor does reach 
government, Prunskiene, as one of many junior partners in a 
coalition, will not be well-positioned to change the 
pro-American course of Lithuania\'s foreign policy.    In any 
event, under any possible scenario, we will work with old and 
new friends in the political arena to preserve our strong 
bilateral relationship. 
KELLY 
"
"22183","10/29/2004 10:41","04VILNIUS1350","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE226131","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001350 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EUR/RPM, AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2014 
TAGS: PARM, MOPS, LH, HT12, HT16 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA: RUSSIAN TEAM COMPLETES UNEVENTFUL VDOC 
INSPECTION 
 
REF: STATE 226131 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  A team from the Russian Federation conducted 
a Vienna Document inspection of Lithuanian military 
facilities on October 27-28.  The inspection covered army and 
air force facilities in Kaunas, Panevezys, and Siauliai, 
including NATO\'s Baltic air policing assets at the Zokniai 
airfield.  The GOL, assisted by a J-6 team from the United 
Kingdom, escorted the Russian team through an uneventful 
inspection.  Reports from the field indicate that the Russian 
team was more than satisfied with all aspects of the 
inspection.  Lithuania\'s willingness to be open, flexible, 
and transparent, exceeding the requirements of the Vienna 
Document, demonstrated that the GOR could and should utilize 
existing inspection mechanisms to gain confidence in NATO\'s 
presence in the Baltics.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) The Government of Lithuania, in response to a Vienna 
document request (reftel A), hosted a team of Russian 
Federation (RF) inspectors on October 27-28.  Lithuanian 
military officials, and two officers from the United 
Kingdom\'s J-6 Division, accompanied the team of four Russian 
military officers as they inspected, by helicopter and car, 
an area that included military installations near the cities 
of Kaunas, Panevezys and Siauliai.  The Russian team 
conducted a complete inspection of NATO\'s Baltic air policing 
assets, including British F-3 Tornado aircraft, at the 
Zokniai airfield. 
 
------- 
Day One 
------- 
 
3. (SBU) The RF team, following the itinerary proposed by the 
GOL, entered the inspection area at Rukla, approximately 30 
kilometers north of Kaunas, on the morning of October 27. 
Military installations around Rukla include the Grand Duke 
Algirdas motorized infantry battalion, maneuvering elements 
of the Iron Wolf Brigade, and a conscript training center. 
The GOL provided three briefings to the RF team in Rukla 
before traveling to Kaunas, where the team boarded a 
helicopter and completed an aerial survey of the inspection 
area.  (Note: Though the GOL denied the RF request to use GPS 
equipment, the team was allowed to monitor the helicopter\'s 
GPS readings during the aerial inspection.)  After the aerial 
inspection, the team had a briefing at Lithuanian Air Force 
Headquarters in Kaunas. 
 
------- 
Day Two 
------- 
 
4. (SBU) The RF team traveled by car on the morning of 
October 28 to Siauliai and received a briefing at Lithuania\'s 
First Air Force Base.  The team toured the Zokniai airfield, 
where they met with the leadership of the NATO Detachment, 
and viewed the British F-3 Tornadoes and storage sites.  The 
team visited Panevezys and received a briefing before 
inspecting the King Mindaugas motorized infantry battalion. 
 
--------- 
Departure 
--------- 
 
5. (U) The RF team will depart Vilnius on October 29 around 
17:00 local time.  Social events are scheduled during the day. 
 
----------------------- 
Comments from the Field 
----------------------- 
 
6. (C) We received several updates from the MFA during the RF 
team\'s visit.  All reports from the field were extremely 
positive, noting that the inspection progressed perfectly as 
planned, with no special surprises or requests from the RF 
team.  Interlocutors said the RF team was \"relaxed\" and 
\"happy\" with the inspection. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
7. (C) Lithuania went above and beyond the letter of the 
Vienna Document and repeatedly illustrated its willingness to 
be open, flexible, and transparent during the inspection by 
allowing, for example, the RF team to fully inspect the NATO 
assets and storage sites at the Zokniai airfield.  The GOL 
again demonstrated its commitment to addressing Russian 
concerns about NATO\'s air policing mission in the Baltics, 
and validated NATO\'s position that the Russian Federation 
should utilize existing inspection mechanisms to build 
confidence. 
MULL 
"
"22196","10/29/2004 13:29","04VILNIUS1352","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1323","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001352 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, LH, HT1 
SUBJECT: THE END OF THE RAINBOW: COALITION TALKS WITH 
CONSERVATIVES COLLAPSE 
 
REF: VILNIUS 1323 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Christian Yarnell 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: The Conservative Party suspended formal 
talks with the Brazauskas-Paulauskas coalition on October 28, 
following major disagreement over the constitution of a 
so-called \"rainbow coalition.\"  Immediately following the 
collapse of talks, the Brazauskas-Paulauskas coalition 
formally agreed to begin negotiations with the upstart Labor 
Party led by Russian-born millionaire Viktor Uspaskich.  The 
Labor Party has said it will accept PM Brazauskas\'s and 
Parliamentary Chairman Paulauskas\'s remaining in their 
respective positions, although Uspaskich hopes to get more 
key posts in Parliament as compensation.  A coalition of the 
Social Democratic, New Union, Labor, and Peasant parties 
would have a solid majority of 84 MPs in the 141-seat 
Parliament, and would leave President Adamkus little choice 
but to endorse its proposed Cabinet.  Detailed negotiations 
will continue well into next week, however.  Brazauskas has 
signaled to the Labor Party that, if his demands are not met, 
he could form a minority Cabinet among the Social Democrats, 
New Union, and Liberal Center, and the Conservatives have 
said they would throw their needed support behind this 
minority Cabinet.  Brazauskas is driving a hard bargain, but 
we expect him to form a coalition government with Labor 
before the end of next week.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Conservatives and Liberals Back Out of Talks 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) \"Rainbow\" coalition negotiations between the 
center-left Brazauskas-Paulauskas alliance (Social Democratic 
and New Union Parties) and the center-right bloc of 
Conservatives and Liberal Centrists, launched following 
October 24 elections (ref A), have all but collapsed.  The 
ideological adversaries -- Conservatives as successors of the 
independence movement Sajudis and Social Democrats as 
Communist Party offspring -- failed to bridge their 
differences and agree on a sharing of power.  The 
Conservatives (25 seats in Parliament) rejected demands by 
the Social Democrats (20 seats) for the top leadership 
positions in the government and key ministerial posts.  The 
Social Democrats, in turn, dismissed the Conservative 
compromise proposal of a two-year rotation of the top 
government spots.  The crisis came to a head when 
Brazauskas\'s party signed an agreement on October 28 to 
launch formal negotiations with the Labor Party. 
Conservative leader Andrius Kubilius responded by suspending 
talks on the \"rainbow\" coalition.  The Liberal Center joined 
with the Conservatives and refused an invitation to join in 
talks with Labor. 
 
------------------------------- 
Labor Party Eager for Coalition 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) The Labor Party (39 Parliamentary seats), meanwhile, 
has already declared that it considers PM Brazauskas and 
Parliamentary Speaker Paulauskas acceptable candidates to 
remain in their current leadership posts.  Uspaskich has 
limited his appetite to six ministerial portfolios (of lower 
importance) and complimented the current 
Brazauskas-Paulauskas Cabinet for implementing a program 
similar to his own.  Brazauskas cautioned that there was more 
to negotiate, however, noting that he could still form a 
minority Cabinet comprised of Social Democrats, New Union, 
and the Liberal Center if necessary.  The Conservatives 
indicated on October 29 a willingness to support such a 
minority Cabinet, bolstering Brazauskas\'s bargaining position 
vis-a-vis Labor. 
 
------------------- 
Negotiation Details 
------------------- 
 
4. (U) Social Democrats demand for themselves the post of PM 
for Brazauskas and seven ministries (out of 13 total) that 
would administer the bulk of EU funds:  Finance, 
Transportation, Environment, Economy, Agriculture, and Social 
Security and Labor.  A majority of portfolios in the Cabinet 
would not only enable PM Brazauskas to steer policy, but 
would also enable him to continue on uninterrupted as PM. 
(Note: According to Lithuanian law, the PM must step down if 
more than half of the Cabinet ministers change.)  The New 
Union wants for itself the posts of Parliamentary Chairman 
and Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Education.  Uspaskich 
has said that Labor could accept as few as six Cabinet 
positions, as long as it received the lion\'s share of 
committee chair posts in Parliament as compensation.  Peasant 
Party leader Prunskiene is battling for control of the 
Ministry of Agriculture, but, according to media reports, is 
unlikely to assume the post herself. 
 
5. (U) A Brazauskas-Paulauskas-Uspaskich-Prunskiene (Social 
Democrats, New Union, Labor, and Peasants) coalition, 
including a few independents, would have a solid majority of 
84 MPs in the 141-seat Parliament.  Talks on the division of 
portfolios, personalities, and Cabinet program will continue 
well into next week, but President Adamkus would have little 
choice but to endorse the Cabinet of this coalition. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
6. (C) Brazauskas has played hardball throughout the 
post-election negotiations, even though his Social Democratic 
Party finished third in the elections with only 20 of 141 
Parliamentary seats.  Yet the Brazauskas-Paulauskas coalition 
remains the only partner acceptable to all sides, and 
electoral math dictates that Brazauskas be included in the 
next government.  His flirtation with the right succeeded in 
frightening Labor, which is desperate to be included in the 
government following a very expensive campaign with high 
expectations of success.  Uspaskich\'s willingness to allow 
Brazauskas and Paulauskas to remain on as PM and 
Parliamentary Chairman, respectively, removes the most severe 
obstacle to a coalition agreement.  We expect the Social 
Democrats, New Union, Labor, and Peasants to announce the 
formation of a coalition government headed by PM Brazauskas 
by the end of next week, although a minority Cabinet 
excluding Labor remains a remote possibility. 
MULL 
"
"22201","10/29/2004 14:14","04VILNIUS1353","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04USNATO940","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 VILNIUS 001353 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EUR/RPM, AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2014 
TAGS: MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PBTS, PGOV, PINS, PREL, LH, HT12, HT16 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA CONCERNED OVER RUSSIAN AIR INCURSIONS 
AND ATTEMPTS TO DIVIDE NATO 
 
REF: A. USNATO 940 
 
     B. VILNIUS 1350 
     C. VILNIUS 987 
     D. VILNIUS 845 
     E. VILNIUS 305 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Trevor Boyd 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (C) Summary.  Lithuania\'s opposition to hosting a Baltic 
regional air safety conference under NATO-Russia Council 
(NRC) auspices (ref A) is rooted in its assessment that 
Russian policy aims to disrupt NATO relations with its newest 
members and raise pressure on the air policing mission. 
Though Russian violations of Lithuanian airspace, once 
annually numbering in the thousands, have dropped to a 
handful in recent years, Lithuania remains concerned that its 
neighbors are violating its airspace to test Lithuania\'s and 
NATO\'s technological ability and diplomatic resolve.  In 
discussions regarding a permanent Baltic air-policing 
mission, Lithuania will stress the need for NATO assets given 
its own meager air defense capabilities, highlighting the 
fact that recent incursions have occurred over the Ignalina 
nuclear power plant and that NATO aircraft have intercepted 
suspected Russian intelligence aircraft traversing the Baltic 
Sea Coast.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Russia\'s Disruptive Presence 
---------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Lithuanian government officials believe that Russian 
air space violations illustrate that the GOR is unwilling to 
accept the new NATO reality in the Baltics and would use any 
NRC discussion on the issue to subvert it.  Despite its 
continued concern over Russian air incursions, Lithuania is 
not yet ready to support initiatives like the proposed 
NATO-Russia Council Regional Air Safety Conference (reftel 
A), fearing that the forum would be used by Russia to create 
a rift within the NATO alliance.  The GOL does not feel it 
necessary to continue to assuage unfounded Russian concerns 
over the nature of the Baltic air-policing mission in 
Brussels or elsewhere. 
 
3. (C) Kestutis Jankauskas, Director of MFA\'s Security Policy 
Department told us that the GOR would use initiatives like 
the NRC Conference to \"single out\" the Baltic region in the 
belief that NATO itself, by calling for a special conference, 
believes that there are differences between its new Baltic 
members and its Western European founders.  NATO, he said, 
affords indivisible security to its members.  A Conference 
focused on the Baltic region, therefore, would add no value 
to the NATO-Russia relationship, and might, in fact, imply 
inter-alliance instability to the GOR.  Noting the recent 
visit of a Russian Vienna Document inspection team (reftel B) 
to the Zokniai airfield and NATO\'s Baltic air policing 
assets, Lithuania, Jankauskas said, prefers to work through 
established CSBM confidence-building instruments to mitigate 
NATO-GOR tensions rather than create new fora that Russia may 
exploit to imply there are problems where none exist. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
The History of Violations of Lithuanian Air Space 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
4. (SBU) There have been nearly 5,500 recorded violations of 
Lithuania\'s airspace by both fixed wing and rotor aircraft 
since January 1, 1992.  Though aircraft from Latvia (on three 
occasions), the United States (once; a BE-20 flying without 
proper authorization July 28, 2000), and Sweden (once) have 
violated Lithuania\'s airspace, only aircraft from Russia or 
Belarus have done so since June 2001. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Summary of Violations of Lithuania\'s Airspace 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) The Government of Lithuania recorded the following 
number of violations of its air space: 
 
--1992      2,557 violations 
--1993      2,621 violations 
--1994      133 violations 
--1995      59 violations 
--1996      14 violations 
--1997      10 violations 
--1998      5 violations 
--1999      4 violations 
--2000      8 violations 
--2001      8 violations 
--2002      4 violations 
--2003      3 violations 
--2004      5 violations 
 
6. (SBU) The GOL argues that, in the mid-late 1990s, 
Lithuania\'s participation in transatlantic security programs 
and anticipated membership in NATO were key to discouraging 
Russian air incursions.  They point in particular to 
Lithuania\'s joining the PfP in January 1994 to explain the 
sudden drop of airspace violations from over two thousand to 
fewer than two hundred.  Improvements in Lithuania\'s ability, 
both technically and multilaterally, to detect and address 
incursions into its air space, such as the development of 
national air sovereignty operations and the 2001 inauguration 
of the Regional Airspace Surveillance Co-ordination Center in 
Karmelava, Lithuania, have also discouraged air incursions. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Belarus Also a Cause for Concern 
-------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Though many of the most recent violations appear more 
incidental than directed, as when helicopters have drifted 
across Lithuania\'s border for under two minutes, Lithuanians 
worry that Russia and Belarus undertake targeted incursions 
to test Lithuania\'s air detection and defense capabilities. 
They point in particular to two incursions, in April and June 
2003, when aircraft from Belarus violated Lithuanian airspace 
over the Ignalina nuclear power plant.  The Ignalina plant, 
four miles from the Belarusian border, is Lithuania\'s only 
area of restricted airspace, and is only modestly protected 
against threats from the air by a single platoon of six 
Swedish-made BOFORS L-70 40mm air defense guns. 
 
------------------------------ 
Surveillance Aircraft Concerns 
------------------------------ 
 
8. (C) Lithuania is concerned about surveillance aircraft 
moving between Kaliningrad and Russia.  A Russian IL-18 
traveling to Kaliningrad violated Lithuanian airspace in 
November 2003.  Russia flies modified IL-18 electronic 
surveillance planes (IL-20 or COOT-A) along the Baltic Sea 
Coast.  Lithuanian interlocutors note that one of the few 
times NATO\'s planes scrambled to address a Baltic airspace 
violation since the Baltic air-policing mission began in 
March was in response to a likely IL-20 traversing Estonian 
airspace without a flight plan, in June.  The Russian crew, 
interlocutors stress, only submitted a flight plan after 
Belgian F-16s had intercepted their aircraft. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Limited Domestic Air Defense Assets 
----------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) Lithuania lacks the air assets to police and defend 
its airspace against air incursions on their own.  The 
country\'s meager national air assets, namely a pair of L-39 
Albatross airframes and small helicopter fleet are not 
night-capable and, therefore, can provide air defense, 
protect against renegade attack, and assist in civil air 
emergencies only during daylight. 
 
----------------- 
Russian Pressure? 
----------------- 
 
10. (C) Russia seems determined, say interlocutors, to play a 
game of cat and mouse with Lithuania to test the 
technological ability and diplomatic resolve of the GOL to 
address violations of its airspace.  Even in instances where 
Russian aircraft are tracked, and air space violations 
recorded, say interlocutors, the GOR refutes GOL evidence 
with blanket denials and technical doubletalk.  Russian 
actions lend little credence to the belief that the GOR will 
ever be more than a disruptive presence in the region. 
 
11. (C) Darius Mereckis of MFA\'s NATO Division shared with us 
an official GOR reply to a GOL query about two airspace 
violations near the Kaliningrad border by Russian military 
aircraft in May.  Russia\'s diplomatic note denied that any of 
its aircraft \"conducted flights in the airspace of the 
Kaliningrad Oblast\" at the time of the incident.  In response 
to Lithuanian electronic evidence that a Russian AN-26 
violated Lithuanian airspace over the Baltic Sea, Russia 
denied the violation, and said the flight was conducted in 
accordance with its request and corresponding permit to 
utilize established air transit routes over Latvia. 
 
------------ 
EU Parallels 
------------ 
 
12.  (C) Lithuanians also claim Russians play a similar game 
with their relations with the EU, by regularly claiming in EU 
fora that Lithuania is attempting to disrupt Russian 
transport links to the Kaliningrad exclave - though objective 
observers regularly praise the Lithuanian government for 
scrupulous implementation of the EU-Russia-Lithuanian 
agreement regulating such transportation. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
13. (C) Violations of Lithuania\'s airspace are rare. 
Nevertheless, in discussions of a permanent Baltic air 
policing solution, the GOL will likely play up perceived 
targeted Russian or Belarusian threats to Lithuania\'s 
security; but they would also concede that they don\'t expect 
a Soviet air invasion.  Such a response are perhaps only 
natural in response to what the Lithuanians perceive 
nationalist hostility towards Baltic NATO membership 
emanating from Russia.  Lithuania is ready to play a 
constructive role within European security mechanisms such as 
the Vienna Document - as it evidenced in successfully hosting 
a Russian inspection this week.  But it will unlikely agree 
to putting Baltic security concerns on the agenda of any NATO 
interaction with Russia until they believe Russia takes 
obvious steps to back off from what the Lithuanians believe 
aim to disrupt relations within NATO. 
MULL 
"
"22528","11/5/2004 12:57","04VILNIUS1369","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04VILNIUS1331|04VILNIUS79","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001369 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, OVIP, LH, HT38 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR IN SIAULIAI STRESSES DEVELOPMENT AND 
TOLERANCE, TOURS NATO DETACHMENT 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1331 
     B. VILNIUS 079 
 
1. SUMMARY.  Ambassador traveled to Lithuania\'s northern city 
of Siauliai October 20-21 to conveying a message of 
admiration for Lithuania\'s rapid democratic and economic 
growth and appreciation for its activist foreign policy and 
contributions to the NATO alliance.  In a town often 
identified with anti-Semitism, the Ambassador promoted a 
message of tolerance and the rights of persons during 
meetings, press interviews, and a public forum with local 
governmental and NGO leaders.  He also visited the Zokniai 
airfield, home to NATO\'s Baltic air policing assets, and 
received briefings from the Commander of Lithuania\'s Air 
Force and NATO\'s detachment commander on the air-policing 
mission.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
2. The visit to Siauliai was the second in a series of 
planned Ambassadorial trips (reftel A) to regional towns in 
Lithuania.  Siauliai is Lithuania\'s fourth largest city and 
the economic, cultural, and educational center of Northern 
Lithuania.  The city is most famous for the memorial of 
thousands of crosses planted in a hillside, initially 
dedicated to people who were killed for Lithuanian freedom, 
which draws nearly a million visitors per annum.  After WWII 
left Siauliai in near ruins, the Soviet Union rebuilt and 
developed Siauliai to support the largest military airport in 
Eastern Europe.  The Zokniai airport is currently home to a 
Lithuanian air force base and, since March, has hosted NATO\'s 
Baltic air policing assets. 
 
------------------------ 
The Ambassador\'s Message 
------------------------ 
 
3. The Ambassador stressed five themes with local 
governmental, NGO, cultural and educational leaders during a 
two-day tour d\'horizon on October 20-21: 
 
--ACTIVIST FOREIGN POLICY:  Ambassador Mull noted Lithuania\'s 
activist foreign policy, its role in strengthening the 
transatlantic alliance and its constructive role in regional 
stability. 
 
--CONTINUED STRONG BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP:  The Ambassador 
assured interlocutors that Lithuania\'s close relationship 
with the United States will continue. 
 
--DEMOCRATIC AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:  Ambassador Mull 
praised Lithuania\'s success in progressing from a 
totalitarian system to a democracy that is vibrant, free, and 
secure. 
 
--INCREASED ECONOMIC COOPERATION:  The Ambassador promoted 
greater economic cooperation between the United States and 
Lithuania and highlighted December\'s Baltic Trade and 
Investment Mission in London. 
 
--TOLERANCE:  The Ambassador praised those who, recognizing a 
serious threat to democracy, stand up and condemn intolerance 
in all its forms, including anti-Semitism. 
 
-------------------------------- 
A Provincial Town In Development 
-------------------------------- 
 
4. Interlocutors focused discussions on issues related to 
economic development and attracting foreign investment. 
Though Siauliai has Northern Lithuania\'s largest university, 
hospital, and airport, interlocutors noted that Siauliai is 
best described as a provincial town, one hungry for 
development and investment. 
 
5. Siauliai County Governor Arvydas Sedzius, who also serves 
as Chairman of Siauliai\'s Regional Development Council, said 
that Siauliai has not yet benefited significantly from EU 
structural fund support.  These funds, and foreign direct 
investment, said Siauliai Mayor Vytautas Juskus, have gone 
primarily to Lithuania\'s three largest cities, Vilnius, 
Kaunas and Klaipeda, and have only begun to trickle to 
Siauliai for local development projects.  Ramunas Markauskas, 
Administrator of Siauliai\'s 68-member strong Confederation of 
NGOs, told the Ambassador that the region\'s budget for social 
welfare programs, for example, is only 130,000 Litas 
(approximately $46,000 USD), insufficient to meet the needs 
of a population of 150,000.  Leadership at the Siauliai 
Hospital and Siauliai University told the Ambassador that 
lack of government assistance keeps these institutions on 
shoestring budgets and impedes expansion or improvement of 
services. 
 
6. Siauliai airport Director Jonas Jutkelis noted his 
frustration at attracting private investment capital to one 
of Eastern Europe\'s best-equipped civilian airports.  In 
spite of its very long runway, new control tower, highly 
qualified specialists, close proximity to the Latvian border, 
and first-rank certification, the airport has not attracted 
private capital for infrastructure development.  The airport 
continues to seek investment partners, but Jutkelis said he 
was not optimistic about finding one in the near future. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Rebellious Past, Undercurrent of Intolerance Today 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
7. Siauliai, a center of rebellion against both Tsarist 
Russian and Soviet oppression during its nearly 800-year 
history, is still known for its straightforward, outspoken 
people.  Acts of intolerance are occasionally reported 
(reftel B) against Siauliai\'s small Jewish community, though 
governmental and NGO leaders downplayed these sporadic 
occurrences, and highlighted Siauliai\'s inter-ethnic harmony 
to the Ambassador.  Reflecting Siauliai\'s reputation for 
candor, residents asked the Ambassador challenging, 
hard-hitting questions on topics that ranged from USG support 
for Lithuania following the Potsdam Conference to the lack of 
U.S. investment in the region during an open forum at the 
Siauliai Community House.  A leader of Lithuania\'s National 
Democratic party present at the forum questioned the U.S. 
role in the Middle East. 
 
---------------- 
NATO\'s Footprint 
---------------- 
 
8. Lithuanian Air Force Commander Colonel Jonas Marcinkus and 
NATO\'s Detachment Commander British Wing Commander Dan 
Storrs provided briefings on the ongoing renovations of the 
Zokniai airfield and the NATO air-policing mission. 
Marcinkus said that renovations to the Zokniai airfield are 
on schedule and should be complete by 2006.  Storrs spoke 
highly of the logistical support provided by the GOL has 
provided to his detachment since its arrival October 14. 
Storrs, during a comprehensive tour of his operational 
headquarters, also detailed his efforts to keep NATO\'s 
footprint as small as possible in Siauliai, in order to 
maintain amicable relations with the civilian population. 
 
-------------- 
Media Coverage 
-------------- 
 
9. There was extensive media coverage throughout the visit. 
The Ambassador gave an exclusive interview to the region\'s 
largest daily newspaper and provided interviews for the 
region\'s television and print outlets throughout the visit. 
 
----------------------------- 
Comment:  Hope for the Future 
----------------------------- 
 
10. Siauliai lags behind Vilnius, Kaunas, and Klaipeda in 
terms of development and investment.  With low unemployment, 
a well-educated work force, the region\'s largest university, 
and NATO funds helping renovate the airport and contributing 
to the local economy, the future for Siauliai could be 
bright.  The region\'s Achilles\' Heel is the undercurrent of 
intolerance, particularly anti-Semitism.  For the region to 
achieve its potential, its leaders must play a more active 
role in promoting tolerance. 
MULL 
"
"22597","11/8/2004 12:16","04VILNIUS1380","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS889","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001380 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/RPM 
DOD FOR DASD BREZINSKI 
NSC FOR VOLKER 
INR FOR INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/07/2014 
TAGS: MARR, MOPS, PREL, MCAP, PINR, PGOV, LH, HT48 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA\'S 2005 DRAFT BUDGET SHORTS MOD 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 889 
 
     B. VILNIUS 320 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  The draft 2005 GOL budget before the 
Parliament fulfills Lithuania\'s NATO commitment to allocate 
two percent of GDP to defense spending, but falls far short 
of providing that two percent to the military.  The budget 
increases the share of defense money that will go to other 
Ministries for non-military defense-related expenditures. 
Military defense spending in 2005 will decrease nearly 14 
percent from 2004 levels.  The GOL downplayed the shortfall. 
While it is likely that Lithuania will be able to maintain 
the scope of its international commitments in Iraq, 
Afghanistan and Kosovo, funding levels may affect Lithuania\'s 
ability to meet its NATO force transformation commitments. 
We will educate new members of Parliament and Government 
about Lithuania\'s NATO commitments and encourage support for 
Lithuania\'s ongoing military transformation goals.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) Parliament\'s National Security and Defense Committee 
approved on October 18 a draft budget allocating 1.86 percent 
of Lithuania\'s projected 2005 GDP for defense spending. 
Approximately 40 percent of this sum, however, will not go to 
the Ministry of Defense (MOD) directly, but will be 
reallocated to cover defense-related expenses of other 
Ministries, such as the Ministry of Interior and the State 
Border Protection Service.  The draft budget allocates 
roughly 750 million Litas (approximately USD 277 million) 
directly to the MOD, a decrease of approximately 120 million 
Litas (USD 44 million or 14 percent) from 2004.  In March, 
the leadership of eleven political parties signed an 
agreement committing the two percent GDP funding level for 
defense through 2008 (reftel B).  To meet the two percent 
commitment, the Ministry of Finance included the 
approximately 230 million Litas (USD 85 million) the EU 
allocated for the implementation of the Schengen visa regime 
into its defense budget calculations. 
 
3. (C) MOD Under Secretary for Resource Planning and Finance 
Jokubas Leleika, noting that Defense Minister Linas 
Linkevicius\'s had argued for additional funds, told us that 
the MOD is disappointed at what he called a \"political 
decision\" to divert funds to secondary defense organizations. 
 Algirdas Gricius, who sits on Parliament\'s National Security 
and Defense Committee, told us that the Committee was 
comfortable with the allocation since Lithuanian political 
parties, like those in many other NATO capitals, define 
\"defense spending\" broadly to include all Ministries working 
on defense-related matters. 
 
4. (C) A Lithuanian MOD defense consultant acknowledged that 
MOD\'s plans for military transformation presumed an annual 
one percent increase for military spending.  While he 
believes that the current budget allocations of defense funds 
for non-military line items will not affect Lithuania\'s short 
term (2006-2008) defense planning goals, he worried that, if 
this trend of diverting defense funds from the MOD continues, 
Lithuania\'s longer-term goals, including maintaining a 
NATO-capable battalion, would be at risk. 
 
5. (C) Comment.  The MOD had hoped to decrease the percentage 
of defense funds allocated for non-military expenditures, but 
apparently lost this battle for now.  Though the MOD assures 
us that international operations will not be affected, it is 
difficult to see how the MOD can meet its long-term NATO 
force goal commitments with these budget cuts.  We will focus 
substantial efforts on educating new members of Parliament 
and Government about Lithuania\'s contributions and 
commitments to NATO and encourage support for Lithuania\'s 
ongoing military transformation 
MULL 
"
"22803","11/12/2004 15:17","04VILNIUS1401","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001401 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/11/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, LH, HT9 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA RUSHES TO RATIFY EU CONSTITUTION 
 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Christian Yarnell 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: Lithuania became the first member state to 
ratify the EU Constitution on November 11 when the government 
rushed through a vote on the treaty on one of the 
Parliament\'s last days in session.  The GOL had previously 
decided not to hold a national referendum on the 
Constitution.  Opposition MPs criticized the rushed vote, 
insisting that additional public debate was necessary. 
Although earning the praise of the European Commission, 
Lithuania\'s race to ratify smacks more of show than good 
statesmanship.  Indeed, it may backfire if the Constitutional 
fails to win acceptance in other capitals -- being first to 
approve what others reject won\'t be much of a claim to fame. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Controversial Ratification of EU Constitution 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) Lithuania on November 11 became the first EU member 
state to ratify the EU Constitution.  Parliament ratified the 
treaty on the last day of its sitting through a fast-track 
mechanism, with 84 MPs voting in favor, four against, and 
three abstaining.  Although the vote was well above the 
57-member majority needed for ratification, it proved 
controversial among MPs who felt that the ratification 
process was unnecessarily hurried. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
GOL Calls for Quick, Parliamentary Ratification 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
3. (U) Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas and Foreign 
Minister Antanas Valionis, Lithuania\'s signatories to the EU 
Constitution, had urged speedy ratification and pushed the 
document through Parliament expeditiously in order to allow 
the current Parliament to approve it.  Some MPs argued during 
the final sitting of Parliament that they did not have enough 
time to properly study the 500-page-plus document. 
Opposition parties had called for a delay in the run-up to 
the vote, but Parliamentary Chairman Arturas Paulauskas 
overrode their concerns and moved for immediate ratification. 
 
4. (C) President Valdas Adamkus had agreed with Brazauskas 
and Valionis that a public referendum was not necessary.  He 
explained to the media that that the Lithuanians\' 
overwhelming vote in 2003 to join the EU was sufficiently 
recent to render a referendum unnecessary, especially as 
voters had already made four separate trips to the polls this 
year.  Arnoldas Pranckevicius, advisor to the President for 
domestic policy, told us that Adamkus had not, in fact, 
believed a speedy ratification critical, but had wanted to 
avoid the costs of organizing another public referendum, and 
he feared that voter fatigue might threaten the \"yes\" vote on 
such a complex treaty. 
 
5. (C) According to Pranckevicius, the Government also feared 
there would be long delay if this Parliament failed to 
ratify, since the next Parliament would likely take up more 
pressing issues in its first few months of work.  Tomas 
Gulbinas of the MFA\'s EU Division added that the next 
Parliament will contain a large number of new MPs, lacking 
experience with the Constitution negotiations, who would have 
required time to familiarize themselves with the issue and 
the document before bringing it to a vote.  He also claimed 
that the GOL had prepared the necessary legislation months 
before the October 29 signing of the Constitution but had had 
to wait for the Rome ceremony before formally starting the 
ratification process at home.  Pranckevicius said that many 
current MPs, especially outgoing Social Democrats, had viewed 
ratification of the Constitution as a fitting, symbolic 
conclusion to the process of Lithuania\'s European integration 
-- a process for which they took credit. 
 
---------------------------- 
Opposition: What\'s the Rush? 
---------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Gintaras Steponavicius, Liberal Center MP and 
prominent opposition figure, told us that he had believed the 
rush for ratification a mistake and had called for a longer 
period of public education and debate.  He added that he 
expects this Constitution to fail to win approval in some EU 
countries, and wondered whether the Lithuanian public would 
think it wise that their representatives so quickly approved 
a document others were still studying or rejecting.  During 
the Parliament\'s final session, several MPs joined the 
Liberal Centrists to urge public debate, although most 
ultimately voted in favor of ratification.  Hoping to mollify 
such criticism, the GOL organized a conference on November 12 
to formally present the EU Constitution to the Lithuanian 
people. 
7. (U) Petras Austrevicius, Lithuania\'s former chief EU 
negotiator and now parliamentarian-elect, publicly criticized 
the rushed procedure for removing a \"bargaining chip\" 
Lithuania could have used in pursuing various goals within 
the EU, such as securing additional EU funding.  During the 
Parliamentary debate, Conservative Party leader Andrius 
Kubilius noted his concerns that the EU Constitution failed 
to properly establish a permanent role for the United States 
in European security.  Kubilius in the end voted to support 
ratification, however. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Comment: Haste may waste public support 
--------------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Although the European Commission was quick to hail 
Lithuania\'s ratification as \"a very positive development 
indeed,\" most Lithuanians themselves are critical of their 
government\'s strong-arm tactics in forcing the treaty through 
Parliament on its last day of operation.  The bumbling in 
Parliament, with MPs claiming not to have read the 
Constitution, took the shine off what the GOL had hoped would 
be a moment in the sun.  The GOL will now try to convince the 
public that adoption of their new \"Constitution\" was indeed 
in Lithuania\'s interest. 
MULL 
"
"22808","11/12/2004 15:54","04VILNIUS1402","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001402 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB (MGERMANO) AND EUR/PPD (JMLOCKARD) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/11/2014 
TAGS: SCUL, PHUM, LH, HT21 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR HOSTS IFTAAR FOR LITHUANIA\'S MUSLIM 
COMMUNITY 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Christian Yarnell 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (c) 
 
 1. (U) SUMMARY: Ambassador Mull celebrated Ramadan on 
November 5 with 20 leading figures from Lithuania\'s Muslim 
community, hosting an Iftaar dinner.  The Ambassador 
highlighted the importance of diversity and tolerance during 
the event, and Lithuania\'s chief Islamic religious figure 
praised the outreach to the country\'s small Muslim 
population.  The Iftaar was a successful and well-received 
first foray into this important minority community, which is 
likely to grow now that Lithuania is a member of the European 
Union.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Ambassador Mull hosted an Iftaar dinner on November 5 
for approximately 20 leaders of Lithuania\'s Muslim community 
and other guests.  Representatives from Lithuania\'s small 
Uzbek, Tajik, and Azeri minorities attended the event in 
addition to leaders of the Tatars who constitute the 
overwhelming majority of Lithuania\'s Muslims.  The country\'s 
Muslim community dates back over 600 years, when Lithuania 
formally invited Tatars to settle here.  The population of 
the increasingly secular, even Christian, Lithuanian Tatars 
today numbers approximately 5,000. 
 
3. (U) Tatar leaders told the Ambassador that, while many 
Lithuanian Tatars no longer practice religion, an influx of 
foreign Muslim students has helped to keep their mosques in 
use.  They said that maintaining the historic local mosques 
was a critical community goal. 
 
4. (C) Diversity and tolerance were the primary themes of the 
event, and Ambassador Mull highlighted the importance of 
tolerance in his brief remarks.  The guest list reflected the 
country\'s diversity, and leaders of other faiths, including 
the chairman of the Jewish Community of Lithuania, were 
present.  Mufti Romualdas Krinickis, one of a few Lithuanians 
trained to lead Muslim prayer, praised the Ambassador for his 
outreach to the country\'s small Muslim community and led a 
short prayer as part of the festivities.  Krinickis also took 
the opportunity to denounce terrorism as \"a violation of the 
teachings of Islam.\"  (NOTE: After we had invited Krinickis 
to the event, the Lithuanian State Security Department shared 
with us their suspicions about Krinickis\'s involvement in 
criminal activities.  We will address these suspicions as 
appropriate in future reporting.) 
 
5. (U) Comment: The Iftaar was a useful opportunity for us to 
engage a minority community that mainstream Lithuanian 
society generally overlooks.  Lithuania\'s small Muslim 
community will undoubtedly grow with the increase in 
immigration expected to result from the country\'s EU 
membership.  We hope to use this successful initial foray to 
strengthen our ties to this community. 
MULL 
"
"22835","11/15/2004 5:22","04VILNIUS1403","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001403 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, DS/IP/EUR AND INL 
 
PARIS FOR USSS FIELD OFFICE 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, PREL, EFIN, LH, HT50 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN POLICE SEIZE NINE MILLION COUNTERFEIT 
EUROS 
 
REF: 03 Vilnius 485 
 
1. Summary.  The Lithuanian Police achieved a major victory 
in the fight against counterfeiting November 6, arresting 
thirteen people and seizing over nine million counterfeit 
Euros.  The Police believe that the group has been printing 
Euros for several years.  The Police also found printing 
plates for U.S. currency, but believes that the group was 
only printing Euros.  The confiscated money earns Lithuania 
the dubious distinction of being one of the world\'s largest 
known exporters of counterfeit European currency.  The 
Mission is following up with Lithuanian authorities, 
including by seeking USSS access to the U.S. counterfeit 
plates.  End Summary. 
 
2. On November 6, 2004, the Lithuanian Police conducted 
more than 40 simultaneous searches in the cities of Kaunas, 
Telsiai, Palanga, and other cities that shut down a 
counterfeiting operation responsible for printing and 
distributing counterfeit Euros throughout Europe in huge 
quantities.  The majority of the arrests and seizure of 
counterfeit currency took place in a printing company in 
Kaunas.  Thirteen people were arrested and over nine 
million counterfeit Euro notes were seized.  The Court 
released two of those arrested and held the others for 
pretrial investigation.  All face criminal charges carrying 
penalties of three to ten years\' imprisonment.  All the 
money found was in 100 Euro notes.  Several of the men 
arrested were in the process of printing more counterfeit 
Euros when the Police raided. 
 
3. The Police believe that the group has been printing 
Euros for several years, working seven days a week.  The 
Police do not know the total amount produced by these 
printing plants, but at the time of the raids, they seized 
over nine million Euros.  The Police also found printing 
plates for U.S. currency, but believe that the group was 
only printing Euros because they were more profitable then 
dollars.  Investigators said the Euro notes were of high 
quality and could not be distinguished from legitimate 
currency with the naked eye. 
 
4.  This is believed to be the largest single seizure of 
counterfeit Euros ever.  Lithuanian law enforcement 
agencies expect to uncover more counterfeiting groups in 
continued investigations.  The confiscated money makes 
Lithuania one of the world\'s largest known exporters of 
counterfeit European currency. 
 
5.  This seizure is the result of a two-year investigation. 
Lithuanian officials initiated their investigation in part 
because of the arrest of several Lithuanian citizens in 
other countries for possession and distribution of 
counterfeit Euros.  The Police believe that the 
counterfeiting group is connected with a Kaunas organized 
crime group.  Last January, the police detained a couple of 
people trying to smuggle 50,000 fake euros from Lithuania 
to Belarus.  The Police confirmed that these were 
counterfeit Euros from Kaunas. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6. This important seizure comes on the heels of U.S. Secret 
Service Counterfeit Detection/Financial Crimes training for 
48 Police officers on October 18-22, 2004.  This training 
was part of a Letter of Agreement between the United States 
and Lithuania, signed on September 30, 2003, to assist 
Lithuania in fighting counterfeiting.  The Letter of 
Agreement included the purchase of $50,000 of advanced 
surveillance equipment for the Police. 
 
7. Embassy Vilnius has assisted Lithuania in previous 
efforts to investigate counterfeit U.S. dollars.  Reftel 
reports Lithuania\'s success in a joint operation with the 
U.S. Secret Service.  A Lithuanian organized crime group 
was shipping counterfeit U.S. currency and drugs to the 
United States.  Lithuanian Police do not know yet if this 
2003 arrest is related to the recent arrests. 
 
8. Together with USSS Paris, the RSO is working with 
Lithuanian officials to learn more about this investigation 
to arrange an inspection of the U.S. counterfeit plates for 
the USSS. 
 
Mull 
"
"22882","11/16/2004 13:51","04VILNIUS1411","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001411 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/RPM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2014 
TAGS: MOPS, MASS, PGOV, PREL, LH, HT11 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN DEFMIN CRITICIZES NATO MEMBERS\' 
RECALCITRANCE OVER IRAQ TRAINING MISSION 
 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (U) Lithuanian Defense Minister Linas Linkevicius, in an 
interview with the Baltic News Service on November 15, 
criticized the decision by ten NATO allies not to send 
instructors to the armed forces training mission in Iraq. 
Linkevicius remarked that he did not believe this decision, 
although a departure from the conclusions of the Istanbul 
summit, presaged a split in the alliance.  Echoing public 
comments by NATO SACEUR James Jones, the DefMin said that 
such \"exceptions should not be tolerated, because they make 
it difficult for the alliance\'s military commanders to plan 
operations.\"  Linkevicius noted there had been similar 
difficulties generating a rotation schedule for the now 
successful Baltic air-policing mission. 
 
2. (C) The MFA\'s Kestutis Jankauskas, Director of Security 
Policy, told us that Foreign Minister Antanas Valionas had 
cautioned (in a statement BNS chose not to run) against too 
quickly criticizing all ten NATO members who chose not to 
send instructors to Iraq.  Jankauskas noted that, had 
Lithuania already met their troop authorization ceiling for 
Iraq, they would have had to seek special authorization from 
Parliament to send the three officers they\'ve now dedicated 
to the training mission.  While acknowledging that one or two 
NATO partners will predictably diverge from the fold, 
Jankauskas thought that logistical obstacles rather than 
political objections had prevented some NATO countries from 
sending participants. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment.  Linkevicius\'s public statement reflects 
the government\'s commitment to active membership in NATO and 
its staunch and reliable partnership in the Coalition. 
MULL 
"
"23259","11/24/2004 13:15","04VILNIUS1437","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001437 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, XH, LH, HT13 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA CONDEMNS FRAUDULENT UKRAINIAN ELECTIONS; 
CALLS FOR CALM 
 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary. Lithuanian government and parliamentary 
officials strongly condemned reports of fraud in Ukraine\'s 
second round of presidential elections.  Fully supporting the 
EU statement on the elections, they noted that Ukraine has 
apparently been deprived of an opportunity to demonstrate its 
willingness to integrate more closely with Euro-Atlantic 
institutions.  More than half of parliament signed a 
statement of solidarity in support of a \"European Ukraine.\" 
Lithuania will likely continue to push for strong measures 
within the EU to condemn the results and sanction those 
responsible for electoral fraud.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Foreign Minister Antanas Valionis said in a November 
24 press interview that Ukraine should seek a \"proper 
assessment of the results\" of the second round of 
presidential voting, revising them if necessary, and he urged 
that it handle the current \"complicated situation\" in a 
\"peaceful and civilized way.\"  Valionis observed that 
Lithuania agrees wholeheartedly with the EU view that the 
Ukrainian elections did not meet international standards. 
 
3. (C) Mindaugas Kacerauskis, head of MFA\'s Ukraine, Moldova 
and Belarus Division, told us that Lithuania is \"very 
saddened\" by the \"tragic events\" that unfolded during 
Sunday\'s election and fully supports the strong EU statement 
on the elections.  Kacerauskis added that Ukraine had lost an 
opportunity to demonstrate its willingness to more fully 
integrate in European and Euro-Atlantic organizations. 
Ricardis Degutis, Director of MFA\'s Eastern European and 
Central Asia Department, had earlier told the Ambassador that 
Lithuania is very concerned about reports of massive fraud 
perpetrated in the election.  Echoing Degutis\'s comments, 
Kacerauskis observed that some oblasts reported returns of 
participation by more than 100 percent of registered voters. 
While Lina Sucilaite, one of Lithuania\'s election monitors in 
the Zhitomir oblast, could not personally corroborate any 
instances of serious electoral fraud, she shared with us 
rumors of citizens receiving 50 gryvna (about USD 10) to use 
ballots pre-marked with Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych\'s 
name.  (Note:  Lithuanian sent seven election observers to 
both rounds of Ukraine\'s presidential elections). 
 
4. (U) 85 of Lithuania\'s 141 parliamentarians signed a letter 
authored by Conservative MP Rasa Jukneviciene on November 23 
to opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenko expressing 
solidarity with the \"aspirations of the Ukrainian nation to 
create a fair, European Ukraine.\"  Jukneviciene, clad in 
pro-Yushchenko orange during Tuesday\'s parliamentary session, 
said that it is important that Lithuania illustrate its 
support for a European Ukraine. 
 
5. (U) Liberal Centrist MEP Eugenijus Gentvilas released a 
statement November 24 expressing support for Ukraine\'s 
democratic forces and hope that calm will prevail in Kiev. 
Commenting that electoral violations \"were obviously directed 
by Yanukovych\'s camp,\" Gentvilas\' statement said that 
Ukraine\'s \"pro-Moscow authorities led by Viktor Yanukovich\" 
had tried to steal victory from Ukraine\'s people \"to ensure 
that Ukraine cannot take its rightful place in the family of 
European states.\"  The statement praised efforts to 
\"peacefully request\" that Ukrainian authorities examine the 
election results. 
 
6. (C) Comment.  Lithuania\'s response is still a work in 
progress.  We expect the GOL to continue to press the issue 
of electoral fraud with the GOU both bilaterally and 
multilaterally.  Lithuania will likely join the chorus 
pushing the EU to formulate a coherent policy to provide 
incentives to Ukraine to conform to Western standards in its 
policies and practices as well as to punish those who 
perpetuated electoral fraud.  Lithuania\'s voice will be one 
more in the region that may give Ukraine\'s authorities, and 
Moscow, pause before continuing with their electoral fraud. 
MULL 
"
"23298","11/26/2004 9:49","04VILNIUS1442","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  VILNIUS 001442 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
EUR/PPD FOR JOANN LOCKARD 
EUR/PA FOR MARGO SQUIRE/CARLOS ARANAGA 
EUR/NB FOR MARIA GERMANO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, PGOV, PREL, LH, RS, Lithuania and the World-Russia 
SUBJECT: FORMER AMBASSADOR\'S CSIS PAPER CAUSES A 
PROMINENT TALKING HEAD TO ROLL 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (SBU) Top TV journalist Edmundas Jakilaitis resigned 
over an incident in which he reported that a \"secret\" 
U.S. document warned of the dangers of Russian influence 
over Lithuanian politicians such as Russian-born Labor 
Party Leader Viktor Uspaskich.  The document turned out 
to be written by former U.S. Ambassador to Lithuania 
Keith Smith for the Center for Strategic and 
International Studies (CSIS) and was posted on the CSIS 
website at least one month prior to its \"leak.\"  No names 
were mentioned in the document.  Jakilaitis claimed he 
was pressured into resigning by interfering owners who 
feared getting on the wrong side of Uspaskich -- expected 
to be Minister of Economy in the newly-forming GOL. LNK 
TV station director Paulius Kovas denied external 
pressure and insisted that Jakilaitis was fired for 
sloppy journalism.  The contents of the Smith article 
were only slightly debated publicly, but its allegations 
of pervasive Russian influence here are likely to return 
to the spotlight.  For now, the high-profile Jakilaitis 
remains the focus of the story. End Summary. 
 
\"SECRET U.S. DOCUMENT\" IS REALLY CSIS PUBLIC PRESENTATION 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) LNK TV news service director Edmundas 
Jakilaitis reported November 16 that a \"secret U.S. 
document\" in his possession described U.S. concerns about 
Russian influence over Lithuanian politicians. 
Jakilaitis named Labor Party Leader Viktor Uspaskich and 
his deputy Antanas Bosas specifically as politicians who 
had links to Russian energy concerns through which 
Russian Intelligence Services are operating to influence 
events in Lithuania.  Upon hearing the report, PAS Media 
specialist called Jakilaitis, who did not divulge his 
source but said the author of the report was Keith Smith, 
who served as U.S. Ambassador to Lithuania from 1997- 
2000.  We found the report on the Web.  It turned out to 
be a presentation given by Smith at a CSIS conference on 
October 19.  The paper is dated August 26. 
 
DAMAGE CONTROL 
-------------- 
 
3.  (U) The media began to inundate PD officers with 
questions regarding the secret report and the Embassy\'s 
opinion of Uspaskich.  The Embassy released a brief 
statement that the report was neither a USG document nor 
was it secret.  Shortly after acquiring the report 
themselves, journalists began asking for our opinion on 
the contents of the report, but they were satisfied with 
the answer that it was not a USG document. 
 
4.  (SBU) The story turned against Jakilaitis when the 
focus of reporting moved from  the Smith presentation to 
mistakes made by Jakilaitis.  The evening of November 17, 
Jakilaitis issued a correction that the document was not 
official but came from a former high-level official in 
the USG.  Jakilaitis said his source led him  to believe 
the report was secret. (NOTE: Three different people 
speculated to us that Lithuanian Ambassador to the U.S. 
Vygaudas Usackas may have been Jakilaitis\'s \"source\".) 
 
DOWNFALL 
-------- 
 
5.  (U) Lithuania\'s second leading daily Respublika 
reported that Labor Party leader Uspaskich was furious at 
Jakilaitis.  In public, however, the leader of 
Lithuania\'s most popular party seemed serene.  In a 
televised interview, Uspaskich calmly spun our denial of 
the report\'s origin into a vote of confidence in him.  On 
November 19, Jakilaitis resigned. 
 
6.  (U) Jakilaitis followed his resignation with a 
November 22 press conference timed for when LNK General 
Manager Paulius Kovas planned to be out of the country. 
In the press conference, Jakilaitis announced that he had 
been forced to resign because of pressure from LNK 
owners, who he said feared crossing Uspaskich.  Kovas, 
tipped off to the conference, returned from the airport 
denying any outside pressure to fire Jakilaitis.  He said 
he asked Jakilaitis to resign because of his sloppy 
journalism -- including a prior plagiarism charge by 
Baltic1 TV which had accused Jakilaitis of reporting 
Baltic1 election survey data as his own. 
 
BULLET DODGED 
------------- 
 
7.  (U) Jakilaitis remained the focus of the story, but 
Ambassador Smith\'s presentation was given wide 
circulation and was even quoted in parliament. 
Conservative MP Rasa Jukneviciene asked PM-designate 
Algirdas Brazauskas on November 23 if he was aware of 
Smith\'s allegations that the Kremlin employed associates 
of the Russian gas giant Gazprom as an intelligence tool. 
\"Are you confident that Uspaskich will be free from 
Gazprom and the direct influence of the Kremlin?\" she 
asked.  Brazauskas responded saying, \"I have been the 
head of the government for three and a half years and 
have not seen anything resembling what you have been 
saying to me now.  I can tell you absolutely frankly that 
I have not noticed any efforts or elements of blackmail 
or coercion in our economic relations with Russia.\" 
 
COMMENT: NEWS CYCLE ENDING BUT REPORT WILL LINGER 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
8.  (SBU) This affair included most of Lithuania\'s 
favorite topics in political intrigue: journalists 
entering the political fray, Russia, the United States, 
and top politicians.  Jakilaitis tried to tag Uspaskich 
with the \"Russian-influenced\" label by using a U.S. 
source to add credibility to his accusation -- a tactic 
tried and tested during the Paksas scandal.    We expect 
the Jakilaitis aspect of this issue to die down shortly, 
but assume that Uspaskich will continue to come under 
attack by Conservative MPs and the mainstream media who 
distrust him.  We also expect Conservatives and think 
tank types to raise the premise of the Smith article in 
the future.  End comment. 
 
9.  (U) Bio Notes: Jakilaits, 27, interviewed President 
Bush in 2002 prior to the NATO Prague Summit and is a 
talented, though apparently careless, journalist. 
Jakilaitis went on a Department-sponsored IVP for young 
European leaders in 2004.  He has landed on his 
feet,already being hired by Lietuvos Rytas TV (a 
television news program named after Lithuania\'s largest 
daily newspaper, which produces the show).  The program 
is broadcast on TV3, the top news station in Lithuania. 
LNK news producer Rolandas Agintas has replaced 
Jakilaitis in the top news spot at LNK. 
 
MULL 
"
"23312","11/26/2004 14:01","04VILNIUS1445","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 VILNIUS 001445 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OMA, EB/IFD/OIA, EUR/NB, AND EUR/ERA 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/MAC/DAS/EUR (JBURGESS) 
HHS FOR WSTEIGER 
WARSAW FOR AG ATTACHE WMOLSTEAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, ECON, PGOV, LH, HT3 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN PRIME MINISTER\'S VISION FOR NEW TERM 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) The Lithuanian parliament (Seimas) re-elected 
Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas November 25.  In a 
speech to the Seimas November 24, Brazauskas outlined a 
broad vision for his new term.  He promised to utilize EU 
funds to promote development in priority areas, such as the 
use, and export, of high-tech products.  He committed to 
increasing the GOL tax collection rate, raising the minimum 
wage, and working to attract more greenfield investments. 
Brazauskas said his new government would promote much- 
needed reforms in health, education, and pensions, and 
would work to make Lithuanian agriculture more competitive. 
Brazauskas\'s emphasis on social issues, which his Labor and 
Peasant coalition partners will no doubt enthusiastically 
endorse, should promote Lithuania\'s development, and help 
ensure its continued strong economic growth.  But all will 
be contingent on the stability of this new coalition, which 
is far from assured.  End summary. 
 
------------------ 
BACK IN THE SADDLE 
------------------ 
 
2. (U) The Seimas, as expected, re-elected Algirdas 
Brazauskas as the country\'s Prime Minister November 25. 
Brazauskas\'s election came after meetings with Seimas and 
party leaders November 22-24.  The Prime Minister now has 
15 days in which to get presidential approval of his 
cabinet and present it, and the government\'s policy agenda, 
to the Seimas.  Thus far, we are aware of the following 
likely cabinet nominees: 
- Zigmantas Balcytis (Social Democrat), Communications; 
- Algirdas Butkevicius (Social Democrat), Finance; 
- Gediminas Kirkilas (Social Democrat), Defense; 
- Arunas Kundrotas (Social Democrat), Environment; 
- Vilija Blinkeviciute (New Union), Social Affairs; 
- Antanas Valionis (New Union), Foreign Affairs; 
- Zilvinas Padaiga (Labor), Health; 
- Vladimiras Prudnikovas (Labor), Culture; 
- Viktoras Uspaskich (Labor), Economy; and 
- Kazimiera Prunskiene (Peasant Party), Agriculture. 
The following three nominees have proved controversial, and 
may not make the final list: 
- Gediminas Vaitkus (Social Democrat), Education; 
- Gintautas Buzinskas (Labor), Justice; and 
- Viktoras Muntianas (Labor), Interior. 
 
Brazauskas, in a speech before the Seimas November 24, 
outlined his vision for the new government soon to take 
office. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
P.M. EXPECTS OVERALL GROWTH TO CONTINUE 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) The Prime Minister observed that Lithuania had 
realized its principal foreign policy goals, NATO and EU 
membership, during his previous term.  Lithuania\'s economy 
had made great progress, with per capita GDP rising to 46 
percent of the EU average, from 35 percent in 2000.  During 
his just completed term, Lithuania\'s GDP had grown by 37 
percent compared to when he took office, and he added that 
he anticipated GDP growth of 20-25 percent over the next 
four years.  Lithuania, observed Brazauskas with 
satisfaction, counts among Europe\'s leaders in this area. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
GOL TO PUT EU FUNDS TO WORK IN PRIORITY AREAS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Brazauskas, observing that Lithuania will receive 
2.6 billion euros (USD 3.4 billion) in EU support from 
2004-2006, remarked that his government would focus on 
infrastructure and energy projects.  Lithuania\'s national 
strategy to implement structural funds in 2004-2006 
earmarks almost 39 percent of incoming EU support to 
improving infrastructure in the transport, energy, health, 
education, research, labor and social affairs sectors.  The 
government will try to make Lithuania more competitive, per 
the EU\'s Lisbon strategy, by using EU funds and government 
grants, subsidies, and credits, to increase the use of high 
technologies in industry beyond the current 20 percent, and 
to augment high tech exports by more than the 35 percent 
that they grew in 2003.  The GOL intends to do this by 
creating industry parks, where scientists and businesses 
can work together to develop new products. 
5. (U) Brazauskas said that a GOL working group is trying 
to help craft a definition of Lithuania as a single EU 
region that would accurately reflect the huge differences 
in unemployment and infrastructure development levels 
within the country.  (The EU considers Lithuania to be a 
single region for purpose of its funding.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
P.M.: GOL WILL NOT BREACH MAASTRICHT CRITERIA 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
 
6. (U) Brazauskas suggested that the GOL might borrow from 
financial institutions to promote reforms in healthcare, 
pensions, education, and culture, since, in his view, the 
current fiscal deficit, at 2.5 percent of GDP, is not very 
high, and the national debt has decreased from 27 percent 
to 21 percent.  The context for the Prime Minister\'s 
statement is concerns previously expressed by President 
Valdas Adamkus and various analysts that the country\'s 
fiscal deficit is very close to the Maastricht Criteria\'s 
three percent limit in order to qualify for European 
monetary union.  In recent macroeconomic reviews, the IMF 
has stressed the importance of Lithuania not exceeding the 
Maastricht fiscal deficit limit. 
 
--------------------- 
TAX REFORM A PRIORITY 
--------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) Brazauskas observed that the GOL\'s tax yield is 
low relative to the pace of the economy\'s growth. 
Lithuania\'s tax collections amount to only 30 percent of 
GDP, in contrast to the EU average of 41 percent, and 
distinguish Lithuania for its low tax burden, second only 
to Ireland.  The government intends to rectify this problem 
by cracking down on businesses that evade taxes and workers 
who don\'t pay taxes on salaries they receive in cash, and 
by introducing a pollution tax preferentially affecting old 
vehicles and a new real estate tax.  At the same time, 
Lithuania will stand by its low corporate profit tax (15 
percent), despite pressure from France and Germany to raise 
it, and in addition, the GOL intends to reduce personal 
income taxes, starting 2006, to 30 percent from the current 
33 percent. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
UNEMPLOYMENT DOWN, MINIMUM WAGE TO GO UP 
---------------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) Brazauskas expressed satisfaction that the 
unemployment rate has declined by 1.2-2 percentage points 
during each year of his recently completed term.  He 
regretted, however, that growth in salaries (7 percent this 
year) lags behind economic growth, and expressed his 
government\'s intention to increase the minimum monthly wage 
from LTL 500 (USD 192) to at least LTL 600 LTL (USD 230). 
The incoming coalition has promised to increase the average 
wage from LTL 1222 (USD 436) to up to LTL 1800 (USD 690). 
 
------------------------------------- 
GOL SEEKS MORE GREENFIELD INVESTMENTS 
------------------------------------- 
 
9. (U) Brazauskas expressed satisfaction that Lithuania is 
doing quite well in attracting investments, which grew by 
75-78 percent from mid-2001 to 2004.  In particular, he was 
pleased that re-investments constitute one third of all 
investments in Lithuania, in contrast to two thirds in 
Estonia.  The World Bank, Brazauskas recalled, described 
Lithuania as a world leader in its investment climate. 
Nonetheless, the Prime Minister said much more could be 
done.  The GOL intends to attract more greenfield 
investments by improving the business climate.  It will do 
so by introducing business-friendly legislation, providing 
one-stop services to potential investors, and promoting the 
use of E-government. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
NEW GOVERNMENT TO INCREASE AGRICULTURE\'S COMPETITIVENESS 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
10. (U) Noting that 40 percent of all incoming EU funds 
(LTL 1.8 billion or USD 689.7 million) will go toward the 
agricultural sector, Brazauskas expressed his new 
government\'s intention to use these funds efficiently.  The 
GOL intends to use the funds to make direct payments to 
farmers, promote exports, and hand out subsidies to 
increase agricultural competitiveness and improve the 
efficiency of Lithuanian farming. 
 
--------------------------------- 
EDUCATIONAL REFORMS IN THE OFFING 
--------------------------------- 
 
11. (U) Brazauskas said he would strive to improve the 
nation\'s educational system.  The GOL will try and ensure a 
quality education for students; increased opportunities for 
teachers to expand their professional competencies; 
equipment upgrades, including modern teaching aids, in 
classrooms; and buildings renovations.  He noted that a 
high proportion (80 percent) of high school graduates 
pursue undergraduate studies. 
 
-------------------------- 
HEALTHCARE REFORMS AS WELL 
-------------------------- 
 
12. (U) Noting that his government had increased healthcare 
funding by LTL 500 million (USD 191.6 million) annually, 
Brazauskas promised that the new government would fund this 
sector with an additional LTL 340 million (USD 130.3 
million) in 2004 and 2005.  The healthcare sector is one of 
Lithuania\'s least reformed sectors, and the GOL intends to 
use its own, as well as EU, funds to modernize hospital 
facilities, institute energy saving programs, and increase 
public access to quality healthcare services.  Turning his 
attention to the plight of the nation\'s 15,000 physicians, 
Brazauskas noted that their salaries are 15 percent below 
the average salary in the country, and he said that the GOL 
had allocated LTL 65 million (USD 24.9 million) to increase 
doctors\' salaries in 2004.  Nevertheless, he observed, this 
money did not reach the physicians.  He urged the new 
management of the healthcare sector to ensure transparency 
in the distribution of healthcare funding.  Brazauskas also 
remarked that the GOL intends consolidating the large 
number of the country\'s medical institutions, which would 
make it possible for the GOL to support them all, and would 
increase the efficiency of their operation. 
 
----------------------------------- 
GOL TO CONTINUE WITH PENSION REFORM 
----------------------------------- 
 
13. (U) Brazauskas noted that his government has 
successfully begun to implement pension reform, increasing 
the average pension by LTL 90 (USD 34.5) during his last 
term.  He stated that the GOL would need an additional LTL 
300 million (USD 114.9 million) for further reform in 2005, 
which should result in an average pension increase of LTL 
650 (USD 249).  Brazauskas promised that his new government 
would focus on the needs of the handicapped and families 
with children. 
 
-------------- 
SECURE BORDERS 
-------------- 
 
14. (U) Brazauskas said the GOL would use 136 million euros 
(USD 179.5 million) in EU funding in 2005-2007 to 
strengthen the control system along the approximately 570 
miles of the EU\'s external border for which Lithuania is 
responsible.  In his last term, he noted, state investment 
in customs, border, and tax information systems had 
increased five times.   Brazauskas expressed confidence 
that Lithuania would join the Schengen space in around 
2007. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
15. (U) Brazauskas\'s vision for his new term, with its 
heavy economic emphasis, and stress on investment in 
infrastructure, health, education, agriculture, and an 
increase in salaries, should help promote Lithuania\'s 
development, and continue its strong economic growth.  His 
Labor and Peasant coalition partners will no doubt work to 
ensure that the new government does not lose its 
sensitivity to social concerns.  By strengthening these 
comparatively neglected areas, the Prime Minister would lay 
the foundation for continued strong socio-economic growth. 
 
16. (SBU) Of course, the key to success for this ambitious 
agenda is the stability of the coalition between the Social 
Democrats and Social Liberals on one side and the neophyte 
Labor Party and the troublemaking Peasants\' party on the 
other.  It seems a strong possibility that the ambitions of 
the latter will sooner or later bring the coalition, and 
these ambitious plans, to an untimely end. 
 
MULL 
"
"23349","11/29/2004 6:24","04VILNIUS1447","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001447 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EUR/PGI:BPOMAINVILLE, 
IO/T/HTTP:ABLACKWOOD, M/R:APONCE, OES/IHA, 
S/ES/SWO:KMAYFIELD, AND USAID:LMORSE 
 
HHS FOR WSTEIGER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO, KHIV, PREL, LH, HT35 
SUBJECT: AIDS IN LITHUANIA 
 
REF: A) VILNIUS 540, B)  VILNIUS 880, 
 
     C) VILNIUS 1180 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  As it prepares to celebrate World AIDS Day, Lithuania\'s 
incidence of HIV/AIDS is the lowest in Central and Eastern 
Europe. The GOL is working to keep it that way, despite 
pressures of rapid social change.  Lithuania has a National 
HIV/AIDS prevention strategy, but poorly monitors its 
implementation.  The Embassy continues to reinforce GOL 
efforts to combat HIV/AIDS by encouraging discussion at the 
policy-making level and funding professional training and 
cross-border collaboration.  End Summary. 
 
HIV/AIDS demographics in Lithuania 
---------------------------------- 
 
2.  Lithuania has to date registered 928 HIV positive 
patients since its first case in 1998 -- the vast majority 
in the last three years.  Transmission of more than 80 
percent of cases occurred through shared needles.  Some 241 
cases are located in Lithuania\'s third-largest (port) city 
of Klaipeda, 148 in Vilnius, and 34 in the nation\'s second 
largest city of Kaunas.  Approximately 76 persons carry the 
diagnosis of AIDS and 34 persons have died from the 
disease. 
 
3.  The European HIV Monitoring Center lists Lithuania as a 
country with a low rate of HIV infection.  Lithuania\'s HIV 
rate per 100,000 people was 24.4 in 2003, in contrast to 
470 in Russia\'s Kaliningrad region, 272.2 in Estonia, 169.6 
in Russia as a whole, 112.9 in Latvia, and 49.7 in Belarus. 
 
Trends point to a probable increase 
----------------------------------- 
 
4.  Health Minister Juozas Olekas recently stated that 
although the number of HIV cases in Lithuania is low, the 
country may face new threats arising from increased 
exposure to surrounding countries with a higher number of 
infected people.  For instance, exposure to disease in the 
Kaliningrad region has increased due to recent growth in 
business and leisure travel (including sex tourism). 
Likewise, greater exposure to Latvia\'s higher rate has 
followed the easing of travel restrictions across the two 
new EU member-states\' common border.  Mazeikiai, a 
Lithuanian transit point for truck drivers on the border 
with Latvia, has one of the highest rates in the country. 
 
5.  Dr. Saulius Caplinskas, Director of the Lithuanian AIDS 
Center, told us that the GOL must step up its surveillance 
of high-risk \"bridge populations,\" such as drug abusers, 
prisoners, and their sexual partners, to prevent them from 
infecting the general population.  He said that free 
movement of persons within the EU, new kinds of injectable 
drugs, and immigration may introduce new avenues for the 
spread of HIV/AIDS.  Already, twelve refugees in Lithuania 
have been found to be HIV positive.  Caplinskas predicted 
that absent increased prevention, HIV/AIDS would rapidly 
spread.  He observed that Russia had an epidemiological 
profile similar to Lithuania\'s before a lack of early 
controls permitted the disease to progress unchecked.  A 
recent UNDP report also recommends that Lithuania rapidly 
undertake appropriate actions to prevent the rate of new 
HIV infections from increasing. 
 
6.  Other HIV/AIDS experts endorse Caplinskas\' views.  Dr. 
Alvydas Laiskonas, Director of the Kaunas Medical 
University Infectious Diseases Clinic, said that 
Lithuania\'s low rate reflects a lack of active surveillance 
by public health authorities.  Rather than the current 
practice of testing only risk groups in the capital, he 
recommended free testing of all volunteers throughout the 
country, as is the practice in Estonia and Latvia. 
Laiskonas suggested that the government undertake a strong 
education campaign stressing prevention among youth. 
 
Good national strategy, poor implementation 
------------------------------------------- 
 
7.  The Lithuanian government approved in 2003 the National 
HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Strategy for 2003-2008. 
The Strategy emphasizes education and treatment of high- 
risk groups (e.g., intravenous injections users, 
prostitutes, etc.) and includes program-specific budgeting. 
The GOL had also constituted a National Coordinating 
Committee to oversee implementation of this plan. 
 
8.  The Strategy identifies priorities, implementing 
structures, activities and timelines, but the Ministry of 
Health does not monitor its implementation on an ongoing 
basis.  MOH Public Health Division Head Romualdas 
Sabaliauskas told us that the GOL and the AIDS Center had 
no information on the actual funds various institutions had 
allocated to date, the measures they had implemented, and 
the results they had achieved.  Sabaliauskas observed, 
however, that the Ministry plans to prepare a one-year 
review report soon. 
 
9.  A recent United Nations report, evaluating Lithuania\'s 
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals, 
indicated that implementation of the National Strategy 
lacks sufficient resources.  The report urges the GOL to 
prioritize activities and allocate sufficient funding to 
support the Strategy\'s wide range of activities and ensure 
its implementation. 
 
Embassy efforts 
--------------- 
 
10.  The Mission is a key contributor to Lithuania\'s fight 
against AIDS.  We are funding professional training and NGO 
AIDS advocacy programs here.  Embassy programs in 2004, 
which total $160K, will: 
 
-- enhance knowledge in HIV prevention in 10 districts of 
Lithuania, by training up to 200 health specialists; 
 
-- facilitate provision of necessary services to HIV 
infected persons though an NGO coalition; and 
 
-- conduct Lithuanian/Kaliningrad cross-border HIV/AIDS 
training to promote sharing of Lithuania\'s experiences with 
Russian medical professionals. 
 
We are also hosting a number of events here during World 
AIDS Day, including a roundtable discussion inaugurated by 
the Ambassador that will assemble Lithuania\'s top 
authorities on the disease. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11.  The GOL has a good plan to tackle HIV/AIDS.  Its 
actions, however, must match its words.  Therefore, we will 
continue to encourage the GOL to ensure effective 
implementation and funding of its national strategy, by 
involving all relevant ministries and stakeholders.  In 
particular, we will encourage the GOL to decentralize 
HIV/AIDS services, and modify provisions of its health law 
that establish a right of free treatment only for AIDS 
patients, but not for the HIV infected. 
 
12.  We will also seek to help the GOL to strengthen 
capacity at the district level in order to complement 
efforts at the national level.  For this, we will use our 
training programs to impart to professionals in Lithuania\'s 
regions much-needed knowledge on how to improve 
surveillance of HIV positive individuals and reduce high- 
risk groups\' vulnerability. 
 
MULL 
"
"23351","11/29/2004 7:01","04VILNIUS1449","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04WARSAW4981","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, UK, LH, HT13 
SUBJECT: ADAMKUS JOINS UKRAINE MEDIATION EFFORT 
 
REF: WARSAW 4981 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (U) Lithuanian President Valdas Adamkus traveled to Kiev 
November 26 to join Polish President Kwasniewski\'s mediation 
efforts as domestic political pressure for Lithuanian 
engagement continued to mount.  Though the scope and 
direction of Adamkus\'s involvement remain unclear, his strong 
democratic credentials should have a positive impact.  End 
summary. 
 
Adamkus to Kiev 
--------------- 
 
2.  (U) Adamkus traveled to Kiev on November 26 to join 
European mediation efforts to broker an end to the Ukrainian 
political crisis.  According to Adamkus\'s senior foreign 
policy adviser Edminas Bagdonas, Ukrainian President Kuchma 
had telephoned Adamkus early on November 25 to invite him to 
join with Polish President Kwasniewski\'s efforts.  Bagdonas 
told the Ambassador that Adamkus was reluctant to insert 
himself in the process, but after Kwasniewski encouraged him 
in a phone call late on November 25, Adamkus had decided to 
join the Kwasniewski mission. 
 
3.  (U) Adamkus advisers tell us it is still unclear how the 
Kwasniewski/Adamkus mission will fit with that of EU foreign 
policy chief Solana, but expressed certainty the two would 
work in tandem.  Foreign Minister Valionis publicly praised 
the initiative November 25 as an important opportunity to 
demonstrate Lithuania\'s leading role in the EU\'s regional 
politics, but noted it included a significant risk of 
failure. 
 
Protest to Ukrainians 
--------------------- 
 
4.  (U) Separately, Valionis summoned the Ukrainian 
Ambassador in Vilnius November 24 and telephoned Ukrainian 
foreign minister Gryshchenko November 25 to protest reported 
Ukrainian plans to publish fraudulent election results as 
final.  Valionis said Lithuania had been engaging in \"quiet 
but active\" diplomacy to promote a resolution. 
 
Pressure for Greater Activism 
----------------------------- 
 
5. (U) Valionis\'s engagement followed mounting popular 
pressure for greater official Lithuanian activism on Ukraine 
since the November 21 elections.  Lithuania\'s leading daily 
\"Lietuvos Rytas\" on November 26 sharply criticized what it 
said was the government\'s lackluster response to the crisis, 
and several political parties announced their support for 
efforts to press Ukrainian authorities to investigate the 
numerous cases of voter fraud.  Despite the criticism, and 
Adamkus\'s and Valionis\'s engagement, newly-reconfirmed Prime 
Minister Brazauskas on November 25 publicly rebuffed calls 
for a greater Lithuanian role in the crisis, asserting that 
Lithuania should not involve itself in the internal affairs 
of other states. 
 
Comment: Seizing the Spotlight 
------------------------------ 
 
6. (U) Lithuania prides itself as a small, but energetic 
activist in supporting democracy in its troubled neighbors to 
the east and south, so it is not surprising that Adamkus 
would jump aboard this train without a very clear idea of 
where it is heading.  Despite the mission\'s unclear 
prospects, Adamkus\'s solid democratic credentials should be 
an asset in efforts to resolve the crisis in accordance with 
democratic standards. 
MULL 
"
"23394","11/29/2004 16:10","04VILNIUS1450","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1449","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001450 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/28/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, UP, LH, HT13 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA DECLARES SOLIDARITY WITH UKRAINE; TO 
PROPOSE NATO ROLE 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1449 
 
     B. VILNIUS 1437 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Chief Nancy Cohen 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (U) The Lithuanian Parliament (Seimas) expressed its 
solidarity with the people of Ukraine and its support for 
their democratic objectives.  In a vote of 123 to 1, with 3 
abstentions, the 141-seat Seimas resolved to support the 
decision of Ukraine\'s Supreme Rada to evaluate the results of 
the second round of presidential elections according to 
generally recognized democratic standards.  The Seimas 
resolution also applauded the efforts of the Supreme Rada and 
other Ukrainian institutions to stabilize the situation in 
Ukraine and commended the diplomatic mediation of Lithuanian 
President Valdas Adamkus, and Polish and EU officials.  The 
Seimas denounced \"illegal intervention of third\" parties to 
interfere in Ukraine\'s domestic political affairs. 
 
2. (C) Mindaugas Kacerauskas, head of the MFA\'s Ukraine, 
Moldova, and Belarus Division, told us that the Lithuanian 
Government is very concerned about protecting democratic 
integrity of the election process and the territorial 
integrity of Ukraine, \"to avoid another Transnistria.\"  He 
said that Lithuanian will take the lead at a meeting in 
Brussels during the week of November 29 and will debrief the 
NATO Ambassadors on the President Adamkus\'s \"fruitful and 
very successful\" meeting in Kiev with Ukraine\'s President 
Kuchma, Polish President Kwasniewski, and the EU\'s Javier 
Solano.  In Brussels, Lithuania will introduce a four-point 
proposal for NATO action, which Kacerauskas described as 
follows: 
 
a)     the North Atlantic Council (NAC) take up Ukraine\'s 
       elections at the December 9 meeting; 
 
b)     the NAC communique incorporate a statement on 
       Ukraine\'s elections and a proposal to ensure 
       Ukraine\'s territorial integrity; 
 
c)     the NATO-Ukraine meeting planned for the margins of 
       the December 9 NAC be at the ministerial level; 
 
c)     the situation in Ukraine be on the agenda for the 
       NATO-Russia Council. 
 
3. (C) Comment:  Lithuania continues to advance its position 
as a leader in regional affairs.  President Adamkus\'s 
successful diplomatic intervention in Ukraine\'s post-election 
crisis has played well in Lithuania, and the media is making 
much of Lithuania\'s restored image in the international arena 
following a year of the country\'s own democratic challenges 
and a presidential impeachment.   More than just show, 
however, the actions of the President and Seimas reflect a 
government-wide commitment that Lithuania will be an active 
member in NATO and in a Europe \"whole and free.\" 
MULL 
"
"23432","11/30/2004 13:47","04VILNIUS1454","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1450","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001454 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/30/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, UK, LH, HT13 
SUBJECT: UKRAINE: RUSSIANS REPORTEDLY BLAME U.S. FOR 
UNREST; ADAMKUS EXPECTS RETURN MISSION TO KIEV 
 
REF: VILNIUS 1450 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Steve Mull.  Reasons:  1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (C) Adamkus expects to return to Ukraine with Kwasniewski 
and Solana before December 3 to continue mediation efforts, 
according to a senior adviser.  Kwasniewski predicted 
privately to Adamkus November 30 that Ukraine would likely 
turn into \"another Georgia\" within a few days.  A November 26 
conversation with Kuchma convinced the Lithuanians he would 
throw his support to whomever offers him a better \"deal\" in 
retirement.  The Lithuanians strongly condemn Russian efforts 
to exacerbate separatist tensions in Ukraine and reported 
that Russian parliamentary speaker Boris Gryzlov pointedly 
told Ukrainian leaders and European mediators in their 
November 26 meeting that the U.S. is orchestrating street 
protests in Kiev.  The Lithuanians strongly welcome high 
profile U.S. activism on Ukraine as an important impetus for 
a democratic outcome.  But they worry about the EU ) Solana 
was poorly prepared, said Adamkus\'s adviser, and report 
worrying indications of an accommodation between Putin and 
key Europeans to safeguard Russian equities in Ukraine. 
Domestic political support for Lithuania\'s involvement in 
mediation efforts remains high, including now from the 
previously skeptical Prime Minister Brazauskas.  End Summary 
 
Nov 26 Talks 
------------ 
 
2.  (C) Ambassador called on Adamkus\'s chief foreign policy 
adviser Edminas Bagdonas (strictly protect) November 30 for a 
debrief of the Adamkus mission to Kiev with Kwasniewski and 
EU foreign policy chief Solana on November 26.  Bagdonas said 
the principle achievements of the session were the agreements 
to foreswear violence and to form a small decisionmaking body 
comprised of Kuchma, Lytvyn, Yanukovych, Yushchenko, and some 
supporting staff to chart a political solution to the crisis. 
Bagdonas reported that Adamkus and he had a private meeting 
with Kuchma before a plenary session with the other 
international mediators.  It was clear to Adamkus at that 
meeting, said Bagdonas, that Kuchma was already having doubts 
about the wisdom of continued support for Yanukovych, leading 
the Lithuanians to predict that Kuchma would ultimately 
support the candidate who offered him a better \"deal\" in 
retirement (presumably immunity from prosecution and 
protection of privileges, said Bagdonas). 
 
3.  (C) Russian Duma Speaker Gryzlov and Russian Ambassador 
Chernomyrdin had attempted to exert heavy pressure against 
compromise at the talks, said Bagdonas.  Gryzlov said at the 
outset that Russia only recognizes one \"legal\" President ) 
Yanukovych ) and that the U.S. was responsible for secret 
efforts to stir up street protests in Kiev.  He called on the 
group to band together to limit American influence on the 
process.  Bagdonas said Adamkus and Kwasniewski had 
particularly harsh views of Russian and Yanukovych efforts to 
play the separatist card.  They agreed it was a serious 
strategic blunder on their part that would only strengthen 
Yushchenko\'s prospects, as indicated in the reported 
resignation of the chief of the Central Election Committee in 
protest. 
 
4.  (C) Bagdonas frankly described Kwasniewski as the true 
motor of the mediation process.  Showing off his fluent 
command in Russian, Bagdonas said that the Polish leader\'s 
pragmatic, energetic and problem-solving approach drove 
everyone to abandon rhetoric and focus on cooperation during 
the November 26 talks. 
 
 
Return to Kiev 
-------------- 
 
5.  (C) Bagdonas said Adamkus would join Kwasniewski and 
Solana on a return trip to Kiev before December 3.  During 
the Ambassador\'s meeting with Bagdonas, Kwasniewski called 
Adamkus to discuss options, and the two planned to hold a 
conference call with Kuchma on the late afternoon of November 
30 to coordinate a return trip.  During the call, Kwasniewski 
told Adamkus he was concerned that the rising temperature of 
street protests would likely lead to \"another Georgia\" within 
a few days.  Adamkus and Kwasniewski agreed to hold off 
announcing a return trip to Kiev until after conferring with 
Kuchma. 
 
Praise for U.S.; Doubts about EU 
-------------------------------- 
 
6.  (C) The high U.S. profile in rejecting results of the 
November 21 elections and repeated calls for a peaceful legal 
and political settlement had provided a huge impetus for the 
mediation process, Bagdonas said.  U.S. statements, 
particularly from Secretary Powell, had shaken Kuchma\'s 
support of Yanukovych and gave Putin second thoughts about 
pressing too hard on the issue. 
7.  (C) Bagdonas shared deep concerns about Solana, whom he 
described as clearly unprepared to engage substantively in 
the mediation process, and for the EU in general.  He said 
Kuchma had complained bitterly to Adamkus that Solana had 
never shown serious interest in Ukraine before ) \"Why should 
I bother talking to him now?\" Bagdonas quoted Kuchma.  More 
worrying, said Bagdonas, are indications of Putin\'s success 
in winning quiet accommodation with Chirac, Schroeder, 
Berlusconi and possibly Blair, in protecting Russian equities 
in Ukraine in efforts to resolve the crisis.  Lithuania 
encourages a continued high U.S. profile on the issue, 
Bagdonas said, as a means of keeping pressure on for a 
democratic outcome. 
 
Strong Support at Home 
---------------------- 
 
8.  (U) Meanwhile, popular political support for Lithuania\'s 
mediation mission remains strong (reftel).  Prime Minister 
Brazauskas, who had earlier scolded eager parliamentarians to 
avoid meddling in Ukrainian affairs, warmly praised the 
Adamkus initiative on November 30 as strongly in support of 
Lithuania\'s interests.  He blamed his earlier grouchiness on 
annoyance with conservative parliamentarians who had argued 
in favor of using the Ukraine crisis to mount greater 
pressure on Russia. 
MULL 
"
"23436","11/30/2004 14:18","04VILNIUS1455","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001455 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/29/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, LH, HT3 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN PM PRESENTS CABINET LIST TO A SKEPTICAL 
PRESIDENT 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Christian Yarnell 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: President Valdas Adamkus on November 29 
appointed Algirdas Brazauskas the new Prime Minister of 
Lithuania.  Brazauskas, in turn, presented the President with 
his list of ministerial candidates, which includes Labor 
Party boss Viktor Uspaskich and Peasant Party leader 
Kazimiera Prunskiene.  The list includes several 
controversial figures Adamkus opposes.  The President has 15 
days to approve the PM\'s Cabinet before it goes to the 
Parliament for confirmation.  Although Adamkus could reject 
Brazauskas\'s list in whole or in part, we expect he will in 
the end approve the Cabinet list to avoid charges that he is 
destabilizing the government.  The ruling coalition promises 
to be unstable enough regardless of what the President does. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------------- 
PM Brazauskas Presents Cabinet List 
----------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) President Valdas Adamkus signed a decree November 29 
appointing Algirdas Brazauskas as the new Prime Minister of 
Lithuania.  The decree also directed the PM to present, 
within 15 days, his list of Cabinet members to the President. 
 Brazauskas, who had already reached agreement with his 
coalition partners on the composition of the Cabinet, 
immediately presented the following list to Adamkus: 
 
- Gediminas Kirkilas (Social Democrat), Defense; 
- Algirdas Butkevicius (Social Democrat), Finance; 
- Zigmantas Balcytis (Social Democrat), Transportation; 
- Arunas Kundrotas (Social Democrat), Environment; 
- Gediminas Vaitkus (Social Democrat), Education; 
- Antanas Valionis (New Union), Foreign Affairs; 
- Vilija Blinkeviciute (New Union), Labor; 
- Zilvinas Padaiga (Labor), Health; 
- Vladimiras Prudnikovas (Labor), Culture; 
- Viktoras Uspaskich (Labor), Economy; 
- Gintautas Buzinskas (Labor), Justice; 
- Viktoras Muntianas (Labor), Interior; 
- Kazimiera Prunskiene (Peasant Party), Agriculture. 
 
The Special Investigative Service (STT) has already conducted 
background investigations on all these candidates and issued 
a clean bill of health. 
 
------------------------------- 
List not to Prez or PM\'s Liking 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Adamkus had opposed Uspaskich, Muntianas, Buzinskas, 
Prudnikovas, Vaitkus, and Prunskiene during negotiations with 
Brazauskas.  Presidency officials told us that Adamkus had 
recognized that he would not be able to block all of these 
controversial candidates, most notably party leaders 
Uspaskich and Prunskiene.  He had, however, hoped to convince 
Brazauskas to remove at least two of the most objectionable 
nominees, Muntianas and Vaitkus.  Many consider Muntianas, 
whose principal qualification seems to be his association 
with Uspaskich and Uspaskich\'s business, under-qualified for 
a ministerial position.  Some, including at least one top 
Presidential advisor, also worry that Muntianas is \"too close 
to the Russians.\"  Meanwhile, media reports have linked 
Vaitkus to a forgery scandal involving the Latvian-based 
Baltic Russian Institute, and he earned a reputation as a 
poor manager during his tenure at the Ministry of Education. 
 
4. (C) Brazauskas publicly supported Vaitkus\'s nomination. 
Of the other controversial candidates, he said that coalition 
partners had refused substitutions and that he would refuse 
accountability for the actions of his ministers. 
Nonetheless, Laurynas Bucalis, head of the PM\'s press 
service, told us that the PM would in the upcoming days make 
clear his responsibility for the work of the government as a 
whole. 
 
----------------------- 
The President\'s Options 
----------------------- 
 
5. (C) Arnoldas Pranckevicius, advisor to the President for 
domestic policy, told us that the Constitution is silent on 
what would happen if the President rejects the PM\'s list, and 
the Constitutional Court has never ruled on this issue.  A 
\"thumbs down\" could trigger another round of parliamentary 
elections, although Pranckevicius argued that Adamkus could 
instead ask Parliament to vote down Brazauskas as PM and 
select a new candidate.  Pranckevicius said that this would 
\"not be a real option,\" however, given the strength of the 
Brazauskas-led coalition in Parliament. 
 
6. (C) Another option for Adamkus, according to his advisor, 
would be to present an incomplete Cabinet for Parliamentary 
approval, excising one or two controversial candidates from 
the list.  Adamkus could thereby try to force Brazauskas\'s 
hand to make some substitutions.  Partial approval of the 
cabinet would also lead Lithuania into uncharted 
Constitutional territory, according to some analysts, 
although Brazauskas has already opined that the Constitution 
allows only for the approval of a complete Cabinet. 
 
7. (U) Reluctant acceptance of the PM\'s list is the 
President\'s final option. 
-------------------------------- 
Comment: Adamkus Likely to Yield 
-------------------------------- 
8. (C) Adamkus does not have firm ground to stand on in 
rejecting candidates on the list, and we suspect that in the 
end he will present Brazauskas\' list in its current form to 
Parliament for confirmation.  Adamkus did not support the 
formation of this coalition government, but he will not 
likely risk taking the blame for its premature demise.  In 
the end, we believe that he will conclude that the coalition 
is unstable enough to collapse on its own, with no 
presidential fingerprints.  The past week\'s tug-of-war within 
the nascent coalition over Lithuania\'s response to the 
post-election turmoil in Ukraine supports such a conclusion. 
FM Valionis and his New Union compatriots side with Adamkus 
in seeking a Lithuanian leadership role in brokering a 
negotiated solution, while Brazauskas and his fellow Social 
Democrats have espoused a more hands-off policy.  This debate 
exposes the fault lines of what promises to be an inherently 
fragile government. 
MULL 
"
"23561","12/3/2004 7:34","04VILNIUS1477","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE257064","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001477 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA, AMGT, PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, LI, LH, HT35 
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY 
MICHAEL KOZAK 
 
REF(S): STATE 257064 
 
1.  Post warmly welcomes Ambassador Michael Kozak and is pleased 
to grant country clearance for the period of December 3-6, 
2004 to attend the \"Advancing Europe Whole and Free: Challenges 
and Opportunities for Transatlantic Cooperation\" conference. 
 
2.  Embassy point of contact for your visit is Trevor 
Boyd, POL/ECON. Contact information is TEL: +370-5-266- 
5539; FAX: +370-5-266-5510; E-MAIL: BoydTW@state.gov. 
 
3.  The American Embassy address is Akmenu 6.  The 24-hour 
Embassy telephone number is +370-5-2665500; fax number is 
+370-5-2665510.  All operators speak English. 
 
4.  Hotel reservations have been made, as requested reftel 
for the nights of December 3-5 at Stikliai hotel for a 
single room at the rate of 126 USD per night.  The room 
rate includes all taxes and breakfast.  The hotel is 
located at Gaono 7; tel: +370-5-264-9596; fax: +370-5-212- 
3870. 
 
5.  Your hotel, most restaurants and many stores accept 
credit cards.  However, it is a good idea to have some 
cash on hand since much of Lithuania still operates on a 
cash economy.  The Embassy cashier is available for check 
cashing services (during the hours 0900 to 1300 M,T,TH,F) 
and there are automatic teller machines (ATM) around the 
city.  There is also an exchange service at the airport at 
commercial rates (comparable to those at the Embassy). 
 
6.  Lithuania is a relatively safe country with very 
little anti-American sentiment.  Vilnius has a low 
criminal threat level, however, visitors should take 
standard precautions, as in any other large urban area. 
Crimes of opportunity are most common, pick pocketing, car 
break-ins and theft.  Most crimes happen at night or in 
the early morning hours.  After dark, visitors should stay 
in pairs and exercise common sense and avoid isolated 
areas.  Visitors are encouraged to leave any valuables in 
their hotel safety deposit boxes.  Use of public 
transportation is not recommended.  Should you wish a 
security briefing upon arrival, please contact the RSO at 
tel: +370-5-2665621. 
 
7.  For additional information about Vilnius you may wish 
to log on to www.inyourpocket.com and select Vilnius. 
 
8.  Visitors are advised to arrange taxi service through 
their hotel or the Embassy.  However, taxis that are 
parked in front of the airport are reliable.  Be aware of 
rogue taxi drivers who approach you offering their taxi 
service.  Always inquire what the fare will be in advance. 
The trip into town from the airport should cost around 
$5.00-$10.00 (depending on exchange rate and day of the 
week). 
 
9.  Visas are not required if stay is less than 90 days. 
 
10.  The climate in Vilnius during the winter is dark, 
cold and wet with snow and ice.  Boots, jacket and gloves 
are necessary. 
 
MULL 
"
"23698","12/7/2004 12:34","04VILNIUS1488","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE256629","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, KNEI, LH, HT7 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA SUPPORTS E-PINE PAPER ON BELARUS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 256629 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
(C) We delivered reftel paper on Belarus to Mindaugas 
Kacerauskis, head of MFA\'s Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine 
Division on December 2.  Kacerauskis said that Lithuania 
supports the themes and actions detailed in the paper, 
including the institution of \"limited\" economic measures to 
freeze the personal financial assets of the Belarusian 
leadership.  Kacerauskis said that the EU, however, would 
likely not support economic sanctions in any form over 
concern that such measures would more negatively affect the 
Belarusian people than the Belarusian leadership. 
MULL 
"
"23702","12/7/2004 13:26","04VILNIUS1489","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04KIEV4845","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001489 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/06/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, XH, LH, HT13 
SUBJECT: ADAMKUS REPORTS INTERNATIONAL MEDIATION MISSION 
COMPLETE; NEXT STEPS UNCERTAIN 
 
REF: KIEV 4845 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR STEPHEN MULL FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (C) Adamkus is satisfied with the outcome of the 
contentious international mediation session in Kiev December 
6-7.  He predicts that December 26 elections will occur on 
schedule, but admits that key uncertainties remain.  A return 
of the international mediators to Kiev appears unlikely for 
now.  End Summary. 
 
Another All Nighter 
------------------- 
 
2.  (C) President Adamkus called Ambassador December 7 to 
brief on that morning\'s latest international mediation 
sessions to broker an end to the Ukrainian political crisis. 
Adamkus said the meetings had been the most contentious yet, 
with angry recriminations, particularly from Kuchma, aimed at 
both Yushchenko and the international mediators over what he 
characterized as foreign intervention.  He said that 
Kwasniewski, Solana and he had patiently pushed back, noting 
the importance of staging open, free and fair elections as 
planned on December 26; \"We told him the eyes of the world 
are on Ukraine,\" said Adamkus, \"you can\'t afford to destroy 
their hopes.\" 
 
3.  (C) The most significant achievements of the talks, said 
Adamkus, were: 
 
-- An agreement by Yanukovych to go on leave of absence 
through the December 26 elections, while a member of 
Parliament acceptable to all sides would assume Acting Prime 
Minister duties; 
 
-- Kuchma\'s agreement to dismiss the Central Election 
Committee and replace it with more politically unbiased 
officials; and 
 
-- A common agreement to consider Kuchma\'s proposed 
constitutional reforms \"in a parallel track\" with the 
election reforms, but without necessarily committing to 
passage of the constitutional measures before the December 26 
elections. 
 
Despite rumors that Kuchma was pressuring Yanukovych to 
withdraw from the race, Adamkus said it was clear in their 
meetings that Yanukovych will certainly run in the December 
26 elections. 
 
Personal Dynamics 
----------------- 
 
4.  (C) Adamkus said that Kuchma\'s clear motive in inviting 
the European mediators to return was to cultivate additional 
pressure on the Yushchenko camp.  Adamkus found Yushchenko 
personable and tough, though occasionally too focused on 
unimportant details of the political dialogue with Kuchma. 
He said that Yulia Tymoshenko obviously exercised strong 
influence on Yushchenko during the mediators\' private meeting 
with him and his staff.  Russian Ambassador Chernomyrdin and 
Duma speaker Gryzlov kept a much lower profile in the round 
table meetings than had previously been the case, he said. 
Throughout the evening, Adamkus said Solana continued to seem 
disinclined to participate in the mediation effort, said 
Adamkus, implying that he was there only as a result of 
higher-level pressure from within the EU.  Although the 
sessions had come close to breaking down at several times, he 
said, by 2:00 a.m. the group had concluded their sessions in 
a congenial mood (with the help of several glasses of 
cognac). 
 
Mission Complete? 
----------------- 
 
5.  (C) Adamkus said that by the end of the sessions on 
December 7, all sides had agreed that the international 
mediation process had done all it could and that future 
returns to Kiev appeared unlikely.  While he expressed 
general satisfaction with mission, he agreed that several 
uncertainties remain in arranging the December 26 elections, 
and that he would be available to return to Kiev with the 
other international mediators to work those issues further if 
the parties desired it. 
 
Comment: Too Glossy? 
-------------------- 
6.  (C) Adamkus\'s essentially positive spin on the latest 
mediation effort  -- at odds with Embassy Kiev (reftel) and 
international media reporting that indicates a continued 
impasse -- undoubtedly reflects his wish to get credit for 
helping to move the process forward.  We defer to our 
colleagues in Kiev for the definitive analysis. 
MULL 
"
"23760","12/8/2004 11:23","04VILNIUS1492","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1380","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001492 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND INR-B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/07/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PREL, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, LH, HT48 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA: DEFMIN NOMINEE PLEDGES TO STAY COURSE 
 
REF: VILNIUS 1380 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  President Valdas Adamkus on December 7 
nominated Gediminas Kirkilas, a leader of the Social Democrat 
Party and former Chairman of parliament\'s Foreign Affairs 
Committee, to become Minster of Defense in Lithuania\'s new 
government.  Kirkilas, who will replace fellow Social 
Democrat Linas Linkevicius, will likely be confirmed by 
parliament next week.  Kirkilas publicly pledged on December 
6 to continue to reform and improve the professionalism of 
Lithuania\'s armed forces, to work to extend the parliamentary 
party agreement allocating two percent of GDP for defense 
purposes until 2012, and to increase the amount of defense 
spending directly allocated to the Ministry of Defense.  We 
expect Kirkilas, who has often proven himself sympathetic 
toward USG views, to continue to promote Lithuania\'s activist 
foreign policy in the Global War on Terror and our strong, 
cooperative MOD-USG relationship.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
New Defense Minister to Stay the Course 
--------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) Gediminas Kirkilas, nominated to replace fellow Social 
Democrat Linas Linkevicius as Minister of Defense in 
Lithuania\'s new Cabinet, pledged on December 6 to continue to 
reform and improve the professionalism of Lithuania\'s armed 
forces.  Kirkilas also promised to work with Lithuania\'s 
political parties to extend their pledge to allocate at least 
two percent of GDP for defense purposes until 2012. (NOTE: 
In March, Lithuania\'s political parties agreed to extend this 
two percent allocation until 2008). Noting that the two 
percent allocation must be \"real\" for the Ministry of 
Defense, Kirkilas pledged to work to reduce the amount of 
defense spending allocated to secondary defense 
organizations, such as to border guard and Ministry of 
Interior troops (reftel A). 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Kirkilas:  An Experienced National Security Hand 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
3. (SBU) Kirkilas brings a wealth of national security and 
foreign affairs experience to his new position.  Kirkilas has 
served in parliament since 1992, is a member of parliament\'s 
National Security Committee, and has served as Deputy 
Chairman of the European Affairs Committee (since July 2001) 
and Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee (since July 
2001).  Kirkilas has served as Chairman of Lithuania\'s 
parliamentary delegation to NATO\'s parliamentary assembly 
since October 2001.  Fluent in English and Russian, Kirkilas 
is a long-serving member of the parliamentary groups for 
relations with the United States and Russia.  In the summer 
of 2002, President Adamkus named Kirkilas special envoy on 
Kaliningrad transit issues.  For his efforts in helping 
secure the EU-Russia agreement on transit issues in November 
2002, and for advancing the border and readmission agreement 
with Russia, Adamkus granted Kirkilas the rank of Ambassador. 
 
4. (SBU) Kirkilas has pledged to remain a Member of 
Parliament, and an active player in the co-ruling Social 
Democratic Party.  President Adamkus is expected to present 
his Cabinet to parliament for confirmation on December 9 
(septel).  A final vote may come as early as December 14. 
There has been no official word on what the future holds for 
outgoing Minster Linkevicius, though there are rumors that he 
may be offered an Ambassadorial position, possibly at the UN. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
5. (C) Kirkilas is a respected figure in Lithuanian national 
security circles.  We have worked well with Kirkilas in the 
past, and have developed strong relations with him over a 
broad range of issues.  His principal challenge will be to 
secure a greater portion of the two percent defense 
allocation for \"real\" defense purposes.  Very influential 
within the ruling coalition and Parliament, and fully versed 
in negotiating the budgetary process, Kirkilas is positioned 
to succeed in areas where Linkavicius did not, especially in 
securing additional funding for the MOD.  Given his 
longstanding pro-American stance, we also expect Kirkilas to 
help maintain Lithuania\'s activist foreign policy in support 
of multinational operations around the world. 
------------------ 
Biographical Notes 
------------------ 
 
6. (SBU) Gediminas Kirkilas was born on August 30, 1951 in 
Vilnius.  He is the eldest of seven children born to a 
teacher and engineer.  Kirkilas served as a conscript in the 
Soviet Northern Fleet in Severomorsk between 1969-1972.  He 
studied literature at the Vilnius Pedagogical Institute 
between 1972 and 1976.  In 1982, he received a degree from 
the Communist Party Institute (Political School) in Vilnius. 
He received an MA in International Trade from Vilnius 
University\'s Business School in 2004. 
 
7. (SBU) Between 1972-1982, Kirkilas worked as an 
architectural restorer, and helped restore the interiors of 
several churches in Vilnius and Kaunas.  Kirkilas began a 
career in the Communist Party apparatus in 1982.  In 1986, 
Kirkilas became the First Assistant to the Secretary of the 
Party Central Committee\'s Culture Department.  He served as 
Assistant Spokesman of the Party\'s First Secretary and later 
for Lithuanian President Algirdas Brazauskas.  When the 
Lithuanian Communist Party split from the Communist Party of 
the Soviet Union and renamed itself the Labor Party in 1990, 
Kirkilas became a member of its Central Committee and its 
Deputy Chairman.  In 2001, he was elected the Deputy Chairman 
of the newly merged Social Democratic Party.  For several 
years following the merger, Kirkilas served as party whip, 
directing the party\'s information strategy and its election 
campaigns.  Kirkilas, running as the party\'s number two 
candidate for the European parliament, failed to win office 
in June.  He was re-elected to parliament from the Social 
Democrat\'s Party list in October. 
 
8. (SBU) Kirkilas is married to Liudmila Kirkiliene, who 
works for Lithuanian Railways.  They have a daughter and two 
sons (one adopted).  Kirkilas is a pipe smoker, and his 
hobbies include fishing and tennis.  He is a prolific author, 
and has published some 900 articles and a book on politics. 
Kirkilas has received two Lithuanian state decorations, the 
Vytautas Order Officer Cross, and the Vytis Cross, and was 
awarded Poland\'s Commander Order. 
Kelly 
"
"23772","12/8/2004 13:34","04VILNIUS1496","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1455","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/07/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, LH, HT3 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIAN PRESIDENT FORCES CABINET SHAKE-UP 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1455 
     B. 12/03 COHEN-CEFKIN EMAIL 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Christian Yarnell 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (C) Summary: President Valdas Adamkus scored a major 
political victory on December 7, forcing the ruling coalition 
of PM Algirdas Brazauskas to replace two Cabinet candidates. 
Viktoras Muntianas and Rimantas Vaitkus are now out of the 
line-up, and, if cleared by investigative services, Labor 
Party member Gintaras Furmanavicius and Social Democrat 
Juozas Antanavicius will serve as Interior Minister and 
Education Minister, respectively.  Adamkus signed a decree on 
the appointment of a new government on December 7, with 
parliamentary approval expected early during the week of 
December 13.  The nomination of Furmanavicius as Interior 
Minister is a concern, as he has links to indicted swindler 
Gintaras Petrikas, who is currently facing extradition 
proceedings in California.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------- 
Victory for President 
--------------------- 
 
2. (U) Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas, after a four-hour 
negotiating session with President Valdas Adamkus and Labor 
Party leader Viktor Uspaskich on December 7, yielded to the 
President\'s concerns on the proposed Cabinet (refs A and B) 
and agreed to replace two of his proposed Ministers.  Adamkus 
had singled out these two candidates, Viktoras Muntianas, 
Labor Party candidate for Interior Minister, and Rimantas 
Vaitkus, Social Democratic candidate for Education Minister, 
as being particularly problematic in the eyes of the 
Presidency (ref A).  Labor Party head Viktor Uspaskich 
announced that Muntianas, now excluded from the Cabinet, 
would instead receive one of the five Deputy Speaker of 
Parliament positions. 
 
3. (C) The coalition\'s concession on the Cabinet was a major 
victory for Adamkus, who is riding high here thanks in large 
part to his role as mediator in Ukraine.  Political analysts 
describe Adamkus\'s victory as a coup of sorts, as the 
Lithuanian Constitution does not explicitly provide the 
President with substantive powers over the formation of the 
Cabinet.  Uspaskich had threatened to withdraw to the 
opposition if Adamkus did not approve Muntianas, his deputy 
in the Party and former mayor of Uspaskich\'s hometown of 
Kedainiai.  One of Adamkus\'s domestic policy advisors and 
member of the negotiating team told us that the Presidency 
was in fact \"surprised\" by the result and had not expected 
the coalition to yield on Muntianas. 
 
-------------------- 
Revised Cabinet List 
-------------------- 
 
4. (U) Adamkus signed a decree on the appointment of a new 
government immediately following the announcement.  Adamkus 
will meet the compromise Cabinet candidates -- Gintaras 
Furmanavicius (Labor), now proposed for Minister of Interior, 
and Juozas Antanavicius (Social Democrat), candidate for 
Minister of Education -- on Friday, December 10 following his 
return from the Baltic Trade Investment Mission in London. 
The pair will also have to pass a screening by Lithuania\'s 
Special Investigative Service (STT).  Adamkus will likely 
present the decree to Parliament without delay, however, and 
most observers expect Parliament to confirm the new Cabinet 
and its program early in the week of December 13. 
 
5. (U) The revised list of Cabinet members is as follows: 
 
-- Prime Minister:      Algirdas Brazauskas (Social Democrat) 
 
-- Agriculture:         Kazimiera Prunskiene (Peasant Party) 
-- Culture:             Vladimiras Prudnikovas (Labor) 
-- Defense:             Gediminas Kirkilas (Social Democrat) 
-- Economy:             Viktor Uspaskich (Labor) 
-- Education:           Juozas Antanavicius (Social Democrat) 
-- Environment:         Arunas Kundrotas (Social Democrat) 
-- Finance:             Algirdas Butkevicius (Social Democrat) 
-- Foreign Affairs:     Antanas Valionis (New Union) 
-- Health:              Zilvinas Padaiga (Labor) 
-- Interior:            Gintaras Jonas Furmanavicius (Labor) 
-- Justice:             Gintautas Buzinskas (Labor) 
-- Labor:               Vilija Blinkeviciute (New Union) 
-- Transportation:      Zigmantas Balcytis (Social Democrat) 
 
------------------------------- 
Controversial Interior Minister 
------------------------------- 
6. (SBU) Furmanavicius, formerly in charge of public 
relations for telecommunications giant Lietuvos Telekomas and 
with no previous government or law enforcement experience, is 
himself a controversial figure.  From 1992-1997, 
Furmanavicius occupied a key post in the Lithuanian firm 
EBSW, working closely with EBSW owner Gintaras Petrikas. 
Petrikas is wanted in Lithuania for embezzling over 80 
million litas (approximately 30 million USD) as head of EBSW. 
 Petrikas fled to the United States to avoid arrest, but 
Californian authorities arrested him in May.  Petrikas is 
currently fighting extradition proceedings in Los Angeles. 
 
7. (C) Adamkus stated that he knew of Furmanavicius\'s work 
for EBSW but that, according to the Presidency\'s information, 
\"there is no direct responsibility of his for the holding\'s 
activities.\"  One of the President\'s advisors told us that 
they do not expect any difficulties with Furmanavicius\'s 
candidacy, sans a red flag from the STT. Should the STT 
determine that Furmanavicius is unfit to serve as a Cabinet 
minister, he noted, the coalition would have to find \"a 
replacement to the replacement.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Comment: Furmanavicius\' Link to Petrikas a Concern 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
8. (C) Despite Furmanavicius\'s checkered past, he is likely 
to pass the screening of the investigative services. 
Ironically, as Minister of Interior, Furmanavicius would have 
a role in executing the extradition of his old colleague 
Petrikas, an important goal for us and the Lithuanian 
authorities.  There is a real possibility that a conflict of 
interest could affect the celerity and vigor with which the 
GOL pursues Petrikas\'s extradition.  We will continue to work 
with the GOL in order to complete the extradition. 
Kelly 
"
"23777","12/8/2004 13:48","04VILNIUS1497","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001497 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP/BA (TFINTON) AND EUR/NB (MGERMANO) 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/MAC/DAS/EUR (JBURGESS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, ETRD, BEXP, LH, HT23 
SUBJECT: SUCCESS STORY: AT&T AND LITHUANIAN TELECOM 
PROVIDER SETTLE RATE DISPUTE 
 
 
1.  Summary.  AT&T and Lietuvos Telekomas, Lithuania\'s 
largest fixed-line telecommunications service provider, 
concluded a new mobile call termination agreement, settling a 
dispute over rates in Lithuania.  Telekomas had threatened to 
block all AT&T incoming traffic if the two failed to arrive 
at an understanding, despite a framework agreement which 
requires a six-month notice of change of service.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  AT&T sought assistance in October in resolving a dispute 
with Telekomas, Lithuania\'s largest fixed-line 
telecommunications service provider, over mobile call 
termination rates.  AT&T and Telekomas\' rate agreement having 
expired in June, Telekomas notified the American carrier that 
it would block all AT&T incoming traffic as of October 15. 
Mary Hoberman, AT&T Director for International Public Policy, 
told us that negotiations had broken down because of 
Telekomas\' attempts to raise rates arbitrarily and 
excessively.  She said that the threatened action and, in 
fact, the warning were in contravention of the companies\' 
framework agreement (ITSA), which requires a six-month notice 
of change of service.  Hoberman described the threatened cut 
in service as \"aggressive\" and said the action would result 
in higher cost and lower quality of service for U.S. and 
Lithuanian customers as AT&T would have to route calls to 
Lithuania through other carriers. 
 
3.  Our subsequent interventions with the directors of 
Telekomas\' Wholesale and International Carrier Service 
Departments, including a face-to-face meeting, resulted in 
the company agreeing not to block AT&T calls and to return to 
the negotiating table.  In November, AT&T and Telekomas 
concluded a new mobile termination rate agreement. 
Kelly 
"
"23807","12/9/2004 9:51","04VILNIUS1499","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04USNATO1040|04VILNIUS1350","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EUR/RPM AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/08/2014 
TAGS: PARM, MOPS, LH, HT12 
SUBJECT: CSBM BILATERALS GIVE LITHUANIA ADDITIONAL TOOL TO 
ASSUAGE RUSSIAN VDOC CONCERNS IN BALTICS 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1350 
     B. USNATO 1040 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Lithuania has developed bilateral Confidence 
and Security Building Measure (CSBM) agreements in accordance 
with the 1999 Vienna Document of OSCE and CFE requirements 
with Russia, Belarus and its Nordic neighbors. For Lithuania, 
the bilateral agreements enhance military transparency and 
predictability and serve as additional mechanisms for 
building concrete cooperation between Russia and NATO. 
Lithuania signed a pair of bilateral CSBM agreements with 
Russia in 2001 that call for additional evaluation visits and 
exchanges of information between Lithuania\'s armed forces and 
Russian forces in the Kaliningrad Oblast.  Though its Vienna 
Document partners have rarely conducted visits under the 
auspices of the bilateral agreements, the GOL has utilized 
its bilateral agreement with Russia each year since 2002 to 
inspect units in Kaliningrad.  Lithuania proposed additional 
CSBM bilateral agreements with Russia in 2003 pertaining to 
the exchange of information and pre-notification of major 
military exercises in each country.  These proposals, to 
date, have received no response from the GOR.  Lithuania also 
signed bilateral CSBM agreements with Finland and Sweden in 
1998, and with Belarus in 2001.  The CSBMs established in the 
Vienna Document and the GOL\'s bilateral agreements provide 
sufficient opportunities for Russia to assuage any concerns 
it may have regarding national or NATO assets based on 
Lithuanian territory.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Lithuania and Russia signed two CSBM bilateral 
agreements in 2001 that go beyond the provisions of Chapter 
IX on Compliance and Verification of the 1999 Vienna Document 
(VDOC).  One agreement affords an additional evaluation visit 
to units in Lithuania and in the Kaliningrad Oblast above the 
quota of three inspections established in the VDOC.  The 
second agreement establishes an annual exchange of 
information about military forces in Lithuania and the 
Kaliningrad Oblast. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Summary of Lithuania\'s Inspections of Kaliningrad 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
3. (C) Lithuania has utilized its bilateral CSBM agreement 
with the GOR to inspect Russian military assets in the 
Kaliningrad Oblast since 2002.  Lithuania conducted the 
following inspections of the Kaliningrad region: 
 
-- A Lithuanian inspection team conducted an evaluation visit 
of the Seventh Motor Rifle Brigade on July 17-18, 2002. 
Following briefings by the brigade commander, the team 
visited the brigade museum, motor pool, firing range, and 
spoke with brigade personnel.  The team had the opportunity 
to count and photograph major weapons and equipment systems 
during the tour. 
 
-- A GOL team visited the 609th Motorized Training Regiment 
on December 8-9, 2003.  Following a briefing by the unit 
commander, the team visited the barracks, service facilities, 
main training areas, and motor pool.  The team had the 
opportunity to count and photograph major weapons and 
equipment systems during the tour. 
 
-- A Lithuanian inspection team conducted an evaluation of 
the 336th Naval Infantry Brigade on August 24-26, 2004. 
Following briefings by the brigade commander, the team 
visited the barracks, brigade museum, canteen and medical 
facilities.  The team had the opportunity to count major 
weapons and equipment systems during the tour. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Russian Inspections of Lithuania 
-------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Russia began inspecting military assets stationed on 
Lithuanian territory pursuant to Vienna Document guidelines 
in 2004.  The first VDOC inspection by a Russian Federation 
team occurred on August 13, under the auspices of the GOL-GOR 
CSBM bilateral agreement. (NOTE:  A country may utilize 
either a bilateral agreement or provisions detailed in the 
Vienna Document itself to substantiate an inspection).  The 
inspection of elements of the Iron Wolf Motorized Infantry 
Brigade included a briefing by the unit\'s commander and a 
visit to brigade\'s barracks.  The team had the opportunity to 
count and photograph major weapons and equipment systems 
during the tour.  A Vienna Document inspection on October 
27-28, (reftel A) included Lithuanian army and air force 
facilities in Kaunas, Panevyzys, and Siauliai, including 
NATO\'s air policing assets at the Zokniai airfield. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
GOL Seeks Additional CSBM Bilateral Agreements with Russia 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Lithuania proposed two additional CSBM bilateral 
agreements to Russia in May 2003.  The agreements call for an 
additional VDOC inspection per year, and the pre-notification 
of each country\'s largest annual military exercises.  Russia 
has not responded to the initiative. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Lithuania\'s CSBM Bilateral Agreements with Belarus 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6. (C) Lithuania signed four bilateral CSBM agreements with 
Belarus in 2001.  The agreements afford an annual exchange of 
information, an additional evaluation visit and inspection 
per year above VDOC quotas, and pre-notification of the 
year\'s largest military exercise within each country. 
Lithuania conducted evaluation visits in July, 2002 of the 
120th Motor Rifle Brigade stationed in Minsk, and of the 38th 
Mobile Brigade in Brest in July, 2004.  Belarus conducted an 
inspection visit of the Iron Wolf Motorized Infantry Brigade 
in Rukla, Lithuania on October 5-7, 2004. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Lithuania\'s Other CSBM Bilateral Agreements 
------------------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) Lithuania signed a pair of CSBM bilateral agreements 
with both Finland and Sweden in 1998.  The agreements afford 
an additional evaluation visit and inspection above the VDOC 
quota per annum.  Both Finland and Sweden utilized their 
bilateral agreement to conduct an inspection in Lithuania in 
2002.  Finland sent an evaluation team to the Jonuso Radvilos 
infantry training regiment in Rukla, Lithuania.  Sweden 
conducted an evaluation of the Iron Wolf Motorized Infantry 
Brigade.  Lithuania is tentatively planning an inspection 
visit to either Finland or Sweden in 2005. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (C) Lithuania has developed a robust bilateral CSBM 
network that lends credence to its (and NATO\'s) argument that 
Russia, in particular, should utilize existing CSBM 
inspection mechanisms to assuage its concerns about military 
activities here.  The GOL seized the opportunity afforded it 
by Russia\'s 2004 inspections to illustrate to both its NATO 
allies and the GOR that Lithuania is willing to exceed the 
letter of the Vienna Document in its openness, flexibility, 
and transparency during CSBM inspections.  Lithuania will 
continue to push back against Russian pressure to establish 
special CSBM monitoring mechanisms. 
Kelly 
"
"23834","12/9/2004 14:33","04VILNIUS1505","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1315","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB (MGERMANO), EUR/ERA AND EB/ESC/IEC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/08/2014 
TAGS: ENRG, PREL, LH, HT25 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA TO PROCEED WITH REACTOR CLOSEOUT 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1315 
 
     B. VILNIUS 1439 
 
Classified By: Economic Officer Miguel Kamat for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D 
) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (C) A GOL resolution on November 24 confirmed that one of 
two Chernobyl-type Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant (INPP) 
reactors will close as expected on December 31.  The 
resolution follows GOL-EU consultations in Brussels at which 
EU experts advised Lithuania to honor its EU accession 
commitments.  Next month, the Lithuanian parliament will 
debate a French company\'s feasibility study on a new NPP. 
Canadian and U.S. companies have also expressed interest in 
constructing a new reactor.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
GOL Affirms December 31 Closure Date for Unit I 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
2. (C) A GOL resolution on November 24 confirmed that the 
older of the two INPP units will close on December 31.  (The 
second unit is slated for decommissioning in 2009.)  The 
announcement reflected President Valdas Adamkus\'s decision to 
abide by Lithuania\'s EU accession treaty obligations and to 
not seek a six-month extension on operations.  The President 
declined the advice of GOL energy experts, who had expressed 
concerns (Ref A) that Lithuania would face a power supply 
shortfall in the event that the remaining unit proved unable 
to meet the winter\'s increased energy demands.  The decision 
also ran counter to statements President Adamkus himself made 
to the Ambassador that he would seek an extension.  Following 
consultations in Brussels, Ministry of Economy Undersecretary 
Arturas Dainius told us that the EU had indicated it would 
likely not support a GOL request for an extension. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
With Closure, Scant Possibility of Blackout 
------------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Presidential Energy Advisor Nijole Zambaite told us 
that a blackout could \"theoretically\" occur following the 
closure of Unit I, but that Lithuania could always turn to 
non-nuclear alternatives (Ref B).  Lietuvos Energija General 
Director Rymantas Juozaitis told us that following the 
closure, Kaliningrad would need to draw its power from Russia 
across the highly integrated regional grid passing through 
Lithuania, since it could no longer depend on surplus 
electricity exports from Lithuania.  This grid must pass 
through a narrow bottleneck consisting of three lines between 
Smolensk (Russia) and Belarus.  This could conceivably raise 
the possibility of a blackout affecting much of Lithuania. 
However, for a blackout to occur in Lithuania, in Juozaitis\'s 
opinion, the following unlikely scenario would have to 
unfold: 
- Failure of INPP\'s remaining unit; 
- Failure of generators at Lithuania\'s Elektrenai Thermal 
Power Plant (INPP\'s back-up) to engage; 
- Extreme icing on at least one of the electrical lines in 
the Russia-Belarus bottleneck; and 
- Excessive consumer demand (as might happen, for example, 
when temperatures fall below zero degrees Fahrenheit). 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Decommissioning Requires Additional Funding 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) INPP Director General Viktor Sevaldin told us that 
Unit I will remain in operational condition, loaded with 
nuclear fuel, for three years following the December 31 
closure date.  The GOL will only commence the process of 
removing fuel from the reactor in 2008, when its new storage 
facility for spent fuel rods will be ready.  Only after the 
fuel is removed from the unit and safely stored in a new 
facility for processing radioactive waste, experts tell us, 
can the reactor be dismantled.  Given the logistics involved, 
said Sevaldin, it is unlikely that dismantling will begin 
before 2013.  Lithuania has received EU commitments of 80-90 
million euros (USD 106-120 million) for the spent fuel 
facility, and 79 million euros (USD 105.1 million) for the 
waste processing facility.  For the decommissioning process 
to proceed according to plan, however, the GOL, according to 
Sevaldin, will need an additional infusion of 80 million 
euros (USD 106.4 million) for the spent fuel facility and 51 
million euros (USD 67.8 million) for the radioactive waste 
processing facility.  Sevaldin said the GOL would present its 
funding needs to donor countries and the European Commission 
at a conference in London on December 10. 
5. (U) Sevaldin noted that INPP\'s need for LTL 50 million 
(USD 66.5 million) annually to maintain the remaining 
reactor, pay employee salaries, and purchase spare parts 
could pose an additional obstacle to decommissioning.  The 
GOL is able to contribute only LTL 18 million (USD 23.9 
million) to this sum, and hopes to obtain EU support for the 
balance.  Although the EU is scheduled to sign an agreement 
with the GOL by December 20 to cover 2005 expenses, Brussels 
has made no additional funding commitments. 
 
------- 
New NPP 
------- 
6. (U) Sevaldin said the GOL has not decided whether to 
construct a new NPP.  The Lithuanian parliament will consider 
a report in January by the French company Framatom and the 
Kaunas Technological University on the feasibility of 
constructing a new reactor.  Sevaldin noted that Adamkus has 
repeatedly told him that he supports a new NPP for economic 
and environmental reasons.  The French, said Sevaldin, are 
organizing an investors\' meeting on the issue on January 13. 
He also claimed that the Canadian company AECL and U.S.-based 
Westinghouse have expressed interest in competing for any 
possible NPP tender (Westinghouse has not contacted the 
Embassy on this matter).  The GOL, which is able to 
contribute only 30 percent of the estimated cost of 2 billion 
euros (USD 2.7 billion), will need private contributions to 
cover the balance. 
 
------------------ 
Workforce Lay-offs 
------------------ 
 
7. (U) Sevaldin said INPP management will lay off 200 workers 
during both 2005 and 2006.  Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant 
Regional Development Agency Director Arnoldas Abramavicius 
told us his agency is drafting a regional development 
strategy to help INPP workers find gainful alternative 
employment.  His agency has created 100 new jobs in 
industries such as construction, sawmills, and tourism. 
Abramavicius said each INPP worker would receive LTL 30,000 
(USD 11,539) on separation, and if eligible, retirement 
benefits as well.  Although reductions before 2009 will be 
relatively minor, Abramavicius predicted that the GOL will 
need to lay off an additional 2,000 workers when it closes 
Unit II in 2009.  His agency\'s strategy is to help members of 
the INPP workforce transfer their skills to industries such 
as metal construction, chemicals, sewing and furniture 
building, and to attract investment to the region\'s tourism 
sector. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (C) The GOL had limited room to maneuver on the reactor 
closure date.  Absent flexibility from Brussels, it felt 
compelled to honor Lithuania\'s international commitments.  By 
taking the high road and closing the reactor, however, both 
President Adamkus and Prime Minister Brazauskas may well get 
a \"black eye\" if a blackout occurs this winter, as the public 
will likely blame both of them for any significant power 
shortfall. 
 
9. (SBU) We note that, as the decommissioning date 
approaches, there is growing momentum within the GOL and the 
local scientific community to support a new NPP.  If these 
plans progress, and Westinghouse really is interested, we 
will work with the company and the GOL to ensure that the 
construction contract bidding process related to a new NPP is 
fair and transparent. 
Mull 
"
"23946","12/13/2004 4:54","04VILNIUS1512","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1480|04VILNIUS1489","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001512 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, UK, BO, LH, HT39 
SUBJECT: CODEL HASTINGS PRAISES LITHUANIAN EFFORTS IN 
UKRAINE, PROMISES OSCE CONFERENCE ON BALTIC REGION 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1489 
     B. VILNIUS 1480 
 
Classified By: Vice Consul Timothy E. Liston for reasons 1.4(B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary: Congressman Alcee Hastings, attending a 
GOL-sponsored conference on the promotion of democracy in 
Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, and the South Caucasus, met with 
President Adamkus and parliamentary (Seimas) and GOL foreign 
policy experts on December 3 to discuss the current Ukrainian 
political crisis and propose an OSCE conference on issues 
affecting the Baltic region, i.e. trafficking in persons, 
Belarus and counter-terrorism.  Hastings, speaking as 
President of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly, praised 
President Adamkus for his mediation efforts of the Ukraine 
political crisis.  President Adamkus planned to continue 
these efforts, but said he was \"not encouraged\" by President 
Kuchma\'s trip to Moscow last week.  President Adamkus and 
Seimas officials promised to assist Congressman Hastings in 
formulating an agenda for his proposed OSCE conference on the 
Baltic region.  President Adamkus and other Lithuanian 
interlocutors reacted positively to Hastings\' calls for a 
more proactive policy towards Belarus. President Adamkus 
warned of repeating past mistakes of EU policy toward Ukraine 
when formulating a new policy toward Belarus.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Ukraine: President Adamkus doing what he can 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Congressman Hastings, representing the OSCE 
Parliamentary Assembly as its President, attended a 
GOL-sponsored conference on promotion of democracy in 
Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, and the South Caucasus. On the 
margins of the conference, Congressmen Hastings met with 
several GOL leaders, including President Adamkus. The 
President stressed his determination to continue mediating a 
peaceful solution to the current political crisis in the 
Ukraine.  He, however, expressed his dismay with President 
Kuchma\'s decision last week to meet with Russian President 
Putin on the situation in Ukraine.  President Adamkus was 
\"not encouraged\" by President Putin\'s level of involvement - 
nor by the statements following the Putin-Kuchma meeting - in 
what Adamkus considered Ukrainian internal affairs. 
Nevertheless, Adamkus underlined his determination to see the 
mediation process through to its end (which, together with 
Polish President Kwasniewski and EU High Representative 
Solana, he has done successfully -- reftel). 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Hastings Proposes Baltic Regional Conference 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) Congressman Hastings put forth in all of his meetings 
the idea of holding an OSCE-sponsored conference addressing 
the issues and challenges that face the Baltic region, 
mentioning Trafficking in Persons, counter-terrorism, and 
Belarus as the headlining issues.  Congressman Hastings 
looked forward to working with GOL officials and Seimas 
leaders in putting together a useful conference with a timely 
agenda.  President Adamkus, Chairman of the Seimas Arturas 
Paulauskas, Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee 
Justinas Karosas, and National Security Committee Chairman 
Alvydas Sadeckas welcomed the idea of such a conference, and 
promised to lend assistance in bringing it to fruition. 
 
4. (C) A central issue during each of Congressman Hastings\' 
meetings was Belarus, which he planned to make a central 
topic at his envisioned OSCE conference on the Baltic region. 
 Hastings underlined the need for a more proactive policy 
toward Belarus, and looked to Lithuania to offer insights on 
the way ahead.  He noted that a policy of isolation would not 
foment regime change in Belarus, and thought it important to 
invite representatives of the Belarusian government, opening 
some channel for frank discussions on the current political 
situation in Belarus. 
 
5. (C) All parties - particularly President Adamkus and 
Seimas Foreign Affairs Chairman Karosas - thought a more 
proactive policy toward Belarus could help stimulate 
pro-democratic forces there.  President Adamkus, prefacing 
his remarks by stating his disapproval of Belarusian 
President Lukashenko, said a more proactive policy would 
allow for the Belarusian people\'s voice to be heard - 
\"pumping oxygen\" into the democratic movement.  President 
Adamkus was quick to draw parallels between Belarus and 
Ukraine, noting that the EU\'s \"reluctance\" to give Belarus 
any signals about becoming part of the \"EU family\" is similar 
to its approach towards Ukraine over the past decade.  In 
Adamkus\' mind, the EU\'s lack of engagement in Ukraine has had 
lasting effects, including the current political crisis 
gripping Kiev.  He stated that the EU must own up to this 
fact, and not repeat the same mistakes with Belarus. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
6. (C) Rep. Hastings visit afforded Lithuanian government 
officials another opportunity to state their commitment to 
playing an active role in the resolution of Ukraine\'s 
political imbroglio and voice their support for a more active 
approach to Belarus.  President Adamkus echoed most of his 
Ukraine comments - sans Belarus parallels - made to 
Congressman Hastings at a dinner he hosted that night for an 
international group of government officials and NGO 
representatives.  However, President Adamkus\' comparative 
remarks on Belarus and Ukraine and the GOL\'s overall positive 
response -- particularly from the new Chairman of the Seimas 
Foreign Relations Committee - to develop a more active policy 
towards Belarus is worth noting, and could signal increased 
Lithuanian efforts to bring about a higher degree of activism 
on the EU-level. 
 
CODEL Hastings has not cleared on this cable. 
Mull 
"
"24183","12/16/2004 12:15","04VILNIUS1519","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE263282","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001519 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KNEI, LH, HT32 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA SUPPORTS EU ACTION PLAN ON 
MOLDOVA/TRANSNISTRIA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 263282 
 
We delivered reftel non-paper on Ukraine and Moldova to 
Mindaugas Kacerauskas, head of MFA\'s Belarus, Moldova and 
Ukraine Division on December 10.  Kacerauskas said that 
Foreign Minister Antanas Valionis discussed the situation in 
Transnistria with Moldovan Foreign Minister Andrei Stratan 
during the recent OSCE ForMin meeting in Bulgaria. Taking the 
reftel points under advisement, Kacerauskas said that 
Lithuania supports the EU-Moldova Action Plan, particularly 
its call for Ukraine to respect the 2003 Customs Protocol and 
to strengthen controls along its border with Transnistria. 
Mull 
"
"24186","12/16/2004 12:32","04VILNIUS1520","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001520 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, LH, HT11 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA TO WORK THROUGH EU ON ANY IRAQ 
OBSERVATION MISSION 
 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Acting AS for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor 
Michael Kozak on December 3 discussed with Foreign Minister 
Antanas Valionis the possibility of Lithuania\'s participation 
in an Iraqi election observer mission.  Ambassador Kozak, in 
Vilnius for a GOL-sponsored conference on supporting 
democracy in EU\'s New Neighborhood, suggested consolidating 
international contributions to the upcoming election observer 
efforts in Iraq under the broad banner of the Community of 
Democracies.  Valionis pledged to consult with other 
countries in the region with a view towards organizing and 
providing election observers. 
 
2. (C) We resumed the discussion with Saulius Jaskelevicius, 
head of MFA\'s Africa and Middle East Division, when we 
delivered the text of a DRL non-paper on the international 
observer mission for Iraqi elections to on December 7.  We 
also discussed Lithuania\'s invitation to a December experts\' 
meeting on an Iraqi observation mission in Ottawa. 
Jaskelevicius told us December 14 that Lithuania\'s Embassy in 
Ottawa will represent the GOL at the IFES and Elections 
Canada-sponsored event.  Budgetary constraints, not lack of 
interest or commitment, said Jaskelevicius, preclude a 
bilateral observer mission to Iraq under the auspices of a 
Community of Democracy mission.  The GOL supports in 
principle a common EU observer mission to Iraq, he said, but 
it will wait and see how this operation develops before 
deciding whether to send observers under that collective 
umbrella. 
 
3. (C) Comment.  Lithuania has always punched above its 
weight in supporting Coalition objectives where Iraq is 
concerned.  In addition to putting boots on the ground in 
Iraq, the GOL hosted an observation mission by a delegation 
of Iraqi political party leaders during Lithuania\'s 
parliamentary elections.  The GOL simply doesn\'t have the 
funds to send observers to Iraq now. 
Mull 
"
"24188","12/16/2004 13:03","04VILNIUS1521","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1160","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001521 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EB/ENR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, ENRG, LH, RS, HT25 
SUBJECT: MAZEIKIU NAFTA MANAGER EXPRESSES CONCERNS OVER 
RUSSIAN DESIGNS ON REFINERY 
 
REF: VILNIUS 1160 
 
Classified By: ECONOMIC OFFICER MIGUEL KAMAT FOR 1.4(B) AND (D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) Mazeikiu Nafta (MN) General Manager Nelson English 
told the Ambassador that the Russian-owned Lukoil company is 
waiting in the wings to acquire the MN oil refinery in the 
aftermath of Yukos\'s \"impending and almost certain collapse.\" 
 According to Amcit English, Moscow is already trying to flex 
its muscle at MN through newly appointed Management Board 
member Michail Elfimov, and he shares popular concern that 
Lukoil will end up owning the refinery.  English doubts that 
the incoming Lithuanian government, with Russian-born Viktor 
Uspaskich as Minister of Economy, will resist Kremlin efforts 
to increase its control over MN decision-making, though 
Uspaskich separately on December 14 said he supports 
renationalization of the refinery to thwart Russian 
intentions.  We will continue to monitor any fall-out for MN 
resulting from the Yukos crisis, and will inquire about GOL 
plans for the refinery with Uspaskich.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
YUKOS COLLAPSE \"ALMOST CERTAIN\" 
------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador met December 13 with Nelson English, a 
veteran oil hand who has served for two years as the General 
Manager of Lithuania\'s oil refinery Mazeikiu Nafta (MN). 
English opined that Yukos faced \"impending and almost certain 
collapse.\" 
 
---------------------------------- 
GOR INFLUENCE IN LITHUANIAN ENERGY 
---------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) English suggested that the Kremlin is trying to 
increase its control over MN through newly appointed 
Management Board member Michail Elfimov.  Elfimov, former 
head of Yukos\'s crude logistics group, has close ties to the 
Kremlin, according to English.  He stated that unlike Mikhail 
Brudno, the former MN president who was a refinery 
shareholder and enjoyed the GOL\'s trust, Elmifov is an 
old-school apparatchik who does not own any shares, and does 
not enjoy the confidence of the GOL.  According to English, 
Elfimov is attempting to steer MN in a direction that would 
serve the Kremlin\'s interests, but not those of the 
refinery\'s shareholders.  For instance, English stated that 
Elfimov wants English to agree to a proposal by Latvia-based 
Woodson Trading Company to invest some of the refinery\'s 
profits in a new terminal to increase throughput, although 
this would needlessly tie up a substantial portion of MN\'s 
working capital.   (Per English, two former KGB generals own 
and operate Woodson.)  English also contends that Elfimov is 
trying to reduce the GM\'s role, making it more difficult for 
English to vet Board decisions with the shareholders at 
large, as he did in the case of the Woodson proposal. 
 
4.  (C) MN is a valuable and strategic asset -- \"one of the 
most liquid in Yukos\' portfolio,\" according to English -- and 
he shares popular concern about it falling under Kremlin 
control via a Lukoil acquisition.  MN employs about 3,500 
workers in Lithuania, and revenues from the oil refinery 
account for about two percent of GDP.  In 2003, MN 
contributed roughly USD 660 million.  This year, with profits 
currently showing a five-fold increase year-on-year, MN\'s tax 
contribution for 2004 should be much greater.  Yukos 
currently controls not only the management of the refinery, 
but also the supply of crude.  While English would clearly 
prefer that MN end up in the hands of a western company with 
equity in Russian oil, that option is not currently on the 
table. 
 
-------------------- 
THE USPASKICH FACTOR 
-------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Commenting on Victor Uspaskich, who on December 14 
became Minister of Economy, English said that \"what I hear 
bothers me.\"  But this week the new Economy Minister made an 
announcement that, on its face, would not seem to favor 
Russian interests.  During a meeting with parliamentarians 
from the opposition (and anti-Russian) Conservative Party, he 
described a plan for the government to reacquire controlling 
interest in MN.  (The government currently retains 40.6 
percent interest in the refinery to Yukos\' 53.7 percent, with 
the remaining interest in the hands of small shareholders.) 
The media reports Uspaskich defending the apparent 
renationalization of the firm as a way \"to reduce the 
influence of the Russian Government.\"  The Russian-born 
Minister has yet to divulge the details of the \"very 
effective and painless\" means by which he hopes to implement 
his scheme.  PM Brazauskas, who also attended the meeting, 
added that the \"issue will be considered, but...no decision 
has been made.\" 
 
----------------------------- 
PURSUING CORPORATE CORRUPTION 
----------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The Ambassador and English also discussed the need 
for the GOL to intensify its anti-corruption efforts. 
English remarked that of the 28 indictments for corruption at 
MN, including charges against six law enforcement officials 
who allegedly siphoned oil from main pipeline, none led to 
prosecution.  English said he had received threats of 
reprisals from a regional prosecutor after English demoted a 
senior MN manager whom he suspected of theft from the 
refinery and bribery of the corrupt prosecutor. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) English is well-placed to comment authoritatively 
on the local energy scene, although his association with 
Yukos doubtlessly influences his analysis.  In any event, the 
fate of MN awaits the resolution of the Yukos crisis or a 
preemptive move on the part of the Lithuanian Government.  We 
will continue to monitor the situation, and explore with the 
new Minister of Economy the GOL\'s intentions. 
 
Mull 
"
"24190","12/16/2004 13:16","04VILNIUS1522","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04VILNIUS1493","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 VILNIUS 001522 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, DRL/IL, PRM/ENA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ECON, SMIG, PGOV, LH, HT49, HT45 
SUBJECT: EU MEMBERSHIP SPURS LITHUANIAN LABOR FLIGHT 
 
REF: VILNIUS 1493 
 
1. SUMMARY:  Young Lithuanians have left their homeland en 
masse since the May 1 accession to the EU in search of 
employment abroad.  The exact number leaving remains 
unclear, although as much as a quarter of the country\'s 
working-age population may leave by the end of the year. 
Some sectors have reported difficulties in hiring workers, 
although representatives from Lithuania\'s thriving 
construction sector argue that media talk of a labor 
shortage is overblown.  The Lithuanian government and other 
economic analysts hope that increased labor outflows will 
in the end benefit the country\'s economy, trusting that 
those currently leaving will return to Lithuania with 
capital and business experience.  For its part, the 
Lithuanian government appears willing to let the market run 
its course.  The Labor Party, victorious in recent 
Parliamentary elections, promised in its campaign platform 
to address the problem, but it remains unclear whether it 
really has a plan.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------- 
Lithuanian Labor Exodus 
----------------------- 
 
2. Lithuania\'s emigration pattern shifted dramatically on 
May 1, when the country entered the European Union and its 
citizens gained the right to live and work legally in Great 
Britain and Ireland.  A startling number of Lithuanians are 
leaving their Baltic homeland for dreams of a better life 
in the West.  While the United States remains a destination 
of choice (reftel), about half of the new emigrees are 
heading for EU countries. 
 
--------- 
How Many? 
--------- 
 
3. The Ministry of Labor actively tracks Lithuania\'s labor 
outflow but keeps this data confidential at the highest 
levels of the Ministry.  It is difficult to estimate the 
exact number of people leaving, as many retain their 
permanent address in Lithuania while working abroad 
illegally.  According to a recent media survey, 28% of the 
population would like to leave Lithuania and go abroad. 
The Ministry of Labor told us it expects that as many as 
360,000 workers, about one-quarter of the country\'s 
working-age population, will have departed Lithuania by the 
end of the year.  According to government data, emigration 
increased by 64% in the first half of 2004 as compared to 
the same period in 2003 -- despite the fact that Lithuania 
continues to enjoy one of the highest economic growth rates 
in Europe.  Some experts from the Ministry of Labor note 
that the large labor outflow following EU accession 
included traditional summer seasonal work, and they believe 
that the initial \"wave\" of emigration has come to an end. 
Recent data from the Lithuanian Labor Exchange (i.e., the 
state unemployment office), supports this theory, 
indicating that emigration decreased 14% from June to July 
after the initial May accession exodus.  Figures from the 
British government also show that work applications from 
Lithuanians in the United Kingdom (Lithuanians\' favorite EU 
destination) dropped 50% from the end of May high to the 
end of September. 
 
-------------- 
Economic Shock 
-------------- 
 
4. Rimantas Kairelis, State Secretary of the Ministry of 
Labor, described the current labor outflow as a shock to 
the Lithuanian economy.  So far, however, the extent and 
character of that shock remains unclear.  Wages, currently 
among the lowest of EU members, will undoubtedly rise. 
Lithuania\'s GDP per capita for 2003 (using Purchasing Power 
Parities to adjust for price level differences) stood at 
only 42% of the EU-15 average and 39% of the UK average. 
As of July 2004, Lithuania\'s minimum wage (PPP adjusted) 
was only 25.9% of the corresponding wage in the UK. 
Salaries are slowly increasing, while political leaders 
debate how quickly they can afford to raise the minimum 
wage. 
 
----------------------------- 
Internationalization of Labor 
----------------------------- 
 
5. Foreign workers who speak Russian and can therefore 
operate in the Lithuanian labor market will increasingly 
fill the gaps in sectors as diverse as textiles and medical 
services.  Kairelis noted that, with many Lithuanians going 
abroad, the GOL would likely begin increasing quotas on 
foreign workers, most of whom are currently from Belarus 
and Ukraine.   The Department of Migration confirmed 
greater demand for foreign workers in November, reporting 
that Lithuanian companies had submitted a significantly 
higher number of work permit applications since May 1. 
 
-------------- 
Economic Boon? 
-------------- 
 
6. Many Lithuanian experts, while concerned about a shock, 
believe that increased labor mobility will strengthen the 
country\'s economy, assuming Lithuanians will send money 
back to Lithuania and eventually return to invest their 
savings in and apply their skills to the Lithuanian 
economy.  Data from the Lithuanian Labor Exchange indicates 
that, during the first month following EU accession, 56% of 
those Lithuanians who found employment abroad had 
previously been on the unemployment rolls in Lithuania. 
Marius Grecius, from the EU Integration division of the 
Ministry of Labor, argues, \"We believe that with increased 
temporary migration (which is predominant in our case), we 
experience more advantages than disadvantages: notably, 
workers return with new experience, we export unemployment, 
and money flows back to the economy in the form of 
remittances.\" 
 
------------------ 
Impact on Industry 
------------------ 
 
Trucking 
-------- 
 
7. Lithuanian trucking companies have been particularly 
hard hit by labor outflows.  The Lithuanian Trucking 
Association, Linava, reported in September a shortage of 
3,000-4,000 truck drivers in Lithuania.  Anatolijius 
Jakimovas, Linava spokesperson, noted that many Lithuanian 
trucking companies must now hire more foreign workers, 
especially from Russia. 
 
Retail 
------ 
 
8. Large retail stores, whose jobs are infamous for low 
wages and long hours, have also reported some difficulty in 
filling all positions.  Media emphasis on a labor shortage 
has sometimes proven exaggerated, however.  Inga Skisaker, 
general director of Rimi Lietuva, one of Lithuania\'s 
largest retail chains, said a month after EU accession that 
she knew of only one case of a Rimi employee quitting for 
work abroad. 
 
Construction 
------------ 
 
9. Lithuania\'s construction sector, credited by many 
analysts with driving Lithuania\'s current economic growth, 
has not felt much of an impact.  Ranga IV, a top-notch 
construction firm that has built many of Vilnius\' largest 
buildings, reports that labor outflow has not significantly 
affected the company\'s business to date, although it has 
identified labor shortages as a possible obstacle to future 
business.  Ranga IV\'s Dita Purliene told us that, while the 
company does not currently employ any foreign workers, 
Ranga IV is now considering hiring from Belarus and Ukraine 
in order to forestall a future labor shortage.  Marius 
Sulcas, General Manager of Regina ir Co., a Vilnius-based 
construction company active throughout Lithuania and in 
some neighboring countries, described the labor flight 
issue as \"more talk than a real problem.\"  He said that the 
quality of life for a skilled laborer in Lithuania, 
primarily because of the low cost of living and proximity 
to family, often matches or even surpasses that of his/her 
counterpart in the United Kingdom, despite the difference 
in nominal salaries.  Regina ir Co. has not witnessed a 
substantial increase in labor flight since May 1.  Turnover 
among the firm\'s approximately 200 employees remains stable 
at around two to three per month. 
 
-------------------------------- 
\"No, Really, We\'ll Come Back...\" 
-------------------------------- 
 
10. Although the impact on business remains unclear, a 
large outflow of labor could devastate tax revenues, place 
inflationary pressures on local labor markets, and have a 
\"brain drain\" effect.  Some analysts already list a 
shortage of skilled labor as a reason for a recent slowing 
of economic growth.  Lithuania\'s hopes that the current 
labor outflow will benefit the economy, therefore, depend 
on the return of a large number of expats -- or at least 
their remittances. 
 
11. Virtually all Lithuanians, however, claim that a 
majority of those leaving the country in search of 
employment will return after a short stay abroad.  Even in 
Kelme, a depressed, rural town in western Lithuania being 
abandoned by its youth in startling numbers, community 
leaders told us that they strongly believed most young 
people would return home after a short stay in the capital 
or abroad. 
 
12. Lithuania\'s students tell us that, while they would 
like to get some international work or study experience, 
they do not want to stay outside of Lithuania for more than 
one to three years.  Most Lithuanians abroad are able to 
secure only unskilled labor positions, despite their 
generally high educational level.  Educated, young 
Lithuanians note that they want to gain professional 
experience abroad, but will not be satisfied in the long 
term with menial positions, even at high wages.  Giedre 
Vilkaite, a member of the Kaunas Technological University 
Student Council, explained, \"We do not want to wash dishes 
for the rest of our lives.\"  Strong nationalist feelings 
also restrain some Lithuanians from permanently leaving 
their 13-year-old republic.  Asked if she would accompany 
her boyfriend, who had taken a job for a logistics company 
in England, 26-year-old Ona Klizaite responded, \"How could 
I disown my homeland?\" 
 
13. Although polling indicates that a majority of 
Lithuanians would like to work abroad, only nine percent of 
respondents claim they would like to leave Lithuania 
permanently.  According to Monika Butkute, who is in charge 
of the EU\'s EURES employment database at the Vilnius Labor 
Exchange, many Lithuanians go to the Labor Exchange looking 
for work abroad simply to earn money for a big-ticket item, 
like a house or car.  After meeting their savings\' goal, 
they usually return home. 
 
----------------- 
... Or Will They? 
----------------- 
 
14. Like so many Lithuanians before them, however, the 
plans of the latest wave of emigrants may change once they 
settle into new lives abroad.  Some of those currently 
departing Lithuania, once they attain quality jobs and a 
new lifestyle, undoubtedly decide to permanently reside 
abroad.  Asta Finch, a Lithuanian citizen who has been 
living in London for more than five years, provided us with 
a different perspective.  Asta left Lithuania for economic 
reasons, and she has settled in with a good job at Harrods 
department store.  Citing the dramatic difference in 
salaries in England and Lithuania, Asta rhetorically asked, 
\"Why would anyone want to stay in Lithuania?\" 
 
---------------------------------- 
Government Not Sure How to Respond 
---------------------------------- 
 
15. Despite increased media attention since May 1 to labor 
flight, politicians largely ignore the issue.  Rimantas 
Karelis, State Secretary from the Ministry of Labor, 
lamented that the GOL has not developed any real strategies 
or tactics to address the danger of labor flight.  Having 
long championed EU accession, the GOL now finds itself a 
victim of its own success, with no plan to deal with the 
demographic consequences of joining one of the world\'s 
biggest economic forces.  Politicians are only slowly 
realizing that they might have to take serious action to 
forestall a population crisis in their country of 3.5 
million. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Comment: An Issue for the Labor Party? 
-------------------------------------- 
 
16. Lithuania\'s new Minister of Economy Viktor Uspaskich 
hopes to stop the brain drain by sending students to study 
overseas.  Uspaskich\'s Labor Party ran to victory in 
October parliamentary elections on a platform that 
recommended state funding for Lithuanians who study abroad 
and then return home to work in critical industries. 
Uspaskich\'s own two children are studying in the United 
States.  It remains unclear, however, whether such 
proposals would do anything to stop the powerful economic 
forces that underpin the latest wave of Lithuanian 
emigration. 
 
MULL 
"
"24192","12/16/2004 13:26","04VILNIUS1523","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1505","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001523 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, LH, HT3 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA\'S NEW GOVERNMENT TAKES OFFICE WITH BROAD 
GUIDELINES BUT FEW SPECIFICS 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1505 
 
     B. VILNIUS 1496 
     C. VILNIUS 1455 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Officer Christian Yarnell 
for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: The 13th Government of Lithuania took power 
on December 14, when Parliament approved the Cabinet and 
program of Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas.  Negotiations 
over two Ministerial posts proved difficult, with the 
President forcing substitute nominees and ultimately 
accepting as Interior Minister a controversial figure with 
alleged ties to a well-known criminal.  The Government\'s 
program, while lacking many specifics, calls for construction 
of a new nuclear power plant and for a heavy social/economic 
agenda highlighting greater redistribution of wealth.  The 
program also calls for continuity in foreign and security 
policy, emphasizing the importance of the transatlantic 
relationship and Lithuania\'s role as a regional leader in 
promoting democracy.  With eight new ministers taking office, 
the broad policy goals of the new government remain unclear. 
We will immediately engage with members of the new government 
to encourage continued pursuit of political, economic, and 
trade objectives favorable to U.S. interests and foreign 
policy goals.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) The Lithuanian Parliament approved the Cabinet and 
program of Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas on December 14 
by a vote of 68 to 44, with three abstentions.  Brazauskas 
and his 13 Cabinet Ministers officially took office after a 
swearing-in ceremony the same day.  Lithuania\'s 13th 
government is the broadest coalition government in the 
country\'s post-Soviet history, and comprises the following 
four parties: Social Democratic Party (led by Brazauskas), 
New Union (led by Parliamentary Speaker Arturas Paulauskas), 
Labor Party (led by business magnate Viktor Uspaskich), and 
Peasant Party (led by former PM Kazimiera Prunskiene).  The 
Conservatives (led by MP Andrius Kubilius), the Liberal 
Center Union (currently led by Vilnius mayor Arturas Zuokas), 
and the Liberal Democratic Party (led by impeached former 
President Rolandas Paksas) all officially declared themselves 
to be in opposition. 
 
----------- 
The Cabinet 
----------- 
 
3. (SBU) The December 14 vote marked the end to difficult 
negotiations over the composition of the Cabinet, with 
President Adamkus forcing two successive substitutions for 
the Minister of Science and Education nomination and one 
substitution for the Minister of Interior slot.  Adamkus 
challenged but ultimately accepted the final candidate for 
MOI, Gintaras Furmanavicius.  Lithuania\'s investigative 
services cleared Furmanavicius, but he remains a 
controversial figure because of allegations of previous 
business association with an accused embezzler  (ref B), and 
Adamkus cautioned that he will ask Furmanavicius to resign 
should evidence of wrongdoing come to light.  Juozas 
Antanavicius, the first replacement for Education Minister, 
withdrew his candidacy when information emerged revealing 
past collaboration with the KGB.  Remigijus Motuzas, who 
subsequently assumed the job of Minister of Education, has a 
solid track record in government service and is known for his 
loyalty to Brazauskas. 
 
4. (U) The final Cabinet line-up is as follows: 
 
-- Prime Minister:      Algirdas Brazauskas (Social Democrat) 
 
-- Agriculture:         Kazimiera Prunskiene (Peasant Party) 
-- Culture:             Vladimiras Prudnikovas (Labor) 
-- Defense:             Gediminas Kirkilas (Social Democrat) 
-- Economy:             Viktor Uspaskich (Labor) 
-- Education:           Remigijus Motuzas (Social Democrat) 
-- Environment:         Arunas Kundrotas (Social Democrat) 
-- Finance:             Algirdas Butkevicius (Social Democrat) 
-- Foreign Affairs:     Antanas Valionis (New Union) 
-- Health:              Zilvinas Padaiga (Labor) 
-- Interior:            Gintaras Jonas Furmanavicius (Labor) 
-- Justice:             Gintautas Buzinskas (Labor) 
-- Labor:               Vilija Blinkeviciute (New Union) 
-- Transportation:      Zigmantas Balcytis (Social Democrat) 
 
----------- 
The Program 
----------- 
 
Social Agenda 
 
5. (SBU) The Parliament-approved program outlined the broad 
goals of the new government, while shedding some of the more 
unrealistic campaign promises made by coalition partners. 
Brazauskas\'s program aims for \"a socially-oriented market 
economy,\" promising a greater redistribution of wealth, lower 
unemployment, and a significant increase in the average and 
minimum wage by 2006.  Increased subsidies to farmers, 
government intervention to control market prices, and pension 
reform, all election campaign proposals of various coalition 
parties, are conspicuously absent from the Brazauskas 
program.  The program does, however, pledge to pursue the 
construction of a new nuclear reactor to replace the 
Soviet-era facility in Ignalina (ref A).  Brazauskas has 
given a green light, and Prunskiene, the primary champion of 
the NPP construction initiative, already announced her 
support for French-controlled Framatome ANP, which is 
currently conducting a feasibility study for a new facility. 
 
Foreign Policy Continuity 
 
6. (U) The government program pledged continuity in its 
foreign and national security policy, emphasizing a need to 
bolster trans-Atlantic ties and to maintain good relations 
with neighboring countries.  FM Valionis stressed that 
Lithuania would seek to become a \"regional leader,\" promising 
to raise the profile of economic and social development in 
Kaliningrad.  He also noted that a \"new field of activity\" 
has emerged in Ukraine, and that Lithuania will champion its 
eastern neighbor\'s bid for EU membership.  Defense Minister 
Kirkilas, formerly chair of the Seimas foreign affairs 
committee, underscored that the government program obliged 
Lithuania to \"continue successful work with NATO Alliance 
partners in the hot spots of the world.\" 
 
7. (U) Opposition figures hailed the government\'s foreign and 
security policy as the best element of the program.  Some MPs 
voiced concern, however, that the program did not go far 
enough in supporting democracy in Russia and Belarus.  Vaclav 
Stankevic, influential member of the Foreign Affairs 
Committee, bluntly stated, \"Our duty is to help Belarus\' 
opposition create democracy.\"  The opposition disparaged the 
social program as nothing more than a \"collection of slogans 
and generalities,\" with the Liberal Center voicing its 
concern that the government\'s agenda will lead to a 
substantial increase in taxation, and criticized the 
government for failing to specify a target date for the 
introduction of the euro.  (NOTE: The Chairman of the 
Lithuanian Central Bank has said that Lithuania is on track 
to join the euro zone in 2007.) 
 
---------------------------- 
Comment: Cabinet a Mixed Bag 
---------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Holdover FM Valionis is a true Atlanticist with a 
commitment to the major policy goals of the United States. 
Yet while Valionis will strive to ensure continuity in 
Lithuania\'s foreign policy, the broader policy goals of 
Lithuania\'s 13th government remain to be seen.  One prominent 
wild card is Uspaskich and his ideologically ambiguous Labor 
Party, which controls the most votes in Parliament despite 
its junior status within the Government.  We are beginning to 
build a relationship with Uspaskich to promote implementation 
of economic policies favorable to U.S. investment and 
commerce.  We will cultivate the interest he has shown in 
foreign investment, while working to ensure a level playing 
field for American businesses. 
 
9. (C) Ag Minister Prunskiene, who has consistently called 
for Lithuania to follow more \"European\" policies, is also of 
concern.  Although charged with agricultural affairs, 
Prunskiene is a political heavyweight capable of influencing 
policy in other spheres, including Lithuania\'s bid to retain 
a nuclear-energy production capacity and to construct a new 
plant. 
 
10. (C) Since independence, the shelf life of Lithuanian 
governments has been relatively brief.  We have therefore 
been in the position of dealing with an unfamiliar cast 
before.  Because of the congruence of Lithuanian and American 
interests, our bilateral relationship has flourished anyway. 
We intend to emulate our past successes, introducing 
ourselves to the eight Ministers new to their roles and 
enlisting them in our effort to promote policies favorable to 
U.S. foreign policy goals. 
Mull 
"
"24246","12/17/2004 12:00","04VILNIUS1525","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04State250474","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 001525 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DS/SPP/EP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, HT31 
SUBJECT: UPDATE OF VILNIUS EAP 
 
REF: State 250474 
 
1. Post\'s EAP was approved on July 6, 2004 and is 
therefore up to date.  Chapters or annexes that contain 
any changes to names of post personnel and contact lists 
will be forwarded to the Department. 
 
MULL 
"
"24253","12/17/2004 13:37","04VILNIUS1526","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001526 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB (MGERMANO) AND EB/IFD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, ECON, LH, HT22 
SUBJECT: IMF\'S RECOMMENDATIONS ON HOW TO PROLONG THE 
LITHUANIAN ECONOMIC MIRACLE 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  An IMF delegation, concluding an Article IV 
Consultation mission to Lithuania December 10, praised 
Lithuania\'s impressive structural improvements and the 
country\'s complete transition to a market economy.  The IMF 
delivered an overall positive assessment of the country\'s 
economic prospects for 2005 and several short-term policy 
prescriptions to ensure continued growth.  The IMF 
delegation warned that the economy risks overheating, 
however, and also advised attention to remaining fiscal and 
other structural reforms.  Congratulating the GOL on the 
economy\'s performance, the mission was optimistic that 
Lithuania would speedily adopt the euro and attain the 
living standards of more advanced European countries.  The 
IMF\'s policy prescriptions provide an agenda for the new 
GOL\'s Ministry of Finance and guideposts for our advocacy 
and reporting of their progress.  End Summary. 
 
2.  An IMF delegation under the leadership of the Fund\'s 
European Department Assistant Director Ashoka Mody 
concluded an Article IV consultation on December 10.  The 
mission\'s overall analysis lauded Lithuania\'s structural 
reforms.  The delegation congratulated the GOL on the 
economy\'s strong performance since the last IMF 
consultation in June 2003, Lithuania\'s accession to the EU, 
and the country\'s entry into the ERM-II currency mechanism. 
The mission noted Lithuania\'s continued robust, non- 
inflationary growth in 2004, declining unemployment, and 
predicted GDP growth of 6.5 percent in 2005, and annual 
growth of five to six percent in the medium term. 
 
------------------------- 
IS LITHUANIA OVERHEATING? 
------------------------- 
 
3.  The IMF cautioned that Lithuania\'s fast growth rates 
would stimulate aggregate demand to grow above potential, 
leading either to destabilizing inflation or greater 
borrowing, with higher current account deficits and 
external debt.  They noted that inflation, expected to be 
just under 1.5 percent in 2004, will likely exceed 2.5 
percent in 2005, and remarked several early signs that 
point to a risk of overheating of the Lithuanian economy: 
 
- High capacity utilization; 
- Continued robust growth of credit, driven by low interest 
rates; 
- Declining unemployment; 
- Acceleration in wage growth; 
- Increases in property prices; 
- Rapid growth in the current account deficit; and 
- Output exceeding potential. 
 
The mission stated that supply-side shocks are exerting 
inflationary pressures, noting that recent increases in oil 
prices had raised domestic prices because of the high 
energy-intensity of Lithuania\'s production.  It noted, 
however, that domestic demand is equally inflationary, 
pointing to the sharp increase in real estate prices, and 
added that there is a continuing risk of price increases in 
utilities and other non-traded goods. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
URGES TWO PERCENT FISCAL DEFICIT TARGET 
--------------------------------------- 
 
4.  The IMF noted that Lithuania\'s current account deficit 
has widened sharply.  The mission recommended the GOL 
closely monitor external debt obligations, take measures to 
raise the private savings rate, and reduce the fiscal 
deficit, since the latter contributes significantly to the 
demand pressures underlying the current account deficit. 
 
5.  Commending the GOL for accepting the fiscal discipline 
of the Maastricht criteria in order to achieve early 
adoption of the euro, the mission encouraged the GOL to 
adopt an even more ambitious fiscal deficit target for 2005 
of two percent of GDP, rather than the current 2.5 percent 
target.  It suggested the GOL could reduce the fiscal 
deficit by taking advantage of the high projected revenue 
in 2004 and transferring domestic co-financing funds to 
2005, since these will not be needed in 2004 due to the 
delay in the utilization of EU funds.  The mission observed 
that a conservative fiscal policy would prevent 
overheating, while allowing the GOL the flexibility to 
increase the deficit in the future in order to stimulate 
demand, should domestic confidence fall unexpectedly. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
URGENT: REFORMS TO ENSURE LONG-TERM GROWTH 
------------------------------------------ 
 
6.  The IMF urged the GOL to implement fiscal and other 
structural reforms to ensure a stable revenue base and 
create incentives for private entrepreneurs to increase 
employment, invest in upgrading the quality of the labor 
force, and better enable their enterprises to compete 
against lower-wage economies in international markets.  The 
mission recommended the following reforms: 
 
- More effective collection of VAT revenues to remedy the 
shortfall in 2004, and reforming the VAT tax administration 
system; 
 
- A significantly lower and unified single personal income 
tax rate that would maintain the current exemption 
threshold and would be appropriately phased in to limit 
disruption to revenues, along with greater efforts at 
achieving tax compliance; 
- Institution of a more wide-ranging property tax, to both 
increase revenues and provide incentives to municipalities 
to invest in education, infrastructure, and public 
services; 
 
- Greater transparency and control in the design and 
management of public expenditures, to include detailed 
documentation of government expenditures and cash flows, 
identification of buffers to deal with contingencies, and 
institution of modern cash control methodology; 
 
- a more financially viable social security system 
featuring accelerating increases in the retirement age; 
 
- Expansion of the social safety net, by devising a means- 
tested targeting system for income support, but not by 
raising the minimum wage, since the latter is already high 
relative to other countries and a further increase would 
only serve to discourage employment; 
 
- Introduction of a Fiscal Responsibility Act in parliament 
which would contain GOL commitments to targets, procedures, 
and transparency of budget revenues, expenditures and debt, 
and would provide a comprehensive and transparent framework 
to ensure long-term fiscal reforms; and 
 
- Additional microeconomic reforms to increase the 
attractiveness of Lithuania\'s business environment, such as 
decreasing complex and time-consuming regulations facing 
small and medium enterprises, increasing private 
initiatives in the health and education sectors, and 
implementing World Bank recommendations on the knowledge 
economy. 
 
The mission concluded that a GOL focus on these short-term 
policy prescriptions would ensure early adoption of the 
euro and rapid improvement of living standards to match 
those of more advanced European countries. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  The IMF prescriptions are timely, coming just as a new 
Government takes office.  The IMF framed the challenge 
well: Lithuanian elites must now decide how quickly 
Lithuanian income levels will converge with those in 
Western Europe.  To catch up quickly, this Government and 
Parliament will have to forget about the populist platforms 
that helped elect many of them and adhere instead to the 
IMF\'s recommendations. 
 
MULL 
"
"24330","12/20/2004 10:39","04VILNIUS1532","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE227856","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 VILNIUS 001532 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/EX, EUR/EX, EUR/NB, OIG/ISP, M/FSI/SPAS, 
CA/VO,CA/FPP AND CA/OCS 
AMCONSUL FRANKFURT FOR RCO BARBARA L. ARMSTRONG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT, CVIS, CASC, CPAS, KFRD, ASIG, AFSI, LH, HT45 
SUBJECT: FY2004 CONSULAR PACKAGE NARRATIVE FOR VILNIUS 
 
REF(S): State 227856 
 
 
1.  Post submits the following consular package 
narrative keyed to reftel. 
 
Management 
 
A) Consular Section Chief: Ruta D. Elvikis (Consul), 
ETD: July 2005, Direct Office Telephone Number: 370- 
5-266-5591, E-mail: ElvikisRD@state.gov; 
 
Deputy Consular Section Chief: Gregory L. Bernsteen 
(Vice-Consul), ETD: February 2005, Direct Office 
Telephone Number: 370-5-266-5605, E-mail: 
BernsteenGL@state.gov; 
 
Vice Consul: Timothy E. Liston 
ETD: January 2005, Direct Office Telephone Number: 370- 
5-266-5592, E-mail: ListonTE@state.gov. 
 
Consular Section Fax Number: 370-5-266-5590.  IVG 
(tie line) code: 973. 
 
B) Do you have sufficient staff to meet consular MPP 
objectives?  (If you believe you do not, describe 
steps you have taken to maximize staff efficiency. 
Note any special circumstances at your post that 
hinder productivity.  Specify the number, type, and 
grade of personnel you would need in order to fully 
meet MPP objectives). Add any comments you might 
have on the effectiveness of training of new 
personnel (such as Congen, FSI language training, 
etc.) 
 
Response:  Post at this time has adequate staff to do 
consular work in accordance with MPP objectives and 
current consular regulations and procedures.  Post\'s Vice- 
Consuls are currently able to handle all NIV interviews. 
Meeting consular MPP objectives will be a challenge over 
the next three months, however, as we face the extended 
absence of the Consul from January 1 through April 1, 
early departure at the end of January of one Vice Consul 
not to be replaced until March 1, and rotation of our 
second Vice Consul in mid-February.  Promised TDY 
assistance from the Department will help us bridge this 
gap.  The most challenging month will be in March, when 
we begin processing our large Work and Travel program 
(see description below), which will require the 
processing of more than 3000 visas between March and 
June.  In addition, post\'s Consular Associate departed 
post at the end of July 2004 and has yet to be replaced 
pending budget approval.  A CA would help the section 
fulfill MPP objectives, such as assisting American 
citizens, as the Section\'s Vice-Consuls focus on 
processing Work and Travel visas. 
 
Post is experiencing an increase in the number of 
Americans traveling to and residing in Lithuania.  Our 
back-up ACS assistant is more often required to assist 
the full-time assistant with our increasing ACS workload. 
As such, we are considering re-designating the back-up 
ACS assistant as a half-time ACS assistant, while 
considering the need for an additional position in ACS to 
allow better service for the growing American community 
in Lithuania.  This staffing change in ACS would assist 
post in meeting its MPP goals. 
 
Regarding training, Congen has traditionally offered 
new consular officers a solid foundation in consular 
work.  However, rapid changes in regulations and 
procedures are a challenge for all consular section 
staff.  Consular officers in the field would greatly 
benefit from additional training, even if only online, in 
SAO processing requirements and working with the TAL. 
Given the many changes in consular work, post would also 
recommend some sort of refresher training for all 
consular officers between overseas assignments. 
 
Post would further recommend that JO\'s assigned to 
Vilnius receive 30 weeks of language rather than 24. 
Solid knowledge of Lithuanian is absolutely necessary at 
the visa window and, despite the excellent FSI Lithuanian 
language program, 24 weeks is sometimes not enough time 
to get a good grasp on the complexities of this extremely 
difficult language. 
 
C) Do you have sufficient space to meet consular MPP 
objectives? (If you believe you do not, describe the 
nature of the space limitations.  Note steps post 
has taken to address these limitations, including 
development of design proposals, allocation of post 
funds, requests for OBO or CA funding, etc.) 
Response: The Consular Section is adequate for the 
current level of staffing.  The greatest difficulty for 
consular operations is that the Vice-Consuls do not have 
office space in the Consular Section, physically 
isolating them from daily operations during non-interview 
hours.  Their offices are located down the hall from the 
Consular Section in the Chancery.  Space will become more 
of an issue with the Section\'s move into temporary swing 
space sometime in FY2006 for the duration of the Chancery 
expansion project.  The swing space is slightly smaller 
than the Section\'s current space, resulting in a smaller 
waiting area, loss of one interview window, loss of a 
privacy booth, and less space for storage of consular 
files.  Current estimates have the Consular Section 
located in this swing space for approximately a year. 
 
D) Describe any management practices (such as off- 
site fee collection, use of a user pays call center, 
courier passback, post hosted web appointment system, 
business programs) that post has instituted in the past 
year.  Are these management practices effective?  Also 
please list any management practices that have been 
discontinued in the past year, citing reasons for the 
termination. 
 
Response: N/A. 
 
E) Please advise whether and why post might benefit 
from a Consular Management Assistance Team (CMAT) 
visit.  If a CMAT visited your post over the past year, 
please summarize any benefits and what steps, if any, 
could be taken to further enhance the productivity of 
CMAT visits. 
 
Response: Post is fortunate to have available the 
guidance of an experienced RCO, who, in her most 
recent visit, offered many of the same benefits as a 
CMAT.  Consequently, while we would welcome the 
visit of a CMAT, we do not believe that post should 
be considered a priority at this time. 
 
Systems: 
 
F) Do you have the equipment you need to meet 
consular MPP objectives?  (If you believe you do 
not, describe the equipment you need and efforts you 
have made to obtain it.) 
 
Response: At this time, post has the equipment it 
needs. 
 
G) How would you rate your consular section\'s 
satisfaction with the automated consular systems 
(excellent, good, average, poor)?  Are there any 
unresolved software or hardware issues?  How do you 
rate the training of post personnel both within the 
consular section and in Management/IM on the use and 
support of Consular systems (excellent, good, 
average, poor)?  What types of assistance would you 
need from the next training and refresher teams 
coming from the consular systems division to assist 
consular system users?  Please also comment on the 
quality of assistance provided by the CA Overseas 
Help Desk. 
 
Response:  We rate the ACS system as poor.  The 
warden information is unwieldy and impractical to 
use for notifications, particularly with the advent 
of alternative methods of notification such as 
email.  This is made even more complicated by the fact 
that IBRS does not interface with the warden database in 
ACS and vice versa.  Consular Section staff generally 
rate NIV as good and user-friendly.  We like the new SAO 
capability and look forward to the day when it is 
entirely electronic. 
 
An Orkand team was here in August for biometric 
installation as well as refresher training.  In addition 
to providing excellent training on all the various 
consular systems and biometric collection, the team 
provided invaluable support for our public relations 
campaign to roll out the new program.  Thanks to its 
help, which included participating in press interviews 
about the equipment and setting up a demonstration 
workstation for the press, post\'s rollout was a 
tremendous success.  The Consular Section is generally 
satisfied with the support received from Management/IM 
but wishes that that office had more time to devote to 
consular systems issues.  Due to other demands on IM\'s 
time, the Consular Section has had to wait a week or more 
for installation of new software or hardware. 
We are pleased that a member of post\'s IM staff was able 
to receive formal training on consular systems.  We are 
also satisfied with the support we have received from the 
CA Overseas Help Desk.  Its replies have been timely and 
useful.  We particularly appreciated their most recent 
assistance in quickly adding NATO visas to our NIV visa 
table in time for Lithuania\'s first NATO staff member to 
travel to the United States. 
 
H) Some posts have recently begun scanning 2-D 
barcodes to input DS-156 information into consular 
systems.  Please comment on other forms you would like to 
see automated and explain why. 
 
Response: No comment at this time. 
 
ACS: 
 
I) What aspects of your ACS work are the most 
demanding? 
 
Response: As more Americans choose to travel to or reside 
in Lithuania, post\'s ACS workload, from routine notarials 
to jail visits, continues to increase.  Our full-time ACS 
assistant increasingly requires the help of our back-up 
ACS assistant just to handle our day-to-day workload. 
 
Another challenging aspect of our ACS work is Federal 
Benefits.  In FY2004, we finally received permission from 
SSA to re-enroll non-U.S. citizen beneficiaries based on 
an exchange of notes with the GOL in early 2003.  It took 
substantial time to locate surviving eligible 
beneficiaries and process their paperwork.  Embassy 
Warsaw provided invaluable assistance in facilitating 
their re-enrollment, enabling payment of benefits to 
begin promptly.  Although the total number of new 
beneficiaries was relatively small, it did add to our FBU 
workload, which is already significant and continues to 
grow, due largely to the number of Lithuanian-Americans 
who return to Lithuania as a way to stretch their pension 
dollars.  The conference for FBU FSNs held last year in 
Warsaw provided great training for our FBU assistant.  We 
hope it was the first of many more such regional FBU 
conferences. 
 
Visas: 
 
K) What aspects of your NIV work are the most 
demanding? 
 
Response: The decline in post\'s NIV applications seems to 
have finally leveled off.  Despite the relatively low 
number of total applications compared to our peak in 
2000, post\'s NIV workload remains high.  Lithuanians 
continue to look to the United States for illegal work 
even after Lithuanian accession into the EU (see Vilnius 
01493).  Unfortunately, Lithuania\'s EU accession has made 
it more difficult for us to ascertain a visa applicant\'s 
periods of stay in the United States as border officials 
no longer stamp the passports of returning Lithuanians. 
As we still do not have access to DHS entry/exit records, 
Lithuanian entry stamps were our only sure means of 
detecting repeated six-month stays, which often is a sign 
of illegal employment in the United States. 
 
We also continue to see a great deal of fraud, including 
forged Burroughs and Teslin foil visas and imposter 
travelers.  There are a number of ongoing investigations 
in Lithuania\'s second city of Kaunas involving fraudulent 
documents and imposter passports and visas, with links to 
counterfeit currency.  We work closely with RSO and local 
authorities on these investigations.  The level and 
increasing sophistication of fraud continues to be the 
most demanding aspect of NIV work in Lithuania.  We are 
continually frustrated that these same rings after their 
arrests are quickly back in business in some modified 
form.  The increased time spent in interviewing to screen 
for fraud, new processing requirements, and the increase 
in the number of applicants seen at post who were 
either refused change of status by DHS, turned around or 
deported due to prior violations, or who have serious 
hits in CLASS have increased not only the complexity of 
the visa process but also the overall time necessary to 
handle post\'s relatively small NIV workload. 
Another demanding aspect of NIV work at post is the 
Work and Travel program.  Lithuania has one of the 
largest per capita participation rates in Eastern 
Europe.  Post processed 2,100 Work and Travel visas 
in FY2004, approximately 27 percent of all visas 
issued by post in that year.  This is a decrease from 
last year\'s totals, due to competition from programs in 
the U.K.  Organizers are hoping to submit at least as 
many Work and Travel applicants in 2005.  As these visas 
are all processed over a short period of time (from 
March to June), this places a great strain on every 
aspect of NIV processing at post.  The perennial demands 
on Section resources of universal interviewing, fraud 
screening, and the risk of printer failure are joined 
this year by the challenges posed by the planned absence 
of the Consul and the timing of the Vice-Consuls\' 
rotations.  Post has developed strategies to handle the 
anticipated challenges. 
 
M) Please comment on the impact that the fingerprinting 
requirement has had on consular space, processing time, 
and relations with your host country. 
 
Response: Post only began fingerprinting on August 23, 
2004.  Our limited experience with fingerprinting has 
been positive.  We had anticipated a negative backlash 
from the Lithuanian public based on local media reaction 
in the early days of the program.  With the cooperation 
of post\'s PD section, Front Office, the Orkand 
installation team (as noted above), and some good local 
contacts, we had a successful media event for the 
biometric rollout.  During that event, four \"Famous 
Fingers\" demonstrated the fingerprinting procedure, and 
the Deputy Director of the Lithuanian Consular Department 
explained the future of biometrics.  The campaign 
succeeded, as the transition to fingerprinting went 
without a hitch.  A number of Lithuanians holding valid 
visas even called the Embassy to ask if they could have 
their fingers scanned anyway. 
 
From the workload perspective, the switch to 
fingerprinting has had little impact on our operations. 
We have only occasionally experienced long delays with 
IDENT returns, but never so long as to disrupt our 
workflow.  There has been no real impact on consular 
space. 
 
N) What aspects of your IV work are the most 
demanding? (Discussion should address any backlogs 
and their causes). 
 
Response: Though Vilnius does not process immigrant 
visas, we accept petitions for immediate relatives, 
usually marriage or fiance petitions.  The number of 
petitions we received has doubled in the last year.  We 
continue to see cases of suspected marriage fraud. 
Approximately 10 percent of the petitions received at 
post in FY2004 were not clearly approvable.  The decline 
in fraudulent marriages seen at post is most likely a 
benefit of EU accession, with young Lithuanian women, the 
usual participant in such schemes, now looking for 
opportunities in Europe rather than in the United States. 
 
O) If applicable, please describe the impact of the 
DV program on your workload. 
 
Response: Lithuanians are very interested in the DV 
program, and every year the consular section receives 
a large number of inquiries about the process.  The 
availability of information on the Internet and through 
our pre-recorded phone message has reduced the number of 
phone and written inquiries to post about the program. 
We are affected by the program in two ways.  First, we 
continue to receive a large number of press inquiries 
every year; second, we receive many requests from Embassy 
Warsaw, our regional DV processing post, for assistance 
in conducting fraud checks of Lithuanian documentation, 
in particular fraudulent diplomas, submitted in support 
of DV applications.  The resources necessary to assist 
Warsaw with these checks place an additional burden on 
our fraud unit. 
 
P) What percentage of your NIV and IV applicants are 
third country nationals (TCN)? From what countries are 
they? Do they speak a different language than post\'s 
designated language?  If so, how do you communicate with 
them? 
Response: Only seven percent of NIV applications at post 
are non-Lithuanian citizens.  The vast majority of these 
are citizens of Russia, mostly seamen from the 
Kaliningrad region.  While many speak at least some 
English, about half speak only Russian.  Almost the 
entire FSN staff speaks fluent Russian, and those not 
fluent are at least proficient.  They interpret for the 
interviewing officers as needed. 
 
Passport: 
Q) Discuss how your post has been affected by the 
Overseas Photodigitized Passports program (OPDP) deployed 
in 2003.  Please note any major adjustments you have had 
to make to workflow or staffing.  Has the number of 
emergency passports issued at post decreased?  If so, by 
how much? 
 
Response: Post continues to be pleased with the 
improvement of service following implementation of OPDP. 
Customers are especially appreciative of this improvement 
in service.  This faster turnaround has resulted in a 
decrease in the already small number of emergency 
passports post issues, down more than half from FY2003. 
 
Fraud Prevention: 
 
R) Briefly summarize the types of fraud most frequently 
encountered at post and programs in place to combat that 
fraud, including use of investigation resources, tracking 
systems, electronic tools, liaison and information 
sharing.  If post has conducted a validation study, what 
was learned from it?  Are you satisfied with the level of 
fraud prevention training for officers and FSNs?  If not, 
what do you believe you need to support your efforts in 
this area?  Do you conduct in-house fraud training for 
non-Embassy consular contacts?  If so, who is the 
targeted audience and how often is it done?  Do local 
authorities effectively prosecute document vendors and 
smugglers? 
 
Response: Visa fraud in Lithuania has changed 
markedly in the last few years.  Fraudulent job letters 
and bank letters are increasingly rare. As we improved 
our detection of these documents with access to the 
Lithuanian Social Insurance Agency\'s (SoDra) database to 
confirm income declarations and use of the InfoBankas 
corporate record database, mala fide applicants have 
turned to other, more sophisticated techniques.  We 
continue to receive reports of fake Burroughs and Teslin 
MRV visas.  While the number of interception reports from 
airport officials has decreased, this may indicate that 
the quality of false documents has improved.  We are also 
receiving reports of Lithuanians seeking entry into the 
U.S. on imposter or photo-subbed passports.  This is 
especially difficult for Lithuanian authorities to 
address as the aliens, having used their real passport 
for departure, have broken no laws in Lithuania.  Local 
authorities recently located and shut down a visa 
\"facilitator\" who had a binder full of hundreds of photos 
from legitimate travel documents with valid U.S. visas 
from which travelers could select the best likeness. 
Post is working closely with investigators to identify 
those to whom the travel documents were originally issued 
as well as those who may have fraudulently used them. 
The investigation may take years but prosecutors are not 
optimistic that the document purveyors will actually do 
jail time. 
 
The Lithuanian Border Police are very helpful in our 
fraud efforts, but the information and assistance 
provided by the Criminal Police is not very specific 
nor responsive to post\'s concerns.  Post continues to 
work to strengthen its relationships with local law 
enforcement authorities.  We continue to work closely 
with RSO to further improve information sharing with 
local authorities.  DHS Copenhagen has been of great 
assistance in a number of investigations, running checks 
through its systems in addition to sharing their 
expertise. 
 
The results of post\'s last B1/B2 validation study, 
completed in early 2004, showed definite improvement from 
the previous year\'s study with a 57 percent return rate. 
Most unusual in this year\'s study was the significant 
number of visa holders (23 percent) who had not yet used 
their visas.  One possible explanation is that many 
applicants obtained U.S. visas on the eve of Lithuania\'s 
EU accession \"just in case.\"  Some Lithuanians were 
nervous about the effect accession would have on the 
local economy and, for all the promise of opportunities 
for legal work within the EU, others continue to look to 
the United States for work opportunities, legal or 
otherwise.  More than six months since Lithuania\'s EU 
accession, we still see just as many potential economic 
migrants despite the possibility for legal work 
elsewhere. 
 
Post\'s fraud prevention staff currently consists of one 
full-time Anti-Fraud investigator and is managed by the 
Consul.  Our part-time fraud assistant is currently 
acting as our full-time Anti-Fraud investigator during 
the investigator\'s extended leave.  She is assisted in 
anti-fraud efforts and investigations by all Section 
staff as necessary.  Neither she nor any of the American 
officers currently at post have had specific anti-fraud 
training.  The opportunity for both our local and 
American staff to obtain such training would no doubt 
enhance our anti-fraud efforts.  Despite the expertise of 
our AFI and extensive fraud files, we still too often 
find ourselves ill-equipped to investigate large, and 
increasingly sophisticated, organized fraud rings.  Post 
has developed a fraud database that will assist us in 
identifying commonalities, analyzing trends, and in 
detecting organized fraud.  The ability to access 
immigration systems such as NIIS and NAILS ourselves 
would greatly strengthen our efforts.  Post would also 
like increased opportunities to attend regional fraud 
conferences and to see more sharing of regional fraud 
information. 
 
We had not felt the need to conduct in-house training for 
our local contacts, as they continue to demonstrate an 
aptitude for detecting fraudulent documents, thanks in 
large part to excellent training provided by DHS 
Copenhagen in the last two years.  We do, however, 
provide informal orientations on U.S. documents for our 
Consular colleagues.  As it has been several years, 
though, the Consular Section and RSO would like to bring 
DHS here for another round of training with the 
Lithuanian Border Guard, as well as prosecutors and the 
Consular Department, who were not included in prior 
training sessions. 
 
General: 
 
S) Describe country conditions that affect your ability 
to provide consular services (infrastructure, fraud, 
political setting, etc.). 
 
Response: Since Lithuania regained its independence 
in 1991, over 500,000 Lithuanians have reportedly 
left the country, many of them to the United States 
where a sizeable Lithuanian community already exists. 
The Lithuanian government does little to discourage this 
exodus, as many politicians are convinced that the 
majority of Lithuanians will eventually return, better 
and richer for their time spent overseas.  While the 
Lithuanian economy continues to grow rapidly, not all 
groups benefit equally from the growth.  This factor, and 
the fact that most young Lithuanians desire to work 
abroad despite their country\'s excellent growth 
prospects, contribute to continuing emigration.  These 
factors will continue to drive post\'s NIV work, and 
refusal rate, in the future.  Immigration to Lithuania 
from both the EU and non-EU world, for both legitimate 
and illegitimate reasons, will continue to increase. 
Significant numbers of illegal aliens continue to be 
apprehended at the Lithuanian-Belarusian border and in 
the port of Klaipeda.  The influx of non-Lithuanians has 
already led to a small increase in the number of TCN 
applicants seen at post.  This number will most likely 
increase further over the next few years and will 
require greater vigilance in the screening of NIV 
applications. 
 
Integration has already increased emigration from 
Lithuania to Western Europe, as Lithuanians seek 
opportunities for legal foreign employment, though this 
has not diminished the demand for visas to the United 
States.  Despite Lithuania\'s membership in the EU, we 
have not yet seen the quality of visa cases improve, as 
economic growth continues to leave certain sectors of 
society behind. 
 
Now that Lithuania is officially part of Europe, but with 
a cost of living still far below its Western neighbors, 
tourism will continue to increase.  More American 
visitors, coupled with a likely increase in the number of 
people who choose to settle in Lithuania, will further 
increase the demand for section services. 
T) Describe any other issue not raised in the 
preceding questions that you believe to be 
significant to the consular section\'s effectiveness 
in handling its responsibilities. 
Response: Post is planning for a major physical expansion 
of the Chancery with construction scheduled to begin in 
FY2006.  The Consular Section will continue to work with 
other elements of the Mission to ensure that our space 
concerns are considered in the final plans.  Two 
additional stories will be constructed above the current 
Consular Section.  During that construction, the Consular 
Section will be moved into swing space in another 
building.  The space is slightly smaller than our current 
quarters.  While OBO has been working with the Consular 
Section to meet our needs, this temporary inconvenience 
will pose challenges for the Consular Section, which we 
are confident we will manage successfully. 
 
MULL 
"
"24485","12/22/2004 12:51","04VILNIUS1546","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1350|04VILNIUS1380|04VILNIUS1492","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 VILNIUS 001546 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EUR/RUS, EUR/RPM, AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/21/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MARR, MOPS, MASS, LH, HT4 
SUBJECT: NEW LITHUANIAN DEFMIN COMMITS TO CONTINUED SUPPORT 
FOR U.S. OBJECTIVES 
 
REF: A. VILNIUS 1492 
     B. VILNIUS 1380 
	C. VILNIUS 1350 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (U) This cable contains two action requests.  Please see 
paragraph 13. 
 
2. (C) Summary. New Lithuanian Defense Minister Gediminas 
Kirkilas told the Ambassador that Lithuania would remain 
engaged in Afghanistan and Iraq during a December 21 tour 
d\'horizon of our bilateral military-military relationship. 
A solid proponent of a strong USG-GOL relationship, 
Kirkilas\'s comments tracked with U.S. views on other key 
issues including Baltic air policing, ESDP, and Lithuanian 
interest in participating in a PRT in Afghanistan.  A long- 
time MP, Kirkilas will focus more on the politics of his 
new position than did his predecessor.   He will need time 
to get up to speed on the details of the more technical 
military issues.  End Summary. 
 
3. (C) Kirkilas welcomed the Ambassador and the Embassy\'s 
pol-mil team at his first meeting with a foreign Ambassador 
since taking office December 14.  The Ambassador and DefMin 
reviewed all aspects of our bilateral relationship with 
major issues highlighted below. 
 
---------------------- 
Bilateral Relationship 
---------------------- 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador noted to Kirkilas that the Embassy 
has had a traditionally active relationship with the 
Defense Ministry and that we look forward to deepening that 
relationship with Kirkilas on the job, particularly through 
a visit to the U.S. early in his tenure.  Kirkilas said he 
would eagerly welcome such an opportunity. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
5. (C) Kirkilas affirmed Lithuania\'s continued 
participation in military operations in Iraq, and said that 
his staff is examining how it might be able to even 
increase its participation, resources permitting.  He 
referred to increasing pressure in Poland for a Polish 
withdrawal, and expressed confidence that Lithuania would 
face no such pressures in the immediate future.  The 
Ambassador thanked Kirkilas for the commitment, in 
particular for Lithuania\'s early and positive response to 
support NATO\'s training mission in Iraq.  He noted that the 
Embassy is committed to help the government maintain 
popular support for its participation, including through 
its recently launched biweekly newsletter on developments 
in Iraq, which we send to political and opinion leaders. 
Additionally, the Ambassador urged that Kirkilas consider 
an early visit to Lithuanian troops on the ground in Iraq 
(and Afghanistan) to acquaint himself personally with 
coalition operations.  He expressed an interest to do so. 
 
----------- 
Afghanistan 
----------- 
 
6. (C) The Ambassador commended the performance of 
Lithuanian special forces in Afghanistan, who just departed 
to return to Lithuania to train for participation in the 
NATO Reaction Force.  While we understood the need to 
withdraw, the Ambassador urged that Lithuania keep its 
commitment to return in 2006. 
 
7. (C) Kirkilas said the GOL is interested in participating 
in a PRT in Afghanistan, but has concerns about the cost of 
such an undertaking.  The Ambassador recommended that 
Lithuania continue to take a leadership role and recommend 
to its Baltic neighbors that they pool their resources for 
a single Baltic-PRT.  We observed that the cost of the 
initiative depended upon the goals of the mission and 
agreed to share information about cost estimates.  (Note: 
The Lithuanians are under the impression that the start up 
and one-year operating costs would be about 40 million 
euros.)  Kirkilas also thought the January 25 deadline for 
declaring intention to mount a PRT posed a problem. 
Kirkilas said that a Lithuanian government team would 
likely visit Afghanistan in January with support from the 
U.K. in order to explore PRT participation options. 
------------------------------------ 
Bilateral Assistance and Procurement 
------------------------------------ 
 
8. (C) The Ambassador said that the USG military assistance 
to Lithuania should remain level and is expected to provide 
approximately $5 million in FMF assistance and $1.2 million 
IMET funding to Lithuania in 2005.  Highlighting the recent 
GOL purchase of Javelin missiles, the Ambassador pledged 
continued assistance in GOL efforts to procure other 
equipment including radios and night vision goggles for 
troops deployed abroad.  The Ambassador also assured 
Kirkilas of continued support in providing opportunities 
for members of Lithuania\'s armed forces to study in U.S. 
service academies, praising the success of the twelve 
students now enrolled. 
 
------------------------------ 
Baltic Air-Policing and Russia 
------------------------------ 
 
9. (C) The Ambassador affirmed U.S. support for NATO\'s air- 
policing operations covering the Baltic States and noted 
likely U.S. participation in the mission in 2005.  He also 
commended Lithuania\'s constructive approach in cooperating 
with Russia\'s Vienna Documents (VDOC) inspection of 
military sites including the Zokniai airfield, in October 
(ref C).  Lithuania\'s constructive approach to Russia had 
enhanced regional security in the past, noted the 
Ambassador, and we strongly encourage the continuation of 
such a policy. 
 
-------------------------- 
Two Percent GDP Allocation 
-------------------------- 
 
10. (C) The Ambassador strongly encouraged the GOL to 
fulfill NATO\'s recommendations to allocate two percent of 
GDP for national defense. The Ambassador applauded 
Kirkilas\'s public statements in support of the allocation, 
and remarked that NATO Secretary General de Hoop Scheffer 
had recently raised the issue with President Adamkus. 
Concurring that the two percent issue is very important, 
Kirkilas said he would work to \"find new decisions\" on the 
issue (reftel B).  Kirkilas conceded that some involved in 
the budgetary process were not sensitive to the realities 
of the defense budget or of the need for Lithuania to 
continue force transformation following NATO membership. 
 
---- 
ESDP 
---- 
 
11. (C) The Ambassador noted the USG support for European 
security and defense, but cautioned that ESDP neither 
duplicate NATO nor diminish the capacity of NATO members to 
meet NATO commitments. Kirkilas concurred that NATO must 
remain the primary guarantor of security in Europe. 
Kirkilas said that Lithuania was not facing significant 
pressure from Europe to pledge more defense assets to ESDP. 
 
------- 
Georgia 
------- 
 
12. (C) Kirkilas described engagement with and support for 
the South Caucasus as a high GOL and MOD priority, and 
noted that the GOL had pledged assistance in Georgia\'s 
preparations for a bid for NATO membership.  He said that 
Georgia approached the GOL seeking a transfer of Soviet 
weapons to Georgian defense forces, and raised a GOG 
request to the GOL to transfer 1,000-2,000 U.S. M-14 rifles 
to Georgia\'s national honor guard forces, and that the GOL 
now sought USG approval of the transfer.  The Ambassador 
welcomed Lithuania\'s engagement with Georgia and encouraged 
Kirkilas in his contacts with the Georgian leadership to 
discourage any new military action in South Ossetia, which 
would impede solution of the problem and endanger Georgia\'s 
NATO aspirations. 
 
--------------- 
Action Requests 
--------------- 
 
13. (C) Action Requests. 
A. We request that the Department provide guidance on the 
GOL transfer of 1,000-2,000 M-14s to the GOG. 
B. We request information on the possibility of Lithuania 
postponing past January 25, 2005 a declaration of its 
intentions regarding participation in a PRT. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
14. (C) It is clear that Kirkilas will need time to come up 
to speed on military issues.  His political background, 
familiarity with the intricacies of Lithuania\'s Coalition 
government, and leadership role within his party and 
parliament (he remains a MP and the Social Democratic 
Party\'s Deputy Whip) may serve the MOD well during 
contentious budgetary battles.  We will continue to 
actively engage Kirkilas on issues of interest, and 
recommend that we create opportunities for travel to the 
U.S. as well as to Iraq and Afghanistan to help him become 
familiar with the issues as quickly as possible. 
 
Mull 
"
"24498","12/22/2004 15:47","04VILNIUS1548","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04VILNIUS1523","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TALLINN FOR FBI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, CMGT, ASEC, LH, HT4 
SUBJECT: New Minister of Interior Furmanavicius Promises 
Continued Cooperation; Easier Residency Permit Process 
 
REF: VILNIUS 1523 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - NOT FOR INTERNET 
 
1. (U) Summary:  Ambassador Mull met with newly appointed 
Minister of Interior Ginteras Furmanavicius on December 
21, 2004.  Furmanavicius thanked the Ambassador for past 
U.S. efforts to train the Ministry\'s experts in border 
security and law enforcement.  He stated his commitment 
to maintaining close cooperation with the U.S., noting 
that both countries face similar challenges in terms of 
terrorism, organized crime, and money laundering.   The 
Ambassador raised concerns about Lithuania\'s residency 
permit process for U.S. citizens - particularly Fulbright 
Scholars - noting that such could act as a disincentive 
for U.S. investment in Lithuania.  Minster Furmanavicius 
agreed to help work towards finding an acceptable 
solution, suggesting the Migration Office is ready to 
work with us to address this issue. In an effort to 
increase cooperation and bi-lateral government contacts, 
the Ambassador encouraged Minister Furmanavicius to make 
an early visit to the United States to meet with top 
federal law enforcement officials. End Summary 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Maintaining the Status Quo: Good Cooperation; Continued 
Training 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. (U) Ginteras Furmanavicius became Minister of Interior 
on December 14, 2004, making him the fourth Minister of 
Interior in four years, and second in the last two. 
Although controversy clouded his appointment, with 
allegations swirling of his business dealings with an 
accused embezzler, Lithuania\'s investigative service has 
cleared Furmanavicius and there has been no additional 
evidence to substantiate these allegations (ref A). 
 
3. (U) Receiving Ambassador Mull for his December 22, 
2004 courtesy-call, Minster of Interior Ginteras 
Furmanavicius noted that we were the first foreign 
diplomats to meet with him, and, although only recently 
appointed, he was well aware of the excellent cooperation 
that has existed over the past several years between the 
USG and Lithuania\'s Ministry of Interior.   He thanked 
the U.S. for the training and equipment it has provided, 
citing the radiological detection equipment at the 
airport and security equipment used in border security to 
help thwart WMD proliferation.  Alluding to President 
Bush\'s speech during his visit to Lithuania, 
Furmanavicius pointed out that Lithuania and the U.S. 
have many mutual challenges to address - organized crime, 
terrorism, money laundering -and he intended to address 
these challenges with the same level of bi-lateral 
cooperation as his predecessors.  Domestically, 
Furmanavicius\'s agenda focuses on increasing state 
security, while improving government services and 
decreasing the economic disparity between urban and rural 
regions. 
 
4. (U) The Ambassador echoed the Ministers comments on 
USG-GOL cooperation in the area of law enforcement and 
border security, stating he looked forward to continued 
cooperation in the future.   The Ambassador made specific 
mention of the police force used to guard the U.S. 
Embassy, noting that while the Ministry of Interior has 
cutback on overall security at embassies in Vilnius, the 
police still maintain a presence at the U.S. Embassy, 
helping ensure our security.  He noted that law 
enforcement training has been one of the strongest areas 
of cooperation with the Ministry of Interior, and he 
hopes to build on the already successful programs the USG 
has undertaken with the GOL, namely undercover police 
work, post-blast training with the FBI, and security 
assessments of port security in Klaipeda and railroad 
security at the borders.  As a way to increase 
cooperation and improve already excellent bi-lateral 
relations, the Ambassador encouraged Minister 
Furmanavicius to make an early visit to the U.S. to meet 
top law enforcement officials in Washington. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Residency Permits: A Sticking Point 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) One area of concern the Ambassador raised with 
Minister Furmanavicius is the current GOL residency 
permit policy.  He mentioned the large number of 
complaints he has heard from U.S. citizens regarding 
their attempts to obtain a residency permit, citing the 
often-confusing and lengthy process of acquiring a 
residency permit.  The current process, the Ambassador 
noted, could act as a disincentive for U.S. investment in 
Lithuania, if U.S. investors have difficulty obtaining 
resident permits. 
 
6. (SBU) The Fulbright Scholars are of particular 
concern. The Ambassador noted that they are in Lithuania 
for an academic year, but must wait a considerable amount 
of time before receiving their visas, often longer than 
90 days, when they become out of status and must leave 
the country or face fines.  The Ambassador mentioned that 
the Fulbright program is a government sponsored program 
and would hope the Migration Office could ensure that the 
Fulbright scholars receive their visas before the 90-day 
temporary residence period expires.  The Ambassador cited 
the bi-lateral program the GOL has in place with the 
French government and hopes that the U.S. Embassy can 
work with the Migration Office to establish a similar 
program.  Minister Furmanavicius stated he was well aware 
of the U.S. concerns regarding residency permits and 
would do everything possible to solve the problem and 
make it easier for U.S. citizens to come to Lithuania to 
study, invest or live.  He suggested we contact the 
Migration Office directly, as they are prepared to talk 
with the U.S. in order to solve this problem. 
 
------------ 
Comment 
------------ 
 
7. (SBU) Minister Furmanavicius seems prepared to 
continue the close cooperation his predecessors have 
forged with the USG, with his list of priorities offering 
specific areas where the USG can offer training and 
support, namely in state security.  He realizes the 
importance of maintaining good relations and has taken 
note of the residency permit issue and seems willing to 
address it promptly.  We will explore options for 
bringing Furmanavicius to Washington in the future. 
 
 
MULL 
"
"24530","12/23/2004 10:58","04VILNIUS1556","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1427","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001556 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EUR/UMB AND EUR/RUS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/22/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PBTS, LH, HT12 
SUBJECT: BALTS REPORT RUSSIAN CHARM OFFENSIVE 
 
REF: VILNIUS 1427 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Russia has launched a \"charm offensive\" 
towards the Baltic states that features new movement on 
bilateral relations, according to Lithuanian officials and 
Baltic diplomats here.  Lithuanian interlocutors point to 
recent Russian initiatives on long-stalled issues such as 
bilateral commissions and on non-security issues like 
environmental protection. Russian diplomats are privately 
telling Baltic interlocutors that the new year will bring 
even friendlier initiatives.  Lithuanians, however, see a 
continued Russian hard line against Baltic/EU efforts to 
\"export\" democracy to other parts of the former Soviet Union. 
 Many observers believe the friendlier tone reflects Russia\'s 
interest in attracting Baltic participation in WWII 
commemorative events in May; others believe it is a new 
tactic aimed at co-opting the Balts for support on Russian 
interests within NATO and EU councils.  Regardless of motive, 
the Lithuanians will probably aim to exploit new initiatives 
to maintain constructive relations with Russia, while remain 
cautious and alert to any encroaching Russian influence that 
could be a by-product. End Summary. 
 
------------------------- 
A Kinder, Gentler Moscow? 
------------------------- 
 
2. (C) MFA Russia Division Chief Arunas Vinciunas 
characterized Russia\'s recent overtures toward Lithuania as a 
\"charm offensive,\" and told us that Lithuania has noticed a 
more cooperative tone from Moscow on issues of bilateral 
interest.  Russia recently announced, for example, that it 
would appoint a chairperson to the GOL-GOR Intergovernmental 
Cooperative Commission, following a six-month vacancy.  The 
Commission, the highest GOL-GOR permanent cooperative body, 
facilitates cooperation on bilateral issues, involving trade, 
transportation, economic cooperation, science, technology and 
culture.  Russia similarly pledged to name a chair to the 
bilateral Demarcation Commission, a technical body 
responsible for delineating the Kaliningrad-Lithuanian 
border, and the GOR recently affirmed its intention to 
participate in a joint Baltic Sea and Curonian Lagoon 
environmental monitoring program in 2005. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Moscow Extends Holiday Cheer toward Estonia and Latvia 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
3. (C) A local Estonian diplomat told us that Tallinn has 
also noticed a \"dramatic shift\" in tone from Russia.  After 
many months of a refusal to meet at the Foreign Ministerial 
level, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov had recently offered a 
meeting to his Estonian counterpart.  President Putin, for 
example, also recently announced his intention to conclude 
negotiation of border treaties with Estonia and Latvia by May 
9, 2005.  (Note:  The Duma ratified the GOL-GOR agreement 
codifying the Russia/Kaliningrad-Lithuanian border in May 
2003.)  The diplomat said Russian diplomats in Vilnius have 
been telling the Lithuanians and Baltic counterparts to 
expect substantial new goodwill initiatives shortly after the 
new year. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
\"Nothing Charming About Russia in Brussels\" 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Despite the new bonhomie on other issues, Russia has 
changed neither its tone nor its policies on the New 
Neighborhood or other substantive issues with the EU, or with 
Lithuania on issues such as Baltic air policing or 
Kaliningrad, according to Lithuanian diplomats.  Mindaugas 
Kacerauskis, head of MFA\'s Ukraine, Moldova, and Belarus 
Division noted that Russia remains \"very tough\" on Georgia, 
Moldova and Ukraine.  Russia, he said, rejected all 
EU-sponsored initiatives regarding the \"New Neighborhood\" at 
both the November EU-Russia Summit and the OSCE Ministerial 
in Sofia.  Noting \"there has been nothing charming about 
Russia in Brussels,\" Jonas Grinevicius, head of MFA\'s NATO 
Division, said that he was \"not impressed\" with Russia\'s 
cooperation on Ukraine at the recent NATO-Russia Council. 
Interlocutors point to Putin\'s involvement with President 
Kuchma following the second round of presidential voting in 
Ukraine, and FM Ivanov\'s critical comments on Kaliningrad 
transit issues at NATO\'s meeting in Bucharest as additional 
evidence that there has been no change in tone or substance 
from Moscow. 
 
--------------- 
A May 9 Motive? 
--------------- 
 
5. (C) The goal of the Kremlin\'s offensive, said Grinevicius, 
is to convince President Adamkus to participate in events 
commemorating the 60th anniversary of the end of WWII in 
Moscow on May 9.  To Lithuanians, May 9, the official Soviet 
Victory Day, signaled the reestablishment of soviet 
occupation and deportation of up to 300,000 Lithuanian 
citizens, thousands of executions and 45 years of the 
subjugation of its language and culture by a foreign occupier 
(reftel).  Raimundas Lopata, Director of the Institute of 
International Relations, echoed Grinevicius, suggesting that 
these examples of uncustomary, if limited cooperation 
represent a new strategy directed toward May 9 participation, 
not a new warmth. 
 
6. (C) Though President Adamkus has told us quietly that it 
will likely be politically impossible for him to participate 
in events that appear to mark the anniversary of Soviet 
occupation of the Baltic countries, the GOL will likely not 
make a final decision until March 2005.  Saulius Gasiunas, 
Director of MOD\'s NATO Department said that the GOL is taking 
a wait-and-see approach, and will see just how far these 
friendly overtures extend. 
 
7. (C) Others believe the new developments reflect a change 
in Russian tactics in advancing its longer term strategy of 
co-opting or weakening NATO and EU influence on Russian 
interests in Europe.  Many of our Baltic interlocutors here 
remain convinced that Russia continues to view its relations 
with Europe as a zero-sum game; that any expansion of NATO or 
EU influence automatically means a diminution of (and threat 
to) Russian interests.  As one Estonian surmised, Russia aims 
to use its warmer cultivation of the Baltic states as a 
platform to weaken NATO and EU cohesion. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (C) Regardless or Russia\'s motives or the durability of 
its new initiatives to the Baltic states, Lithuanian 
officials will likely aim to exploit them to keep bilateral 
relations on a constructive footing, while remaining cautious 
and alert to any ulterior motives.  As Lithuania\'s new 
government takes power with the participation of Labor Party 
leader (and ethnic Russian) Viktor Uspaskich, sensitivity to 
prospective Russian manipulation of Lithuania is especially 
high.  For example, even Uspaskich himself this week sounded 
the alarm about the need to protect Lithuania from Russian 
manipulation. 
Mull 
"
"24638","12/27/2004 14:19","04VILNIUS1566","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE245841","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 VILNIUS 001566 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND S/CT (REAP) 
STATE PASS TO TTIC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, KCRM, EFIN, KHLS, KPAO, LH, HT29 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 245841 
 
Parts of the following cable are sensitive but unclassified. 
Please handle accordingly. 
 
1. (U) Post submits the annual terrorism report for 
Lithuania.  Embassy\'s update on Lithuania for the 
Department\'s 2004 Patterns of Global Terrorism report 
(reftel) is in paras 2-4. 
 
2. (SBU) Lithuania has been fully supportive of the war 
against terrorism.  Lithuania is implementing the National 
Security Strategy of October 2004 and has nearly completed 
its National Counter-terrorism Program of January 2002.  The 
counter-terrorism plans include: participation in the 
international fight against terrorism; expanding and sharing 
resources; defending possible targets and infrastructure; 
identifying terrorists, their groups, and supporters; 
identifying and cutting off sources of terrorist finances; 
clarifying the procedures for investigating terrorist cases; 
strengthening rapid reaction and crisis management 
capabilities; strengthening of counter-terrorist 
intelligence; and strengthening of internal economic and 
social security in general. 
 
3. (SBU) Lithuania has also sent troops and other military 
personnel to Afghanistan and Iraq.  Since November 2002, 
Lithuanian Special Operation Forces have participated in 
Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan.  About 120 
Lithuanian troops and logistics specialists operate in Iraq. 
In September, Parliament voted to extend the missions to 
Afghanistan and Iraq (and also the Balkans) until the end of 
2005. The Government also pledged modest financial 
assistance to Iraqi reconstruction and training of Iraqi 
forces. 
 
4. (SBU) Lithuania is a party to all 12 international 
conventions and protocols relating to terrorism, including 
the International Convention for the Suppression of the 
Financing of Terrorism and the International Convention for 
the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.  The Government has 
been very cooperative in investigating and detecting 
potential terrorist finances. 
 
---------------- 
ADDENDUM SUMMARY 
---------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Lithuania has cooperated with international counter- 
terrorist initiatives, and has supported USG efforts to 
prevent international terrorist organizations from taking 
root in Lithuania.  The GOL has increased funding of its 
security, expanded and strengthened intelligence collection, 
stepped up border controls, and is working to adopt a new 
National Counter Terrorism Program.  The information that 
follows is keyed to reftel addendum questions.  End Addendum 
Summary. 
 
--- 
-A- 
--- 
 
6. (SBU) The GOL has fully supported the global coalition 
against terrorism through contributing to operations in 
Afghanistan and Iraq, the ratification of international 
counter-terrorism-related conventions, efforts to block 
terrorist assets, and the development of new counter- 
terrorism legal mechanisms.  Since November 2002, a group of 
up to 50 Lithuanian Special Operation Forces and logistics 
specialists has served in Operation Enduring Freedom in 
Afghanistan (officially in \"Central and Southern Asia\"). 
About 120 Lithuanian troops and logistics specialists have 
operated in Iraq since summer 2003.  In September, their 
term of duty was extended until the end of 2005. 
 
7. (SBU) In March, Lithuania acceded to the EU Code of 
Conduct in Arms Export.  In October, Lithuania updated its 
2002 National Security Strategy to reflect its membership in 
NATO and the EU.  It has also implemented more than 90 
percent of its January 2002 National Counter-Terrorism 
Program, which focused on: participation in international 
fight against terrorism; expanding and sharing CT resources; 
defending possible targets and infrastructure; identifying 
terrorists, their groups, and supporters; identifying and 
cutting off sources of terrorist finances; clarifying the 
procedures for investigating terrorist cases; strengthening 
rapid reaction and crisis management capabilities; 
strengthening of counter-terrorist intelligence; and 
strengthening of internal economic and social security in 
general.  In September, the State Defense Council charged 
the State Security Department to strengthen terrorism 
prevention and draft a new CT Program focusing on blocking 
terrorists\' assets and income by tackling drug trafficking, 
smuggling, illegal migration and human trafficking. 
 
8. (SBU) Lithuania\'s State Security Department (SSD) is 
tasked to prevent terrorism in the country in cooperation 
with other state institutions (the MoD, Customs, Border 
Protection Service, the Police) and foreign secret services. 
In April, the SSD joined the Club of Berne, which includes 
intelligence services of EU countries, Norway, and 
Switzerland, and is working to implement the European 
Council Declaration on combating terrorism.  In February 
2002, the GOL established the Interagency Coordination 
Commission Against Terrorism headed by the head of the SSD. 
In September, the Chief Police Commissioner was invited to 
join the Commission.  Lithuania is also working to improve 
information-sharing among major agencies involved in 
flagging and tracking suspicious transactions -- the 
Prosecutor General\'s Office, the Financial Crime 
Investigation Service under the Ministry of Interior, the 
State Insurance Supervising Service, the State Securities 
Commission, and the Bank of Lithuania (BL). 
 
9. (SBU) Lithuania has ratified all 12 major international 
conventions regarding counter-terrorism and has implemented 
the relevant UNSCRs.  In December 2003, the Parliament 
ratified the 2001 International Convention on the 
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, which Lithuania signed in 
June 1998.  In November, Lithuania signed a protocol 
partially revising the 1977 European Convention on counter- 
terrorism measures.  In September, Lithuania hosted a 
meeting of the European Organization of Supreme Audit 
Institutions (EUROSAI, established in 1990), which set up a 
permanent body to fight money laundering for terrorism. 
 
--- 
-B- 
--- 
 
10. (SBU) To the Embassy\'s knowledge, there has been no 
prosecution relating to terrorism in Lithuania in 2004, 
although some GOL investigations pointed to or may 
eventually reveal terrorist connections  (see para 13). 
 
11. (SBU) During the year, the Government has continued 
efforts to fight widespread corruption in the State Border 
Protection Service and Customs, stepped up the screening of 
money transfers and protection of classified information. 
 
12. (SBU) In fall of 2002, the GOL corrected laws that had 
previously allowed the Kaunas-based company Aviabaltika to 
supply spare parts of military and dual-use helicopters to 
Sudan.  The Lithuanian security services have monitored 
Aviabaltika\'s commercial activities since the end of 1999. 
In January 2003, the Civil Aviation Department allowed the 
Kaunas-based company Helisota to fly a repaired Mi-17 
helicopter to the United Arab Emirates.  Earlier, the 
Customs Department had stopped the planned transportation of 
the helicopter to Sudan.  In January in the Lithuanian 
seaport of Klaipeda, the GOL seized three Russian-made Mi-8 
helicopters en route from Bangladesh to Aviabaltika\'s Kaunas 
headquarters and later to Russia.  Following an official 
investigation, the helicopters were released months later. 
 
13. (SBU) In 2003, a two-year long investigation by the SSD 
revealed an IRA terrorist finance-related smuggling ring 
which involved four judges (who were fired in July 2003, and 
which could have involved politicians.  In October 2004, the 
SSD detected a major group of document forgers supplying 
identity documents to criminal groups that were sold 
primarily to illegal immigrants for use in Lithuania and the 
EU.  In November 2004, the SSD arrested a well-organized 
group minting high quality fake 100-euro banknotes.  At the 
time of the arrest, the Police seized counterfeit notes 
valued at nine million euro.  In May, Lithuania amended its 
Money Laundering Law.  The amendments shortened the time 
needed to investigate money laundering cases; enabled the 
Division of Prevention of Money Laundering (FIU) to block 
assets in two days, without a court order; and enabled 
Lithuanian banks and credit institutions to stop suspicious 
banking operations without a court order, inform the FIU 
within 3 hours, and freeze accounts within 24.  Bank of 
Lithuania officials say that, to date, no terrorist accounts 
have been identified in Lithuania. 
 
14. (SBU) In September, the SSD closed the pro-Chechen 
website Kavkaz-Center for the second time (it was first 
closed in June 2003), following expert analysis that it 
contained information related to terrorism and religious and 
national enmity.  In November, a Lithuanian provider opened 
a \"mirror\" of the main server of Kavkaz, which had moved to 
Sweden. The SSD is attempting to close the website through 
the court system. 
 
15. (SBU) In August 2003, the Lithuanian MFA banned Chechen 
fighter Basayev from entering Lithuania and purchasing 
weapons here due to his ties with the al-Qaeda terrorist 
network. 
 
16. (SBU) Numerous GOL agencies are working closely with the 
Embassy to counter the threat that terrorism posed to 
Lithuanian and U.S. interests.  The State Security 
Department, the \"Aras\" Counter Terrorism response team 
(under the Ministry of Interior), and the Police Department 
have offered excellent support to strengthen the Embassy\'s 
security posture at times of heightened terrorist threat. 
These organizations have worked effectively to uncover the 
existence of (a small number of) individuals affiliated with 
international terrorist organizations (Hamas, Hezbollah, and 
Russian criminal groups). 
 
17. (SBU) Since September 11, 2001, the GOL has stepped up 
security at the U.S. Embassy, GOL facilities, and  strategic 
locations such as the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant.  GOL 
leaders, often acting with other countries, NATO, and the 
EU, have condemned terrorist attacks across the world.  The 
GOL has fully backed the fight against terrorism, including 
by sending Lithuanian soldiers to participate in the GWOT. 
 
18. (SBU) In June 2003, the GOL supported the EU position 
not to sign an agreement on immunity from the International 
Criminal Court for U.S. troops.  (Note: Lithuania has signed 
but not yet ratified the Rome Treaty.)  The GOL expressed 
hope that the USG decision to cancel its military support 
over the article 98 of the ICC is not final, and that the 
USG-EU dialogue will achieve \"acceptable decisions.\" 
 
----- 
-C/D- 
----- 
 
19. (SBU) Lithuania strengthened counter-terrorism measures 
following the March bombings in Madrid.  In April, Lithuania 
signed the NATO Declaration on Terrorism.  The GOL is 
closely coordinating terrorism-related migration issues with 
the EU.  In October 2001, the GOL and the USG signed an 
extradition treaty.  There have been no reports of terrorism- 
related deportations in 2004.  In 2002, the GOL deported 
(apparently to their home country) six Lebanese nationals 
who were members of Hamas.  The GOL deported at least one 
individual linked to international terrorist organizations 
in 2001, and five individuals (several of them Lebanese 
nationals) in 2000.  To the Embassy\'s knowledge, the GOL has 
not received extradition requests from other countries, or 
requested extradition of suspected terrorists for 
prosecution during the year.  In October 2001, the State 
Security Department gave MPs a list of terrorist 
organizations that could have members in Lithuania: al Qaeda 
was not on the list, but Hezbollah was.  In previous years, 
the State Security Department tracked Kurdish, Sikh, and Abu 
Jihad al-Islam terrorists who posed as refugees traveling 
via Lithuania to the West. 
 
----- 
-E/F- 
----- 
 
20. (SBU) The SSD has invested heavily over the past two 
years to procure modern interception equipment.  The 
Criminal Process Code requires a judge\'s authorization for 
the search of premises of an individual, including 
terrorists; in most cases, such permission is granted.  The 
seizure, monitoring, and recording of information 
transmitted through telecommunications networks or 
surveillance must also be court-ordered.  Intelligence 
(e.g., voice recordings) verified by criminal experts is 
permitted as evidence in a court of law.  Under the law, 
police may detain suspects for up to 48 hours, based upon 
reliable evidence of criminal activity and approval by an 
investigator or prosecutor.  Pretrial detention applies only 
in the case of felonies, to prevent flight, to allow 
unhindered investigation if the suspect might commit new 
crimes, or when there is an extradition request.  Suspected 
detained terrorists, like other criminals, are barred from 
telephone or e-mail access.  However, criminals frequently 
violate this prohibition in practice.  The detaining 
authority routinely collects photographs, fingerprints, and 
DNA samples. 
 
21. (SBU) Since September 2001, the GOL has permitted U.S. 
aircraft to overfly its national airspace.  The GOL, 
together with the other Baltic states, has provided full 
data from the Baltic Air Surveillance Network (BALTNET) to 
the NATO air defense system.  In April, BALTNET joined the 
NATO airspace surveillance system.  Since March, NATO 
fighter planes have been deployed in Lithuania to provide 
air policing over Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia. 
 
22. (SBU) In October 2002, the Lithuanian MoD and the U.S. 
DoD signed an agreement on cooperation in prevention of 
proliferation of mass destruction weapons.  The USG has 
trained Lithuanian personnel and donated equipment worth 
several hundred thousand dollars to the Lithuanian Customs 
Department and State Border Protection Service.  The 
equipment, which includes mobile and stationery X-ray and 
radioactivity detection tools, has strengthened Lithuania\'s 
land border, airport, and port security infrastructure.  In 
February, a USG-sponsored WMD and illicit materials 
detection and data transfer system valued at $4.2 million 
dollars was opened at Vilnius International Airport; it is 
linked to a U.S. monitoring station in Washington, D.C. 
Senior GOL officials, however, admitted that control and 
security is still inadequate at some smaller airports.  In 
September, the GOL opened a new, USG-funded security and 
diversion detection system at the nuclear waste repository 
in Maisiagala.  Also in September, the USTDA signed an 
agreement with Lithuania to fund a safety study at the port 
of Klaipeda, and the GOL hosted a FBI Post Blast 
Investigation exercise for Lithuanian, Latvian, and Estonian 
specialists. 
 
23. (SBU) In June, Lithuania ratified an agreement on 
cooperation in fighting terrorism, organized crime, and drug 
trafficking with Turkey.  Lithuania has similar treaties in 
force with Kazakhstan (since August 2001), Germany (since 
June 2002), and Hungary (since October 2002).  In June, 
Lithuania joined a Russian-NATO military exercise that 
simulated a terrorist attack on an oil platform in the 
Baltic Sea near Kaliningrad. 
 
24. (SBU) The GOL continued to reinforce the protection of 
Lithuania\'s borders with Belarus and Russia.  In May 2003, 
Russia ratified the bilateral border agreement.  Since early 
April 2002, Lithuania has deployed an anti-aircraft missile 
battery near the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant to protect it 
from possible terrorist attacks.  In November 2004, the GOL 
augmented the air defenses around Ignalina by deploying a 
short-range RBS-70 air defense missile system. 
 
25. (SBU) Lithuania continued to support Georgia in the 
fight against terrorism by contributing to a training and 
supply program for Georgia\'s military units. 
 
26. (SBU) The Ministry of Interior has reorganized two of 
its regiments into public security units tasked to fight 
terrorists. 
 
------- 
-G/H/I- 
------- 
 
27. (SBU) The GOL does not support international terrorism, 
terrorists, or terrorist groups.  The GOL acts promptly to 
prevent any ties between terrorists, terrorist groups, or 
terrorist-supporting countries with Lithuania. 
 
28. (SBU) The GOL has made no public statements in support 
of a terrorist-supporting country on a terrorism-related 
issue. 
 
29.  (SBU) The GOL has consistently supported the global 
coalition against terrorism and has further strengthened 
intelligence gathering and counter-terrorism activities. 
The GOL is also increasing defense funding.  The ongoing 
army reform, among others, will allow for greater 
interoperability with allied troops during international 
counter-terrorist operations. 
 
KELLY 
"
"24664","12/28/2004 10:03","04VILNIUS1568","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE14279","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 001568 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, INL/AAE, AND DS/IP/EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PREL, LH, HT29 
SUBJECT:  COUNTER-TERRORISM ACTION GROUP DISCUSSES STATE OF 
PLAY IN LITHUANIA 
 
REF: STATE 14279 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Embassy Vilnius convened a meeting of 
the Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG) in Lithuania on 
December 9.  Representatives from the French, German, 
Canadian, Japanese, Spanish, Italian, British, and Russian 
Embassies, as well as EU and UN representatives, compared 
notes on counter-terrorism assistance to Lithuania.  The 
CTAG agreed that the threat of terrorism in Lithuania is 
low.  Some participants noted new risks, such as the 
possibility that terrorists would exploit Lithuania\'s EU 
membership by using it as an entry point into the rest of 
the EU.  End Summary. 
 
Training for Lithuania 
---------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) During a round table discussion, the participants 
discussed their past counter-terrorism and general law 
enforcement assistance to Lithuania.  No one had any 
specific plans for future counter-terrorism assistance. 
The participants reported the following counter terrorism 
assistance and training for Lithuania: 
 
-- France:  France has provided two small seminars on 
Threat Assessment and Crisis Management and one training 
exercise at the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant. 
 
-- Germany:  Germany has a Police Attach, assigned to its 
Embassy.  The representative explained that Germany had 
funded many projects, but none were related to counter- 
terrorism.  German training focuses on organized crime, 
witness protection, and undercover operations.  Germany has 
also provided DNA database equipment for the Police 
Forensics Laboratory.  Germany said that its assistance and 
investigation priorities in Lithuania involved trafficking 
in persons, counterfeit Euros, illegal drugs, and 
trafficking in stolen cars.  The Germany representative 
stated that they prefer to deal with a specific unit and 
provide assistance directly to that unit.  Germany said 
that bilateral assistance would decrease because Lithuania 
was now an EU member.  Instead, Lithuania can seek EU 
funding for assistance.  According to Germany, Finland and 
Sweden have also provided a variety of law enforcement 
assistance. 
 
-- Russia:  Russia has provided no assistance to Lithuania. 
The Russians stated that Lithuania had never asked for its 
help, and there were no issues that concerned Russia. 
 
-- Japan:  Japan supported the need for cooperation in 
fighting terrorism, but said that it was the policy of 
Japan to provide counter-terrorism assistance only to the 
Asian countries that surround Japan. 
 
-- United Kingdom:  The UK rep stated that it was difficult 
to obtain counter-terrorism assistance for Lithuania 
because of the low terrorism threat.  The UK provides 
assistance in other areas.  The British representatives 
highlighted their assistance in fighting financial crime 
with training and the donation of special software for 
tracking financial transactions.  Great Britain said that 
two legal experts had reviewed Lithuanian law and 
determined that it was appropriately crafted to facilitate 
terrorism investigations. 
 
-- EU (Dutch Presidency):  A representative for the Dutch 
Embassy attended to represent the EU.  He said that there 
had been no specific EU assistance for counter-terrorism. 
He did not have any information about general law 
enforcement assistance.  He also said that the Netherlands 
had provided no assistance, but emphasized that counter- 
terrorism was now a priority for the Netherlands. 
 
-- Italy:  Italy reported that they had provided no 
counter-terrorism assistance, but had a Memorandum of 
Understanding for Judicial Assistance with Lithuania that 
will be updated in the near future to include terrorism. 
 
-- UNDP:  The UN has no counter-terrorism programs, but 
does have trafficking in persons and drug trafficking 
programs with Lithuania. 
 
-- Spain:  Spain has provided no counter-terrorism 
assistance and has no counter-terrorism agreements.  They 
are working towards an agreement on fighting organized 
crime and terrorism.  Spain said they would cooperate with 
Lithuania in this and all issues within the framework of 
the EU.  The representative from Spain is the Resident 
Twinning Advisor to the Ministry of the Interior. 
 
-- Canada: Canada, which just opened its mission here, has 
provided no assistance yet.  Its representative said that 
Canada will start up in this area in 2005, and will be 
looking to work with other countries to support counter- 
terrorism assistance. 
 
Areas of Risk 
------------- 
 
3. (SBU) The Italian representative noted that, while the 
terrorism threat in Lithuania was low, Lithuania was now 
part of the external border of the EU.  The other 
participants agreed that this could create the potential 
for terrorists to use Lithuania as an entry point into the 
rest of the EU.  France raised the concern that terrorists, 
using organized crime resources in Lithuania, could obtain 
items such as forged documents, and emphasized the 
importance of maintaining a counter-terrorism perspective 
when dealing with such crimes. 
 
Conclusion: Low Risk, Little Assistance 
--------------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) CTAG participants share the view that the current 
terrorism threat in Lithuania is low.  The modest support 
provided by CTAG governments to the GOL reflects this 
assessment. 
 
KELLY 
"
"24777","12/30/2004 12:10","04VILNIUS1577","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE274965","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L VILNIUS 001577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL AND EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/29/2014 
TAGS: PROP, PREL, PHUM, IZ, LH, HT11 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA SUPPORTS EU-IMIE COOPERATION ON IRAQ 
ELECTIONS 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 274965 
 
     B. VILNIUS 1520 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
(C) Charge delivered reftel points on supporting the 
International Mission for Iraq Elections (IMIE) to Ginutis 
Voveris, Director of MFA\'s Americas, Africa, Asia and Pacific 
Departments on December 30.  Noting the importance of the 
elections for the democratization and reconstruction of Iraq, 
Voveris said that the GOL will participate \"one way or 
another\" in an international observation mission, and 
reiterated that the GOL is strongly leaning toward 
contributing to an EU mission (reftel B).  Commending the 
GOL\'s participation in the recent IMIE conference in Ottawa, 
Charge highlighted widespread international support for the 
IMIE.  Pointing out that representatives of other EU members 
and the EU Commission attended the Ottawa meeting, he added 
that participation in the IMIE and an EU-organized effort 
were not necessarily mutually exclusive.    Voveris 
concurred, noting that the GOL would support collaboration 
between IMIE and the EU.   We will continue to interact with 
the GOL in the coming weeks to learn more about the nature of 
Lithuania\'s participation and its recommendations on how best 
to bring the EU and IMIE efforts together. 
KELLY 
"
"24788","12/30/2004 13:55","04VILNIUS1578","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE249035","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 VILNIUS 001578 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL, EUR/NB, AND EUR/SCE 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
DEA FOR OILS AND OFFICE OF DIVERSION CONTROL 
MILAN FOR DEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, EFIN, KSEP, LH, HT28 
SUBJECT: 2004-2005 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY 
REPORT (INCSR) FOR LITHUANIA, PART I 
 
REF: SECSTATE 249035 
 
---------- 
I. Summary 
---------- 
 
1.  In 2004, Lithuania strengthened its counter-narcotics 
efforts, rolling out a National Drug Addiction Prevention 
and Drug Control Strategy for 2004-2008.  The use and 
sale of narcotics, however, continues to increase in 
Lithuania.  Lithuania remains a transit route for heroin 
from Asia to Western Europe and produces synthetic 
narcotics for both domestic use and export.  Law 
enforcement authorities estimate that the domestic drug 
trade is 500 million Litas (USD 200 million) per annum 
and growing.  The most popular drugs include synthetic 
narcotics, poppy straw extract, heroin, and cannabis. 
Industrially produced psychotropic drugs are also 
popular.  Though public awareness campaigns have grown, 
the number of registered drug addicts and drug-related 
crimes increased in 2004.  USG and GOL law enforcement 
cooperation is very good.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------- 
II. Status of Country 
--------------------- 
 
2. Synthetic narcotics, poppy straw extract, heroin, and 
cannabis are the most popular drugs in Lithuania.  Poppy 
straw and cannabis are popular because they are 
inexpensive, while synthetic narcotics are most popular 
on the black market.  The price of a dose of heroin, 20 
Litas (USD 5.7), remained unchanged from 2003.  Heroin is 
smuggled into Lithuania from Central Asia and the 
Balkans.  Cocaine imports from South America travel 
through Western Europe into Lithuania.  Poppy straw is 
especially popular in the countryside, and is smuggled to 
the Kaliningrad district of Russia.  Industrially 
produced psychotropic drugs (e.g., GHB), liquid heroin, 
and new psychotropic substances are increasingly popular. 
Hashish is not popular.  Law enforcement authorities 
estimate that the domestic drug trade is 500 million 
Litas (USD 200 million) per annum and growing. 
Lithuanian organized crime groups have begun to penetrate 
the German narcotics market. 
 
3.  There were 4,689 registered drug addicts in January 
2004, an increase of 284 individuals from 2002.  In 2003, 
356 persons approached health care institutions for the 
first time (653 in 2001).  Nearly 75 percent of all drug 
addicts are younger than 35 years old, while more than 90 
percent live in cities, and one-fifth are women.  Over 90 
percent of drug dependency cases are intravenous drug 
users.  Lithuania had 943 registered cases of HIV in 
October 2004, an increase from 735 cases at the beginning 
of 2002.  80 percent of those registered with HIV 
contracted the disease through intravenous drug use.  In 
2003, rates of Hepatitis B and C infection among 
intravenous drug users decreased by 26 percent and 35 
percent, respectively. 
 
4.  The number of 15-16 year-old students who have tried 
drugs at least once remained stable at approximately 15 
percent (15.6 percent in 2003, 15 percent in 2002). 
Health education programs have been integrated into 
school curricula, resulting in an increased awareness 
about the dangers of drug use.  Lithuania is a member of 
the international European School Survey Project on 
Alcohol and Other Drugs (ESPAD 95, ESPAD 99, ESPAD 03) 
and monitors the fluctuations of data on substance abuse 
among children aged 15-16.  A 2003 survey showed that the 
consumption of cannabis, hashish, amphetamines, alcohol 
and tobacco is increasing, while the consumption of 
heroin and ecstasy is decreasing among Lithuania\'s 
student population.  According to an international survey 
published in 2004, 81 percent of children in foster care 
abuse alcohol, drugs, or glue. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
III. Country actions against drugs in 2004 
------------------------------------------ 
 
5.  Policy Initiatives.  In order to improve preventive 
measures, combat addiction, and bring Lithuanian law in 
line with the European Union\'s 1999 anti-drug strategy, 
the Government of Lithuania (GOL) enacted the National 
Drug Addiction Prevention and Drug Control Strategy for 
2004-2008.  The Strategy, initiated in April 2004, 
increases cooperation between national authorities and 
drug control organizations, promotes local government 
initiatives to prevent and control drug use, and 
increases the role of society in dealing with drug 
problems.  In 2004, the GOL provided 10.2 million Litas 
(USD 4.08 million) to the Strategy.  In 2004, more 
resources were allocated for initiatives that focused on 
prevention and rehabilitation than were allocated for 
fighting the trafficking and sale of narcotics.  EU 
structural funds, however, augmented GOL expenditures in 
support of strengthened national borders. 
 
6.  The GOL\'s Narcotics Control Department, which 
implements the Strategy and coordinates the efforts of 
the national and local governments, began operation in 
January 2004.  In December 2004, parliament created a 
Drug Addiction Prevention Commission.  The GOL continued 
to implement its National HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control 
Program for 2003-2008.  The program seeks to prevent the 
transmission of HIV/AIDS within high-risk groups 
(intravenous users, prostitutes, sailors, long-distance 
drivers, and prisoners).  In the summer of 2004, the 
Parliament annulled a provision in the Criminal Code that 
established alternative punishments (15 to 90 days of 
incarceration) for those convicted of drug distribution. 
Those convicted now face prison terms of between five to 
eight years. 
 
7.  Accomplishments.  Experts note that public awareness 
concerning the hazards of drug use is rapidly increasing. 
In 2004, the GOL allocated approximately 4 million Litas 
(USD 1.6 millions) for public awareness programs, 
primarily conducted by the Ministry of Education and 
Science and NGOs.  Police conducted separate awareness 
programs. 
 
8.  Lithuania joined the European Monitoring Center for 
Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) in May 2004.  Police 
continued to participate in a joint counter-narcotics 
operation with Sweden and Poland (\"Trap\") and in a 
multilateral operation \"542\" (against Rohypnol 
producers).  Under the PHARE \"Synthetic Drugs and 
Precursors Project,\" police continued to receive training 
on how to strengthen controls over legally produced 
precursors and synthetic drugs and how to prevent the 
introduction of these substances into the illegal market. 
Another PHARE project helped the Customs Department to 
complete a technical assessment of equipment needed to 
better detect drugs moving across Lithuania\'s borders. 
All PHARE projects ended in 2004.  In May 2004, 
Lithuanian Customs joined Europol\'s \"Case\" expert group 
and began exchanging information on synthetic narcotics. 
 
9.  Law Enforcement Efforts.  The number of drug-related 
crimes increased in 2004.  By December 2004, Lithuanian 
law enforcement authorities registered 1,121 crimes (up 
from 886 in 2003).  In 2004, the police shut down a 
laboratory producing high-quality amphetamines.  The 
Customs Criminal Service initiated six narcotics related 
criminal cases in 2004 (13 in 2003, 14 in 2002, 8 in 
2001, 0 in 2000).  In December 2004, a Kaunas court 
sentenced three Lithuanian citizens to 10.5 years, 8 
years, and 2 years of imprisonment, respectively, for 
producing amphetamines. In the largest seizure of 2004, 
police seized 18,000 doses of LSD, 71,000 ecstasy 
tablets, 3 kilograms of marijuana, and 2 liters of 
precursors in November from a 19-year-old student who 
police believed to be a member of an organized 
trafficking group.  On December 31, 2003, in the largest 
seizure of the year, Customs officials confiscated 
300,000 Rohypnol pills (26 kilograms) at a Latvian border 
checkpoint. 
 
10. Corruption.  In December 2004, a parliamentary 
ombudsman, Kestutis Virbickas, resigned following 
findings that he had illegally intervened on behalf of a 
Lithuanian national standing trial for drug trafficking 
in Norway. 
 
11. Cultivation/Production.  An intravenous opium extract 
produced from locally grown poppies and the drug 
\"Ephedrone,\" made from medications containing ephedrine, 
remain popular in Lithuania.  Police, in cooperation with 
Customs agents, destroyed 52,141 square meters of poppy 
plots (up from 31,426 in 2003 and 22,676 in 2002) and 196 
square meters of cannabis plots between June and 
September 2004 (down from 687 in 2003 and 1,884 in 2002). 
Underground laboratories produce amphetamines for local 
use and export. 
 
12. Drug Flow/Transit.  Drug transit channels remain 
unchanged. 
 
13. Each year, more Lithuanian citizens become involved 
in the international narcotics business.  53 Lithuanian 
citizens (down from 118 in 2003) were detained in 2004 
for trafficking amphetamines, heroin, cocaine, marijuana, 
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol) and other pills, mostly in 
Norway (14), Germany (11), and Sweden (11).  There were 
no reports of Lithuanians being detained in Latin America 
(3 were detained in 2003 and 15 in 2002).  In a joint 
operation in May 2004, the Police Drug Control Office, 
Lithuanian Customs Criminal Service, and authorities in 
Sweden cracked an international drug distribution 
network.  Three Swedish citizens and eight Lithuanians 
were arrested and police seized 20 kilograms of 
amphetamines produced in Lithuania.  In the spring of 
2004, Lithuanian, Swedish, and Norwegian cooperation 
stopped a drug smuggling and production ring that 
included five Lithuanians, two Belarusians, and two 
Norwegians.  Approximately ten kilograms of amphetamines, 
six liters of liquid amphetamines, and several forged 
passports were seized. 
 
14. Domestic Programs (Demand Reduction).  Lithuania 
operates five national dependence disorder centers.  Ten 
regional Public Health Centers with local outlets work to 
prevent the use of drugs, especially in schools.  In 
2004, 20 rehabilitation centers (which together can 
service around 200 people annually) and 17 addict 
rehabilitation communities operated in Lithuania. 
Methadone treatment programs have operated in major 
cities since 1995, with 315 people receiving treatment in 
2003 (133 in 2002). 
 
15.  According to the Ministry of Justice\'s Prisons 
Department, in January 2004, 1,148 persons, or 14.4 
percent of all prisoners, are registered drug users.  In 
September 2004, 219 inmates were infected with HIV. 
After the HIV outbreak in the Alytus prison in 2002, the 
GOL allocated 2 million Litas (USD 800,000) for equipment 
and activities designed to prevent the trafficking of 
drugs, train officials, and educate inmates at the Alytus 
facility.  In May 2003, a reconstructed building capable 
of housing 300 HIV-infected prisoners opened in Alytus. 
In November 2003, a prevention and rehabilitation center 
for drug addicts and HIV-infected prisoners opened at the 
Pravieniskes correctional center. 
 
16. In 2002, cases of drug use were discovered among 
military conscripts.  433 conscripts were tested for drug 
use; 2.3 percent tested positive.  The most popular 
substances among conscripts are heroin and synthetic 
drugs. 
 
17. Treaties and Agreements.  In October 2003, the GOL 
signed cooperative law enforcement agreements with 
Europol and the Belgium Royal Government. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
IV. U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
---------------------------------------- 
 
18. Bilateral Cooperation.  USG and GOL law enforcement 
cooperation is very good.  In 2004, the U.S. continued to 
support GOL efforts to strengthen its law enforcement 
bodies and improve border security.  To strengthen 
regional cooperation in the fight against HIV/AIDS in the 
Baltic States and Russia, the U.S. funded \"The Network of 
Excellence\" project.  In June 2004, a U.S. court in 
Florida acquitted 11 Lithuanian sailors apprehended in 
June 2003 of drug trafficking charges following the 
seizure of 3.5 tons of cocaine aboard the merchant vessel 
Yalta.  In December 2003, Lithuania extradited an 
American citizen wanted for narcotics trafficking.  In 
2003, the Lithuanian State Security Department discovered 
a package suspected of containing counterfeit U.S. 
currency that was being sent to Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
The package also contained 100 tablets of Ecstasy.  A 
joint investigation by the State Security Department and 
U.S. Secret Service resulted in arrests in both 
countries, including that of a major organized crime 
figure in the city of Kaunas.  His trial is ongoing. 
 
19. The Road Ahead.  The USG looks forward to continuing 
its close cooperative relationship with Lithuania\'s law 
enforcement agencies.  Although Lithuania has made some 
progress in improving regulations and procedures and 
developing an export control infrastructure, it still 
lacks the professional skills to detect narcotics and 
clandestine labs.  In 2005, the USG will continue to 
promote increased GOL attention to the drug problem, and 
support activities aimed at preventing the production and 
trafficking of illicit narcotics.  In 2005, the DEA will 
provide training to Lithuanian law enforcement agencies 
on the investigation and seizure of drug laboratories. 
 
20. Table 1.  Narcotics seized by the Lithuanian Police 
in 2004 (January-November) and in 2003 
 
Per Calendar Year  2003  2004 (11 months) 
Poppy straw (kg)   269   349 
Poppy straw extract (l)53  45 
Cannabis Straw (kg)  --  -- 
Marijuana (kg) 30.1   4.7 
    30.1    4.7 
Heroin (kg)  0.8   1.85 
Ecstasy (tablets)  98,458  31,152 
Amphetamine (kg)   6.96   3.27 
Metamphetamine (kg)  24.72.19 
Cocaine (kg)   0.183   12.87 
Hashish (kg)  262.7   4 
Safrol (l)   20.2   20 
BMK (l)   34.6   14.5 
 
 
Police also seized small amounts of LSD, hallucinogenic 
mushrooms, various psychotropic drugs, and precursors. 
 
Table 2. Narcotics seized by Lithuanian Customs in 2004 
(January-November) and in 2003 
 
Per Calendar Year  2003   2004 (11 months) 
Heroin (g)  --  -- 
Cocaine (kg)   0.162  12.57 
Poppy straw (g)  --   -- 
Poppy straw extract (ml)  0.60  -- 
Opium (ml)  -- -- 
Marijuana (g)  8,190  0.4 
Hashish (g)--2.2 
Hallucinogenic Mushrooms (g)---- 
Metamphetamine (g)   --  300 
Amphetamine (g)   1.5   0.4 
Ecstasy (tablets)   21,000  30,720 
 
Customs also seized 20 kilograms of the First Category 
Precursor BMK and 150,000 units of various psychotropic 
drugs. 
 
KELLY 
"
"24865","1/3/2005 14:24","05VILNIUS3","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 VILNIUS 000003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA AND EUR/NB 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO OPIC, USAID, USTR, AND EXIM 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/MAC/DAS/EUR (JBURGESS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, KIDE, ECON, KTDB, LH, HT23 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA 2005 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  To maintain its high rate of growth, Lithuania needs 
more foreign investment.  The government affords foreign 
investors equal protection to domestic investors, and sets 
few limitations on their activities.  Foreign investors 
have the right to repatriate or reinvest profits without 
restriction, and can bring disputes to the International 
Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes. 
Lithuania automatically extended protections to European 
Community trademarks and designs when it acceded to the EU 
on May 1, and has stepped up seizures of pirated goods. 
However, it remains on the Special 301 Watch List, because 
piracy rates remain high.  The government harmonized 
national company law with EU requirements, offers special 
incentives, such as tax concessions, to strategic 
investors, and has nearly completed major privatizations. 
U.S. executives report burdensome procedures to obtain 
licenses and residence permits as well as corruption in the 
lower and middle ranks of government.  Labor shortages, the 
result of increased emigration to the EU, affect a few 
sectors.  The United States is the sixth largest investor 
in Lithuania, with investments totaling USD 481 million 
(8.5 percent of total FDI).  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
OPENNESS TO FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  Lithuania has one of the fastest growing economies in 
Europe, with GDP growth of nine percent in 2003, and 6.7 
percent during the first three quarters of 2004.  Domestic 
consumption and investment drove Lithuania\'s rapid growth 
in 2003.  External factors, such as rising fuel costs, 
coupled with a shortage of qualified labor, slowed growth 
in 2004.  The private sector now produces more than 80 
percent of the country\'s GDP.  The Lithuanian Development 
Agency\'s annual survey of foreign investors reports that 94 
percent of investors are satisfied with their investment, 
up from 80 percent in 1997.  Among the attractions of 
Lithuania\'s investment climate are a large and diversified 
economy, investment laws that conform to EU standards, a 
low corporate tax, a very well educated workforce, the 
region\'s best developed infrastructure, a stable democratic 
government and banking system, leading specialists in 
biotechnology, lasers, telecommunications and information 
technologies, and a strategic location between the EU and 
Russia. 
 
3.  Lithuanian income levels still lag well behind the rest 
of the EU, with per capita GDP in 2004 at 46 percent of the 
EU average.  The government needs to attract more 
greenfield investments, because Lithuania will likely lose 
its current competitive advantages of low interest rates 
and an inexpensive labor force in the future.  Though there 
have been recent investments from Thailand, Austria and 
France, the overall investment flow is not impressive. 
Substantial inflows of capital from EU structural funds 
(over USD one billion over the next three years) should 
provide a boost to the economy. 
 
A level playing field for all investors 
--------------------------------------- 
 
4.  The government welcomes foreign investors and requires 
no special permit to invest in Lithuania.  The law grants 
equal protection to foreign and domestic investors. 
Foreign investors have free access to all sectors of the 
economy, with some limited exceptions: 
 
-- Article 8 of The Law on Investment prohibits the 
investment of foreign capital in sectors related to the 
security and defense of the State; and 
 
-- The law requires governmental permission and licensing 
for commercial activities that may pose a risk to human 
life, health, or the environment, including the manufacture 
of, or trade in, weapons. 
 
The government has recently expanded the number of areas in 
which investment is permissible: 
 
-- Legal amendments in 2000 eliminated the provisions of 
Article 13 that established a list of commercial activities 
exclusively permitted to either State or municipal 
enterprises; 
 
-- The same amendments opened mass media enterprises to 
foreign investment; and 
 
-- The parliament passed amendments to Article 47 of the 
Constitution in 2001 permitting the sale of agricultural 
land to foreigners.  Previously, the Constitution had 
permitted foreigners to buy agricultural land only when 
they owned buildings on agricultural land.  As part of its 
EU accession agreement, however, Lithuania established a 
seven-year transitional period wherein EU citizens and 
companies are restricted from purchasing agricultural and 
forestry land.  This agreement, however, granted exceptions 
to foreign nationals who are permanent residents of 
Lithuania and who have been engaged in the agricultural 
business for at least three years and to foreign 
organizations that have established representative or 
branch offices in Lithuania.  These entities may acquire 
agricultural and forestry land on equal footing with 
Lithuanian citizens. 
 
Investments 
----------- 
 
5.  The law defines investments as funds or other financial 
assets used to generate profit or achieve charitable or 
public (governmental) goals.  It permits several forms of 
investment: 
 
-- Establishment of an enterprise, or acquisition of a part 
or whole of the authorized capital of an operating 
enterprise registered in Lithuania; 
 
-- Acquisition of securities of any type; 
 
-- Creation, acquisition, and increase in the value of 
long-term assets; 
 
-- Lending of funds or other assets to business entities in 
which the investor owns a stake, which in turn makes 
control or considerable influence over the company 
possible; and 
 
-- Concession or leasing agreements. 
 
6.  Foreign investors can contribute capital in the form of 
money, movable or immovable assets, intellectual or 
industrial property.  Foreign entities may also establish 
branches or representative offices, neither of which, 
however, have the same rights as a legal person.  (Branches 
may engage in commercial activities; representative offices 
may not.) 
 
Privatization nearly complete 
----------------------------- 
 
7.  The law treats foreign investors equitably in 
privatization programs.  The government has successfully 
privatized most state enterprises and property included in 
the initial privatization program.  Major assets still in 
government control include the Lithuanian electric power 
company Lietuvos Energija, the national airline Lietuvos 
Avialinijos, and the railway company Lietuvos 
Gelezinkeliai. 
 
8.  Privatization of state and municipal companies yielded 
USD 330 million in 2003, 2.6 times that in 2002.  VP 
Market\'s purchase of 77 percent of the Western Power Grid\'s 
stock for USD 196 million represented the largest 
privatization transaction.  In March 2004, the government 
sold 34 percent of Lithuania\'s main natural gas distributor 
Lietuvos Dujos (Lithuanian Gas) to the Russian company 
Gazprom.  In 2003, the government privatized two large 
state companies.  Mineraliniai Vandenys purchased the 
alcohol company \"Stumbras\" for $55 million, and the Polish 
Company Belvedere Dystrybucja purchased the alcohol company 
\"Vilniaus Degtine\" for USD 7.6 million.  In 2003, the 
government halted the privatization of the Eastern Power 
Grid, rather than sell it to the only bidder, the Estonian 
state-owned power company \"Eesti Energia,\" amid concerns 
that the prospective buyer had excessive debt liabilities. 
 
9.  The government established the State Property Fund to 
manage and privatize state assets.  It commonly screens 
companies according to size and performance criteria when 
privatizing state or municipal property and during public 
procurement.  The privatization of state property is 
carried out by the following methods: 
 
-- Public share subscription (for large and medium scale 
enterprises); 
 
-- Auctions (for small enterprises or their divisions); 
-- Tenders or auctions for convertible currency; 
 
-- Direct negotiations; 
 
-- Leases with the option to purchase; and 
 
-- Combinations of the above methods. 
 
-------------------------------- 
CONVERSION AND TRANSFER POLICIES 
-------------------------------- 
 
10.  Lithuanian law requires that all transactions in the 
country be made in the national currency, the Litas.  On 
February 1, 2002, the government pegged the Litas to the 
euro at a rate of 3.45:1, under a currency board 
arrangement.  The Bank of Lithuania ties the amount of 
currency in circulation to the size of reserves.  There are 
no restrictions on the transfer or conversion of the Litas. 
Lithuania is interested in joining the European Monetary 
Union and acceded to the Exchange Rate Mechanism II in June 
2004 as a step towards joining the euro.  Lithuania\'s 
strong macroeconomic performance and stable monetary policy 
may enable it to be among the first wave of countries to 
join the eurozone. 
 
-------------------------------- 
EXPROPRIATIONS AND COMPENSATION 
-------------------------------- 
 
11.  Lithuanian law permits expropriation, on the basis of 
public need, but with compensation at market value in 
convertible currency.  There have been no cases of 
expropriation of private property by the government since 
1990.  Moreover, the government has been denationalizing 
and returning private property seized by Soviet authorities 
during the occupation. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND INCENTIVES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
12.  Lithuania provides special incentives to investors 
whom the national or municipal governments designate 
strategic investors, though the criteria used to determine 
a strategic investor varies from project to project.  In 
general, the national government requires that a strategic 
investor invest USD 50 million or more.  Municipalities may 
tie the designation to different criteria, such as the 
number of jobs created and the environmental benefits 
involved.  Strategic investors may be rewarded with special 
business conditions, such as favorable tax incentives, for 
up to ten years.  Significant tax incentives apply to 
foreign investments made before 1997.  Municipalities may 
grant special incentives to induce investments in municipal 
infrastructure, manufacturing, and services. 
 
13.  The government applies performance requirements 
uniformly to domestic and foreign investors.  Government 
Resolution No. 918 of July 15, 2003 requires offset 
agreements as a condition for awarding contracts to procure 
military equipment valued at more than LTL 5 million (USD 
1.9 million).  Offsets are obligations the government 
imposes that require companies to provide services, create 
jobs, or purchase local goods as a condition for the 
contract\'s award.  The Embassy has not, however, processed 
any Letters of Request (LOR) for military equipment or 
services exceeding this ceiling since the resolution went 
into effect.  Foreign investors have the same rights as 
local firms to participate in government-financed and - 
subsidized research and development (R&D) programs.  There 
are few such opportunities, however, since most R&D 
financing is awarded to state-owned institutes. 
Lithuania\'s external tariffs are aligned with EU 
requirements.  The requirements that labels must be 
translated into Lithuanian may pose a non-tariff barrier to 
trade. 
 
14.  There are no requirements for local content or 
purchasing from local sources as a condition for investment 
or public purchases.  Municipalities have the right to ask 
investors to develop roadways or other infrastructure 
adjoining their project, though such development is subject 
to negotiations.  Lithuania\'s EU membership has given 
foreign firms the additional right to appeal adverse 
governmental rulings to the European Court of Justice. 
Lithuania\'s modified \"Law on Public Procurement,\" which 
came into effect on March 1, 2003, is completely harmonized 
with the EU Acquis Communautaire. 
 
Difficulties with residency permits 
----------------------------------- 
 
15.  Americans and citizens of the EU can stay in Lithuania 
no more than 90 days without a visa (and no more than 180 
days per calendar year).  Those who stay longer face 
criminal sanctions and deportation.  The current residence 
permit process is not user-friendly.  Though Lithuanian law 
mandates that permits be available through its embassies 
abroad, permits can in practice only be obtained in 
Lithuania.   Decisions by the Migration Office regarding 
the issuance of residency permits may take up to six 
months.  The Embassy has learned of instances where 
American Citizens have either been trapped in Lithuania or 
asked to leave solely because their application for a 
residency permit was not processed in a timely manner.  By 
law, there are reports that the Migration Office imposes 
varying and sometimes capricious demands regarding the 
documentation required for a residency permit.  Companies 
wishing to hire citizens of former Soviet republics may 
face even more restrictive requirements. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
RIGHT TO PRIVATE OWNERSHIP AND ESTABLISHMENT 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
16.  The law places no limits on foreign ownership or 
control over investments.  Foreign investors have the right 
to repatriate profits, income, or dividends, after payment 
of taxes, or to reinvest their income without any 
limitation.  Lithuania introduced a law restricting 
monopolies in 1993, and a law on competition in 1999.  An 
anti-monopoly committee oversees implementation of these 
laws. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
PROTECTION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS/DISPUTE SETTLEMENT 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
17.  Lithuanian law protects foreign investments and the 
rights of investors in several ways. 
 
-- The Constitution and the law on Foreign Capital 
Investment protect all forms of private property against 
nationalization or requisition. 
 
-- International agreements offer protections, such as the 
1958 New York Convention on the recognition and enforcement 
of foreign arbitral awards. 
 
-- Bilateral agreements with the United States and other 
western countries on the mutual protection and 
encouragement of investments reinforce these protections. 
 
-- The law on capital investment in Lithuania and other 
acts regulate customs duties, taxes, and relationships with 
financial and inspection authorities.  This law also 
establishes the order of dispute settlement. 
 
-- In the event of justified expropriation, investors are 
entitled to compensation equivalent to the market value of 
the expropriated property. 
 
-- Foreign investors may defend their rights under the 
Washington Convention of 1965 by applying to either 
Lithuanian courts or directly to the International Center 
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes.  To date, 
Lithuania has not been involved in any investment disputes 
with American or other foreign investors. 
 
-- State institutions and officials are obliged to keep 
commercial secrets confidential and must pay compensation 
for any loss or damage caused by illegal disclosure. 
The laws did not change significantly, other than the 
reform of the enforcement system in 2003, which made it 
possible to hire private bailiffs to enforce court 
judgments. 
 
Company law conforms to EU requirements 
--------------------------------------- 
 
18.  Lithuania has harmonized its company law with EU 
standards, including the principles of the free 
establishment of companies, protection of shareholders\' and 
creditors\' rights, free access to information, and 
registration procedures.  The following Lithuanian laws 
address company law: the \"Company Law\" and \"Law on 
Partnerships\" (both modified January 1, 2004), the \"Law on 
Personal Enterprises\" of January 1, 2004, the \"Law On 
Investments of 1999,\" the \"Law On Bankruptcy of Enterprises 
of 2001,\" and the \"Law on Restructuring of Enterprises of 
2001.\" 
 
19.  The Civil Code of 2000 governs commercial guarantees 
and security instruments.  It provides for the following 
types of guarantee and security instruments to secure 
fulfillment of contractual obligations: forfeiture, surety, 
guarantee, earnest money, pledge, and mortgage.  Bankruptcy 
procedures, which are regulated by the \"Law on Bankruptcy 
of Enterprises,\" are consistently applied.  The law 
establishes the following order of creditors\' claims: 
 
-- Claims by creditors that are secured by a 
mortgage/pledge of debtor; 
 
-- Claims related to employment; 
 
-- Tax, social insurance, and state medical insurance 
claims, and claims arising from loans guaranteed or issued 
on behalf of the Republic of Lithuania or its Government; 
and 
 
-- Other claims. 
 
Lithuania remains on the Special 301 Watch List 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
20.  Lithuania observes international standards and 
subscribes to international conventions on the protection 
of intellectual property.  Lithuania is a member of the 
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and became 
a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) on May 31, 
2001.  It is a signatory to the following IPR-related 
treaties and conventions: 
 
-- The Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial 
Property in 1990 (effective May 22, 1994); 
 
-- The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and 
Artistic Works of 1886 (effective December 14, 1994); 
 
-- The Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, 
Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations of 
1961 (effective July 22, 1999); 
 
-- The Nice Agreement Concerning International 
Classification of Goods and Services of 1957 (effective 
February 22, 1997); 
 
-- The Madrid Protocol of 1989 (effective November 15, 
1997); 
 
-- The Patent Cooperation Treaty of 1970 under the auspices 
of WIPO (effective July 5, 1994); 
 
-- The WIPO Copyright Treaty of 1996 (effective March 6, 
2002); 
 
-- The WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty of 1996 
(effective May 20, 2002); and 
 
-- The Trademark Law Treaty of 1994 (effective April 27, 
1998). 
 
Lithuania, in 2002, enacted regulations to protect 
confidential test data that pharmaceutical firms submit for 
 
SIPDIS 
patent and trademark registration.  Lithuania\'s parliament 
is expected to ratify the 1973 and 2000 Conventions on the 
Grant of European Patents. 
 
21.  Following EU accession, Lithuania extended protection 
to Community trademarks, designs and applications. Though 
the issue is under review by the Ministry of Culture, 
Lithuania has not yet brought its national law protecting 
biological inventions into compliance with EU Directive 
98/44. 
 
22.  Lithuania remains on the 2004 Special 301 Watch List. 
The country remains a transshipment point for pirated 
optical media products from the East, particularly Russia, 
to Europe.  Although Lithuania amended its Copyright Law in 
2003 to bring it in line with the EU copyright directive, 
penalties for confiscated pirated software and media worth 
less than LTL 12,500 (USD 4,800) remain low.  The rate of 
CD piracy in 2003, estimated at between 55-85 percent of 
all sales, was high.  The software piracy rate in 2003 (58 
percent) was also high.  Law enforcement efforts against 
pirates improved in 2004, with the number of seized pirated 
CDs increasing fourfold.  The Lithuanian Music Industry 
Association reported that the Criminal Police closed six 
Internet sites in 2004 for illegally distributing films, 
computer games, music and software that had not yet reached 
retail outlets. 
 
------------------------------------- 
TRANSPARENCY OF THE REGULATORY SYSTEM 
------------------------------------- 
 
23.  Business in Lithuania is still fairly heavily 
regulated.  More than 50 agencies regulate the business 
environment and possess the legal standing to close a 
business.  Investors and lawyers complain that many laws 
and regulations are vague, confusing, and often 
contradictory.  A U.S. executive noted that government 
officials are not held accountable for the untimely or 
incorrect implementation of regulations or ministerial 
decrees, and that there is no mechanism within ministries 
to appeal these decisions.  U.S. executives have complained 
about a lack of clarity in the government\'s procurement 
rules, bureaucratic incompetence, and a lack of 
transparency in licensing rules. 
 
24.  U.S. corporate representatives have noted lengthy 
bureaucratic procedures to obtain customs clearances and 
other certifications.  The Executive Director of the local 
Investors\' Forum noted that it takes approximately 20 days 
to start a business in Lithuania. 
 
25.  The government gives the business community little 
advance notice of new legislation, and still less 
opportunity for comment.  It usually does not publish new 
laws in draft form, nor does it publish an analysis of its 
responses to public commentary.  A U.S. company executive 
noted that the government does not engage in active or 
constructive dialogue with industrial and trade 
associations to solicit their views before enacting 
legislation. 
 
26.  Labor, health, and safety laws may distort investment 
because strict labor laws governing working hours do not 
afford companies needed flexibility.  Companies have also 
complained about burdensome health and lighting 
requirements. 
 
Tax Burden 
---------- 
 
27.  The government reduced the corporate profit tax on 
January 1, 2004 to 15 percent, and plans to eliminate the 
turnover tax, currently at 1 percent, in mid-2005.  It is 
also considering reducing the personal income tax from the 
current 33 percent to 30 percent.  Local analysts have 
drawn our attention to the fact that while the corporate 
tax is low, the total tax burden remains high, since 
companies must pay a 31 percent social security tax on 
wages.  The government is considering a proposal from the 
Investors\' Forum to limit payment of social security tax to 
the first LTL 5,000 (USD 1900) of an employee\'s salary. 
Analysts have noted that a foreign bank extending a loan to 
finance a company would need to pay a ten percent 
withholding tax, twice the rate a Lithuanian bank would 
have to pay. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
EFFICIENT CAPITAL MARKETS AND PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
28.  Government policies do not interfere with the free 
flow of financial resources or the allocation of credit. 
Commercial credit and short-term, trade-related loans are 
readily available.  Demand for credit is high due to low 
interest rates, and the loan market expanded by 52 percent 
in 2003.  Interest rates will likely rise in 2005-2006 
after Lithuania adopts EU requirements that tax interest 
from deposits.  A recent IMF delegation on an annual 
Article IV consultation mission to Lithuania noted that 
inflation, expected to be just under 1.5 percent in 2004, 
will likely exceed 2.5 percent in 2005.  The mission noted 
several signs that point to an increased risk that the 
economy will overheat in 2005 including: 
 
-- High capacity utilization; 
-- Continued robust growth of credit, driven by low 
interest rates; 
-- Declining unemployment; 
-- Acceleration in wage growth; 
-- Increases in property prices; 
-- Rapid growth in the current account deficit; and 
-- Output exceeding potential. 
 
29.  The banking system is stable, well-regulated, and 
conforms to EU standards.  The privatization of all state- 
owned banks was completed in 2002.  Foreign banks may 
operate in Lithuania through branches, representative 
offices, and subsidiaries or through the acquisition of 
shares in local banks.  Any acquisition involving ten 
percent or more of a local bank\'s share capital requires 
approval by the Bank of Lithuania.  The total assets of the 
country\'s largest banks on October 31, 2004 amounted to LTL 
3.19 billion (USD 1.24 billion).  Commercial banks have 
dramatically expanded their range of services, including 
leasing, insurance, asset management and investment 
banking.  Credit cards have become increasingly popular in 
Lithuania.  Lithuania\'s response to the 1998 Russian 
financial crisis included the restructuring of the banking 
sector and increased governmental oversight. 
 
30.  There are no restrictions on portfolio investment. 
Portfolio investment, however, has not attracted many 
foreign investors due to the small number of companies 
listed on the National Stock Exchange, whose market 
capitalization, as of May 2004, amounted to approximately 
LTL 20.221 billion (USD 7.84 billion).  In May 2004, the 
government privatized 44.3 percent of the National Stock 
Exchange\'s shares and 32 percent of the Lithuanian Central 
Depository\'s shares to OMHEX, Northern Europe\'s largest 
stock exchange operator.  Three different authorities 
supervise the financial market -- the Bank of Lithuania 
supervises commercial banks and credit unions, the 
Securities Commission supervises the securities market, and 
the Insurance Supervisory Commission supervises insurance 
companies.  The law requires these institutions to 
cooperate with the respective EU authorities.  The Embassy 
is not aware of any cases of local \"stable Shareholder\" 
arrangements that would restrict foreign investment. 
 
------------------ 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
------------------ 
 
31.  Lithuania has not witnessed any recent incidents 
involving politically motivated damage to projects and/or 
installations.  There have been no nascent insurrections, 
belligerent neighbors, or other politically motivated 
activities. 
 
---------- 
CORRUPTION 
---------- 
 
32.  Most large foreign investors report that senior 
officials are often very helpful in solving problems.  The 
Investors\' Forum, which counts large corporations among its 
members, reports no outstanding issues with corruption. 
The small and medium enterprise (SME) sector holds a 
different perspective on the Lithuanian bureaucracy, 
however.  These businessmen describe lower level 
bureaucrats as rigid, unhelpful, corrupt, often abusive, 
and sometimes displaying an anti-business attitude.  The 
Lithuanian press is replete with stories of tax inspectors, 
economic police, and customs officials who make 
unreasonable demands on small businesses.  Many companies 
agree that the government appears to be biased in favor of 
big business, which are seen as a ready source of capital 
and employment, in spite of the existence of several 
official programs to promote SMEs. 
 
33.  The Special Investigation Service (Specialiuju Tyrimu 
Tarnyba or STT) was established in 1997, under the auspices 
of the President of the Republic, to fight corruption.  The 
law treats bribery in any form (giving or receiving) as a 
criminal act.  Lithuania is a signatory to the OECD 
convention on combating bribery and hosts a representative 
office of Transparency International.  The government 
stepped up oversight of the administration of EU transfers 
and fought corruption in the State Border Protection 
Service and Customs.  Efforts to combat corruption, 
however, stalled in the second half of 2004 because of 
protracted disputes among politicians, prosecutors, and the 
STT about how to proceed.  In September, the STT Chief 
resigned as a result.  Parliament also failed to pass a 
Code of Ethics for either Civil Servants or Politicians. 
 
34.  Transparency International\'s Global Corruption 
Barometer survey, released in December 2004, noted that one 
in three Lithuanians admitted paying a bribe during the 
past twelve months.  Those polled indicated that the 
customs service is the most corrupt element of society, 
followed by political parties and the parliament, the 
courts, the police, and the health care system.  The 
Embassy has funded ethics training for government officials 
in procurement and other areas. 
 
------------------------------- 
BILATERAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
35.  Lithuania has commercial relations with more than 160 
countries, including free trade agreements with 20 trading 
partners.  It has concluded \"Agreements Concerning the 
Promotion of Mutual Investment\" with all EU member states 
(except Ireland), the United States, Australia, China, 
Iceland, Israel, Korea, Russia, Venezuela, Argentina, 
Kazakhstan, Turkey, and a number of Central and Eastern 
European countries.  It has signed Most Favored Nation 
agreements with 22 countries, including the United States. 
The United States and Lithuania have signed and ratified 
the following agreements: 
 
-- Charter of partnership between the USG, Estonia, Latvia 
and Lithuania; 
 
-- Agreement on reciprocal investment protection and 
encouragement (recently amended to avoid incompatibilities 
with obligations arising out of EU membership); 
 
-- Treaty on avoidance of double taxation; 
 
-- Treaty on legal assistance in criminal matters; 
 
-- Treaty on extradition; and 
 
-- Treaty on mutual assistance in Customs matters. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
OPIC AND OTHER INVESTMENT INSURANCE PROGRAMS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
36.  Coverage from the Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation (OPIC) is available for U.S. investments in 
Lithuania.  Lithuania is a member of MIGA (the Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency).  The embassy purchases local 
currency at an exchange rate that varies on a daily basis. 
On December 28, 2004, it was LTL 2.53 to the dollar. 
 
37.  Lithuania has concluded \"Agreements on the Avoidance 
of Double Taxation of Income and Capital and the Prevention 
of Fiscal Evasion\" with Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, 
Belgium, Canada, China, Croatia, the Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, 
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Malta, 
Moldova, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, 
Romania, Russia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, 
the United States, and Uzbekistan. 
 
----- 
LABOR 
----- 
 
38.  Lithuania is a member of the International Labor 
Organization (ILO) and adheres to its conventions. 
Lithuanian work requirements are stricter than in other EU 
countries.  By law, white-collar workers have a 40-hour 
workweek and blue-collar workers a 48-hour workweek, with 
premium pay for overtime.  Minimum workplace health and 
safety standards are in place, but they are sometimes 
ignored.  A U.S. company executive told us that the labor 
regulations lack flexibility and preclude him from hiring 
seasonal labor.  The average monthly wage is USD 470.  The 
unemployment rate, at 11.3 percent in the second quarter of 
2004, is decreasing.  Despite a planned increase in the 
minimum wage, analysts do not expect unemployment to rise, 
since many workers migrate abroad seeking better wages. 
Structural unemployment in the health care system, one of 
Lithuania\'s least reformed sectors, may rise if the 
government decides to close one or more hospitals. 
 
39.  Lithuania\'s EU accession has led to a migration of its 
labor to other EU countries.  The Ministry of Labor expects 
that as many as 360,000 workers, about one-quarter of the 
country\'s working-age population, will have left Lithuania 
by the end of 2004.  According to government data, 
emigration increased by 64 percent in the first half of 
2004 as compared to the same period in 2003.  The impact of 
emigration varies by sector.  In September 2004, the 
Lithuanian Trucking Association, for example, reported a 
shortage of 3,000-4,000 truck drivers.  Large retail stores 
have also reported some difficulty in filling positions. 
The construction sector anticipates shortages in the 
future.  Industry analysts expect that foreign workers that 
speak Russian (and can therefore operate in the Lithuanian 
labor market) will increasingly fill the shortages in 
sectors as diverse as textiles and medical services.  The 
government will likely begin increasing foreign worker 
quotas to enable individuals from Belarus and Ukraine to 
fill areas of labor shortage. 
 
40.  Emigration has led to salary increases in certain 
sectors, such as construction and transportation.  It is 
anticipated that salaries in these two sectors will 
increase by 25 percent in 2005.  A recent study projected 
that Lithuania\'s salary growth in 2005, projected to be a 
9.9 percent nominal increase and 7.7 percent real increase, 
will likely be the highest in the world.  Government plans 
to raise the minimum wage to LTL 600 (USD 230) from the 
current 500 (USD 190) are likely to negatively affect the 
textile industry and other sectors that rely upon 
inexpensive labor. 
 
41.  Since unions do not have a very large membership base, 
the labor movement is weak.  The unpopularity of unions is 
a legacy from Soviet times, when they were co-opted by the 
Soviet regime.  Unions are often reluctant to exert 
pressure on management for fear of jeopardizing jobs in a 
job market characterized by high unemployment.  There have 
been no major industrial strikes since independence.  There 
were no reports of political violence or politically 
motivated damage to property from 1991 through 2003.  Civil 
disturbances are unlikely. 
 
---------------- 
FREE TRADE ZONES 
---------------- 
 
42.  Lithuania has Free Economic Zones (FEZ) in the cities 
of Klaipeda, Kaunas and Siauliai.  Klaipeda is the 
country\'s largest seaport, Kaunas is an air, road, and rail 
hub, and Siauliai hosts the largest airport in the Baltics. 
Business conditions in the zones favor investment in 
manufacturing and exports.  Companies operating within the 
zones enjoy: 
 
-- 80% corporate tax reduction for the first five years of 
operation, and 50% for the next five years; 
 
-- Exemption from customs taxes; 
 
-- Exemption from Value Added Tax; and 
 
-- A 50% discount on land leases. 
 
There are currently four businesses operating in the 
Klaipeda FEZ.  This largest of Lithuania\'s zones, with 130 
million euros (USD 174 million) in total foreign 
investment, has signed contracts with four more enterprises 
to begin operations in 2005. 
 
43.  Companies operating in the FEZ receive the same legal 
guarantees as those operating elsewhere.  Parliament 
approved a law on the fundamentals of free economic zones 
on June 28, 1995 that regulates conditions for the 
establishment of free trade zones and the legal status of 
firms operating in such zones.  Lithuania\'s EU Accession 
agreement permits the indefinite operation of existing 
FEZs, but precludes the establishment of new ones. 
 
------------------------------------ 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT STATISTICS 
------------------------------------ 
 
44.  Lithuania is an attractive location for foreign 
investors, and a competitive center for product sourcing in 
the region.  The country has: 
 
-- A highly skilled, low-cost labor force, making it an 
attractive production alternative to the West; 
 
-- Strong production potential to serve both the Russian 
and EU markets; and 
 
-- Economic growth, a stable currency, and a favorable 
business environment. 
 
45.  The U.S. is the sixth largest investor in Lithuania. 
American companies have invested USD 481 million, 
constituting 8.5% of total FDI, as of November 30, 2004. 
There are 584 companies with American capital registered in 
Lithuania.  Total FDI was LTL 14.65 billion (USD 5.68 
billion) on July 1, 2004.  Per capita FDI is USD 1382. 
More than 60 percent of incoming FDI is from the EU-15 
countries.  FDI from the EU-15 increased by ten percent in 
2003, reaching USD 3 billion.  Lithuania\'s FDI stock 
constituted 26 percent of GDP on January 1, 2003.  FDI 
flow, as a proportion of GDP, was 5.3 percent in 2002 and 
3.8 percent in 2001.  The most attractive sectors for 
foreign investment in 2003 were: 
 
-- The processing sector, 31.1 percent of total FDI; 
 
-- The trade sector, 17.9 percent; 
 
-- Transportation and communications, 17.1 percent; and 
 
-- Financial mediation, 15.7 percent. 
 
46.  Lithuania\'s top five foreign investment sites (2002 
data) are: 
 
-- Latvia, USD 19 million; 
 
-- Estonia, USD 15 million; 
 
-- Russia, USD 8.6 million; 
 
-- Bosnia, USD 5.3 million; and 
 
-- France, USD 3.6 million. 
 
Total Lithuanian investment abroad amounts to USD 73 
million. 
 
47.  The top ten foreign countries investing in Lithuania 
(2004 data) are: 
 
-- Denmark (FDI: USD 827 million as of January 1, 2004; up 
from USD 788 million as of January 1, 2003); 
 
-- Sweden (FDI: USD 700 million as of January 1, 2004; down 
from USD 702 million as of January 1, 2003); 
 
-- Germany (FDI: USD 465 million as of January 1, 2004; up 
from USD 440 million as of January 1, 2003); 
 
-- United States (FDI: USD 405 million as of January 1, 
2004; up from USD 398 million as of January 1, 2003); 
 
-- Estonia (FDI: USD 401 million as of January 1, 2004; 
down from USD 539 million as of January 1, 2003); 
 
-- Finland (FDI: USD 408 million as of January 1, 2004; up 
from USD 204 million as of January 1, 2003); 
 
-- Russia (FDI: USD 277 million as of January 1, 2004; up 
from USD 239 million as of January 1, 2003); 
 
-- U.K. (FDI: USD 236 million as of January 1, 2004; down 
from USD 237 million as of January 1, 2003); 
 
-- Netherlands (FDI: USD 163 million as of January 1, 2004; 
up from USD 83 million as of January 1, 2003); and 
 
-- Norway (FDI: USD 146 million as of January 1, 2004; up 
from USD 135 million as of January 1, 2003). 
 
KELLY 
"
"24878","1/4/2005 6:52","05VILNIUS5","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

040652Z Jan 05
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 000005 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EUR/RPM, AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: MASS, MARR, PREL, LH, HT18, HT47 
SUBJECT: Lithuania\'s Acquisition of Night Vision Devices: 
A Two-Tiered NATO? 
 
 
1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see para 8. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
2.  A U.S. vendor of advanced Night Vision Devices (NVDs) 
recently advised the Lithuanian government that its 
acquisition contravenes de facto USG policy.  The 
apparent policy to deny new NATO members these devices 
limits the effectiveness of Lithuanian soldiers serving 
in Iraq and elsewhere; creates divisions that corrode the 
cohesiveness of the NATO alliance; and ignores 
Lithuania\'s stellar track record of controlling its stock 
of less advanced U.S.-supplied NVDs.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Background: Two-tiered NATO? 
---------------------------- 
 
3.  On November 25, 2004, a representative from the 
Lithuanian Defense Staff contacted us regarding 
Lithuania\'s efforts to acquire a level of Night Vision 
Devices (NVDs) through a Direct Commercial Sales 
contract.  Other NATO nations have acquired these 
devices.  Lithuania\'s J4 informed us that, as a result of 
an inquiry for the acquisition of NVDs, ITT corporation 
(the leading U.S. NVD manufacturer) told the Lithuanian 
Defense Staff that there was a de facto two-tiered NVD 
release to NATO nations for U.S. manufactured NVDs (see 
para 5 for text). 
 
4.  Lithuania plans to use the NVDs requested to support 
troops deployed in Iraq, those currently preparing to 
join the U.S.-led NATO Reaction Force-5, and future 
deployments in Afghanistan.  Post has previously 
supported the acquisition of Generation III NVDs as well 
as advanced communications devices such as the PRC-117 as 
well as the release of COMSEC 1 for tactical radios, 
which SOCOM deems essential for full interoperability 
with US forces. 
 
5.  Text of ITT letter follows: 
 
We understand you have received inquiries concerning the 
possibility of Lithuania receiving night vision equipment 
with a FOM of 1600.  Decisions on the performance levels 
of exports are made by the Government of the United 
States and these decisions are made on a case-by-case 
basis for night vision equipment.  We can report to you 
only what our experience has been so far, since we have 
no basis for knowing for certain what decisions will be 
made on future export applications. 
With this preface, above, here is what we know right now: 
For the new NATO countries the exportable FOM has been 
limited to 1250, maximum.  We see this limit written in 
the provisos of recently-approved export licenses.  We 
have no knowledge of any change planned for that maximum. 
The old NATO countries, including Poland, Hungary and the 
Czech Republic, have been limited to 1600 FOM, maximum. 
Since the resolution of most modern image intensifier 
tubes is either 64 or 57 line pairs per millimeter, to 
stay within the top limit of 1250 FOM the maximum 
exportable Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) will be either 
19.5 or 21.9, respectively, for the new NATO countries: 
19.5 x 64 = 1248.0, 21.9 x 57 = 1248.3. 
 
---------------------- 
A Staunch, Active Ally 
---------------------- 
 
6.  Lithuania fully supports U.S. policies in the Global 
War on Terrorism and staunchly supports Operation 
Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom.  The 
Lithuanian Parliament, in September 2004, approved a bill 
extending its military\'s participation in Central and 
South Asia, the Persian Gulf, and the Balkans. 
Lithuanian Special Operations Forces have maintained a 
nearly continuous presence in Afghanistan since November 
2002.  They rotated out last month, but are committed to 
return in 2006.  They have also recently committed to 
participate in NATO Reaction Forces -5 and -6. 
Lithuanians have also served in Kuwait and Iraq since 
April 2003, and over 100 Lithuanians are currently in 
Iraq. Since 1994, over 1,300 Lithuanians have 
participated in Peacekeeping operations in the Balkans. 
Over 100 Lithuanian troops serve there now. 
 
--------------------- 
A proven track record 
--------------------- 
 
7.  Lithuania procured a lower grade of NVDs through an 
FMF case in 2003/2004 and employed them in support of OIF 
and OEF without any physical security incidents.  The 
Lithuanian Military received, processed, and inventoried 
this equipment in accordance with the terms of the Letter 
of Acceptance under the supervision of the Office of 
Defense Cooperation.  The Chief of the Office of Defense 
Cooperation recently inventoried the U.S.-supplied NVDs 
located in Afghanistan and Lithuania and found no 
security infractions or loss of accountability. 
 
-------------- 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
8.  Lithuania\'s mission need and track record warrant 
acceptance of its NVD purchase request.  Post requests 
that the Department encourage OSD to review USG equipment 
release criteria for Lithuania.  Ensuring that this 
reliable ally can procure the same equipment as other 
NATO allies will eliminate the unfortunate perception of 
a two-tiered NATO.\"  It will also help our allies, 
currently serving in harm\'s way together with U.S. 
troops, to protect themselves and other coalition 
soldiers. 
"
"24911","1/4/2005 14:46","05VILNIUS8","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","05SECSTATE959","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR, EAID, PGOV, LH, HT41 
SUBJECT: OUTPOURING OF LITHUANIAN SUPPORT FOR TSUNAMI 
VICTIMS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 959 
 
1.  We delivered reftel points encouraging assistance for the 
victims of the December 26 Indian Ocean earthquake and 
tsunami to Diana Mickeviciene of MFA\'s Asia and Pacific 
 
SIPDIS 
Division on January 4.  Mickeviciene said that the GOL will 
likely announce on January 5 plans to contribute 150,000 
Litas (USD 60,000) from its reserve fund to the Lithuanian 
Red Cross\'s special account for victims.  She added that the 
Vilnius Municipality will contribute a further 100,000 Litas 
(USD 40,000) to the account.  Lithuania\'s Red Cross reports 
that, to date, more than 900 private donors have contributed 
an additional 155,000 Litas (USD 62,000) to the account. 
Caritas, a charity affiliated with the Catholic Church, has 
collected nearly 12,000 Litas (USD 5,000) in private 
donations. 
 
2.  There were no Lithuanian casualties from the events of 
December 26. 
 
3.  Comment:  Given the absence of Lithuanian casualties and 
this country\'s relative poverty (second-lowest per-capita 
income in the EU), the outpouring of assistance from the 
government and private citizens here strikes us as generous. 
KELLY 
"
"24967","1/5/2005 14:32","05VILNIUS13","Embassy Vilnius","CONFIDENTIAL","04VILNIUS1196","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VILNIUS 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB AND EUR/RPM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2014 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, MCAP, PGOV, PREL, LH, HT6 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA REAFFIRMS INTEREST IN AFGHANISTAN PRT 
MISSION 
 
REF: A. ANDERSON-KELLY E-MAIL 1/4/05 AND PREVIOUS (NOTAL) 
     B. 2004 VILNIUS 1196 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON OFFICER TREVOR BOYD 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Lithuania is seriously considering leading a 
Provincial Reconstruction Team mission in Afghanistan.  The 
MFA will brief the Foreign Minister and Defense Minister on 
the issue on January 6.  Following the return of a GOL 
fact-finding team from Kabul and Mazar-i-Sharif on January 
11, President Adamkus will likely discuss GOL participation 
during a meeting of the State Defense Council on January 12. 
Lithuania\'s two most salient concerns are cost and staffing. 
It will want commitments of personnel and other resources 
from NATO allies before climbing aboard.  End Summary. 
 
Reaction to Prospective USG Support 
----------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Charge met with Kestutis Jankauskas, Director of MFA\'s 
Security Policy Department, on January 5 regarding 
Lithuania\'s possible participation in a Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) mission in Afghanistan.  Noting 
that a GOL team will conclude a fact-finding mission to 
Britain\'s PRTs in Kabul and Mazar-i-Sharif on January 11, 
Jankauskas requested the meeting to obtain information 
regarding possible USG support for a Lithuanian-led PRT in 
Qala-ye Now or Chaghcharan.  Jankauskas told Charge he will 
brief both Foreign Minister Antanas Valionis and Minister of 
Defense Gediminas Kirkilas on the issue January 6.  President 
Adamkus, he said, would likely call a meeting of the State 
Defense Council to discuss, and possibly decide, Lithuania\'s 
participation in a PRT on January 12. 
 
3. (C) Noting that the GOL should submit a formal request for 
assistance, Charge described the technical, financial, 
personnel, and logistical support the USG might provide to 
the PRT per guidance in ref a.  Jankauskas welcomed the news 
on the potential assistance, especially the prospective offer 
of a USG development aid specialist with access to USAID 
funds (the GOL has virtually no experience in that field). 
 
4. (C) The cost, and the January 20 deadline imposed by 
DSACEUR, still concerns the GOL, said Jankauskas.  The GOL\'s 
2005 defense budget has already been allocated; GOL funds for 
the mission have to come from somewhere else.  For that 
reason, he said, the GOL remains focused on cost.  To that 
end, Jankauskas said the GOL would appreciate additional 
logistical information, particularly related to 
transportation issues within Afghanistan and start-up costs. 
He agreed that some of these issues would clarify once 
Lithuanian fact-finders were on the ground next week. 
 
Looking for a Partner 
--------------------- 
 
5. (C) Though the GOL remains hopeful, Jankauskas observed 
that Lithuania\'s Baltic neighbors appeared reluctant to 
participate in a GOL-led PRT.  He stressed the importance of 
obtaining personnel contributions from other NATO allies. 
The GOL, with 56 troops already detailed to Afghanistan, has 
nearly reached the 70-troop deployment ceiling established by 
the September 2004 international operations bill (ref B). 
While the GOL will shift some of those resources to the PRT 
if it commits, Jankauskas said that the GOL simply must have 
troop contributions from other NATO states if it is to run 
the PRT.  In particular, he said, Lithuania would like to 
have troops from a larger and more experienced NATO ally 
(e.g., the United States, UK, Netherlands, or Denmark) to 
raise the PRT\'s security comfort level. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6. (C) NATO needs more countries to lead PRTs.  The GOL 
thinks that, in principal, participating in -- and maybe even 
leading -- a PRT would be a good thing.  But it has concerns 
and questions that need to be answered before a 
political-level decision is made to commit.  To answer these 
questions, the GOL is involved in an intensive 
information-gathering process on what such a Mission 
involves.  Post appreciates the guidance Washington has 
provided already; the quick responses we have been able to 
provide here have improved our chances of enlisting the GOL. 
We\'ll probably be back with more questions from the 
Lithuanians before they sign on the dotted line. 
KELLY 
"
"25059","1/7/2005 8:43","05VILNIUS18","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","05SECSTATE3792","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS VILNIUS 000018 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR, EAID, PGOV, LH, HT40, HT41 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA TO ATTEND UNOCHA TSUNAMI DONOR CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 3792 
 
     B. VILNIUS 00008 
 
We delivered reftel points describing USG goals for the 
UNOCHA tsunami donor conference to Laurynas Jonavicius of the 
MFA\'s Development Assistance Division on January 7.  MFA 
Undersecretary Sarunas Adomavicius, said Jonavicius, who is 
attending the extraordinary EU GAERC meeting on the situation 
in Southeast Asia, will represent the GOL at the January 11 
conference.  Highlighting the outpouring of victim support 
from Lithuania, Jonavicius said that the GOL pledged 350,000 
Litas (USD 132,000) from its reserve fund to UNOCHA on 
January 5.  In addition, he noted, private donations, 
including a personal pledge of 3,000 Litas (USD 1,150) from 
Prime Minister Algridas Brazauskas, have to date surpassed 
500,000 Litas (USD 192,000). 
KELLY 
"
"25172","1/10/2005 14:39","05VILNIUS28","Embassy Vilnius","UNCLASSIFIED","05VILNIUS1430","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 VILNIUS 000028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL AND EUR/NB 
JUSTICE FOR OIA AND AFMLS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, EFIN, KCRM, PTER, KTFN, LH, HT28 
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA INCSR (INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL 
STRATEGY REPORT) PART II (FINANCIAL CRIMES AND MONEY 
LAUNDERING) 2004-2005 
 
REF: (A) STATE 254401; (B) VILNIUS 01430 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  Money laundering is not a significant problem in 
Lithuania.  Strict legal and regulatory controls and the 
GOL\'s cooperation with international regulatory 
counterparts explain the government\'s success.  The 
Lithuanian government increased controls to prevent 
financial crimes and money laundering in 2004.  It 
published regulations implementing earlier parliamentary 
statutes passed in 2003.  These regulations also expanded 
the criteria and rules governing the identification of 
suspicious transactions and management of registers 
recording them.  The proceeds from smuggling, principally 
cheap Russian cigarettes for domestic consumption, but also 
alcohol, Chinese goods and narcotics, and from VAT fraud 
and tax evasion, enter the Lithuanian economy.  Such 
\"predicate crimes\" constitute a greater problem for law 
enforcement than the consequent money laundering.  In 2004, 
law enforcement stepped up interceptions of smugglers, 
while the Financial Crime Investigation Service (FCIS) 
started nine money laundering pre-trial investigations. 
FCIS froze over USD 9.6 million in criminal assets in 2004 
(first ten months).  The FBI reports excellent cooperation 
with Lithuanian law enforcement on suspected money 
laundering cases.  Lithuania is a signatory to numerous 
international conventions on money laundering, concluding 
four additional agreements with European countries in 2004. 
Lithuanian law enforcement officials participated in two 
money laundering prevention workshops made possible with 
USG assistance in 2004.  End Summary. 
 
Sources of Illicit Money 
------------------------ 
 
2.  Local experts identify the informal economy, estimated 
at 18 percent of GDP, as the most likely source of illicit 
money in Lithuania.  The flow of smuggled goods, 
principally cigarettes and alcohol from Russia and Belarus, 
is driven by price differentials between these countries 
and Lithuania and the West.  A pack of cigarettes in 
Lithuania, for example, costs only one-fourth the price of 
a pack in the EU.  Experts anticipate that smuggling will 
increase when Lithuania adopts the minimum EU excise rate 
in 2009.  The demand for smuggled cigarettes is greatest 
domestically, a shift from 2002, when cigarettes transited 
Lithuania for Germany and the U.K. 
 
3.  Smuggled Chinese goods are also a source of illicit 
income, since smugglers underreport the value of the goods 
to Customs and the State Tax Administration to avoid VAT 
and profit taxes on such goods.  Smugglers avoid paying 
taxes on the goods by generally selling them at largely 
unregulated outdoor markets.  Following the removal of 
border checkpoints after Lithuania\'s accession to the EU, 
customs officials are only able to inspect Chinese goods if 
they receive information to track them down in Lithuanian 
warehouses. 
 
4.  VAT fraud is a third source of illicit income.  Experts 
note that VAT revenues are not increasing proportionally to 
retail sales.  In 2003, for example, VAT revenues 
constituted 6.7 percent of GDP, whereas in 2002, they 
constituted 7.5 percent of GDP. 
 
------------------------ 
LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITY 
------------------------ 
 
Smuggling 
--------- 
 
5.  Customs reports that it initiated 114 pre-trial 
investigations against smugglers in 2004, up from 101 in 
2003.  The agency provided a partial breakdown of these 
investigations: 
 
-- 33 investigations related to smuggling into Lithuania; 
-- 30 cases addressed a failure to re-export goods from 
Lithuania; and 
-- 13 investigations addressed document forgery. 
According to Customs data covering the first nine months of 
2004, the four top categories of smuggled goods, in terms 
of total value of goods intercepted were: 
 
-- Tobacco products, worth LTL 654,624 (USD 251,778), up 
from LTL 644,644 (USD 247,940) during the same period in 
2003; 
 
-- Stolen cars, worth LTL 400,000 (USD 153,846), down from 
LTL 1,246,097 (USD 479,268) during the first nine months of 
2003; 
 
-- Chinese goods, worth LTL 114,222 (USD 43,931), down from 
LTL 10,298,688 (USD 3,961,033) during the first nine months 
of 2003; and 
 
-- Metals, worth LTL 73,000 (USD 28,077), down from LTL 
92,000 (USD 35,384) during the first nine months of 2003. 
 
6.  Customs says that the major category of contraband it 
intercepts is cheap Russian cigarettes smuggled in from 
Kaliningrad.  It reports that small groups of mainly 
Lithuanian, but also Russian and Belarusian, smugglers 
control this trade.  This is a significant change from the 
situation before 2002, when large criminal groups 
controlled this illegal activity, and smuggled goods exited 
Lithuania for Western countries in exchange for illegal 
cash entering Lithuania.  A Border Guard press release 
stated that the agency had confiscated a record 3.2 million 
packs of smuggled cigarettes at the borders in 2004, up 
from 1.6 million packs in 2003, and 467,000 packs in 2002. 
The breakdown of the 2004 seizures is as follows: 
 
-- 2.4 million packs at the border with Kaliningrad; 
-- 540,000 packs at the Belarussian border; and 
-- 288,000 packs at the Latvian border. 
 
The Border Guards noted that smuggled cigarettes are sold 
at two or three times the purchase price in the black 
market, which is only half the legal price at shopping 
centers. 
 
7.  Customs also reports that it initiated four pre-trial 
investigations against alcohol smugglers in 2004.  The 
largest seizure of 2004 occurred in September along the 
Polish border and involved 26 tons of spirits of Belarusian 
origin.  Customs launched four pre-trial investigations 
(down from twelve cases in 2003) against criminals 
smuggling stolen cars from Western Europe.  In 2004, 
Customs started 52 pre-trial investigations against 
suspects smuggling Chinese goods into Lithuania, and 
another 30 cases against individuals who had broken their 
commitments to re-export Chinese and Turkish goods to 
Latvia. 
 
VAT Fraud 
--------- 
 
8.  In November 2004, the press reported that the FCIS 
intercepted a well-organized criminal gang, which had 
defrauded the state budget of more than LTL seven million 
(USD 2.7 million) in VAT revenues.  During 2003-2004, the 
group had established more than 30 shadow companies, 
according to FCIS, trading in timber, metal and other 
products.  Press reports state that FCIS seized LTL 200,000 
(USD 76,923) in cash, a dozen plastic bankcards, and 
falsified accounting books.  The agency froze a large 
proportion of the criminal group\'s property valued at LTL 
four million (USD 1,530,000). 
 
Narcotics 
--------- 
 
9.  The sale of narcotics does not generate a significant 
portion of financial crime and money laundering activity in 
Lithuania.  FCIS reported no cases of money laundering 
related to narcotics in 2004.  Customs reported that it 
started ten pre-trial investigations against narcotic 
smugglers in 2004, the same number as in 2003.  Law 
enforcement authorities estimate that the domestic drug 
trade is worth LTL 500 million (USD 200 million) per annum 
and is growing.  Lithuanian organized crime groups have 
begun to penetrate the German narcotics market.  Heroin is 
smuggled into Lithuania from Central Asia and the Balkans. 
Cocaine imports from South America travel through Western 
Europe into Lithuania.  Poppy straw is especially popular 
in the countryside, and is smuggled to the Kaliningrad 
district of Russia. 
 
Cash Couriers 
------------- 
 
10.  Customs reported three seizures totaling LTL 69,620 
(USD 26,778) during the first nine months of 2004, down 
from LTL 150,706 (USD 57,964) during the same period in 
2003.  On January 7, 2004, the Border Guards detained a 
Belarusian national on charges of smuggling LTL 123,000 
(USD 47,307) and on December 14, another Belarusian 
national was detained for carrying USD 30,000 in cash. 
 
Money Laundering:  Nine pre-trial investigations underway 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
11.  There are no precise estimates regarding the scale of 
money laundering in Lithuania.  One expert opined that 
money laundering is anywhere between LTL 10-100 million 
(USD 4-40 million) per year, but this is probably a low 
estimate, when viewed in the context of the size of the 
informal economy (LTL 10 billion, USD 3.8 billion)). 
Prosecutors launched criminal proceedings in nine suspected 
cases of money laundering, and seven additional cases of 
suspected tax evasion, document forgery, and smuggling. 
FCIS reported no convictions for money laundering in 2004. 
The nine suspected money laundering cases arose in part 
from FCIS-led investigations into 119 suspicious bank 
transactions, out of a total of more than one million 
transactions during the first ten months of 2004.  Banks 
reported 65-70 of the suspicious transactions, while the 
balance were identified by FCIS. 
 
12.  Authorities did not launch a single investigation 
against bank officials for complicity in money laundering 
in 2004.  Regulatory authorities exercise tight supervision 
of the country\'s ten commercial banks, two foreign bank 
branches and 58 credit unions, and laundering cash through 
the banking system is a high-risk activity.  FCIS stated 
that although there were many cases of credit card fraud, 
none were related to money laundering.  The Police report 
that financial crimes constituted four percent, fraud 
accounted for three percent, and the production of 
counterfeit currency slightly above one percent of all 
crimes committed in 2004. 
 
13.  Lithuania has good laws that have created adequate 
legal safeguards against money laundering.  Experts observe 
that GOL controls in the banking sector are adequate, and 
that the banking system, largely Scandinavian-owned, is 
vigilant against potential launderers.  They opine that the 
GOL dedicated adequate funds in 2003-2004 to its three law 
enforcement agencies (FCIS, Border Guards, Customs) 
responsible for combating money laundering.  FCIS\'s 2004 
budget increased by 23 percent over 2003, while the 
Customs\' budget decreased by 13 percent.  The experts 
highlight, however, some deficiencies in law enforcement 
measures, such as a lack of adequate cooperation and 
information exchange among these agencies at the regional 
level, inadequate training of officers, and corruption at 
the regional level.  Additionally, following EU accession, 
Customs officials no longer routinely inspect goods at 
border posts with neighboring EU states, relying instead on 
mobile units to patrol the border.  The GOL currently has 
13 mobile units, and plans to establish an additional ten 
by the end of January 2005. 
Real Estate - a potential venue to launder money? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
14.  Experts identify real estate purchases as a potential 
venue to launder money.  The State Tax Administration 
checks the income and property declarations of categories 
of high-spending individuals, such as those purchasing 
expensive real estate, jewelry, furniture or other luxury 
goods worth more than LTL 50,000 (USD 19,230), and large 
donors to election campaigns, and matches them with 
expensive purchases.  The agency told us they have many 
sources to gather this information, such as inspection of 
Lithuania\'s single Real Estate Register, information from 
construction companies and real estate agents, and review 
of the largest luxury good stores\' records.  From January 
1, 2004, all taxpayers must submit one annual income and 
property declaration.  Before this change, only those 
purchasing property with a value in excess of LTL 46,000- 
50,000 (USD 17,700-19,230), politicians, and business 
managers were obliged to submit these declarations.  The 
tax inspectorate has closed the loophole that enabled 
potential launderers to purchase property in Lithuania 
worth less than the threshold, using illegal-source monies, 
without declaring the purchase or accounting for the source 
of the funds.  The agency told us that its data for 2004 
would only be available after the tax submission deadline 
of May 1, 2005. 
 
15.  Lithuanian officials and financial institutions do not 
encourage or facilitate money laundering or narcotics 
trafficking.  Lithuania is not an offshore or regional 
financial center.  The State Tax Administration informed 
us, however, that it has encountered cases of Lithuanian 
companies purchasing goods in Russia at lower prices, then 
attributing higher prices to offshore companies outside 
Lithuania, such that the Lithuanian companies are able to 
conceal the illicit profit they make. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
LAWS AND REGULATIONS TO PREVENT MONEY LAUNDERING 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
16.  Money laundering is a criminal offence punishable by 
up to seven years in prison.  The Lithuanian parliament, on 
January 29, 2004, amended the definition of money 
laundering in Article 216 of the Criminal Code.  The law 
now defines a money launderer as \"any person who carries 
out financial operations with his own or another person\'s 
money or property or with part of them knowing that such 
money or property acquired in a criminal way, concludes the 
agreements, uses them in economic or commercial activity, 
or makes a fraudulent declaration that they are derived 
from legal activity, for the purposes of concealing or 
legitimizing these proceeds shall be punished by 
imprisonment for a term of up to 7 years.  Enterprises 
shall also be held liable for the acts specified in 
paragraph 1 of this Article.\" 
 
Reporting Requirements 
---------------------- 
 
17.  Amendments to the law on the Prevention of Money 
Laundering went into effect on January 1, 2004.  FCIS now 
has the authority, upon receiving a report of suspicious 
financial activity, to direct financial institutions to 
freeze an account for 48 hours without prosecutorial 
intervention.  Article 9 of the Money Laundering Prevention 
Law requires financial institutions and other entities 
(auditors, insurance companies, investment companies, book- 
keeping companies and notaries) to report to the FCIS 
suspicious transactions of any size and the identity of 
clients involved within three hours of detecting such 
activity.  The FCIS may extend the freeze during an 
investigation. 
 
18.  The GOL published four regulations in 2004 to 
implement the new requirements of the Law on Money 
Laundering. 
-- In July, the Cabinet expanded the criteria to identify 
suspicious money operations.  The new list includes 25 
detailed criteria, such as an unusual increase in cash 
payments, cashing LTL 100,000 (USD 40,000) or more within 
seven days, splitting a cash transaction into a number of 
transactions in order not to reach the LTL 50,000 (USD 
20,000) threshold, and cashing more than LTL 100,000 (USD 
40,000) in seven days using a foreign credit card. 
 
-- The Cabinet also adopted new rules in July to identify 
persons involved in suspicious transactions, and on 
transferring this information to FCIS.  The regulation 
establishes a list of data and documents that a bank or 
another financial institution must request from a person 
whose identity must be established in accordance with the 
Law on Money Laundering. 
 
-- In July, the Cabinet adopted detailed rules governing 
the management of registers of suspicious money 
transactions, and transactions exceeding LTL 50,000 (USD 
19,230). 
 
-- On November 15, the Cabinet approved new \"Rules on 
Stopping Suspicious Money Operations and Providing 
Information to the Financial Crime Investigation Service 
(FCIS) at the Ministry of Interior.\"  These rules entitle 
FCIS to request any legal or natural entities, except 
notaries, to freeze suspicious money operations for 48 
hours upon receiving an FCIS order, unless such action 
would inhibit the investigation of suspicious money 
transactions.  All entities except notaries are required to 
freeze such operations if they notice them, and to appoint 
individuals who will be responsible for monitoring money 
operations and who can freeze suspicious operations.  All 
entities except notaries must report details on all such 
operations to FCIS within three working hours after 
freezing the suspicious operations. 
 
Large Transactions 
------------------ 
 
19.  The law on money laundering requires financial 
institutions to identify and report to the FCIS within 
seven days any transaction exceeding LTL 50,000 (USD 
19,230).  The law also requires financial institutions to 
maintain a register of customers who engage in transactions 
exceeding LTL 50,000 (USD 19,230), or its equivalent in 
foreign currency, and to retain records for a minimum of 
ten years.  The press, however, has criticized the 
requirement to report transactions exceeding LTL 50,000 
(USD 19,230).  Banks are aware of their reporting 
requirements and although not very happy about the new 
reporting burden imposed on them, have been very 
cooperative and report and exchange information of their 
own accord, not only upon request of the FCIS. 
 
20.  Although Lithuanian law provides for confidentiality 
of commercial banking information, Article 16.4 of the 
Money Laundering Prevention Law protects bankers who report 
required information to the FCIS.  The \"Law on the 
Financial Crime Investigation Service\" of March 28, 2002 
authorizes FCIS to collect information from financial 
institutions. 
 
Cross-border Currency 
--------------------- 
 
21.  The law requires that individuals must declare to 
Customs cash they transport into or out of the country in 
excess of LTL 10,000 (USD 3,846).  Following Lithuania\'s EU 
accession, this requirement applies only to individuals 
from third (i.e. non-EU) countries.  Customs authorities 
must report to the FCIS as soon as possible, and no later 
than within seven working days, incidents where a person 
enters or departs the country transporting cash in excess 
of LTL 50,000 or equivalent (USD 19,230).  Customs has 
primary responsibility for border checks, the Border Police 
perform periodic checks, and the FCIS provides consultation 
support, as necessary. 
 
Other Reporting Requirements 
---------------------------- 
22.  The amendments to the Law on the Prevention of Money 
Laundering require that insurance companies identify 
customers whose annual insurance payment exceeds LTL 8,500 
(USD 3,269).  Casinos must register patrons who wager, win, 
or exchange for chips amounts larger than LTL 3,500 (USD 
1,346).  Although they are not obliged to report this 
information, FCIS tells us that they usually do.  Casinos 
are required to report any suspicious transactions and any 
transactions exceeding LTL 50,000 (USD 19,230). 
 
23.  The amendments also require lawyers to notify the 
lawyers\' association about clients\' suspicious 
transactions, and that the association inform the FCIS 
within three working hours of notification.  The lawyers\' 
association must maintain a register of suspicious 
transactions and maintain relevant records for ten years. 
Lawyers protested that the new reporting requirements 
violate attorney-client privilege.  No other groups have 
voiced substantive objections about the new legislation. 
 
Record-keeping Requirements 
-------------------------- 
 
24.  Banks and other financial institutions are required to 
maintain records for ten years \"after they break contact 
with the customer.\"  FCIS interprets this to mean ten years 
following the customer\'s last transaction.  Banks also 
retain information on the identity of an account owner ten 
years following the closure of the account. 
 
Bankers\' Obligations 
-------------------- 
 
25.  The Code of Administrative Violations imposes a fine 
of LTL 2,000 (USD 769) on bank officers who negligently or 
inadequately identify and report money laundering in their 
institutions, or who do not keep the required records. 
Bank officials who are suspected of complicity in money 
laundering are subject to criminal prosecution and 
imprisonment of up to seven years under Article 24 of the 
Criminal Code.  The Central Bank may withdraw a bank\'s 
license for violating procedures designed to prevent money 
laundering. 
 
Witness Protection 
------------------ 
 
26.  Prosecutors and pretrial investigation officers may 
grant witnesses anonymity, per the Criminal Process Code 
(Articles 198, 199).  The Court protects the anonymity of 
witnesses under threat to life, health, freedom, or 
property, or when the witness\'s testimony is critical to 
the case.  There were no reports of retaliatory actions 
taken by traffickers or organized crime specifically 
related to money laundering investigations.  There have 
been minor incidents of vandalism of police officers\' homes 
and cars, but these were not specific to money laundering 
investigations. 
 
------------------- 
TERRORIST FINANCING 
------------------- 
 
27.  The GOL has independent national authority to freeze 
assets linked to terrorism.  The amended Law on the 
Prevention of Money Laundering defines terrorist financing 
as an \"activity by means of which individuals intentionally 
use money or other assets received by criminal or other 
means for the direct or indirect funding of terrorism.\" 
Article 9 of this law authorizes FCIS to freeze suspicious 
assets (including those related to terrorism) for a period 
of up to 48 hours, after which period, procedures outlined 
under the Code on Penal Procedure apply.  Article 72 of the 
Criminal Code permits confiscation of assets that served as 
the tool, or represent the result, of a crime.  Article 250 
of the Criminal Code, which came into force on April 10, 
2003, establishes financing terrorist acts as a crime, and 
prescribes imprisonment of between 4-20 years. 
28.  In 2003, Lithuania ratified the International 
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of 
Terrorism, which came into force on March 22, 2003.  In 
April 2004, the Parliament passed a law on the 
\"Implementation of Economic and Other International 
Sanctions\" which makes international financial sanctions, 
including UN sanctions against terrorists, valid in 
Lithuania, and charges MFA with taking the lead in 
overseeing their implementation.  It also clarifies the 
role of other GOL agencies, such as FCIS, Customs, the 
Insurance Authority, and the Stock Exchange Commission, in 
this process.  The law provides that the Lithuanian Cabinet 
establish and amend, by resolution, implementation of 
international sanctions.  Provisions of the law apply to 
the actions of Lithuanian legal and natural persons in 
foreign countries, irrespective of whether foreign 
countries implement international sanctions as applied by 
Lithuania.  Lithuania does not have an \"all serious crimes\" 
anti-money laundering law. 
 
29.  The State Security Department is the lead GOL agency 
coordinating efforts against terrorism.  Together with 
FCIS, it circulated to financial institutions the names of 
all terrorist individuals and entities on the UN 1267 
Sanctions Committee\'s consolidated asset freeze list and/or 
whom the USG has designated and whose assets it has frozen, 
for names which we provided to the GOL on a non-close-hold 
basis.  For names provided on a close-hold basis, FCIS 
informed us it did a thorough search in its database.  The 
government has provided no indication that its searches in 
2004 have yielded any evidence of terrorist assets. 
 
30.  Charitable and non-profit entities do not play a role 
as conduits to finance terrorism.  Alternative remittance 
systems do not exist in Lithuania.  A press report noted 
that a Catholic priest accepted a donation of LTL 5-10 
million (USD 1.9-3.8 million) in November 2004 in violation 
of internal Church regulations that require the approval of 
a bishop for donations of more than LTL 10,000 (USD 3,846). 
The Church has started an internal investigation into this 
matter, while the parliamentary budget committee debates 
how best to regulate charities. 
 
---------------- 
FREE TRADE ZONES 
---------------- 
 
31.  Lithuania has Free Economic Zones (FEZ) in the cities 
of Klaipeda, Kaunas and Siauliai.  Klaipeda is the 
country\'s largest seaport, Kaunas is an air, road, and rail 
hub, and Siauliai hosts the largest airport in the Baltics. 
There are currently four businesses operating in the 
Klaipeda FEZ.  This largest of Lithuania\'s zones, with 130 
million euros (USD 174 million) in total foreign 
investment, has signed contracts with four more enterprises 
to begin operations in 2005. 
 
32.  Companies operating in the FEZ receive the same legal 
guarantees as those operating elsewhere.  Parliament 
approved a law on the fundamentals of free economic zones 
on June 28, 1995 that regulates conditions for the 
establishment of free trade zones and the legal status of 
firms operating in such zones.  Lithuania\'s EU Accession 
agreement permits the indefinite operation of existing 
FEZs, but precludes the establishment of new ones. 
Businesses operating in the zones enjoy the following 
advantages: 
 
-- 80 percent corporate tax reduction for the first five 
years of operation, and 50 percent for the next five years; 
 
-- Exemption from customs taxes; 
 
-- Exemption from Value Added Tax; and 
-- A 50 percent discount on land leases. 
 
FCIS has no indication that any of these free trade zones 
are being used in trade-based money laundering schemes or 
by the financiers of terrorism. 
 
------------------------- 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
------------------------- 
 
33.  Lithuanian law enforcement cooperates with the USG in 
investigations and the exchange of information related to 
money laundering, financial crimes, terrorist financing and 
customs issues.  The Lithuanian FCIS exchanges information 
with the U.S. Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and the Internal 
Revenue Service of the U.S. Department of the Treasury on 
suspicious financial transactions, and carries out joint 
investigations of money laundering cases.  FBI states that 
it has had excellent cooperation with law enforcement 
agencies in Lithuania.    In 2004, FCIS responded to five FBI 
and FinCen requests in 2004 for cooperation on money 
laundering and fraud cases, while FBI responded to several 
FCIS requests concerning individuals and businesses 
possibly associated with money laundering and fraud.  The 
police and FCIS continue to cooperate with U.S. law 
enforcement bodies on a significant Russian Organized 
Crime/Money Laundering investigation.  Through Mutual Legal 
Assistance Treaty (MLAT) and other requests, Lithuania 
provided bank records and other evidence to the United 
States to be used at trial.  Lithuania allowed bank 
officials to travel to the United States in 2004 to testify 
at trial.  FBIHQ is reviewing an FCIS proposal in 2004 for 
a Memorandum of Understanding between the two agencies to 
clarify their relationship. 
 
34.  Lithuanian authorities exchange records in connection 
with investigations and proceedings relating to terrorist 
financing and other crime investigations.  The USG-GOL 
MLAT, which entered into force in 1999, provides a 
mechanism for formal exchange of records.  Lithuania 
voluntarily exchanges with the United States information 
regarding on-site examinations of banks and trust 
companies.  FCIS joined the Egmont Group of Financial Crime 
Investigative Units in 1999, whose primary objective is to 
provide a mechanism to exchange information in a timely and 
secure manner to further the fight against money 
laundering.  FCIS joined the Egmont Secure Web in December 
2003, permitting communication via secure email, including 
the posting and assessing of information regarding trends, 
analytical tools, and technological developments.  In 
addition to Egmont, GOL officials exchange records via 
Interpol, and FBI, Customs and Internal Revenue Service 
liaisons.  The Lithuanian government has not refused to 
cooperate with USG agencies on important cases. 
 
35.  Law enforcement is working with other countries on 
significant organized crime money laundering 
investigations.  FCIS signed four agreements in 2004 
covering cooperation against economic and financial 
crimes, money laundering, and exchange of information 
with the European Anti-Fraud Office, the Azerbaijan 
Revenue Service, the Italian Guarda di Finanza, and the 
Estonian Tax and Customs Board.  Nine Memoranda of 
Understanding on cooperation for exchanges of financial 
intelligence information were signed with Financial 
Intelligence Units (FIU) from Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, 
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Poland and 
Slovenia between 1999-2003.  Lithuania and Germany signed 
an agreement in 2001 to cooperate in the fight against 
organized crime and terrorism. 
 
36. USG assistance has provided advanced training to combat 
money laundering, including terrorist financing, and 
organized crime.  The East-West Management Institute 
(EWMI), a not-for-profit organization that promotes 
economic and legal reform in countries making the 
transition to a free-market economy, conducted the 
following workshops and seminars with USG assistance: 
 
-- A \"Regional Workshop on Prevention of Money Laundering\" 
(for law enforcement institutions) in Tallinn, Estonia, on 
June 10-11, 2004.  Lithuanian participants included two 
Supreme Court judges, two prosecutors and two FCIS 
officials; 
 
-- A \"Regional Workshop on Prevention of Money Laundering\" 
(for law enforcement institutions) in Vilnius on February 
26-27, 2004.  Lithuanian participants included six FCIS 
representatives, two judges, nine prosecutors and the 
Deputy Director of the Ministry of Justice\'s International 
Law Department.  In addition, there were participants from 
Estonia, Latvia, and Ukraine; 
 
-- In January 2003, EWMI organized a study tour to the 
United States for representatives of the three Baltic FIUs. 
Three FCIS officials traveled to the United States to meet 
with FINCEN, the U.S. FIU, to discuss money laundering; 
 
-- A \"Regional Workshop on the Prevention of Money 
Laundering\" (for law enforcement institutions) in Gdansk, 
Poland, on May 22-23, 2003, which served as a forum for 
specialists in financial crime to discuss cases and 
exchange opinions about the current situation in the field. 
Lithuanian participants included two prosecutors and one 
judge.  There were investigators, judges and prosecutors 
from Estonia, and Latvia as well; 
 
-- A seminar on \"Prevention of Money Laundering\" (for banks 
and financial institutions) in Riga, Latvia, on October 30, 
2001; and 
 
-- A seminar on \"U.S. and Foreign Banks\' Compliance with 
the US Patriot Act\" (for banks and financial institutions) 
in Riga, Latvia, on October 30, 2002. 
 
In addition, the USG and the GOL signed a letter of 
Agreement on Law Enforcement on September 30, 2003, under 
which the United States agreed to provide training and 
equipment to the Lithuanian police to combat currency 
counterfeiting.  The USG provided USD 325,000 in 
surveillance equipment in 2003, pursuant to a Letter of 
Agreement signed on March 22, 2002, to combat corruption. 
 
37.  Lithuania is a signatory to the 1988 International 
(Vienna) Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic 
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, which it ratified on 
March 12, 1998.  It is also party to the 1990 Council of 
Europe (Strasbourg) Convention on Laundering, Search, 
Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime, which 
it ratified in 1994.  On December 9, 2003, Lithuania\'s 
Parliament ratified the International Convention for the 
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.  The country adheres to 
the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force and 
relevant EU policy directives.  The 2003 amendments to the 
Law on the Prevention of Money Laundering incorporated 
recommendations from EU policy directives issued in 1991 
and 2001. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
ASSET FORFEITURE AND SEIZURE LEGISLATION 
---------------------------------------- 
 
38.  Pretrial investigation agencies (police, FCIS, 
Customs, secret police) are responsible for tracing assets. 
A prosecutor may prohibit individuals suspected of 
involvement in money laundering or other financial crimes 
from disposing of property for a period of up to six 
months.  Freezing assets for a longer period requires a 
court order.  The court can seize only property which the 
criminal or his/her accomplice used as an instrument of a 
crime or a means to commit a crime or which was acquired as 
the direct result of a criminal act.  The court may seize 
assets in order either to ensure the possibility of 
forfeiture in criminal cases or to secure a judgment in a 
civil action.  Upon conviction of money laundering or 
terrorism financing, an individual may be subject to fines, 
restrictions on operation of his/her company, or 
liquidation of property. 
 
39.  The FCIS froze over LTL 25 million (USD 9.6 million) 
in assets during the first ten months of 2004.  In 2003, 
the FCIS froze over LTL 52 million (USD 20 million) in 
assets, and in 2002, LTL 35.1 million (USD 13.5 million). 
There are no figures available for the total value of 
forfeited crime-related assets.  The police lack adequate 
resources to perform property seizures. 
 
Disposition of Assets 
--------------------- 
 
40.  Proceeds from seizures and forfeitures go into the 
national budget, except for armaments, which go into the 
national weapons fund.  The police destroy seized 
narcotics.  Enforcement actions led to LTL 6.5 million 
(USD 2.5 million) in seized drugs in 2004.  Lithuania does 
not share crime-related assets with other governments. 
Seizures and forfeitures of assets have not generated a 
public or political reaction.  Following passage of the 
Criminal Process Code in 2003, the government is not 
currently considering other legislation on seizure and 
forfeiture. 
 
41.  The public and business community are supportive of 
GOL efforts against money laundering, so long as these 
measures are undertaken in a transparent manner. 
 
MULL 
"