
"19508","8/6/2004 12:27","04QUITO2198","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2018","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002198 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, WHA/PPC, WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR MOVING FORWARD ON COMBATING TIP 
 
REF: QUITO 2018 
 
1.  Summary.  A State Department Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
delegation visited Ecuador from July 30 to August 4.  Their 
agenda included a series of meetings with high-level GOE 
officials (the Ministers of Government and Labor), a 
congresswoman, different units of the police, the MFA, and 
several NGOs, including the International Labor Organization 
(ILO).  The GOE provided additional information about its 
efforts and is working hard to combat TIP.  The delegation 
members were impressed by GOE officials\' genuine concern 
about the issue and believe the political will exists to 
fight it.  Full implementation of the action plan remains a 
concern, however.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Rachel Owen of the G/TIP office and Eric Falls of WHA 
visited Ecuador from July 30 to August 4, 2004.  Ecuador 
earlier had earned a Tier 3 TIP rating.   The purpose of the 
visit was to gauge the GOE\'s progress on a 60-day action plan 
to reclassify Ecuador to the Tier 2 Watch List. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
MINISTER OF GOVERNMENT IS NEW TIP COORDINATOR 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
3.  The TIP delegation first called on Minister of Government 
Raul Baca.  Baca has demonstrated a highly sophisticated 
understanding of TIP.  He began studying the problem in 
January, a full five months before Ecuador was placed on the 
report.  Baca presented the TIP team a diagram explaining the 
nature of the problem and pages of judicial reforms needed in 
the penal code.  He was very concerned that the law be 
amended to mandate that adults engaged in commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors (CSEM) are sufficiently punished. 
Additionally, Baca\'s office had studied the Internet 
distribution of child pornography and found occurrences in 
Quito. 
 
4.  When asked when Ecuador would name a TIP Coordinator, 
Baca was confused and said he is the TIP Coordinator.  He 
said his mandate is obvious and did not understand why a 
written document was needed.  However, he agreed to seek an 
\"official\" nomination. 
 
------------------------ 
ON THE LEGISLATIVE FRONT 
------------------------ 
 
5.  The Baca call was followed by a visit to Congresswoman 
Jacqueline Silva.  Silva has submitted a bill, which is 
currently in committee, to define TIP and institute penalties 
against traffickers.  The draft earlier had been reviewed by 
the American Bar Association (ABA), and Silva had amended it 
to include the ABA\'s suggestions.  She believes the bill will 
enter the first debate in November.  Ecuador\'s Congress 
recently began a one-month vacation, but Silva is making a 
strong effort to place the bill on the docket as early as 
possible. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
POLICE PROMISE TO CONTINUE RAIDS OF PROSTITUTION HOUSES 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
6.  At a joint meeting between DINAPEN (a police unit 
dedicated to protecting children), COAC (an anti-alien 
smuggling unit the USG trains and financially supports), the 
Ministry of Social Welfare, CONAMU (the National Commission 
Advising on Women\'s Issues), AID, and other USG officials, 
DINAPEN promised to conduct additional raids of prostitution 
houses.  They also said they had conducted weekly raids of 
prostitution houses for some time. 
 
7.  The police affirmed their commitment to fighting CSEM but 
were concerned about a lack of social services for rescued 
victims.  In response, the Ministry of Social Welfare offered 
a building in southern Quito as a shelter.  AID provided 
DINAPEN with a list of NGOs and encouraged the police to work 
with those able to provide shelter and/or counseling.  The 
director of ALISEI, an Italian NGO with experience fighting 
TIP in Africa, said psychologists at their existing migrant 
centers in Quito, Guayaquil, and Cuenca could counsel victims. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
PRESIDENTIAL DECREE AND PRESS BULLETIN COMING 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8.  On day two, the team called on the MFA\'s migration and 
human rights offices.  The MFA diplomats are equally commited 
to combating TIP and promised to meet with the embassy of 
Spain, a destination country for trafficked Ecuadorians, and 
also the embassies of Colombia and Peru, source countries, in 
the next week. 
 
9.  Additionally the MFA presented the visitors with a copy 
of a presidential decree against TIP.  The version is the 
final draft and should be signed at a cabinet meeting on 
August 9.  The decree makes important advances by naming a 
TIP coordinator and establishing a committee of government 
agencies to eradicate TIP. 
 
10.  In addition to these steps, the MFA and President 
Gutierrez\'s spokesperson agreed on the critical need for a 
public statement against TIP.  A public service announcement 
by the Ricky Martin Foundation denouncing TIP already has 
aired on local stations.  They noted the press secretary is 
planning additional showings. 
 
11.  The TIP team\'s final call was with Magne Swartbekk, head 
of the ILO\'s mission.  Through the U.S. Department of Labor, 
the ILO has approximately $150,000 to combat CSEM.  Swartbekk 
explained the organization will begin a project in Machala 
shortly.  The action plan is being written, and the goal is 
to reform legislation at the municipal level and train 
politicians about the problem.  Furthermore, Swartbekk noted 
the ILO will train local police in seven provinces in 
September and include information on using an integrated 
approach to CSEM raids by working with NGOs in law 
enforcement activities.  The GOE also is contributing 
funding.  Along these lines, the Minister of Labor has 
established an interinstitutional committee to eradicate 
child labor. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
COMMENTS AND SHORT-TERM EMBASSY ACTIONS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
12.  Post too was impressed by the GOE\'s commitment to combat 
TIP and sophisticated understanding of the issue.  The GOE 
has taken important steps toward combating the problem 
despite difficulties with a legalistic culture and very 
limited resources.   Now comes the hard part - implementation. 
 
13.  Baca and Silva\'s efforts to seek legislative remedies 
are understandable in Ecuador\'s highly legalistic 
environment.  They likely believe them important first steps. 
 While legislative change is necessary, it should occur 
concurrently with other efforts.  We will show strong support 
for their proposals, however, in our regular interaction with 
Congress.  In regards to law enforcement actions, the Embassy 
has received weekly reports from the police on their raids 
but finds the format difficult to understand.  The Embassy 
will work with the police to summarize the information in a 
clear manner and pass it to G/TIP. 
 
14.  Post will continue to push the GOE for concerted 
efforts, and key among them the press release, and report on 
new developments.  End Comment. 
 
15.  The Trafficking in Persons delegation did not clear this 
message before departing Ecuador. 
KENNEY 
"
"19576","8/9/2004 17:49","04QUITO2208","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE168747","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 002208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/05/2014 
TAGS: KDEM, KPAO, PGOV, PREL, EC, VE, Regional 
SUBJECT: GOE CONCERNED, YET UNWILLING TO ACT ON VENEZUELAN 
 
REFERENDUM 
 
REF: SECSTATE 168747 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.5 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) At an August 5 dinner hosted by Ecuadorian President 
Lucio Gutierrez in honor of visiting President Jimmy Carter, 
the Ambassador raised U.S. concerns (reftel) over the August 
15 Venezuelan referendum.  Gutierrez asserted that Ecuador 
wanted \"real\" democracy in Venezuela.  The birthplace of 
Bolivar was dangerously polarized, he added, and only a free 
and fair vote could bring down temperatures.  Earlier, 
President Carter had informed the Ambassador that he believed 
the referendum would be free of foul play, with Carter Center 
and OAS observers enjoying full access to electoral sites. 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador and DCM followed up in an hours-later 
pull-aside with Foreign Minister Patricio Zuquilanda.  The FM 
predicted a Chavez victory August 15.  Disgusted, he offered 
his customary pro-U.S., anti-left diatribe, calling the 
Venezuelan president an unrepentant communist.  \"Why not make 
your opinions public?,\" the Ambassador pressed.  His color 
drained, Zuquilanda backpedaled hard, claiming \"we Latins 
don\'t do that.\"  Sensing a need to save face, however, the FM 
revealed that Chavez was pushing hard for a state visit to 
Ecuador.  The GoE was resisting. 
 
3.  (U) The Embassy August 6 transmitted reftel points to the 
MFA\'s OAS/Americas office, following up August 9 with Office 
Director Santiago Ruiz.  Ruiz emphasized that Ecuador 
followed the OAS consensus vis-a-vis Venezuela politics.  He 
shared the USG position that observer missions must enjoy 
unfettered access to polling and counting stations.  Ruiz was 
noncommittal, however, on whether the MFA would take a public 
stand, should \"rumors\" of Chavez/supporters\' interference 
prove true. 
KENNEY 
"
"19653","8/11/2004 22:05","04QUITO2235","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2198","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002235 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, WHA/PPC, WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR\'S RAIDS AGAINST TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
REF: QUITO 2198 
 
1.  Summary.  The police in Ecuador have conducted 75 raids 
(compared to five required in the action plan) aimed at 
eradicating trafficking in persons (TIP) and focusing on the 
commercial sexual exploitation of minors.  Minors were found 
in 25 raids and typically were released to family members. 
End Summary. 
 
2.  DINAPEN, a police unit whose works focuses on minors, 
provided Post with a clear report of all law enforcement 
activities conducted as part of the GOE\'s effort to combat 
TIP.  While the 60-day action plan required a minimum of five 
raids, the police conducted 75 raids from June 4 to August 7, 
2004.  The raids were conducted periodically in 14 of 22 
provinces.  Four of the eight provinces in which raids were 
not conducted are in eastern Ecuador with jungle terrain and 
almost no population.  Post\'s DHS representative said that, 
of the establishments listed on the report that he is 
familiar with, they all are prostitution houses. 
 
3.  DINAPEN encountered minors engaged in commercial sexual 
exploitation in 25 of the 75 establishments.  In an 
additional two cases, the minors had an immigration violation 
and it is not clear if they were involved in prostitution. 
The police found minors in the highest percentage of raids in 
the provinces of Azuay, Orellana, and Pichincha.  In cases 
where minors were found, often they were placed in the 
custody of their parents or other relatives.  In a few cases, 
rescued minors were taken to a shelter, a home for juveniles, 
and provincial government agencies designed to protect 
children. 
 
4.  Comment.  The GOE clearly made a large effort, given its 
limited resources, to combat TIP through law enforcement 
raids.  DINAPEN conducted 15 times the number of raids 
required in the action plan.  Furthermore, DINAPEN conducted 
some raids as early as June 4, before this year\'s TIP report 
was published.  Post will continue to follow up with DINAPEN 
and request additional reports on their law enforcement 
activities against TIP.  End Comment. 
KENNEY 
"
"19752","8/13/2004 16:41","04QUITO2251","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/11/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, KCOR, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: PARTY POSTURING PROMPTS BUCARAM RETURN RUMORS 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.5 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  President Lucio Gutierrez\'s recent comments 
favoring the return of exiled former President Abdala Bucaram 
have ignited a political firestorm in Ecuador, with leading 
opposition parties promising that impeachment proceedings 
would shortly follow.  Bucaram, whom Congress removed in 
February 1997 on \"mental incapacity\" grounds, subsequently 
fled to Panama and enjoys political asylum there; he 
continues to lead the Ecuadorian Roldosista party (PRE) en 
absentia.  Analysts surmised that Gutierrez, seeking an 
alliance between the PRE and his own Patriotic Society party 
(PSP), had acquiesced to the former\'s primary goal and 
platform plank, \"the return of Abdala.\"  The Social 
Christians (PSC) loudly opposed, arguing that court orders 
demanding Bucaram\'s immediate arrest for fraud remained in 
force.  PRE leadership, however, assert that a provincial 
judge rescinded the orders in 2001, allowing for the swift 
return of their beloved master.  Non-partisan Embassy 
contacts and Presidency officials consider the PRE\'s public 
bluster, announcing Abdala\'s imminent arrival, a gambit 
designed to energize the bases.  We agree, viewing 
Gutierrez\'s discourse as another political test balloon.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------- 
The Man They Call El Loco 
------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) Historians and political analysts rate Bucaram 
Ecuador\'s most corrupt leader, an impressive achievement in a 
country that Transparency International consistently ranks 
amongst the hemisphere\'s worst kleptocracies.  A 
self-proclaimed \"loco\" (he recorded a song titled \"A Madman 
in Love\"), Bucaram campaigned as a leader for the poor.  His 
raiding of the public till, combined with widescale fraud 
perpetrated by cabinet officials, worsened his constituents\' 
poverty.  Public demonstrations calling for his ouster 
reached such levels in February 1997 that Ecuador\'s Congress, 
itself not lilly-white, impeached Bucaram on grounds of 
mental incapacity.  The president lost the subsequent vote, 
44-34, and eventually fled for Panama and political asylum. 
Embassy contacts and media speculate he bought his status. 
 
3.  (U) In remarks to Quito daily El Comercio August 5, 
Gutierrez welcomed the disgraced former president\'s return. 
\"...I would like Bucaram to come back, because he didn\'t 
commit the crimes he was accused of.  Some politicians are 
terrified at his return (I am not).  But as president, I 
can\'t tell him to come, nor can I oppose him.\"  In an El 
Comercio interview published August 6, Bucaram proclaimed his 
innocence and thanked Gutierrez for displaying admirable 
political courage.  The deposed leader claimed the law was on 
his side.  \"I could return tomorrow,\" Bucaram claimed, \"but I 
need guarantees I won\'t be detained illegally.\"  His stated 
intention was to return in time to present his candidacy for 
the October Guayaquil mayoral race (August 17 is the cutoff 
date). 
 
---------------------------------- 
Method to the President\'s Madness? 
---------------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) Media speculated that Gutierrez\'s show of Bucaram 
support had political motivations.  Ecuadorian electoral law 
stipulates that parties not winning five percent of the vote 
in multi-candidate races shall be disbanded (Ecuadorian 
legislative elections are more parliamentary than 
presidential, with parties presenting candidate lists). 
Gutierrez\'s PSP fell below the threshold in 2002 national 
elections, and pollsters predict a similar showing in the 
October 2004 local races.  Allying with Bucaram\'s PRE offered 
the PSP greater prospects and a stay of execution.  Minister 
of Government Raul Baca lent weight to these theories August 
4, telling TeleAmazonas TV that PSP and PRE deputies already 
had joined forces in Congress. 
 
------------------------- 
Enemies Line Up For Fight 
------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) Opposition forces quickly denounced Gutierrez.  PSC 
stalwart Leon Febres Cordero led the pack, arguing that any 
move by the president to facilitate Bucaram\'s return 
represented an impeachable offense.  Press report that two 
criminal cases remain active against the former leader, both 
stemming from alleged misuse of government funds.  Were 
Gutierrez to order the police not to enforce the court order, 
he would \"commit an attack against the security of the 
state,\" Febres Cordero asserted, violating the constitutional 
mandate for separation of powers. 
 
6.  (U) In a meeting with Poloff August 10, PSC Congressman 
Carlos Torres added personal recollections of the last days 
of Bucaram.  The PRE leader had attempted to buy \"no\" 
impeachment votes at $1 million per.  Losing the vote and the 
presidency, he left Ecuador with literally baskets of cash, 
stolen from the Central Bank.  By law, the fraud 
investigations against Bucaram had frozen upon his departure 
from Ecuador, but the charges remained outstanding.  Torres 
discounted the PRE-publicized decision by an Esmeraldas judge 
who, via a constitutional challenge, supposedly had cleared 
the ex-president\'s name.  \"The PRE owns Esmeraldas,\" the PSC 
legislator asserted, and only the Supreme Court could issue 
such a challenge. 
 
7.  (U) PRE discourse announcing Bucaram\'s imminent return 
was old hat, Torres continued.  The party was really a cult 
of personality, directionless without its leader.  In the 
seven years since Bucaram fled, PRE leaders had trotted out 
the \"he\'s coming\" line before every election, hoping to get 
the faithful to the polls.  Torres believed Gutierrez 
eventually would wise up and retract support for Bucaram\'s 
return. 
 
8.  (U) Guayaquil Mayor Jaime Nebot (PSC), perhaps the 
front-runner for the presidency in 2006, was convinced 
Bucaram did not want to return.  He would be arrested at the 
airport, Nebot told the Ambassador August 12, and he knows 
it.  The PRE leader\'s effectiveness is greatest from afar, 
lobbing charges against any and all parties.  Last, Nebot 
argued that the PRE\'s few serious politicians did not want 
the tarnish that Bucaram\'s return would bring. 
 
------------------------------------ 
And Supporters Say Abdala Was Framed 
------------------------------------ 
 
9.  (U) Ernesto Valle and Mario Touma, PRE legislators, 
maintained their boss\'s innocence, telling Poloff August 10 
that Bucaram\'s ministers were to blame in any malfeasance. 
\"A leader can\'t be faulted for the actions of his followers,\" 
Valle incredulously explained.  Besides, there was no 
\"documentary\" proof of wrongdoing.  The Esmeraldas judge\'s 
finding was binding, as the government had not appealed 
within the mandated time limit.  ANd Gutierrez, as chief 
executive, was bound by law to enforce court rulings and thus 
allow Bucaram\'s return. 
 
10.  (C) \"He owes us,\" Valle continued, revealing a four 
year-old verbal agreement between PRE congressmen and the 
then-cashiered Army colonel.  Under that deal, the PRE bloc 
would vote to amnesty Gutierrez and other participants in the 
2000 presidential coup, in exchange for future support in 
bringing Bucaram back.  There were tapes of the conversation, 
Valle threatened.  Touma insisted that Bucaram\'s return 
presented little political risk to the president.  The PSC 
might impeach, but the votes needed - 67, or two-thirds of 
Congress - were not there.  It would be one more crisis 
Gutierrez could overcome, he thought. 
 
----------------- 
One Expert\'s View 
----------------- 
 
11. (U) Prominent analyst Adrian Bonilla ventured that 
Gutierrez\'s support for Bucaram was tongue-in-cheek. 
Although the president had committed numerous gaffes before, 
he was not so dumb as to miss the risks inherent in calling 
Bucaram home.  Only by removing Baca (a PRE demand) could 
this occur, since the MinGov was a straight-shooter certain 
to oppose instructions to ignore pending arrest warrants. 
Baca\'s departure spelled disaster, Bonilla believed, as he 
was one of few serious politicians in the current cabinet. 
Although he doubted Gutierrez would do it, he urged the 
Embassy to reconsider its support if he did. 
 
12. (U) Bonilla predicted the PSP would survive, regardless 
of its October showing.  The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) 
had proven unsuccessful at decertifying parties commanding 
far fewer votes - its orders were essentially toothless. 
Additionally, PSP prospects looked good in Ecuador\'s jungle 
provinces.  He thus thought Gutierrez could jettison the PRE 
with minimal adverse effects. 
 
-------- 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
 
13.  (C) We have argued before that, despite numerous 
missteps and mounting political pressures, we don\'t see the 
silver bullet to take Gutierrez down.  A Bucaram return to 
Ecuador looks lethal, however, regardless of Touma\'s vote 
tally.  Thankfully, Gutierrez\'s comments appear more another 
test balloon, less a well-formed policy decision. 
Presidential Legal Advisor Carlos Larrea August 11 confirmed 
that Gutierrez had not issued Bucaram\'s travel orders, nor 
had he requested a legal opinion for political cover.  Larrea 
was confident the ex-president would remain in Panama.  END 
COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"19753","8/13/2004 16:43","04QUITO2252","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2198","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, WHA/PPC, WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR\'S TIP CZAR GOES TO THE PRESS 
 
REF: QUITO 2198 
 
1.  Summary.  Ecuador\'s TIP Coordinator, the Minister of 
Government Baca, cooperated with the country\'s largest 
newspaper for a front-page article recognizing the TIP 
problem and laying out a plan to combat it, including penal 
code reforms.  The reforms are a significant step forward and 
comply with US standards.  Minister of Government Baca\'s 
pro-active actions and his commitments to the Ambassador 
reflect his leadership on the issue.  He subsequently 
provided Post with significant documentation of the GOE\'s 
projects and plans to combat TIP.  End Summary. 
 
2.  El Universo, Ecuador\'s largest newspaper, featured a 
front-page story on TIPs on August 12.  Sources within the 
Ministry of Government told us the Ministry had initiated the 
article and worked with the local press to ensure it was 
published by the Post-requested deadline.  The article 
focuses on Baca\'s leadership as TIP Coordinator, as well as 
GOE proposed legal reforms and penalties for commercial 
sexual exploitation of minors (CSEM) and TIP.  The article 
summarizes the results of the International Labor 
Organization\'s study and mentions a police report on law 
enforcement activities in July and August 2004 aimed at 
combating CSEM. 
 
4.  The article\'s salient points are the following: 
 
- The Ministry of Government will present a bill to Congress 
that reforms the penal code and attempts to punish and 
eliminate CSEM.  The document makes significant reforms to 
the penal codes of children and adolescents, health, and the 
Tourism Law. 
 
- The Ministry of Government has been working to combat CSEM 
for nine months, and the Ministry of Labor is actively 
involved in projects to eradicate child labor. 
 
- All parties (including clients) involved in sexual tourism 
with minors will be held  legally responsible.  Tourism 
providers, hotels, airlines, and land and sea transport 
providers that are aware their services are used for sexual 
tourism will be subject to criminal penalties if they do not 
notify police. 
 
- The reforms change the definition of a minor to include 
persons from 14 to 18 years old. 
 
- Minors who are victims of sexual exploitation can 
criminally charge their pimps for 10 years after the victim 
has turned 18.  Victims determine when they are 
psychologically ready to testify. 
 
- Establishments where minors are engaged in sexual 
exploitation will be closed permanently and fined.  Current 
legislation does not allow prostitution houses to be closed 
and by default allows establishments to employ minors if 
their papers are in order. 
 
5.  Ambassador Kenney spoke with Baca on August 11 and was 
very encouraged after the conversation.  Baca stressed his 
long-time commitment to working against TIP and said the 
presidential decree would be issued during the week of August 
16.  As Baca promised in the call, Post received additional 
TIP documentation on August 12.  The contents illustrate the 
GOE\'s commitment to combating TIP and the particular concern 
for minors who are victims.  A letter from Baca to the 
Ambassador states the Ministry of Government has been 
coordinating an interagency process to develop a plan to 
combat TIPs since January.  In particular, the group has 
worked on a bill reforming the penal code to present to 
Congress. 
 
6.  Comment.  In our view, the El Universo article confirms 
the GOE\'s public commitment to combating TIP and Baca\'s 
pro-active role as the GOE TIP Coordinator.  The article and 
documents constitute the substance of what will become the 
GOE\'s National Plan to combat TIP.  We continue to work 
closely with Minister Baca and other GOE officials to 
encourage their efforts and suggest additional actions.  Both 
the de facto press release and naming of a TIP Coordinator 
are critical steps completed on the 60-day action plan.  End 
Comment. 
KENNEY 
"
"19845","8/17/2004 20:32","04QUITO2268","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002268 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/AND 
DEPT PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12985: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, EFIS, EC, Environment 
SUBJECT: FORMER PRESIDENT JIMMY CARTER DISCUSSES GALAPAGOS 
WITH PRESIDENT GUTIERREZ 
 
1.  Summary:  At dinner on August 5, former President Jimmy 
Carter discussed with President Lucio Gutierrez the 
importance of protection of the Galapagos Islands. 
Gutierrez also expressed concern for the issue.  Carter 
suggested that the Carter Center may host a conference on 
the protection of the Galapagos, and Gutierrez promised to 
send a high-level delegation to such a conference ready to 
discuss in detail the options.  End Summary. 
 
2.  At the end of his family vacation in the Galapagos, 
Jimmy and Rosalyn Carter accepted the invitation of 
President Gutierrez to meet for dinner.  Ambassador also 
attended, as did a variety of GOE officials and Gutierrez 
friends and family.  Ambassador had briefed Carter before 
the dinner on U.S. priorities and efforts in the Galapagos. 
Carter used his vacation as an introduction to the Galapagos 
issue.  He said his visit to the islands had worried him. 
Uncontrolled population growth and questions about the 
implementation of fishing regulations, together with 
complaints about park management and cuts in the budget of 
the national park operations raised doubts whether this 
important ecological resource was being adequately 
protected. 
 
3.  Gutierrez admitted that he also was worried.  The GOE 
was taking action, though.  A ban on shark fin exports would 
soon be in place and would help defend marine resources near 
the islands.  The GOE would like to retrain fishermen in the 
Galapagos and help them find other kinds of work, but funds 
were scarce. 
 
4.  Carter noted that the Galapagos, of course belonged to 
Ecuador.  Still, we wanted to help.  He expressed concern 
that, despite the best of intentions on the part of the GOE, 
this incredible ecosystem could disappear in five years.  He 
suggested that maybe the Carter Center could host a 
conference to discuss the alternatives and how to implement 
programs that would guarantee the future of the Galapagos. 
If the Center did sponsor such a conference, would the GOE 
participate? he asked.  Gutierrez promised that the GOE 
would participate in force.  He would send the Minister of 
Environment, and high-level officials from the Ministry of 
Tourism.  He was certain that representatives of the fishing 
industry would also want to be concluded. 
 
5.  Comment:  Jimmy Carter\'s concern for the protection of 
the Galapagos clearly had an impact on Gutierrez\' thinking. 
We believe such a conference on Galapagos would be 
particularly timely now, given the pressure on the islands. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"19913","8/19/2004 20:29","04QUITO2287","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE176595","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002287 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, PREL, PARM, MNUC 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR LIKELY TO HELP ON NAM RESOLUTION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 176595 
 
1.  PolCouns provided reftel points to Amb. Fernando Flores 
Macias, DirGen for Multilateral Affairs, on August 17. 
Flores told PolCouns on August 18 that Ecuador\'s delegation 
to the NAM meeting in Durban, led by Vice Minister Edwin 
Johnson, will determine the GoE position on this issue.  He 
pledged to communicate USG concerns to the VM, and noted that 
NAM resolutions are adopted by consensus.  Flores also noted 
that support for efforts to stem nonproliferation, such as 
PSI, is an element of Ecuador\'s foreign policy. 
KENNEY 
"
"19948","8/20/2004 16:41","04QUITO2301","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002301 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EAID, SENV, EC, Economy 
SUBJECT: BREAKFAST WITH GUTIERREZ: ECONOMIC ISSUES 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  In a breakfast meeting on August 18, 
President Gutierrez told the Ambassador that Ecuador will 
resolve its business disputes with the U.S.  He expressed 
appreciation to the U.S. for its economic assistance, stated 
that he had instructed Minister of Trade Ivonne Baki to work 
more closely with the Ecuadorian Congress on the Free Trade 
Negotiations, and said he supported the Carter initiative to 
organize a conference on the protection of the Galapagos 
Islands.  He was conspicuous in his uncharacteristic coolness 
toward Minister of Economy and Finance Mauricio Yepez.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (U) Ambassador and DCM breakfasted with Gutierrez on 
August 18 at his request.  Gutierrez clearly had several 
issues on his mind (see septel for political discussion). 
With the appeal of the Occidental arbitration case in the 
news, he made a point of re-stating his commitment to the 
resolution of commercial disputes.  (He did not specifically 
mention the Occidental case, and Occidental has requested 
that the Embassy not press its case with the GOE, so 
Ambassador did not raise it either, but his statement seemed 
intended to imply that the GOE would respect the outcome of 
the appeal.) 
 
3.  (U) Gutierrez noted the difficulties his administration 
has had with the Ecuadorian Congress.  He stated that he has 
instructed Minister of Trade Baki to work more closely with 
Congress as negotiations progress on the FTA.  Ambassador 
complimented this initiative, emphasizing the importance of 
an inclusive public and congressional relations strategy to 
the final approval of the FTA.  Gutierrez agreed. 
 
4.  (SBU) Ambassador told Gutierrez that we continue to have 
an excellent relationship with Minister of Economy and 
Finance Mauricio Yepez, who is doing a great job.  Gutierrez, 
was uncharacteristically and visibly cold on the subject, and 
made no comment. 
 
5.  (U) Gutierrez thanked Ambassador for U.S. assistance. 
Ambassador responded by telling him that the Department of 
Defense intends to increase the number of MEDRETE\'s for 
Ecuador this year, as many as 14 may take place.  Ambassador 
asked Gutierrez what he thought of the proposal by Jimmy 
Carter to have the Carter Center host a conference on 
protection of the Galapagos.  Gutierrez responded that he 
thought it a very good idea and would support it. 
 
6.  (SBU) Comment:  This meeting was not as wide-ranging as 
others, probably because Gutierrez had made many of his 
points in the meeting with Codel Weller and the Ambassador 
just the evening before.  We expect the notable coolness of 
Gutierrez to mention of Yepez may reflect tensions related to 
Yepez\' effort to maintain budget discipline during what 
Gutierrez sees as a crucial political campaign (upcoming 
municipal elections).  His statements on commercial disputes 
and the Galapagos confirm his continued support for important 
U.S. initiatives. 
KENNEY 
"
"19949","8/20/2004 16:41","04QUITO2303","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002303 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/19/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S TOUR D\'HORIZON WITH PRES. GUTIERREZ 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney.  Reason 1.5 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary: In a private breakfast meeting with the 
Ambassador and DCM on August 18 at the National Palace, 
President Lucio Gutierrez discussed upcoming municipal 
elections, his Cabinet, and requested additional U.S. aid for 
the social sector.  The Ambassador encouraged free and fair 
elections, emphasized the importance of combating trafficking 
in persons, described extensive USG assistance programs in 
the social sector, and urged Ecuador to consider how to help 
strengthen democracy in Venezuela in the aftermath of the 
referendum there.  Gutierrez exuded confidence and control, 
despite his unpopularity.  End Summary. 
 
Elections 
--------- 
 
2.  (C) Asked about the upcoming October municipal elections, 
Gutierrez exuded confidence.  \"After all, I control the purse 
strings,\" he said.  Asked about the major mayorships up for 
election, Gutierrez said he believed Gen. (ret.) Paco Moncayo 
would win Quito.  The Ambassador noted that the USG is 
scrupulously neutral in Ecuador\'s internal political affairs. 
 She raised the need for the Executive to carefully separate 
affairs of state from partisan political activity, saying the 
free and fair elections in October will truly be a feather in 
the president\'s cap.  A successful and fair election would 
culminate a year of positive exposure for Ecuador on the 
international stage. 
 
TIP and Cabinet: Changes Ahead 
------------------------------ 
 
3.  (C) President Gutierrez hinted that there may be changes 
in his Cabinet after upcoming elections, but did not 
elaborate on specific planned changes.  (Note: he recently 
said the same publicly.)  The Ambassador praised the 
President and Minister of Government Raul Baca for this 
leadership on the important issue of trafficking in persons. 
The President agreed that TIP is a very important issue, and 
mentioned the press conference to take place later that day 
at which he would sign a decree making TIP official 
government policy.  The President said he had established a 
Commission to develop a national plan related to TIP and 
proposed legislative reforms to strengthen prosecutions 
against traffickers.  The Ambassador noted great interest and 
leadership in the Ecuadorian Congress on this issue by key 
members, including Jacqueline Silva (PSC) and Miriam Garces 
(ID), and highlighted USG interest in working together with 
other nations to jointly combat this scourge. 
 
Social Sector Assistance 
------------------------ 
 
4.  (SBU) Gutierrez made a pitch with the Ambassador for 
additional USG assistance in the social sector, as he had 
done with CoDel Weller (septel).  What is needed, he said, is 
a \"Plan Ecuador\" to invest in social infrastructure in health 
and education to combat poverty and external threats fueling 
political instability.  The DCM noted that several USG 
assistance programs designed to address these concerns will 
be announced in September, including $20 million in INL 
funding and $20 million from AID.  The Ambassador mentioned 
the series of unquantifiable Medrete exercises we conduct to 
provide health services to Ecuadorians, which target 
under-served and indigenous areas. 
 
Venezuela 
--------- 
 
5.  (C) The Ambassador raised with the President the need for 
Venezuela\'s Andean neighbors to consider how to contribute to 
the strengthening of Venezuelan democracy in the wake of the 
referendum.  Public aspiration for democracy was reflected in 
the patience and determination of voters to endure long lines 
to cast their referendum vote.  Gutierrez agreed this is an 
important issue to consider. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (C) Gutierrez appeared relaxed, in control and 
optimistic, despite his low popularity in the polls.  Perhaps 
energized by recent campaign-like trips to inaugurate public 
works projects in areas his party has electoral hopes, his 
manner belied conventional wisdom that the Patriotic Social 
Party is heading towards electoral oblivion.  (Note: the 
party narrowly failed to meet the 5% threshold in the 2002 
election, and will lose its official registry if it fails to 
do so in the upcoming municipal elections.)  Gutierrez\' 
naming of Moncayo as the clear favorite in the Quito mayoral 
race was also somewhat odd, since most view that race as very 
tight.  It may be explained by the fact that although now 
political competitors, Moncayo and Gutierrez served together 
in the Army, and Moncayo has referred to Gutierrez as a 
protege. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"20037","8/24/2004 21:01","04QUITO2327","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002327 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/24/2014 
TAGS: ETRD, EPET, ECON, EC, Oil Sector 
SUBJECT: THE PROCURADOR STRIKES BACK AT OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM 
 
REF: 8/23/04 MEMMOTT-HARMAN TELCONS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (U) See paragraph 11 for an action request. 
 
2. (C)  Summary.  Ecuador\'s Procurador (Solicitor General) 
may be seeking to terminate Occidental Petroleum\'s (Oxy) 
Block 15 participation contract for alleged violations of the 
hydrocarbon law.  If the allegations are upheld, Oxy\'s Block 
15 contract could be terminated and the assets would revert 
to state-owned Petroecuador.  The Procurador initiated his 
investigation of Oxy shortly after Oxy won a $75 million 
international arbitration award against the GOE.  The 
Ambassador conveyed the USG\'s extreme displeasure at this 
action to the Ministers of Trade, Economy, Foreign Affairs 
and Government, as well as to President Gutierrez.  Though 
there may be technical grounds to justify the Procurador\'s 
action, it smacks of retaliation.  While criticizing the GOE 
for the abuse of its legal system and explaining that it 
could result in serious trade implications, the Ambassador 
also encouraged the GOE to discuss with Oxy an amicable 
resolution to all its pending issues with the GOE.  End 
Summary. 
 
Retaliation or Coincidence? 
--------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) The Procurador (Solicitor General) admitted to the 
press that he started the investigation of Occidental 
Petroleum (Oxy) shortly after the July international 
arbitration decision against the GOE, awarding $75 million to 
Oxy (through 12/31/03) in value-added-tax (VAT) drawbacks. 
Yet, he claims this latest action has nothing to do with that 
decision.  He is also investigating Canadian oil company 
EnCana, which has its own VAT drawback case before 
international arbitrators.  Last week, under apparent 
pressure from the GOE, the GOE-appointed arbitrator resigned 
in the EnCana arbitration.  He also was the GOE-selected 
arbitrator in the Oxy international arbitration and joined 
the other two arbitrators in the unanimous decision against 
the GOE. 
 
4.  (U) The Procurador seeks to nullify Oxy\'s contract with 
the GOE on the basis that Oxy failed to comply with 
Ecuadorian law by transferring 40% of its block 15 assets to 
Canadian oil company EnCana without Ministry of Energy 
authorization and 33 other alleged violations of the law. 
Under Ecuador\'s hydrocarbon law, if Oxy transferred its 
contractual rights to EnCana without Ministry of Energy 
authorization or is a repeat violator of the law, the 
contract can be terminated (caducidad) and the area under 
contract would be immediately returned to the state, with all 
equipment, facilities, etc. transferred to state-owned 
Petroecuador, without cost.  Upon the Minister of Energy\'s 
declaration of caducidad, the oil company will have between 
30 and 60 days to resolve any alleged violations. 
 
Oxy\'s Position 
-------------- 
 
5.  (C) Econoffs met August 23 with Oxy\'s Ecuadorian 
President and GM Jerry Ellis, who said that while Oxy \"could 
have done things better\" with respect to the transfer, Oxy 
did materially comply with the law.  Ellis said Oxy notified 
then Energy Minister Pablo Teran in October 2000 about the 
proposed transfer of 40% of Oxy\'s economic interest in block 
15 to a subsidiary of EnCana.  In January 2001, after an 
exchange of letters and information between Oxy and the 
Ministry of Energy (MOE), Teran sent a letter to Oxy that 
said, according to Ellis, that Oxy should seek the MOE\'s 
approval at the time of the transfer of legal title to 
EnCana.  Ellis said that EnCana fulfilled its preconditions 
for the transfer this year and Oxy sent a letter to the MOE 
and Petroecuador on July 15 seeking authorization of the 
transfer.  Ellis claims that Oxy has not assigned any rights 
and obligations under the Block 15 participation agreement to 
EnCana.  He left Quito on August 24 for Oxy\'s corporate 
headquarters in Los Angeles to discuss the matter. 
 
6.  (C) Ellis said that 15 of the 33 other violations were 
for failure to file reports in a timely fashion.  These 
reports fell through the cracks when the responsible employee 
was transferred to Russia.  He claimed the other violations, 
like drilling without permits, were minor, citing drilling 
operations that were authorized to begin on January 1, but 
were actually begun on December 31, as an example of the 
minor nature of the breach.  Other claims include over 
drilling.  Ellis said that fines have been paid for most of 
the violations.  In some cases, administrative procedures 
have not been completed.  Still, the hydrocarbon law does 
provide for sanctions, including caducidad, for repeated 
violations of the law. 
 
EnCana\'s in Trouble Too 
----------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) EnCana (nearly 50% U.S. investor owned) has 
problems too.  It has set up a data room for potential 
purchasers interested in its Ecuadorian assets.  The 
Procurador\'s accusations regarding the transfer from Oxy 
casts doubt on the legality of the transfer of Oxy\'s Block 15 
assets to EnCana and on any sale of EnCana\'s Ecuadorian 
assets.  EnCana tells us that it has also been cited for 
seven violations of the hydrocarbon law.  Press reports 
suggest that all or most other oil companies operating in 
Ecuador are also under investigation, and some analysts 
believe Ecuador is seeking to use these investigations to 
re-negotiate its contracts with all the private oil companies. 
 
Embassy Action 
-------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) The Ambassador raised the Oxy issue with Trade 
Minister Baki on August 23.  She explained to Baki that the 
GOE\'s apparent retaliation against Oxy for the VAT decision 
could have serious implications for Ecuador\'s free trade 
negotiations and ATPDEA benefits (ref telcons).  The 
Ambassador conveyed the same message to Minster of Economy 
Mauricio Yepez later that afternoon and again on August 24 to 
Minister of Government Baca.  She also raised the issue 
during her visit with the Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Patricio Zuquilanda.  The Ambassador spoke with President 
Gutierrez on August 24, expressing the USG\'s concern about 
the Procurador\'s actions and irresponsible statements to the 
press.  Ambassador suggested Gutierrez form a commission to 
resolve the matter, noting that Oxy would be willing to sit 
down and talk (as Oxy had previously relayed to the Embassy). 
 
9.  (C) The ministers had also agreed to raise the issue with 
President Gutierrez and all concurred that it reflected 
poorly on Ecuador and its investment climate.  Baki called it 
an outrage.  Baca said he had tried to dissuade the 
Procurador from taking the action, telling him it was 
unacceptable.  Even if there were grounds to investigate, 
Baca said, the Procurador was wrong to go to the press before 
giving Oxy a chance to respond.  Yepez suggested forming a 
commission to sit down with Oxy to resolve the Procurador\'s 
allegations and the VAT drawback case, which the Procurador 
has appealed to the court in London.  Yepez opined that a 
commission would limit the influence of the Procurador, tone 
down the rhetoric and provide an opportunity for resolution 
on all pending matters between Oxy and the GOE.  The Foreign 
Minister noted to the Ambassador that his press comments 
focused on finding solutions in a calm environment. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  (C) Clearly, the Procurador is retaliating against Oxy 
as a result of the VAT arbitration decision.  This course of 
action flies directly in the face of what Ecuador is trying 
to accomplish -- reach a free trade agreement and attract 
foreign investors, particularly in the oil and energy 
sectors.  That said, the Procurador might well have technical 
grounds to pursue actions against Oxy and, possibly, other 
private oil companies.  Still, the most egregious allegation 
against Oxy is the failure to get prior authorization before 
the transfer of some assets to EnCana, an accusation that Oxy 
vehemently denies.  The GOE has not, and cannot credibly 
claim that the proposed transfer from Oxy to EnCana would 
adversely affect Ecuador\'s interests.  Both are reputable, 
responsible companies and both are among the biggest 
taxpayers in Ecuador. 
 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
11.  (C)  A strong signal must be sent to the GOE, that 
government retaliation against U.S. companies that win 
arbitration cases is unacceptable.  We urge Washington 
interlocutors to engage the GOE to express our extreme 
displeasure at the abuse of the legal system against U.S. 
companies (including in the cases of BellSouth, Duke Energy 
and, potentially, ChevronTexaco) and to reiterate that 
continuing abuses will have serious bilateral implications. 
At the same time, we urge Washington to encourage Oxy and the 
GOE to discuss the pending matters, perhaps along the lines 
suggested by Minister of Economy Yepez.  Post has already 
begun the process and will continue to vigorously press for a 
speedy resolution of the current problems and more 
responsible behavior by the Procurador and other GOE 
officials in the future. 
KENNEY 
"
"20039","8/24/2004 22:45","04QUITO2333","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002333 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/AND 
DEPT FOR EB/IFD/OMA 
TREASURY FOR G. SIGNORELLI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, ENRG, EC, Economy 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR\'S ECONOMIC PROGRAM 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Minister of Economy and Finances Mauricio 
Yepez told Ambassador on August 23 that the GOE had covered 
its financing needs for 2004 and is now planning for 2005. 
The GOE would carry out significant reforms this fall, 
including ending the subsidy of household gas and a reform of 
the electric sector.  Ecuador would, however, need 
International Financial Institution (IFI) assistance next 
year, and hoped for U.S. support for an IMF \"comfort letter,\" 
after the reforms were carried out, to allow the IDB and the 
IBRD to disburse funds.  Yepez said he would be in Washington 
the first week of September, and asked for help setting up 
appointments at State and Treasury.  End Summary. 
 
Financing 2004 
-------------- 
 
2.  (U) At his request, Yepez met with Ambassador to discuss 
the Occidental Petroleum case (septel) and the GOE\'s economic 
program.  Yepez started by stating that the GOE has covered 
its financing gap for 2004.  To a great extent, the gap has 
been covered by using resources in the petroleum fund 
(FEIREP, by its Spanish acronym) to buy back debt from the 
Social Security Fund, and then placing debt back into Social 
Security from the central government.  However, this 
operation has not substantially affected debt maturing in 
2005, making that a difficult year for Ecuador. 
 
Three Major Reforms 
------------------- 
 
3.  (U) Yepez noted that an IMF team was presently in Quito 
reviewing Ecuador\'s plans, and particularly its 2005 budget. 
He had proposed to the Fund three major reforms for this 
fall.  First, as part of the budget, oil revenues would be 
re-categorized and treated as investment income which should 
be re-invested, rather than current revenue to be put into 
current expenditures.  He characterized this change as a 
back-door way of breaking some of the current pre-assignment 
of revenues and giving the GOE more budget flexibility. 
 
4.  (U) Second, Yepez said the GOE would raise gas prices in 
November.  With petroleum prices as high as they were, the 
gas subsidy would otherwise cost the GOE more than $300 
million, and the budget would be impossible finance.  He said 
that President Gutierrez was fully behind this proposal, 
which has always been considered politically impossible.  He 
would announce the gas price on one day, Yepez said, and 
Gutierrez would announce a package of social measures the 
next day to alleviate the burden on the poor.  Ambassador 
offered to coordinate, and suggested that an announcement of 
already planned USG assistance (such as already planned 
Medretes) might be made simultaneously to help soften the 
blow and support the government. 
 
5.  (U) Finally, the GOE would propose electric sector reform 
geared to encouraging private investment in generation.  This 
reform was already with the President and would be sent to 
Congress within days, he expected. 
 
Support from the IFIs Needed 
---------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Between the elimination of the gas subsidy and 
continued high oil prices, Yepez said, the GOE would be 
within reach of filling the financing gap for 2005.  However, 
it would need support from the IFIs to make it the last few 
meters.  The GOE was not receiving IFI budget support this 
year, and was making substantial payments on its IFI debt. 
Net, Ecuador would retire some $400 million of IFI debt in 
2004.  The Ministry of Finance had reviewed all planned 
borrowing from the Institutions for the coming years and cut 
it back to a bare minimum.  Any project which did not 
demonstrate clear and substantial returns was being rejected. 
 However, some budget support would be necessary. 
 
Comfort From the IMF Sought 
--------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Of course, in order to get support from the IFI\'s 
some kind of arrangement would have to be reached with the 
IMF.  The GOE did not need and was not seeking funding from 
the IMF.  It understood, as well, that the Fund would be 
reluctant to sign another agreement with the GOE until 
Ecuador was able to show that it is capable of carrying out 
significant reforms.  However, Yepez said he hoped the IMF 
could issue a comfort letter to the Banks toward the end of 
this year on the basis of a sound fiscal plan, passage of a 
significant electric sector reform, and the elimination of 
the gas subsidy.  Discussions with the IDB suggested that it 
would release some $100 million on the basis of such a 
letter.  Ecuador would approach the IBRD for a similar 
amount.  With this funding, Ecuador could make its payments 
in 2005. 
 
8.  (U) Yepez said he intended to travel to Washington the 
first week of September, and asked Ambassador to help set up 
appointments with officials in the Departments of State and 
Treasury.  He said that September 3 would be ideal for 
appointments, but he would also be available on September 7, 
if necessary. 
 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
9.  (U) Request State and Treasury schedule meetings at an 
appropriate level for Yepez. 
KENNEY 
"
"20040","8/24/2004 22:51","04QUITO2334","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR\'S INDIGENOUS: QUIET BUT CONFIDENT 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Battered by its early association with an 
unpopular government it helped install, bruised by open 
internal divisions, and hurt by a humiliatingly low turnout 
in fizzled national protests in June, Ecuadorian indigenous 
leaders might be expected to have low electoral expectations 
for upcoming municipal elections.  In fact, some indigenous 
leaders defiantly claim the movement remains united and 
strengthened by its travails, and warns that they will fight 
against the Gutierrez government,s liberal economic 
orthodoxy and an FTA with the U.S.  Indigenous leaders also 
warn they could yet be driven to \"extremes\" if conditions 
worsen.  Our view is the indigenous movement, as the only 
force with proven capability to mobilize, remains vitally 
relevant to political stability in Ecuador and should not be 
counted out. End Summary. 
 
In weakness, strength 
---------------------- 
 
2.  (U) On August 17, PolCouns and PolOff met former FM Nina 
Pacari, whose indigenous party, Pachakutik, broke its 
alliance with President Gutierrez and left positions in his 
government a year ago.  Pacari insisted that despite poor 
turnout during recent national protests and contrary to the 
opinion of many political analysts here, the break with the 
government and recent open divisions over whether to protest 
the Gutierrez government have not seriously damaged the 
indigenous movement.  Instead, she believes the indigenous 
movement emerged strengthened and \"consolidated\" after 
Amazonian indigenous leaders were discredited and rejected by 
their base for supporting Gutierrez.  Many of those leaders 
have now been replaced, according to Pacari.  Pacari did 
acknowledge that the movement learned a costly lesson by 
participating in Gutierrez\' government: that without 
controlling the Presidency itself, the movement could not 
achieve its goals. 
 
3.  (U) Pachakutik,s national coordinator, Guilberto 
Talahua, similarly claimed the indigenous movement is growing 
stronger, especially at the local levels.   He agrees that 
their political bases are consolidated and stated that they 
haven\'t lost their credibility.  Pacari said that the media 
wrongly assume the weakness of the movement.  Instead, she 
believed the indigenous movement suffers from an \"image\" 
problem.  Regarding the fizzled attempt at mobilization in 
June, she said that while some of the national leaders 
didn,t support it, the leaders at the lower levels reacted 
and rejected pro-Gutierrez indigenous leaders. 
 
From Partners to Kingmakers 
---------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Pacari was very critical of Gutierrez saying 
Gutierrez had committed worse offenses than former (corrupt) 
President Bucaram.  However, the movement is not interested 
in getting rid of Gutierrez unless more \"extreme\" conditions 
arise.   She said the Social Christian Party (PSC) is waiting 
for an opportune moment to get rid of Gutierrez and had 
sought to enlist the help of the indigenous movement; 
however, the indigenous are not interested in serving PSC 
interests.  She said that by getting rid of Presidents 
Bucaram and Mahuad through protest the movement hat matured 
and now realizes \"change for the sake of change\" is not worth 
it unless there is someone better who can step in and respond 
to the historic moment.  Today, she said, conditions are not 
right for an indigenous mobilization to oust the President. 
However, she warned, Gutierrez, \"divide and rule\" approach 
and neo-liberal policies could conceivably drive the country 
to just the \"extremes\" that could provoke popular reaction. 
 
5.  (SBU) Minister of Government Raul Baca, told the 
Ambassador on August 24 that despite the indigenous 
movement\'s substantive differences with GOE policy, he 
maintains an open door for dialogue with the indigenous.  The 
GOE is very pleased that the indigenous movement has chosen 
to participate within the democratic electoral process 
despite its bitter exit from the Gutierrez government a year 
ago. 
 
US Role Criticized 
------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Reacting to public pronouncements by the 
Ambassador, Pacari criticized the US distinction between 
supporting the institutions of democracy versus President 
Gutierrez personally, saying that the two are inextricable. 
She believed the US was acting like an \"big brother\" telling 
Ecuador what form of democracy was best.  She criticized 
Gutierrez for being \"subservient\" to the US on issues such as 
the FTA and said he would not fight for conditions favorable 
to Ecuador.  Pacari believes that Ecuador is not ready for a 
FTA but claimed some personal credit for having led the 
indigenous movement from outright rejection of free trade to 
support for a ten-year moratorium to allow Ecuador to prepare 
for any FTA with any country. 
 
No Worries About Elections 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) Pacari said the indigenous movement is now focused on 
long-term goals and not worried about partisan electoral 
results. Pachackutik would participate in upcoming elections 
but were not suffering any \"anguish\" over the results. She 
also said they would focus on working at the local level. 
Talahua stated publicly that there has been and will be no 
rapprochement with anyone in the current Government. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) While the indigenous movement may not be as united 
as they were, their potential must not be discounted or 
underestimated.  While Gutierrez has proven skillful at 
sowing division, the indigenous leaders are regrouping and in 
our view, retain the potential for civil disturbance if 
provoked.  That said, Pacari,s complacency about the 
upcoming municipal elections probably indicates confidence 
that the indigenous will retain or extend its representation 
in town halls where the indigenous are concentrated. 
Regardless, economic and political conditions in Ecuador have 
clearly not reached the \"extremes\" required to stir a 
slumbering indigenous movement. 
KENNEY 
"
"20100","8/26/2004 12:39","04QUITO2362","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE152009","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, PHUM, KDEM, AORC, EC, UNGA, UN 
SUBJECT: AMB. SIV PROMOTES UNGA AGENDA 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 152009 
 
     B. QUITO 2104 
     C. QUITO 2106 
     D. QUITO 2274 
     E. SECSTATE 181382 
 
1.  Summary:  During a visit to Quito on August 21-22, U.S. 
Representative to ECOSOC Ambassador Sichan Siv raised UNGA 
demarche points (Ref A) and other multilateral issues with 
Amb. Fernando Flores Macias, DirGen for Multilateral Affairs. 
 Ambassador Siv also expressed disappointment with Ecuador\'s 
ECOSOC vote in favor of Cuba\'s ECOSOC resolution on July 22 
(Ref B), inquired about Ecuador\'s candidacy for leadership of 
the G-77, and explained U.S. views on the International 
Finance Facility.  Flores raised a recent GoE anti-terrorism 
seminar he had organized, was unresponsive on the Cuba vote, 
and vague about G-77.  He highlighted new GoE activity on 
TIP; otherwise his responses on UNGA issues tracked with 
previous responses (Ref C).  Flores also made several 
suggestions to improve the effectiveness of the First 
Committee.  End Summary. 
 
UNGA Demarche Issues 
-------------------- 
 
2.  Ambassador Siv raised the Monterrey consensus that each 
country has primary responsibility for its own economic and 
social development and importance of mobilizing domestic 
resources in the private sector for development.  He 
expressed fundamental USG concerns with the practicality of 
global taxation and said the U.S. could not support 
mechanisms such as the International Finance Facility. 
Flores agreed and noted the consensus encouraged regional and 
sub-regional collaboration on development, which Ecuador 
intends to pursue within GRULAC and the Andean community. 
Siv asked about GoE views on human cloning.  Flores said the 
GoE was studying the issue with the help of scientific 
experts and did not yet have a position.  Ambassador Siv 
emphasized USG commitment to strengthen collaboration to 
combat trafficking in persons (TIP).  Flores welcomed USG 
interest and expressed GoE commitment to address the issue, 
highlighting the August 18 announcement of a Presidential 
decree addressing TIP and other related problems (Ref D) 
Ambassador Siv made the point that democracies form the 
majority in UN bodies and by working together could have a 
profound impact on the operation of those bodies.  Reducing 
the number of Middle East resolutions also remains a U.S. 
priority.  Flores agreed that democracies should collaborate 
to improve the operation of UN bodies. 
 
Improving the First Committee 
----------------------------- 
 
3.  Flores told Ambassador Siv that the GoE agrees with the 
U.S. view (conveyed to him with delivery of the U.S. note 
verbale on August 20 by PolOff, per Ref E), that 
revitalization of the UNGA, including the First Committee is 
of vital importance.  He elaborated practical suggestions the 
GoE will propose, including: 
 
-- limiting congratulations and greetings to the beginning of 
the session. 
 
-- limiting sessions to address single themes, except in 
general debate. 
 
-- treat some recurring themes bi- or tri-annually. 
 
Flores emphasized that the GoE believes it is essential to 
ensure greater follow-up of UN resolutions to enhance 
effectiveness. 
 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
4.  Asked by Ambassador Siv about the GoE candidacy for 
leadership of the G-77, Flores said only that the leadership 
issue should be sorted out soon within the GRULAC group.  He 
was more eager to raise the GoE\'s ongoing efforts to combat 
terrorism, highlighting a recent GoE seminar involving 
experts from Vienna and the OAS (which he had organized). 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5.  Flores\' vague response on G-77 might indicate lack of 
confidence that Ecuador will eventually be selected as the 
GRULAC candidate. 
LEDAHAWSKY 
"
"20107","8/26/2004 14:29","04QUITO2365","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE168250","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS, ETRD, SENV, EC, OES, Environment 
SUBJECT: NO WORD FROM ECUADOR ON TEDS CHANGES 
 
REF: STATE 168250 
 
Last week, pursuant to reftel request, Post followed up with 
Government of Ecuador (GOE) authorities on the new 
regulations regarding the design and use of turtle excluder 
devices (TEDs).  The GOE responded that it does not yet have 
any comment on the new TEDs regulations. 
LEDAHAWSKY 
"
"20108","8/26/2004 14:30","04QUITO2366","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE168229","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002366 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, AORC, EC, ICAO 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR\'S RESPONSE TO ICAO ASSEMBLY DEMARCHE 
 
REF: STATE 168229 
 
Reftel ICAO Assembly demarche talking points were delivered 
to the Director General of the Civil Aviation Directorate 
(DAC) Rafael Davila Fierro.  Davila said he agreed with the 
USG talking points and would vote with the US at the ICAO 
Assembly.  He will attend the Assembly, as will the President 
of the Civil Aviation Council Colonel Jorge E. Naranjo A. and 
another GOE representative that has yet to be named. 
Separately, an invitation to the September 28 luncheon was 
extended to Mr. Davila, with the request that he respond to 
the US ICAO Mission. 
LEDAHAWSKY 
"
"20177","8/27/2004 17:43","04QUITO2380","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2327","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002380 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/27/2014 
TAGS: EPET, ETRD, ECON, EC, Oil Sector 
SUBJECT: PROGRESS ON OCCIDENTAL CASE 
 
REF: QUITO 2327 
 
Classified By: CDA Frank Ledahawsky Reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. Occidental Petroleum (Oxy) and Embassy 
efforts to tone down the rhetoric and reach an amicable 
resolution with the GOE are starting to pay dividends.  Oxy 
had a productive meeting with the Procurador (Solicitor 
General).  President Gutierrez has selected a commission, 
comprised mostly of rational members, to address the latest 
accusations by the Procurador and Oxy\'s international 
arbitration with the GOE.  The Procurador said he would not 
link the two issues and has reportedly agreed to say nothing 
further in the press on the Oxy case.  Oxy is pleased with 
the progress that has been made over the last few days.  End 
Summary. 
 
Progress with the Procuraduria 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) Oxy\'s President and GM for Ecuador Jerry Ellis met 
with Procurador General Jose Maria Borja on August 24.  Ellis 
described the meeting as cordial and productive.  The 
following day, Econ Counselor met with attorneys from the 
Procuraduria (Solicitor General\'s Office).  Oxy asserts that 
its transfer of 40% of its Block 15 rights to Canadian Oil 
Company EnCana has not been completed.  The Procuraduria 
cites an October 1, 2000 agreement with City Investing 
Company Ltd. (at that time EnCana\'s subsidiary operating in 
Ecuador) and a November 1, 2000 \"Farmout Agreement\" that was 
filed with the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to 
support its allegation that the transfer was completed in 
2000.  Press reports refer to several SEC filings by Oxy that 
purportedly confirm the transfer. 
 
3. (SBU) The Procurador\'s representatives told us that it is 
not their desire to have the GOE cancel Oxy\'s Block 15 
participation contract and take over Oxy\'s Block 15 assets. 
Still, they asserted, the law could not be ignored.  In press 
statements, the Procurador has said he will not only look at 
Oxy, but will also review the contracts of all oil companies 
operating in Ecuador, starting next with EnCana. 
 
4. (C) On August 25, the Procuraduria officially notified 
Minister of Energy and Mines Eduardo Lopez of the violations, 
stating they were grounds for the termination (caducidad) of 
Oxy\'s Block 15 contract.  Attorneys for the Procuraduria told 
EconCouns August 25 that the Procuraduria would make no more 
public comments on the issue, now that it is in the hands of 
the MEM.  They also said that the Procurador would not link 
the alleged hydrocarbon law violations with Oxy\'s $75 million 
value added tax (VAT) international arbitration case, 
currently under appeal at the Queen\'s Court in London.  The 
Procurador\'s representatives told us that given Ecuador\'s 
Director of Internal Revenue Service (SRI) Elsa de Mena\'s 
public admission that the SRI owed Oxy at least $55 million 
in VAT drawbacks, even if the GOE won the appeal, it would 
make arrangements with Oxy for payment of that amount.  If 
the GOE lost the VAT case appeal, they said the GOE would 
meet its obligation to pay the $75 million in full. 
 
 
Case Generates Lots of Attention 
-------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) The press has widely publicized the case.  Numerous 
articles and electronic media have expressed support for the 
Procurador and some criticize the international arbitration 
decision for allegedly ignoring the cases pending in 
Ecuadorian courts on the same issues.  Members of Congress, 
many of whom are already critical of private investment in 
the oil sector, have been quick to urge the cause against Oxy 
and the Procurador\'s investigations of other foreign oil 
companies.  In the meeting with Procuraduria staff, EconCouns 
emphasized the importance of reducing the quantity and tone 
of rhetoric on the issue.  In past cases in Ecuador the 
negative rhetoric had gotten out of control and the 
Government had painted itself into a corner.  Procuraduria 
staff acknowledged that this was a danger, but said that 
their boss had issued an order to his press staff that 
morning to stop making statements, and had said that he had 
made his last public pronouncements on the subject, for now. 
 
Oxy\'s Reaction 
-------------- 
6. (C) Oxy admits that it could have handled the transfer to 
EnCana better (reftel) and that it has violated the 
hydrocarbon law on a number of occasions (providing a list of 
51 possible violations to Econoffs, 17 more than originally 
cited by the Procuraduria and in press reports).  As to the 
other violations of the hydrocarbon law, Oxy notes that it 
has complied with all requests from the MEM and where Oxy has 
violated the law it has paid the statutory fine. 
 
 
7. (C) Ellis has repeatedly told Econoffs that Oxy is willing 
to sit down with the GOE to discuss the alleged hydrocarbon 
law violations and Oxy\'s VAT arbitration award.  Oxy views 
the August 26 formation of a commission composed of the 
Procurador, Ministers of Economy and Energy, a representative 
from the Corruption Commission, and two well-respected 
private sector representatives, Walter Spurrier and Galo 
Garcia Ferrat, as another positive development.  Oxy 
headquarters representatives will likely visit Quito next 
week to begin discussions. 
 
8. (C) Oxy headquarters lawyers called EconCouns on August 26 
to discuss the case and review the names of new counsel they 
intend to contract to work on this issue.  EconCouns 
recounted the meeting with Procuraduria lawyers, updated them 
on the formation of the commission, and provided background 
information on the lawyers they are considering hiring. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (C) Post\'s messages to the GOE about the gravity of the 
Procurador\'s (over) reaction to the Oxy transfer and other 
violations and the potential ramifications for ATPDEA 
benefits, FTA negotiations and other USG support are sinking 
in with the GOE.  Procuraduria representatives\' statement 
that they have no desire to see Oxy\'s contract cancelled or 
Oxy leave Ecuador, a statement echoed by other members of the 
GOE, appears to be a result of the forceful position we have 
taken.  Oxy\'s willingness to sit down with the GOE to discuss 
the issues is also encouraging. 
 
10. (C) This latest crisis could be turned into an 
opportunity to not only resolve current issues, but also 
address additional development/foreign investment in the oil 
sector. The MEM announced August 26 the discovery of 4.6 
billion barrels in new reserves in the 
Ishpingo-Tambococha-Tiputini (ITT) fields.  However, there is 
also a risk, albeit small at this point, that the attention 
of the press and the Congress could put added pressure on the 
weak Gutierrez administration, making it more difficult to 
resolve the crisis in a quiet and amicable manner. 
LEDAHAWSKY 
"
"20181","8/27/2004 19:59","04QUITO2382","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2203","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002382 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/WRA, AC, WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM, MASS, MOPS, MARR, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADORIAN ARMS, MUNITIONS OFFERED FOR DESTRUCTION 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2203 
 
     B. QUITO 1699 
 
1.  In response to the Embassy\'s offer to include Ecuador in 
the State Department\'s Small Arms/Light Weapons (SALW) 
destruction program, Ecuador\'s service chiefs recently 
provided lists of weapons and ammunition they wish to 
destroy.  Ecuador\'s joint command later blessed the 
inventory.  Post believes there is sufficient overlap between 
USG priorities (MANPADS, RPGs, shoulder-fired munitions) and 
the military\'s request to merit Ecuador\'s SALW inclusion. 
 
2.  Translation of combined lists follows (Post also emailed 
the list August 27 to PM/WRA POC Mark Adams). 
 
Type  Quantity 
 
A.  IGLA Missiles        30 
B.  RPGs     6,467 
C.  Hand Grenades 19,013 
D.  Rifle Grenades      38,560 
E.  LAW Rockets    1,119 
F.  Ammo - 7.62mm 90,441 
G.  Ammo - 5.56mm         109,442 
H.  Ammo - .50            281,614 
I.  Ammo - 14.5mm  8,660 
J.  Ammo - 20mm   10,014 
K.  Ammo - 23mm         137 
L.  Ammo - 30mm   46,890 
M.  Ammo - 35mm    5,524 
N.  Rockets - likely 68mm      3,730 
O.  Rocket Warheads - 68mm     2,434 
P.  Shells - 30mm    542 
R.  Shells - 40mm  6,537 
S.  Shells - 57mm  7,331 
T.  Shells - 60mm        1,565 
U.  Shells - 75mm  5,971 
V.  Shells - 81mm  4,535 
W.  Shells - 90mm  8,410 
X.  Combat Rifles - Mauser     53 
Y.  Machine Guns - small cal   15 
 
3.  The Embassy stands ready to assist State in any/all 
manners possible to get this mutually beneficial program 
underway soonest. 
 
LEDAHAWSKY 
"
"20223","8/30/2004 18:03","04QUITO2399","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2332","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002399 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ETRD, ECON, EFIN, EC, BR, UN 
SUBJECT: FAWNING THRONGS GREET LULA IN QUITO 
 
REF: QUITO 2332 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.5 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Cheering crowds met Brazilian President 
Lula da Silva at every stop during his August 24-25 visit to 
Quito.  Pre-arrival press was universally positive, 
portraying the ex-labor leader as a third-world savior and 
counterweight to the United States.  Concurrently, editorials 
ravaged Ecuador President Lucio Gutierrez for hitching 
Ecuador\'s fortunes solely to the United States and the Free 
Trade Agreement.  Perhaps sensing that rolling out the 
reddest carpet for Lula might offend the USG (and derail the 
FTA), GoE protocol downgraded the visit from \"state\" to 
\"official.\"  Along similar lines, Ecuador\'s foreign minister 
sought an urgent meeting August 24 with the Ambassador to 
trumpet Ecuador\'s earlier refusal to back a pro-Cuba 
Brazilian initiative. 
 
2.  (C) In public remarks Lula predictably promoted his 
vision for a new economic model, South American unity, and a 
LatAm economic bloc capable of confronting the U.S. and 
European Union.  Gutierrez seconded the Brazilian\'s 
discourse, asserting the international community should fight 
hunger with the same vigor and united front now reserved for 
combating terror.  Media lauded the scope of the 44-point 
joint declaration, although the text seems heavy on \"resolve 
to study\" and light on \"commit to.\"  With pomp and 
circumstance the GoE assuaged elites who seek Bolivarian 
unity, while it skillfully avoided commitments likely to 
dampen U.S. FTA enthusiasm.  END SUMMARY. 
 
3.  (U) President of Brazil Ignacio \"Lula\" da Silva conducted 
an official visit to Ecuador August 24-25, calling on the 
president and foreign minister, receiving decorations from 
Congress and the Executive, signing a joint presidential 
declaration, and speaking briefly before media.  A press 
darling in Ecuador, pre-visit coverage treated Lula like a 
conquering hero, playing up his supposed success \"standing up 
to the gringos.\"  A South American counterweight to U.S. 
hegemony was forming, columnists waxed, led by 
internationalist Lula, a Hugo Chavez re-invigorated by recent 
referendum results, and Argentina\'s wildly popular Nestor 
Kirchner.  Ecuador was smart to get aboard. 
 
4.  (U) Media accounts differed on specifics, but most 
ventured that Lula\'s Quito talking points would include:  1) 
seeking Ecuadorian support for regional integration, namely 
tighter ties between Mercosur and the Andean Community of 
Nations (CAN); 2) fomenting an economic bloc capable of 
negotiating on level ground with the United States and 
Europe; 3) inking deals in the energy and telecommunications 
sectors, and 4) obtaining GoE buy-in for Brazil\'s bid for UN 
Security Council permanent membership.  A solitary article 
pondered the risks to the FTA of a too-cozy Lula visit, its 
authors correctly noting that Ecuadorian exports to the 
United States were five hundred times greater than its 
shipments to Brazil. 
 
5.  (C) Might a like-thinker exist at the foreign ministry, 
cognizant that an open-arms welcome to FTA/FTAA basher Lula 
could complicate ongoing free trade talks with the United 
States?  Perhaps.  Foreign Minister Patricio Zuquilanda 
telephoned the Embassy August 23, urgently seeking a meeting 
with the Ambassador.  At the ministry the next day, 
Zuquilanda boastfully claimed he had convinced the Brazilians 
to withdraw a Rio Group initiative to offer Cuba membership 
(Reftel).  \"How could a group of democracies dialog with a 
nation that rejects democracy?,\" Zuquilanda pondered.  He 
claimed that Gutierrez would deliver the same line to Lula, 
should Cuba issues arise in bilateral discussions. 
 
6.  (U) Run-up atmospherics grew stranger still.  Speaking 
before press August 24, Acting Quito Mayor Antonio Ricaurte 
protested that Lula would not receive the keys to the city, 
owing to Gutierrez\'s opposition.  \"Quitenos reject the 
president\'s attitude,\" Ricaurte exclaimed.  Palace staff 
responded, arguing that Lula\'s visit was \"official, not 
state.\" Stoking further conspiracy theorists, one newspaper 
wrote that the presidential color guard did not deploy for 
Lula\'s palace arrival, a definite snub. 
 
7.  (U) The Brazilian leader eventually obtained the city 
keys, as well as congressional and presidential hardware, in 
the 22-hour lovefest that followed.  Introducing Lula before 
a special session of Congress, chief legislator Guillermo 
Landazuri praised the Brazilian\'s principled opposition to 
U.S.-led free trade accords.  \"Signing the FTA must not in 
itself be a goal, but rather we should be seeking clear 
commercial advantages,\" Landazuri argued.  Lula\'s subsequent 
diatribe claimed that FTAs were hypocritical and unjust. 
Surprising, in that Gutierrez praised free trade in his 
retort to Hugo Chavez\'s similar remarks at the June OAS 
General Assembly, the Ecuadorian president followed Lula\'s 
remarks with his own bash on neoliberalism.  \"The current 
world situation obliges the hemisphere\'s nations to seek a 
new order,\" Gutierrez asserted.  He added that \"the 
international community expends too much effort on security 
considerations and not enough on fighting hunger.\" 
 
8.  (U) The Embassy August 26 obtained a copy of the 
presidents\' joint declaration.  While lengthy (44 points), 
mushy phrases like \"resolve to study\" and \"express their 
desires to\" pepper the text.  Highlights include references 
to the nations\' signings of side agreements on energy policy 
and telecommunications, their intention to seek stronger 
Mercosur-CAN ties, their determination to combat trafficking 
in persons (TIP), and their agreement to seek an expanded UN 
Security Council (with a permanent seat for Brazil). 
Unilaterally, Brazil offered assistance to Ecuadorian 
exporters, aiming to reduce the one-sided trade relationship, 
and committed to helping revamp INECI, the Ecuadorian MFA\'s 
bilateral assistance office.  Of concern was the leaders\' 
commitment to make the 2005 South America-Arab League summit 
\"a new framework for cooperation and dialog between these 
regions.\" 
 
9.  (U) Positive security-related themes also made the final 
declaration cut.  Both countries defense ministries will look 
to augment cooperation, with Brazil possibly providing 
Ecuador intelligence gathered by SIVAM, its Amazon region 
collection platform.  They hailed their peacekeeping 
contributions in Haiti and implored the international 
community to commit long-term to resolving that nation\'s 
pressing problems.  Compromise reined regarding Cuba, the 
declaration recommending Rio Group dialog with Castro but 
only after reaching agreement on a pro-democracy agenda. 
 
10.  (C) COMMENT:  Lula\'s working-class roots, gringo 
bashing, and rhetorical skills make him pop-star popular 
here.  Even Ecuadorian elites cut him slack over his dubious 
domestic record and diplomatic ham-handedness.  Gutierrez, 
focused of late on October local elections, thus had no 
choice but to welcome the Brazilian warmly - anything less 
risked exposing his own political unpopularity.  Similarly, 
good sense dictates that Ecuadorian exporters look to expand 
overseas markets, although Brazil, which produces many 
competing products, looks particularly tough to crack. 
 
11.  (C) Calls for Latin solidarity notwithstanding, we see 
no sea change in Ecuadorian foreign or trade policy resulting 
from Lula\'s visit.  Rhetoric alone cannot make Brazil 
Ecuador\'s largest foreign investor, export destination, 
assistance provider, or migrant destination, all roles 
currently played by the United States.  Gutierrez knows this. 
 While the state/official silliness was clumsy and 
Zuquilanda\'s Ambassadorial call contrived, the signal seemed 
clear:  Ecuador desires southern allies, but requires 
northern friends.  END COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"20329","9/2/2004 22:01","04QUITO2418","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2327|04QUITO2380","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002418 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO USTR BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2014 
TAGS: EPET, ETRD, ECON, EC, Oil Sector 
SUBJECT: OXY BRINGS IN THE BIG GUNS - EMBASSY KEEPS FIRING 
AWAY 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2327 
     B. QUITO 2380 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.5 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (U) Summary.  Occidental Petroleum (Oxy) brought a team 
of lawyers and executives to Ecuador to discuss the GOE\'s 
claims that Oxy failed to comply with the hydrocarbon law in 
the transfer of 40% share of its Block 15 interest to 
Canadian oil company EnCana.  Oxy is confident that it is on 
solid legal ground in the matter, but remains willing to 
discuss this and other issues (i.e., its $75 million VAT 
award) with the GOE.  Oxy prefers to keep the matter as low 
profile as possible, for the time being.  GOE officials 
expressed confidence that they were right that Oxy failed to 
get GOE authorization for the transfer, but that is likely 
due more to their lack of understanding of the issue than the 
strength of their legal argument.  The Ambassador met with 
the Oxy representatives explaining the efforts that she and 
the Embassy team have made on Oxy\'s behalf and offered Oxy 
advice on how to proceed with the GOE.  Oxy representatives 
were meeting with the Procurador, Minister of Government and 
perhaps other GOE officials in the coming days.  This is yet 
another instance in which one person can do great harm to a 
US company and Ecuador\'s best interests.  End Summary. 
 
Oxy Reps Come to Town - With Strong Legal Arguments 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
2.  (C) President and General Manager of Occidental Petroleum 
(Oxy) Exploration and Production Company John Morgan is in 
Quito to discuss the GOE allegations of an unauthorized 
transfer of 40% of Oxy\'s share of the Block 15 oil field to 
Canadian oil company EnCana (reftels).  He and his team of 
seven lawyers and executives met with the Ambassador on 
September 1.  Oxy officials cited Ecuadorian law, regulations 
and constitutional provisions and the transfer contract 
language supporting its position that it was operating within 
Ecuadorian law in the transfer to EnCana.  The Ambassador 
explained that in contacts with the GOE it appeared that 
Procurador Jose Maria Borja was becoming quite nervous about 
the case.  She added that it is unclear whether Borja was 
acting on his own or at the behest of someone else, but the 
former seemed more likely.  Borja\'s efforts may be an attempt 
to soften the blow of the expected Queen\'s Court ruling in 
Oxy\'s favor on the GOE appeal of the $75 million 
international arbitration award against the GOE.  All in the 
meeting agreed that Borja was a loose cannon and not to be 
trusted.  The Ambassador explained that she had spoken with 
President Gutierrez about the case and the day before has 
also raised it with Minister of Economy and Finance Mauricio 
Yepez.  According to GOE sources, Gutierrez instructed the 
Minister of Energy in a subsequent meeting with his cabinet 
that under no circumstances should Oxy\'s Block 15 contract be 
declared void (caducidad). 
 
3.  (SBU) In conversations with the Ambassador and econoffs, 
several GOE officials said they were certain that Oxy had 
made the transfer without authorization and they expected Oxy 
to acknowledge its alleged transgression and compensate the 
GOE.  GOE officials base their arguments heavily on U.S. SEC 
filings by Oxy and other public documents that imply that the 
sale to EnCana was completed some time ago.  Incredibly, none 
of our GOE interlocutors seemed aware of a GOE regulation 
controlling the transfer between Oxy and EnCana that stated 
the procedures for the transfer and the amount of 
compensation to be paid to the GOE.  They were also 
apparently unaware of the transfer contract provisions 
(though the GOE has copies of the contract) stating the 
transfer would not be complete until authorization was 
provided by the GOE.  Nonetheless, none of the officials we 
have spoken to have said they wanted the contract terminated. 
 
 
4.  (C) Morgan said Oxy wanted to keep a low profile in the 
case.  Confident of Oxy\'s legal position, he wanted to avoid 
the sensationalism of the Ecuadorian press to give the GOE an 
opportunity to \"save face\" in a quiet manner.  He said Oxy is 
willing to discuss with the GOE how it has complied with the 
hydrocarbon law and would be willing to discuss how they 
could work out the payment of the $75 million arbitration 
award.  On the advice of the Ambassador, Oxy sent two lawyers 
to talk with Borja, instead of sending higher-ranking Oxy 
officials to the meeting.  Oxy officials plan to meet with 
Minister of Government Raul Baca on September 2 and will seek 
meetings with Minister of Trade Ivonne Baki and Minister of 
Economy Yepez when they are in the USA (separately) next 
week.  The Ambassador said she would be raising the Oxy case 
with President Gutierrez again, upon his return from the 
Panamanian presidential inauguration.  Oxy and Embassy 
officials will continue to quietly press the case with GOE 
officials and keep one another informed of developments in 
the matter. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5.  (C) This latest commercial dispute highlights a 
continuing problem in Ecuador.  The dearth of any 
institutional or transparent processes leaves room for 
individuals (e.g., Procurador Borja) or GOE entities (GOE 
regulators) to act with whim and caprice without fear of 
being held accountable, under the banner of national 
sovereignty so long as they can argue it is good for Ecuador. 
 These officials only fear pursuit by the Contraloria 
(Inspector General equivalent) and the Civil Corruption 
Commission, both subject to considerable political influence, 
or the vengeance of some future government administration. 
A free trade agreement can help build the institutions 
Ecuador desperately needs, but political will and a 
fundamental change of attitude will be crucial to the real 
improvements in the rule of law and respect for contracts 
Ecuador desperately needs.  We are driving those points home 
to the GOE and explaining that such capricious behavior has 
its costs, in lack of investment and trade benefits. 
KENNEY 
"
"20426","9/8/2004 13:18","04QUITO2446","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2251","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

081318Z Sep 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002446 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE FOR USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/07/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ELAB, EC, President 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT GUTIERREZ\' LATEST POLITICAL BLUNDER 
 
REF: QUITO 2251 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney for reasons 1.4 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  President Gutierrez urgently invited the 
Ambassador to a private breakfast on September 7 to discuss 
fallout from his recent visit to Panama.  There, he had met 
with disgraced former president Abdala Bucaram, setting off a 
political firestorm at home.  After hearing the President\'s 
explanation of events, the Ambassador took the opportunity to 
stress key USG priorities on TIP, labor rights, the promotion 
of an environment conducive to trade, and Galapagos national 
park stability.  SepTels will report on points related to 
Galapagos park management and ongoing Occidental commercial 
disputes. End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Press interest in a possible meeting was provoked 
by ongoing speculation that Gutierrez has agreed to help 
Bucaram return from exile in Panama, where he has resided 
since he was declared mentally incompetent to rule by 
Congress in 1997 (see RefTel).  In this context, the trip to 
Panama to attend the inauguration of Panamanian President 
Torrijos caused speculation about whether Gutierrez and 
Bucaram would meet, which FM Zuquilanda publicly denied. 
 
Panama:  Comedy of Errors 
------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) Nevertheless, the meeting with Bucaram did in fact 
take place and became public.  The President explained his 
political blunder by telling the Ambassador simply that 
\"these things just happen.\"  Gutierrez said that upon 
returning after midnight to his hotel room after an eventful 
inauguration schedule, (during which he met, productively, 
with President Lagos; with the President of Taiwan, prompting 
inquires from the PRC; and (inexplicably) with a 
representative of the Polisario), he found Bucaram waiting 
from him in the hallway outside his room, and felt obliged 
out of common courtesy to agree to a brief meeting. 
 
4.  (C) According to Gutierrez, Bucaram proceeded to plea his 
case to return to Ecuador on \"humanitarian\" grounds, alleging 
a political conspiracy to keep him from returning to Ecuador 
after eight years of separation from family, friends and even 
Ecuadorian cuisine.  Despite the notorious corruption of his 
government, Bucaram also pleaded financial difficulty 
maintaining his lifestyle in exile.  He accused the 
opposition Social Christian Party of Leon Febres Cordero and 
others of trying to entice him to return to overthrow 
Gutierrez.   Comment:  this is farfetched, since Bucaram is 
probably the only Ecuadorian politician with lower popularity 
than Gutierrez himself.  End Comment. 
 
5.  (C) Ultimately, according to Gutierrez, Bucaram asked him 
to form a governmental commission to review the charges 
against him (a sort of \"truth commission,\" as he put it) with 
a view to clearing the legal obstacles preventing his return 
(i.e. several warrants for his arrest on corruption charges). 
 Gutierrez said he responded to Bucaram\'s request with a 
promise only to ask his government\'s legal experts to 
consider the request.  Gutierrez said his legal experts have 
advised against any such effort, and he now has no plans to 
create such a commission.  He believes the political reaction 
to his meeting with Bucaram is a symptom of election politics 
in which the opposition (especially the PSC) seeks to gain 
advantage, especially in the Sierra region where his party, 
the PSP, hopes to gain ground. 
 
Other Issues:  TIP and Labor 
---------------------------- 
 
6.  (C) Gutierrez brightened when the Ambassador raised other 
areas of USG interest.  He cited the submission to Congress 
of new anti-TIP legislation on September 9, noting the 
positive press and public reaction to government efforts in 
this area.  \"Even Congressional Deputy Bohorquez,\" he said, 
\"has supported Government efforts in this area, for a 
change,\" alluding to his sometimes politically strained 
relationship with his wife.  The Ambassador responded that 
there are several women Congressional deputies who have shown 
great interest and deserve credit for efforts to address 
deficiencies in the laws against TIP, from various political 
parties. 
 
7.  (SBU) The Ambassador also raised the draft Presidential 
decree on subcontracting, which we understood would be issued 
shortly and would clarify the labor code and prevent abuse of 
subcontracting to inhibit workers\' freedom of association. 
Gutierrez indicated he was aware of the issue and would check 
with Labor Minister Izurieta on its status.  The Ambassador 
told the President we would do the same. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  (C) Gutierrez\' clumsy handling of his visit to Panama 
reflects either poor political judgment or naivete.  We tend 
to agree with the President that the opposition, led by PSC 
leader Febres Cordero, is milking the Bucaram issue primarily 
for electoral purposes in the run-up to October 17 municipal 
elections.  Unfortunately, this blunder is only the latest in 
a series of events which have cost this government its 
credibility and threatens to undermine public faith in 
democracy.    - 
KENNEY 
"
"20453","9/8/2004 16:30","04QUITO2447","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO2274","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002447 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR CONTINUES TO MOVE FORWARD ON TRAFFICKING 
IN PERSONS 
 
REF: QUITO 2274 
 
1. (U) Summary.  Ecuador continues to push ahead in its fight 
against trafficking in persons (TIP).  The Embassy TIP 
working group met on September 1 to review GOE and USG 
efforts to combat TIP since the August 18th Presidential 
decree (Reftel).  Raids on brothels continued, and the GOE is 
giving victims services priority in its national TIP 
planning.  Government Minister Raul Baca continues to 
coordinate GOE efforts through an active GOE anti-TIP working 
group and told the Ambassador of a new TIP victims shelter 
and the possible opening of another one in the capital. 
Several penal code reform bills to punish traffickers have 
been drafted, and a harmonized bill drafted by the Government 
will be submitted to Congress shortly.  End Summary. 
 
AMBASSADOR\'S MEETINGS WITH GOE OFFICIALS 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) At a breakfast with the Ambassador on August 24, 
Baca, GOE\'s TIP Coordinator, expressed his strong personal 
commitment to combat TIP.  Baca is attempting to harmonize 
several bills in Congress which penalize TIP, child 
pornography, and violence against women.  He noted positive 
press play on the problems and GOE efforts to combat it.  The 
media across the country have written numerous articles on 
child pornography and commercial sexual exploitation, and 
civil society has mobilized marches to demand strong GOE 
efforts to protect victims 
 
3. (SBU) Baca was concerned about providing services to 
victims and mentioned a new victims shelter in Machala.  He 
said one shelter is not enough, so the GOE is exploring with 
UNESCO funding possibilities for a victims\' center in 
historic Quito center.  Upon further investigation, PolOff 
learned the shelter in Machala will open in November and is 
operated jointly by a NGO and the ILO.  The shelter\'s work 
will focus on prevention and recovery of children who are 
victims of sexual exploitation.  PolOff will follow-up with 
the ILO to learn more about the services offered for TIP 
victims. 
 
4. (SBU) Also on August 24, the Ambassador met with National 
Police Chief Jorge Poveda, who discussed his efforts to fight 
TIP and the need for additional work in specific areas. 
Poveda said he believes in the importance of coordination 
between the police and victims\' services\' providers.  (The 
Embassy plans to facilitate this dialogue.)  Poveda said he 
also plans to train additional officers to join DINAPEN, a 
police unit that focuses its work on assisting children, in 
response to mounting requests from provincial police forces 
all over the country. 
 
LAW ENFORCEMENT\'S ACTIONS 
------------------------- 
 
5. (U) DINAPEN continued to conduct raids on brothels and 
nightclubs where minors work as prostitutes.  From August 14 
to 26, the police visited 36 establishments in 14 provinces. 
They rescued 61 minors.  DHS inspections of nightclubs in 
Quito confirm that the number of minor victims found is 
realistic.  (Reports were faxed to WHA/PPC on September 3.) 
The following is pertinent information from the police 
reports: 
 
--On August 15, police found 9 adolescents in a discotheque 
in Esmeraldas. 
--On August 22, 18 minors were found in a discotheque in 
Manabi. 
--From August 21 to 27, 5 minors from Colombia, 1 from 
Argentina, and 1 from Peru were found in raids. 
--Most minors were returned to their parents, but one minor 
in El Oro province reportedly was taken to a shelter. 
 
6. (U) In conjunction with the Capital Historic Center 
Administration, police have conducted raids recently in Quito 
and closed 14 brothels for a lack of appropriate paperwork. 
A September 1 article in leading Quito daily, Hoy newspaper, 
reports that 150 prostitutes were displaced as part of this 
action. 
 
7. (U) DHS trained GOE officers from across the country on 
computer forensics to combat child pornography.  On August 
11, 18 Ecuadorian National Police officers were trained, and 
on August 12, 18 officials from DINAPEN, the judicial police, 
and the prosecutors office received training.  Mariana Yepez, 
the attorney general, opened the August 12 session, expressed 
the GOE\'s commitment to fighting child pornography, and said 
she supports training for GOE personnel.  The GOE financially 
supported the program by sending 7 officials to Quito on 
temporary duty from Guayaquil, Santo Domingo, and Cuenca for 
training. 
 
8. (SBU) DHS continues to work with GOE officials to 
prosecute Joseph Day, a Cuban-American who engaged in child 
pornography in Guayaquil, in the U.S. under provision of the 
Protect Act.  The GOE is expected to deport Day to the U.S. 
shortly. 
 
9. (SBU) DHS and the Ecuadorian National Police also worked 
together to deport Brandon Jones to the U.S. for prosecution. 
 Jones was wanted on a range of child sex charges in South 
Carolina.  USG and GOE agents conducted this investigation 
under Operation Predator, which protects children against sex 
crimes. 
 
10. (U) Press reports that the Burdet-Cedeno couple has 
received additional sentences for crimes of child pornography 
in the Galapagos.  The couple reportedly received three 
sentences for 16, 12, and 20 years respectively.  They were 
prosecuted for child pornography and sexual abuse of more 
than 50 minors.  National media coverage of this case was 
extensive. 
 
VICTIM SERVICES 
----------------- 
 
11. (SBU) On August 31, PolOff met with Rocio Rosero, 
director of CONAMU (the National Commission on Women), which 
is an institutional member of the newly created anti-TIP GOE 
working group with special interest in victims services. 
Rosero said she is conducting a pilot program with UNICEF 
through a church in Sucumbios to provide services to TIP 
victims.  CONAMU is also working with a local NGO in Coca to 
provide victims services. 
 
12. (SBU) At a meeting with PolOff on September 1, National 
Institute of the Children and Families (INNFA)\'s 
representative Lillian Ortiz described plans to provide 
long-term social services to victims of TIP and commercial 
sexual exploitation.  PolOff encouraged INNFA to work with 
NGOs already engaged in victims services to develop a 
national network of shelters to supplement limited and less 
appropriate police-run facilities. 
 
PENAL CODE REFORM 
----------------- 
 
13. (SBU) According to CONAMU Director Rosero, the Committee 
to Design the National Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons, 
Alien Smuggling, and Labor and Sexual Exploitation, 
established in the presidential decree (reftel), has begun 
meeting biweekly to coordinate GOE efforts.  Last week\'s 
meeting focused on legal reform of the penal code.  The 
Government Ministry is trying to harmonize several draft 
reform bills into a unified Government proposal, which will 
sanction TIP and impose prison terms of up to 12 years for 
traffickers.  Once the President signs the bill, it will be 
sent to Congress.  Rosero told PolOff she has begun meeting 
with interested members of Congress to explain and lobby for 
the reforms.  MFA Director General for Human Rights Julio 
Prado told PolCouns that the GOE needs to carefully review 
the draft legislation to ensure it complies fully with the 
provisions of the TIP Protocol of the Palermo Convention. 
 
NEXT STEPS:  VICTIM SERVICES AND TRAINING 
------------------------------------------ 
 
14. (SBU) Anti-TIP legislation is a necessary and important 
benchmark for progress.  However, existing legislation is not 
sufficient to allow the GOE to prosecute traffickers, and 
minors are being removed from prostitution houses on labor 
law violations which do not levy sanctions on traffickers. 
We will continue to work with the GOE to resolve the issue of 
competing anti-TIP legislation in Congress and monitor the 
status of bills.  We will also strive to ensure that any 
reforms are compatible with the GOE\'s obligations under the 
Palermo Convention protocols. 
 
15. (SBU) Victim services and training are also critical to 
the GOE\'s protection efforts.  We plan to visit the shelter 
Baca mentioned and the shelter in El Oro province (see 
paragraph 5) to determine what services are offered.  We also 
will work with NGOs and the GOE to encourage progress.  End 
comment. 
KENNEY 
"
"20454","9/8/2004 17:00","04QUITO2448","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE163453","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002448 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOL/ILAB FOR TINA FAULKNER, DRL/IL FOR MARINDA HARPOLE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EIND, ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, SOCI, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR CHILD LABOR UPDATE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 163453 
 
     B. 03 QUITO 02567 
 
 1.  (U) Summary.  Child labor remains a major problem in 
Ecuador.  However, the GoE, NGOs and other institutions are 
taking steps to combat worst forms of child labor in Ecuador. 
 More clearly needs to be done, particularly in the 
enforcement of child labor laws and the rehabilitation of 
child laborers.  This cable provides an update on child labor 
information in Ecuador, as required for Trade and Development 
Act reporting requirements (Ref A), and updates our previous 
report (Ref B).   End Summary. 
 
The Problem 
---------------- 
2.  (U) According to a study released by UNICEF in March 
2004, 755,753 children work full-time in Ecuador. 
Thirty-nine percent of these children do not attend school. 
Of these, UNICEF estimates that 44% of these children began 
working between ages 10 and 14 and 70% do not reach secondary 
school.  At least 71% live in rural areas, and work in 
agriculture.  Sixty-six percent of children in Ecuador live 
in poverty.  Geographically, 65% live in the Sierra, 25% on 
the coast and 10% in the Amazon region.  Minister of Labor 
Izurieta told a visiting US labor delegation on September 1 
that his Ministry\'s estimate for child labor is much lower, 
around 300,000.  Union representatives, meanwhile, put the 
number at 1.2 million. 
 
New Child Labor Division Created 
-------------------------------- 
3.  (U) In July 2004, the Ministry of Labor created a 
Division for Child Labor comprised of three officers, 
augmenting the previous single position for Child Labor, 
which was also responsible for International Affairs.  The 
Division meets at least monthly with the MOL and the 
inter-agency National Committee for the Progressive 
Eradication of Child Labor. 
 
Inspections 
----------- 
4.  (U) On May 25, 2004, the MOL hired eighteen new child 
labor inspectors, bringing the total nation-wide to 19.  Each 
inspector is assigned to a different province.  The MOL told 
a visiting U.S. delegation on September 1 that three 
inspectors would soon be hired to meet the GoE\'s legal 
requirement for at least one child labor inspector in each of 
Ecuador\'s 22 provinces.  The monthly salary of a child 
inspector is approximately $460. 
 
5.  (U) According to ILO/IPEC, the inspectors have found 500 
child laborers in the field.  According to the MOL, a member 
of civil society always accompanies each inspector as a check 
against corruption.  Currently, inspections are directed 
mostly at the larger banana plantations of over 30 hectares. 
Some employers reportedly fire child workers when they hear 
that inspectors are coming. 
 
6.  (U) On August 18, 2004, the MOL held a one-day workshop 
for child labor inspectors.  Sixteen inspectors attended; 
some reportedly paid their own transportation expenses to 
attend.  A ninety-page inspection manual developed by UNICEF 
and the government-supported Institute for the Child and 
Family (INNFA) was distributed and reviewed with the 
inspectors.  The manual targets inspections in the banana 
sector, and also has a section on issues specific to the 
growing cut-flower sector. 
 
7.  (U) Inspectors lack adequate budgetary support for 
offices, computers and transportation.  Currently, INNFA is 
loaning the MOL some offices and cars for use by the 
inspectors.  Banana plantation owners also occasionally 
provide transportation.  While inspections are not announced, 
employers can suspend the use of their vehicles at will, and 
did so in June.  Therefore, most child labor inspections are 
carried out in urban areas, where public transportation is 
available.  The MOL claims more money will be allocated for 
inspections in the 2005 budget proposal. 
 
8.  (U) Nation-wide the budget for child labor is $465,000. 
Of this amount, $300,000 went to the Ministry of Social 
Welfare and still has not been spent, $25,000 to the MOL, and 
$140,000 is for the inspectors\' salaries.  According to the 
MOL, it has received only $16,000 of the $25,000 allotment. 
 
9.  (U) Meanwhile, INNFA receives $3.5 million to work with 
25,000 children.  Part of INNFA\'s work has been to address 
the problem of child labor in the flower sector.  In the 
cut-flower sector, there has been an intensification of the 
information and awareness campaigns.  INNFA has provided 
information on child labor to all the major flower producers 
(about 400), and believes the incidence of child labor in 
this sector is decreasing. 
 
New ILO/IPEC Program Launched 
----------------------------- 
10.  (U) The ILO/IPEC program began a child labor Time-Bound 
Program (TBP) in October 2003.  They have conducted guideline 
studies of the banana, flower, construction, commercial sex 
exploitation of minors, trash and mining sectors.  The ILO 
provides $2 million dollars in funds for the 3-4 year TBP; 
this amount is matched by the Ecuadorian government.  Action 
plans for each sector aim to get children out of work and 
back in school.  IPEC will work with the MOL, NGOs and the 
inspectors to meet this goal.  The ILO\'s mining program ended 
in March 2004 so mining will not be included in the TBP. 
 
USDOL Program 
----------------- 
11.  (U) USDOL Bureau of International Labor Affairs has 
awarded a $3 million project to Catholic Relief Services to 
improve access to quality education in Ecuador as a means to 
combat child labor.  The program will target children and 
adolescents ages 5-15, giving special attention to at-risk 
groups including girls and indigenous children. 
 
Child Worker Program 
---------------------------- 
12.  (U) The Child Worker Program funded by the Central Bank 
of Ecuador, has developed a workshop program called \"Panita\" 
which meets three times a week to promote civic values and to 
work with families and schools on the issue of child labor. 
There are Panita centers in Quito, Guayaquil, Ambato, Lago 
Agrio and Porto Viejo.  In addition, the Child Worker Program 
is also planning a community ombudsman program to hire a 
community group to receive and act on reports of child labor. 
 A similar program has been successful for domestic child 
abuse in 300 communities.  The Central Bank provides $200,000 
annually for the Child Worker Program in Quito and ten other 
cities. 
 
Rehabilitation 
------------------ 
13.  (U) The Ministry of Social Welfare received $300,000 
from the national budget in 2004 for scholarships, 
professional development, and community workshops to combat 
child labor.  However, the Ministry has yet to spend this 
money.  Meanwhile, Bell South provides scholarships to 500 
children a year through its School Insertion Plan, to help 
defray fees that discourage school attendance. 
 
Legal Issues 
------------ 
14.  (U) The labor code needs to be harmonized with the Code 
for Children and Adolescents (passed by Congress in December 
2002), which sets higher standards.  The Child and 
Adolescents Code raised the fine for child labor violations 
to $200 to $1000; the Labor Code fine remains 50 sucres.  The 
minimum work age is 12 for work as domestics or artisans, and 
14 for all others, while in the Child Code it is fifteen for 
all.  In September, the National Committee for the 
Progressive Eradication of Child Labor will be making this 
Labor Code reform proposal to Andres Paez, head of the Labor 
Commission in Congress and will follow up with lobbying. 
 
Comment 
----------- 
15.  (SBU) While disparities exist on the extent of the child 
labor problem, the GoE took some positive steps to combat 
child labor this year.  Still, more needs to be done.  While 
some laws have been improved, enforcement is still lacking. 
Ministry of Labor inspectors clearly need more resources and 
training to carry out their duties.  Also, more needs to be 
to done to rehabilitate former child workers, particularly by 
the Social Welfare Ministry, which has not spent funds it has 
for this purpose.  Finally, labor code reform is necessary to 
bring the code into agreement with the Code on Children and 
Adolescents.  We will report SepTel on prospects for labor 
code reform and progress in child labor inspections in the 
banana sector, as reported to the recent U.S. FTA labor 
delegation. 
KENNEY 
"
"20455","9/8/2004 17:27","04QUITO2449","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO2076|04QUITO2251","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, KCOR, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: PREPARING FOR ECUADORIAN ELECTIONS OCTOBER 
17--REQUEST FOR USG SUPPORT FOR OAS MISSION 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2251 
     B. QUITO 2076 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Ecuador\'s upcoming local elections are an 
indirect test of the Gutierrez Administration\'s strength (it 
is widely expected to fail that test) and, more importantly, 
an opportunity for Ecuadorian voters to renew their faith in 
the democratic process.  President Gutierrez\' Patriotic 
Society Party (PSP) is expected to suffer a humiliating 
defeat to opposition incumbents in key races.  Although there 
are few hints or recent history of fraud in local elections, 
a political crisis is developing over the President,s 
flirtation with the opposition Ecuadorian Roldosista Party 
(PRE) of disgraced ex-President Abdala Bucaram.  A clean 
election likely will increase the longstanding disparity 
between public confidence in local versus national political 
leaders, as re-elected incumbents enjoy greater public trust 
than the President.  It could also help renew confidence in 
democracy, if only at the local level.  Given the importance 
to political stability of clean elections, Embassy recommends 
USG support for an OAS monitoring effort, which we hope to 
join on election day. 
 
What is at Stake? 
----------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) AID democratic values surveys consistently show 
voter confidence in politicians and democratic institutions 
to be higher at the local than national level.  Mayors of 
larger cities currently enjoy high approval ratings as a 
result of concerted emphasis on infrastructure improvements. 
Quito Mayor Paco Moncayo recently told PolOffs that major 
city mayors from a variety of opposition parties have been 
meeting to share lessons learned, and comprise a new 
municipal movement of competent, proven leaders.  With 
confidence in the Gutierrez government nearing single digits, 
the opportunity to re-elect popular opposition mayors and 
provincial prefects on October 17 could help reinforce public 
confidence in electoral politics, indirectly benefiting the 
embattled national government.  However, to have this effect, 
the elections must be generally perceived as clean and 
well-run. 
 
3.  (SBU) President Gutierrez\' PSP has been marginalized at 
the national level since the departure of its broad-based 
coalition; it now has only five of 100 Congressional deputies 
and no mayors.  The PSP will lose its national registry if it 
fails to win more than 5% of the national vote for the second 
straight time, as expected.  (Note:  on its own, the party 
failed to win more than 5% of the vote in 2002, despite 
Gutierrez victory of the presidency with the support of 
several allied parties.  The PSP currently holds no 
mayorships, since the party was formed after the last 
municipal elections in 2000.)  Nevertheless, President 
Gutierrez has been actively visiting (and distributing public 
largesse in) areas in the Amazon region and selectively in 
some Sierra districts where the PSP hopes to gain in these 
elections. 
 
4.  (SBU) The key races among the 219 municipal and 22 
prefectural posts (U.S.-governor-equivilents) up for election 
on October 17 are for the Guayaquil and Quito mayorships and 
the prefect races in Guayas and Pichincha provinces.  In both 
cases, the mayoral incumbents (Jaime Nebot of the Social 
Christian Party (PSC) and Moncayo for the Democratic Left 
Party (ID), respectively) are expected to win handily (Nebot 
has the highest popularity ratings of any politician in the 
country); their prefectural counterparts are also favored to 
win by lesser margins over non-incumbent challengers.  There 
is another reason to pay special attention to the race in 
Guayas province: there were unsubstantiated allegations of 
fraud by challengers in the 2000 election of Nebot and PSC 
Guayas prefect Nicolas Lapentti.  The Manta mayor race is 
also of interest for its potential impact on the Manta FOB. 
 
Election Preparations Underway 
------------------------------ 
 
5. (SBU) OAS Representative Dr. Cesar Ocampo told PolCouns on 
August 24 that the GoE ratified a formal request from the 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) requesting the OAS to send 
an observation mission for the municipal elections.  Although 
the OAS has not made a decision, Ocampo believed that it 
would be positive and that the bulk of the mission would be 
comprised of accredited staff and diplomat volunteers in 
Ecuador.  He characterized Ecuadorian electoral authorities 
as \"politicized but competent\" and said expectations of 
electoral fraud are low for election day.  Ocampo said he had 
offered his own good offices to help resolve lingering 
controversies over campaign financing and allocation of 
municipal council seats (RefTels), as he had in the past to 
promote indigenous representation. 
 
6.  (SBU) The elections will be administered by the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal (TSE), which is comprised of seven members 
representing some of the major political parties in Congress. 
 Seven alternates are appointed on the same basis.  The TSE 
appoints provincial electoral tribunals in each of the 22 
provinces, which in turn appoint municipal level tribunals. 
The political parties are represented at each level.  TSE 
President Nicanor Moscoso, himself the former campaign 
manager of the National Institutional Action Renewal Party 
(PRIAN) confirmed to PolCouns on August 31 that the GoE has 
invited the OAS to observe the upcoming elections.  He 
downplayed concerns about possible fraud in the Guayas 
prefect race, saying the issues raised during the last 
election have been dealt with through subsequent reforms.  He 
said the TSE had contracted a credible Spanish firm to manage 
the vote count, a small sample of which will be tallied 
electronically. 
 
7.  (SBU) What concerned the TSE president more was 
resistance on the part of the PSC and the ID parties to 
needed increases in official campaign finance limits.  By 
blocking Congressional action to raise the limits, these two 
parties have maintained hypocritically low limits for 
election expenses ($600,000 for all prefect and municipal 
races, combined, including highs of $44,000 and $40,000 for 
the Guayaquil and Quito mayor races, respectively).  The 
motive for the resistance of these two parties to higher 
spending limits is self-serving, according to Moscoso.  Both 
presume they can effectively block any effort to investigate 
their own spending due to their preponderant weight within 
the TSE\'s deliberative structure.  Smaller parties do not 
enjoy that assurance and will be vulnerable to future 
investigation for overspending. 
 
8.  (SBU) Another issue of concern to Moscoso is the system 
to proportionally allocate municipal council seats among 
parties.  In this, he said, the TSE has the power to act 
Congress does not.  Moscoso said he was consulting with the 
parties and intended to announce the system later this month. 
 
 
USG Assistance 
-------------- 
 
9.  (U) AID is providing $800,000 in election-related 
support, roughly divided between support to the TSE 
administered through the Center for Electoral Promotion and 
Assistance (CAPEL) and the other half to NGOs for civil 
society oversight of the elections.  The latter includes a 
civic education campaign, electoral reforms, efforts to 
monitor campaign spending, domestic observation of the 
elections and an independent quick count.  Funding is being 
provided to NGOs for election dialogues and candidate fora. 
AID is coordinating election support efforts with other 
Embassy elements and with other donors, including the OAS, 
UNDP, German aid agency (GTZ) and the EU. 
 
10.  (U) Should an OAS mission be mounted, the Embassy will 
volunteer a core group of officers to participate in the 
monitoring effort.  We will also conduct and report on 
pre-electoral visits to key districts to report on specific 
races. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11.  (SBU) Given the potential for these municipal elections 
to affect political stability and confidence in democracy, we 
believe close international observation is justified.  The 
obvious institution to boost electoral certainty and 
confidence on election day is the OAS.  We therefore request 
USG support for an OAS monitoring mission. 
KENNEY 
"
"20489","9/9/2004 22:33","04QUITO2459","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2446","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002459 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AID FOR AA/LAC, LAC/SA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/09/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC, Democracy, President 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR: POLITICAL INSTABILITY RISING 
 
REF: QUITO 2446 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney for reason 1.4 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  After a hiatus of three months, and with 
local elections looming in October, the political temperature 
here is rising, fueling rumors of political instability. 
While we take these recurrent rumors with a grain of salt, 
opposition politicians blame President Gutierrez\' political 
mis-steps for each subsequent cycle of scandal, and warn this 
could lead to impeachment, social unrest or worse.  In 
response to these rumors, we have stepped up our efforts in 
support of constitutional democracy and its institutions with 
opposition and government leaders, to help calm the political 
waters.  End Summary. 
 
Background on Impeachment Talk 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  (C) The latest round of opposition maneuvering against 
the Gutierrez Government came in reaction to the President\'s 
recent meeting in Panama with disgraced former president 
Abdala Bucaram, who lives there in exile as a fugitive from 
Ecuadorian justice (RefTel).  In response, some elements of 
the opposition are now threatening impeachment proceedings 
against Gutierrez.  Meanwhile, reacting to Gutierrez\' recent 
round of travel by Gutierrez to inaugurate public works 
projects in areas where his party has electoral hopes, Vice 
President of Congress Ramiro Rivera (of the small Democratic 
Party) in late August submitted a request to the Attorney 
General to investigate the diversion of public funds by the 
President, allegedly for electoral purposes.  Others are 
calling for the resignation of Social Welfare Minister 
Antonio Vargas for his alleged role in the alleged 
inappropriate use of public funds (to construct local sports 
facilities inaugurated by the President on his travels). 
 
Congress Contemplating Impeachment 
---------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) President of Congress Guillermo Landazuri told the 
Ambassador on September 9 that discord in Congress about the 
Bucaram meeting threatens to divert Congress from its 
legislative agenda.  He blamed Gutierrez\' political 
ineptitude for the decision to visit Panama and, while there, 
committing the breach of meeting with a fugitive from 
Ecuadorian justice (Bucaram is wanted on corruption charges 
here).  This political blunder by Gutierrez came on the heels 
of his campaign-like swing to inaugurate public works in 
areas where his party has electoral hopes, another breach of 
presidential etiquette.  Landazuri said his party, the 
Democratic Left (ID), is reluctant to support formal 
impeachment proceedings against Gutierrez at this time, for 
lack of votes.  Landazuri said he personally would prefer 
that Gutierrez be allowed to finish his term and let the 
voters judge his performance in national elections in 2006. 
That position is unpopular within the ID; as a result, 
Landazuri implied, he would face internal competition for his 
job when the ID nominates the new President of Congress in 
January 2005.  Ultimately, however, the President is his own 
worst political enemy, and each subsequent scandal builds on 
the others. 
 
4.  (C) The Ambassador noted that it is not the USG role to 
judge the performance of the Ecuadorian president--that is 
for Ecuadorian voters to decide.  Instead, she emphasized to 
Landazuri how important political stability and respect for 
the institutions of Constitutional democracy is to Ecuador\'s 
democratic and economic development.  The Ambassador also 
urged Landazuri to get Congress to address pressing national 
legislative issues involving trafficking in persons reforms, 
labor code reforms, civil aviation and money-laundering.  The 
Ambassador also raised the issue of GoE action against 
Occidential Petroleum (SepTel).  Landazuri agreed with the 
Ambassador that many issues merit Congressional action, but 
regretted they would probably have to wait until after the 
October 17 election.  Similarly, he said he was not 
interested in meeting with President Gutierrez to discuss the 
legislative agenda until after the elections, and then, only 
if requested by the President. 
 
5.  (C) Landazuri estimated there are currently 61 
Congressional votes, including the ID (17 deputies) and the 
PSC (25) and other small parties, but without the support of 
the PRE (15) or PRIAN (10), in favor of impeachment; just 
five short of the two-thirds majority needed to impeach.  The 
ID party leadership, headed by former president Rodrigo 
Borja, is reluctant to bring an impeachment resolution 
without sufficient votes to assure passage, according to 
Landazuri, for fear of giving Gutierrez a political victory 
before the upcoming elections.  Landazuri also said Congress 
was looking into the business interests of the President and 
his brother Gilmar (a controversial Congressional deputy who 
leads the PSP bench in Congress), to determine whether they 
are benefiting from any business with the state.  On the 
opening day of the fall session on Congress on September 7, 
no action was taken on impeachment but Congress voted to 
censure Gilmar Gutierrez\' provocative public accusation that 
a \"conspiracy\" exists to terminate his brother\'s presidency. 
Landazuri also expressed concern that with indigenous 
disillusionment with this government at an historic low, he 
feared the potential for social mobilization and protest. 
6.  (C) Indigenous party (Pachacutik) leader Gilberto Talahua 
was mute about the possibility of national protests in a 
meeting with PolCouns on September 8.  Talahua said decisions 
on protests come from the indigenous social movement 
(CONAIE), only.  However, according to Talahua, Pachacutik is 
convinced there are ample grounds for impeachment proceedings 
against Gutierrez or Vargas. 
 
Risk of Self-Coup? 
------------------ 
 
7.  (C) Landazuri said there is growing concern among the 
opposition parties that President Gutierrez might attempt a 
\"self-coup\" to hang onto power in the face of mounting 
Congressional opposition.  However, Landazuri said he did not 
believe the Armed Forces would support such a coup.  The 
Ambassador told Landazuri that she has made the USG position 
rejecting all extra-constitutional maneuvers perfectly clear 
in public and private, including with the President. 
 
8.  (C) Separately, indigenous leader Talahua raised the same 
concern bout a possible \"auto-coup\" with PolCouns.  Any such 
unconstitutional attempt to retain power would provoke a 
strong (but unspecified) reaction from the indigenous 
movement, he said.  Talahua insisted that his party would not 
support any change of regime through extra-constitutional 
means, a position which PolCouns noted coincides with the USG 
position.  Talahua also noted that the constitution provides 
for dismissal and replacement of the President by the 
Congress. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  (C)  This is by no means the first time our political 
interlocutors have raised the spectre of replacing President 
Gutierrez prematurely, by constitutional or 
extra-constitutional means.  While hostile anti-Government 
debate in Congress may simply be a pre-electoral maneuver, we 
must redouble our efforts to encourage a more reasoned 
discourse and promote the virtues of political stability. 
While always alert to the very real prospect for 
anti-Government opposition to move to shorten Gutierrez\' term 
of office through impeachment, we believe the prospects for 
an \"auto-coup\" are far lower. 
KENNEY 
"
"20520","9/10/2004 18:42","04QUITO2462","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2418","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002462 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/10/2014 
TAGS: EPET, ETRD, ECON, EC, Oil Sector 
SUBJECT: OXY: GOE TAKES A SERIOUS WRONG TURN 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2418 
 
     B. QUITO 2380 
     C. QUITO 2327 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney Reason 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1. (U) See action request in paragraph 12. 
 
2. (C) Summary.  The GOE is proceeding with the contract 
nullification process (caducidad) against Occidental 
Petroleum (Oxy), potentially triggering the nationalization 
of Oxy\'s assets in Ecuador.  Presidential Legal Advisor 
Carlos Larrea acknowledged that the GOE action would amount 
to an expropriation, expressly prohibited by the Ecuadorian 
Constitution.  Still, he said President Gutierrez was too 
weak to negotiate a resolution with Oxy.  The GOE has grossly 
underestimated the strong negative reaction from the USG and 
the foreign investor community should the GOE follow through 
with the nullification.  We have spoken with Oxy\'s GM and are 
educating GOE officials about the severity of its 
miscalculation.  These efforts appear to bearing fruit as 
Gutierrez has apparently ordered Economy and Finance Minister 
Yepez to meet with Oxy on September 10 to explain that the 
Larrea position is not the GOE\'s official position.  We urge 
State, USTR and Commerce officials to send a similar message 
to Ecuador\'s Ambassador to the United States and other GOE 
officials.  End Summary. 
 
 
GOE to Pursue Contract Nullification/Nationalization 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
4. (C) In a September 8 meeting with econoffs, Presidential 
Legal Advisor Carlos Larrea said the GOE would go forward 
with the nullification of Oxy\'s Block 15 contract (reftels), 
essentially nationalizing Oxy\'s Block 15 assets.  Econ 
Counselor explained to Larrea the serious nature of such 
action, comparing it to the expropriations of the 1970s.  He 
told Larrea that it could cost Ecuador its ATPDEA trade 
benefits and a free trade agreement with the United States. 
Larrea said he was aware of those risks.  He felt Oxy would 
be able to overturn the expropriation in local courts as the 
Ecuadorian Constitution prohibited expropriations, but said 
President Gutierrez was too weak politically to resolve the 
case through negotiation.  He suggested that after the 
administrative nullification, judicial action would be the 
only remedy left to Oxy. 
 
5. (U) Later that day, Minister of Energy and Mines (MEM) 
Eduardo Lopez announced in a press conference that he would 
seek the nullification of the Oxy contract.  The actual 
nullification and takeover of Oxy\'s Block 15 assets could 
occur within the next 30-70 days. 
 
 
Embassy Action 
-------------- 
 
6. (C) Ambassador met with Oxy Ecuador President and GM Jerry 
Ellis on September 9, who said that Oxy had not received the 
official notification of intent to nullify from the MEM.  He 
added that if the MEM declared nullification of the contract, 
Oxy would not seek relief in any Ecuadorian legal process, 
but seek a remedy through the Bilateral Investment Treaty 
(BIT) and/or the U.S. courts.  Ellis feared what could happen 
to Oxy\'s assets if they were left to Petroecuador to run for 
even a short period of time.  He was reluctant to 
characterize the GOE\'s action thus far as retaliation, but 
said Oxy would consider the takeover of its Block 15 assets 
nothing short of expropriation.  Still, he said Oxy was 
willing to sit down with the GOE to discuss a mutually 
beneficial resolution to the matter. 
 
7. (C) He agreed with the Ambassador\'s recommendation that 
she contact President Gutierrez again about the issue.  The 
Ambassador also explained the she had raised the matter with 
the President of Congress that morning and he too admitted 
that it appeared that the GOE was trying to nationalize Oxy\'s 
assets.  Econoffs also explained the MEM\'s latest step in the 
nullification process to USTR on the morning of September 9 
as USTR was preparing for a meeting between Ambassador 
Zoellick and Trade Minister Baki.  Our efforts appear to be 
bearing fruit. Late September 9, Ellis told Econ Counselor 
that President Gutierrez had ordered Economy and Finance 
Minister Yepez to meet with Oxy in New York on September 10, 
and to tell Oxy that the policy espoused by Presidential 
Legal Advisor Carlos Larrea was not the GOE policy. 
The Oxy Nullification Case as a Political Landmine 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
8. (C) The Procurador has put the Gutierrez government in an 
extremely difficult position with his actions on the 
Occidental case.  The press and public have swallowed, hook, 
line and sinker, the Procurador\'s oft-repeated public line 
that Oxy has violated the terms of its contract, that the 
Minister of Energy is legally bound to nullify the contract, 
and that that process should be expedited.  The Procurador 
stated a week ago to the press that anyone opposing his 
involvement in the case was \"a traitor to the fatherland\" - 
clearly an attempt to create a political climate in which the 
government would have no choice but to expropriate Oxy\'s 
property.  On September 6, he announced that if the Ministry 
of Energy and the state oil company did not move 
expeditiously he would request that the Controlaria (an 
investigatory body analogous to our GAO, but with the 
authority to bring charges against government officials for 
malfeasance) open investigations.  Less than 24 hours later 
the Minister of Energy acted. 
 
9. (SBU) The effect of the Procurador\'s tactics has been wide 
and deep.  Opinions expressed in the press and on the street 
are almost unanimous:  \"the GOE must nullify the Oxy 
contract, anything less would be a breach of rule of law.\" 
 
10. (C) Our contacts universally believe that the Procurador 
is acting with the support of the Guayaquil-based Social 
Christian Party (PSC, by its Spanish acronym) in order to 
place the Gutierrez government in a position in which it must 
choose against a position that the whole country has equated 
with basic Ecuadorian national interests or against the 
United States.  Many believe that this trap has been laid in 
order to bring the government down.  Presidential Legal 
Advisor Larrea told us that top PSC insiders such as Miguel 
Orellana and Javier Neira, but maybe not party leader Leon 
Febres Cordero, were behind the Procurador\'s actions. 
Consulate General officers in Guayaquil will continue to make 
clear to PSC officials our support for constitutional 
democracy as well our expectations of a level playing field 
for US companies. 
 
Comment and Action Request 
-------------------------- 
 
11. (C) A strong message must be sent to the GOE that if it 
follows through with the nullification it could amount to 
expropriation of an American company\'s assets.  Should an 
expropriation occur, Ecuador would risk losing its ATPDEA 
trade benefits, a possible free trade agreement with the 
United States and the support of the international community, 
both investors and multilateral lenders.  The Ambassador will 
again explain to President Gutierrez the potential serious 
consequences of this latest misstep by the GOE and Embassy 
officials will continue to raise the matter with their GOE 
counterparts. 
 
12. (C) Action Request.  We recommend State and Commerce 
raise with Ecuador\'s Ambassador to the United States Raul 
Gangotena and other high-ranking GOE officials our serious 
concern about the possible expropriation of an American 
company\'s assets.  We suggest the following talking points: 
 
-- The action by the Procurador was taken on the heels of 
Oxy\'s international arbitration award, making it appear to be 
a case of retaliation. 
 
-- Regardless of whether the GOE or Oxy are right on the 
merits of the case, the remedy sought by the GOE is not 
proportionate to the alleged offense and could amount to an 
expropriation, an unconstitutional act in Ecuador, and an act 
penalized under U.S. law. 
 
-- It is in everyone\'s interest for both sides to sit down 
and discuss a reasonable solution to this matter. 
 
-- If Oxy\'s assets are expropriated, Ecuador risks losing 
ATPDEA trade benefits, a free trade agreement with the United 
States and the support of the international community, both 
private investors and multilateral lenders, not to mention 
the certain ruin of its investment climate. 
KENNEY 
"
"20521","9/10/2004 19:50","04QUITO2464","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY - PARA MARKINGS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, EAID, ECON, EFIS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, EC, Environment 
SUBJECT: GALAPAGOS PARK LEADERSHIP POTENTIALLY DESTABILIZED 
 
 
1. (U)Summary:  The status of the leadership of the Galapagos National 
Park (GNP) is uncertain, with Park Director Edwin Naula facing 
possible dismissal.   There are political motives behind the change 
and we will continue to press for stability.  The US Mission has 
expressed concern at the highest levels of the government on the 
impact of continued polarization of the park directorship on the 
sustainability of donor investments, and reiterated the need for 
technically qualified staff to lead the program.  A continued ebbing 
of park management undermines international conservation efforts, 
threatens the archipelago\'s unique and fragile ecosystems, and raises 
concerns on Ecuador\'s long-term ability to independently manage its 
vital natural resources.  Our efforts to prevent further instability 
in the leadership may be frustrated; we continue to press for the 
conservation and protection of the Park.  End Summary. 
 
Possible Replacement of Park Director 
------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U)Rumors of a park director replacement have been swirling for 
several weeks.  During this period, the Ambassador expressed concerns 
about park stability with the Minister of the Environment.  This same 
message has been conveyed by AID with ministry officials and the 
donor community. 
 
3. (U)On September 7, the Ambassador met with Gutierrez to express 
concerns about the importance of institutional stability for the 
Park, donor concerns over rumors about the possible removal of the 
Park Director, the importance of avoiding politicizing the park 
leadership, and sustainability of USG investments.  Gutierrez said he 
had agreed about the importance of Park conservation. 
 
4. (U)Naula has alleged there are political motives for his removal. 
He told the ADCM that he had refused to step down unless Gutierrez 
orders him directly.  Later the day, however, press also reported 
unconfirmed rumors that Gutierrez had in fact ordered the Minister of 
Environment to fire Naula.  That has still not happened, fueling 
uncertainty. 
 
5. (U)GOE sources say a decision will be made shortly on the removal 
of Naula.  One candidate for the job is Fausto Cepeda, a former park 
director who until recently served as an advisor to the fishing 
sector in the Galapagos.  He would not be ideal; some believe Cepeda 
would be biased towards the fishing sector over conservation. 
 
6. (U)The Galapagos Park Rangers Association has contacted our consular 
agent in the Galapagos to voice concern over the politicization of 
the park and requested USG intervention. 
 
7. (U)The Embassy has repeatedly cautioned the GOE that the director 
position must not be used as a political tool.  Jimmy Carter made the 
same points to Gutierrez during an August visit.  We support the full 
stability and protection of this unique environment.  The position of 
park director should be predicated solely upon qualified technical 
experience. 
 
USG Assistance 
-------------- 
 
8. (U)The Galapagos has had 8 park directors in the last 18 months. 
The constant turn-over has hampered the successful development of GOE 
conservation programs.  USG programs, foreign investment and 
multilateral donations have also been adversely affected.  The 
ultimate victim of this instability has been the Park and its 
welfare. 
 
9. (U)Fishermen from Baja California, Mexico are currently visiting 
Galapagos fishing cooperatives under an exchange program financed 
with USAID\'s marine reserve project.  This exchange is aimed at 
reducing conflict between environmental and fishing interests.  The 
Mexicans are sharing a world-class fisheries management model that 
has successfully bridged the interests of government, fisheries, and 
environmental groups.  Additionally, two new USG initiatives are 
under way: a) the creation of an environmental prosecutor unit in the 
Galapagos Province and b) strengthening local government institutions 
through the Galapagos Municipal Consortia. 
 
10. (U)USAID co-chairs the donor round table and a one-day meeting will 
take place on September 17 to discuss the Galapagos situation at the 
request of UNDP.  In addition to the international donor community, 
the Ministry of Environment has been invited to attend. 
 
11. (SBU) Comment:  Despite our best efforts, it appears the 
President may have decided to remove the Park Director.  Also, there 
are political motives for this change, as the President seeks to 
mollify the political opposition (in this case we suspect PSC leader 
Leon Febres Cordero) which is calling for his impeachment.  We will 
continue to press to ensure that any new director is qualified and 
focused on conservation.  End comment. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"20562","9/13/2004 20:23","04QUITO2480","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 QUITO 002480 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE FOR USTR 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF, USDOL FOR JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ, DRL/IL 
FOR GREG MAGGIO, EB FOR AMY HOLMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC 
SUBJECT: LABOR DELEGATION CONSULTATIONS IN ECUADOR 
 
 
1.  (U) Summary.  During a September 1-3 visit to Ecuador, an 
interagency labor delegation met with GoE officials, labor 
and business representatives and Ecuadorian civil society 
representatives, fulfilling the Trade Promotion Authority 
mandate to consult on labor law and practice and begin the 
fact-finding process necessary to prepare the meaningful 
labor rights report to Congress.  Their meetings helped 
clarify the significant labor rights challenges facing the 
GoE, including possible labor code reform.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (U) The USG delegation consisted of William Clatanoff, 
Assistant US Trade Representative for Labor Affairs, USTR; 
Jorge Perez-Lopez, Associate Deputy Under Secretary for 
International Affairs, DOL; Amy Holman, Trade Economist, 
Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, DOS; Greg Maggio, 
Foreign Affairs Officer, DRL, DOS; and Carlos Romero, 
International Economist, International Labor Affairs Bureau, 
DOL.  The delegation met with the Ambassador and selected 
Country Team members shortly after their arrival and were 
accompanied to all meetings by LabOff, and joined in Quito by 
PolCouns, and in Guayaquil by CG.  The Embassy issued a press 
release about the visit but press coverage was light on 
substance, with the exception of a positive article in major 
national daily \"El Comercio\" on September 4. 
 
Private Sector Wants Labor Flexibility 
-------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) On September 1 in Quito the delegation met with 
members of the Chambers of Commerce and Industry.  Chamber 
leaders offered a power point presentation showing what they 
feel to be disadvantages (especially when compared to 
neighboring countries) in the current labor laws for business 
owners in Ecuador.  Some of the labor laws they feel are too 
rigid include the 40-hour work week and 13-hour work day, the 
cost of contracting a worker, cost of firing a worker 
(including company retirement) and the 15% annual 
profit-sharing required by law.  As a result, only 3,900 of 
some 80,000 businesses in Ecuador report profits.  To be more 
competitive, business leaders believe Ecuador needs to 
lengthen the work week and the work day, and lower costs of 
hiring and firing workers.  The Chambers agreed that if 
consensus were found in the National Labor Council, it would 
be much easier to approach the government with a labor 
reform. 
 
4.  (SBU) In Guayaquil on September 3, the delegation met 
with Alberto Dassum, President of the Chamber of Industry of 
Guayaquil; Miguel Pena, Alternate President of the same 
Chamber; and Teodoro Maldonado, Executive Vice President of 
the Chamber of Commerce of Guayaquil.  Chamber leaders in 
Guayaquil agreed with their counterparts in Quito that more 
labor law flexibility was needed.  Dassum said the workweek 
should be extended to 44 hours.  Some labor laws were part of 
the Constitution and therefore could not be changed easily. 
Pena, however, said that if the unions and the business 
community could jointly propose reforms to Congress, they 
could serve as an example for the world. 
 
Unions Want Greater Protection 
------------------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) On September 1, the delegation met with Jaime 
Arciniegas, President of CEOSL, the largest union federation 
in Ecuador; Mesias Tatamuez, President of the union 
federation CEDOCUT and rotating head of the United Workers 
Front, which includes the five largest labor federations; 
Santiago Yagual, head of the union federation CTE; and 
Patricio Contreras of the Solidarity Center (AFL-CIO).  The 
union leaders expressed concern about business community 
desires to reduce wages and (in the union\'s view) curtail 
worker rights in order to be more competitive.  The unions 
have proposed their own reforms of the labor code.  In their 
view, real collective bargaining does not exist in the 
country.  They believe workers currently have little 
protection on paper and none in practice, with no guarantee 
of stability.  While laws such as profit-sharing exist, CEOSL 
believes that no more than 220 unionized workers and 4,000 
workers overall actually receive it.  The unions are also 
worried about worker rights in the flower sector where there 
are serious health problems arising from the use of 
pesticides without proper protection and child labor issues. 
They believe the MOL needs to do more to monitor health and 
safety standards in the flower and banana sectors. 
 
6.  (SBU) The unions estimate that 75% of Ecuador\'s workers 
are hired through subcontracting.  They feel the MOL needs to 
do more to regulate subcontracting.  The union leaders did 
not express much faith in the current Minister of Labor and 
his Ministry; Arciniegas said the country would be better off 
without the Ministry.  The unions believe the ILO should play 
a more active role helping the GoE comply with international 
labor standards.  Union leaders estimate union membership at 
less than one percent; business leaders put union membership 
at five percent or lower.  The union leaders believe the 
Gutierrez government lacks the credibility to sign a Free 
Trade Agreement with the U.S. at this time. 
 
MOL Committed to Reform 
----------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Also on September 1, the delegation met with the 
Minister of Labor Dr. Raul Izurieta, Vice Minister Beatriz 
Garcia, and several other key officials from the MOL.  The 
Minister discussed the possibilities of labor reform, yet 
most of his suggestions seemed to fall on the side of making 
it easier to hire and fire workers.  The Minister agreed with 
the Chambers that the current labor laws are over-protective 
of workers and need to be changed so businesses can be more 
competitive.  The Minister said he would introduce reforms to 
allow payment of workers per hour, changing vacation 
requirements and altering company retirement laws. 
Currently, after 20 years of work, a worker is entitled to an 
additional retirement package.  Because of this, many 
employers fire their workers just before they reach this 
threshold.  The Minister said he believed it would be 
impossible to lower the 30 person minimum requirement to form 
a union. 
 
8.  (SBU) The Minister said he has asked the ILO and two 
Ecuadorian lawyers to work on proposals for labor code 
reform.  He has also asked the ILO to identify an 
international expert who could help.  Izurieta claimed it has 
had some success in dealing with child labor in the banana 
sector with the tripartite Social Banana Forum.  They are 
also considering supporting a similar program for the flower 
sector.  The Minister said that flower and agricultural 
workers prefer to resolve their conflicts directly, without 
the interventions of union federations.  Minister Izurieta 
said three more child labor inspectors would be named soon, 
in addition to the 19 that are already in place, to comply 
with the labor law that requires one inspector per province. 
 
9.  (SBU) The delegation met on September 2 with the 
newly-created National Labor Council.  Representatives from 
the union federations, the Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 
the small business community, and artisans attended.  CEOSL 
union representative Jose Chavez expressed concern that ILO 
conventions still were not being lived up to.  Ramiro Leon of 
the Chamber of Industry of Pichincha province said both 
unions and businesses share the same goal which is to 
increase jobs in the formal sector and that if change is made 
through consensus, it could benefit everyone. 
 
10.  (SBU) With the US delegation later that evening, the 
Minister said he had spoken earlier with Congressman Andres 
Paez (head of the Labor Commission in Congress) and would 
include him in future meetings of the National Labor Council 
(see para 14 on the delegation meeting with Paez).  The 
Minister said he had reached an agreement with Paez that the 
Minister would table reform proposals in the National Labor 
Council by the end of September.  He told delegation member 
Clatanoff that he intended to urge the Council to engage in 
discussions about those reforms after national local 
elections on October 17, with a view toward submitting 
revised changes to Congress by early November. 
 
Trade Ministry Willing to Help With Industry 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) In a meeting on September 2, with Minister of 
Trade Ivonne Baki and Christian Espinosa, Under Secretary of 
Foreign Commerce and Integration and Ecuador\'s Chief FTA 
negotiator, Mr. Espinosa said both business and labor are 
hesitant to re-open the labor code issue as it is a Pandora\'s 
Box; both sides fear that they will end up worse off than 
they were to begin with.  Minister Baki said it would be 
impossible to lower the number of 30 workers needed to form a 
union, even though ILO reports suggest this number is too 
high.  (The number was raised from 15 to 30 in a 1991 
reform.)  Mr. Espinosa said it was important to make clear to 
the National Labor Council that this could be an opportunity 
where both sides could gain and to have them look at positive 
examples of labor reform from other countries, like Morocco. 
 
ILO Willing to Help 
------------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) On September 2, the delegation met with Ricardo 
Hernandez Pulido, ILO\'s Regional Director from Lima; Adolfo 
Ciudad, the ILO\'s labor specialist in Lima; Jorge Viteri, 
consultant to the ILO in Quito; and Magne Svartbekk, Director 
of ILO/IPEC\'s program in Ecuador.  Mr. Hernandez said the 
Ministry of Labor had requested the ILO institutionalize 
social dialogue on labor reform.  He expressed concern about 
lack of communication between the ILO and the Inter-American 
Development Bank and World Bank in support of labor code 
reform.  The delegation agreed that it would be logical for 
the ILO to play an important role in creating a foundation 
for a modern, balanced labor code reform. 
 
13.  (SBU) Magne Svartbekk spoke to the group about IPEC\'s 
child labor program which started seven months ago.  He has 
insisted that the program be tripartite including the 
Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Government, Police, Unions and 
Chambers of Commerce.  IPEC played a role in organizing 
training for the child labor inspectors, but Mr. Svartbekk 
believes the new inspectors are still weak and lack 
resources.  He is also working on a reform proposal to 
harmonize the labor code with the more recent Code on 
Children and Adolescents, which has stronger protections 
against child labor. 
 
Congress Takes Middle Course 
---------------------------- 
 
14.  (SBU) On September 2, the delegation met with 
Congressman Andres Paez, member of the Democratic Left party, 
and head of the Labor Commission in Congress.  Paez claimed 
that while the businesses and trade unions have opposing 
points of view, his viewpoint is only the interest of the 
country as a whole.  Paez said he did not think freedom of 
association was a problem in Ecuador.  He believes rules on 
collective bargaining in the private and public sectors 
should be different, to prevent excessive salary increases 
from burdening the national budget.  Paez told the delegation 
that currently no political party supports lowering the 
number of 30 workers needed to form a union.   Paez also said 
he believed that subcontracting has been abused by employers 
to avoid their responsibilities to workers, and has 
introduced legislation to harmonize the labor code with the 
stronger Code for Children and Adolescents.  Paez said it is 
important for labor code reforms to have social legitimacy. 
He agreed with the delegation about the importance of 
ensuring that any reforms are ILO-consistent.  Paez also said 
he believed that to succeed, labor reforms must have social 
legitimacy. The National Labor Council could help build that 
legitimacy for labor law reform that can gain Congressional 
approval.  He noted that the Congressional Labor Commission 
is diverse and includes seven Congress members -- two from 
the Democratic Left party, two from the Social Christian 
Party, and one each from the Communist party, the Ecuadorian 
Roldosista Party, and the National Institutional Renewal 
Action Party. 
 
Going Bananas 
------------- 
 
15.  (SBU) On September 3, the group traveled to Guayaquil 
where they met with Sergio Seminario, a former Minister of 
Agriculture and head of SONICONTI, a group that analyzes 
international banana markets, and owner of a banana 
plantation.  Seminario said that Ecuadorian labor law does 
not respond to rural realities.  For example, a cow needs to 
be milked seven days a week, not only between Monday and 
Friday as the labor code allows.  Rigidities in the law have 
forced banana producers to resort to subcontracting. 
Seminario also claimed that it was not in producer interests 
to get certified as organic producers or labor standard 
compliant, because they did not get a better price in the 
international market as a result. 
 
16.  (SBU) The group also met with the Banana Social Forum in 
Guayaquil.  The Forum is active in three provinces: Guayas, 
Los Rios and El Oro.  Guillermo Touma, head of the trade 
union FENACLE and a Forum member, said the creation of the 
Forum was a positive outcome of Human Rights Watch\'s 2003 
report on the banana sector in Ecuador.  Touma said 
conditions for adult workers need to be improved before child 
labor can be eradicated.  Touma said of 200-300,000 direct 
banana employees, only 1,350 were unionized.  Touma said 
\"union\" is still a \"taboo\" word in Ecuador.  A representative 
from the Noboa banana company claimed that over 1,800 
unionized workers exist on just one plantation, Hacienda 
Clementina.  Touma in a later meeting charged that the Noboa 
union is a \"yellow\" union controlled by management. 
 
17.  (SBU) According to Maria Antonieta Reyes of the Forum, a 
second round of child labor inspections began August 4, 2004. 
 She did not discuss the first round of inspections in depth. 
 The Foro has helped find monitors to accompany the 
inspectors when they go out on inspections.  Reyes said that 
there was just one case of a minor under the age of 15 
working.  In this case, it was a 14-year old father of two 
children.  Reyes said none of the minors were at any health 
risk and only worked one to two days a week. 
 
18.  (SBU) The delegation also met in Guayaquil on September 
3 with Guillermo Touma, president of the FENACLE union 
federation, Jaime Arciniegas, President of CEOSL. and Gina 
Carangui, a former banana worker.  Touma said banana workers 
receive a monthly salary of $80-140 and work over ten hours a 
day.  This is far from enough to purchase the basic basket of 
goods which costs $380 a month.  Employers use six-month 
contracts for banana workers, rotating them from one 
subcontractor to another, to avoid having to pay social 
security or other benefits.  Touma said there is no 
government commitment to respect labor rights, including 
freedom of association.  Banana producers are too strong 
politically and economically for the government to control 
them.  As evidence, they cited the government\'s weak 
investigation and prosecution of anti-union violence at the 
Los Alamos plantation, owned by prominent businessman and 
politician, Alvaro Noboa.  Touma said a labor dispute had 
been resolved the day before at La Viscaya plantation, where 
FENACLE was able to have workers reinstated after being fired 
for unionizing.  The businesses gave them a new contract and 
social security but still would not allow them to unionize. 
Arciniegas said he does not want the unions to be an obstacle 
to commerce, but wants the GoE to permit the formation of 
horizontal (industrial) unions, especially in the banana, 
flower and sugar sectors. 
 
Comment: The Way Ahead 
---------------------- 
 
19.  (SBU) Labor code reform will be very difficult 
politically, and Izurieta may be overly optimistic about his 
timetable for reform.  Both labor and management want 
changes, but want different (not wholly irreconcilable) 
things.  The Minister\'s priorities seem heavily weighted 
toward business interests.  We can help by urging him to work 
together with business and labor, the ILO and Congress to 
produce a balanced and politically feasible reform package. 
The National Labor Council appears an ideal venue for any 
labor-business accord to be blessed by both sectors before 
going to Congress.  Meanwhile, we continue to press for 
issuance of the long-delayed Presidential Decree on 
subcontracting. 
KENNEY 
"
"20618","9/14/2004 22:44","04QUITO2497","Embassy Quito","SECRET","03QUITO2824|03QUITO3813|04QUITO2327|04QUITO2380|04QUITO2418|04QUITO2459|04QUITO2462","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002497 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/13/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC, Democracy 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR: POLITICAL STABILITY AND USG SUPPORT 
 
REF: A. 03 QUITO 3813 
     B. 03 QUITO 2824 
     C. QUITO 2459 
     D. QUITO 2462 
     E. QUITO 2418 
     F. QUITO 2380 
     G. QUITO 2327 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney for reason 1.4 (b&d). 
 
1.  (S) Summary:  With President Gutierrez increasingly 
isolated and weakened, his Cabinet divided and Congress 
hopelessly fragmented, rumors continue to swirl about a 
constitutional or extra-constitutional change in the 
Presidency.  In this context we have reviewed how political 
instability here affects USG interests and what we can do to 
support constitutional democracy in Ecuador.  In the near 
term we see many opportunities to do so, including measures 
we can take from here, President Gutierrez\' UNGA attendance 
in September, and upcoming visits by senior USG officials. 
We also recognize that Gutierrez faces worrisome potential 
flash-points in coming months.  End Summary. 
 
Political Conditions Difficult 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  (S) Since late last year (Refs A-B) President Gutierrez 
has faced mounting political opposition and public 
disenchantment with his government\'s performance.  Much of 
this damage to Gutierrez\' credibility is self-inflicted; the 
result of a series of political blunders.  The latest round 
of speculation about possible moves against Gutierrez (and 
possible desperate extra-constitutional moves by him to 
retain power) began with Gutierrez\' inexplicable visit to 
Panama and meeting there with reviled ex-president Abdala 
Bucaram (see Ref C).  Gutierrez dealt with the negative 
repercussions of that move (which bought him the temporary 
support of Bucaram\'s PRE but lost the heftier backing of the 
PSC) by offering concessions to the PRIAN (by replacing the 
head of the national tax authority, who had been pursing 
party leader Alvaro Noboa\'s back taxes). 
 
3.  (S) Without the support of the PRIAN or PRE for 
impeachment, Congress has diverted itself by censuring 
provocative statements by Gutierrez\' brother Gilmar and 
investigating the brothers\' business dealings, searching for 
impeachable offenses.  Meanwhile, the Vice President, the 
President of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, and the 
President of Congress have publicly criticized the 
President\'s campaign-like pre-electoral visits to inaugurate 
public works in districts where his party has local electoral 
hopes. 
 
Potential Flash-points 
--------------------- 
 
4.  (S) While Gutierrez has proved himself a canny survivor 
to have lasted this long into his mandate, we share the 
concern of some analysts that with each subsequent cycle of 
scandal/blunder, political opposition mounts and his 
government\'s vulnerability increases.  Gutierrez faces a 
series of potentially difficult challenges to his authority 
in coming months, which could include: 
 
-- a return of former President Abdala Bucaram (as soon as 
mid-October), if he is not immediately arrested and tried on 
outstanding corruption charges; 
 
-- corruption scandals associated with Gutierrez\' coterie of 
corrupt family members and trusted associates; 
 
-- spill-over from mishandling of the Occidental Petroleum 
case, should the GoE proceed (October-November) to 
nationalize Oxy\'s assets (Refs D-G); 
 
-- the Guayaquil round of FTA talks (October 25-29), which 
could attract anti-government protests; 
 
-- new economic measures which could provoke social protests, 
including elimination of the subsidy on cooking gas 
(currently planned by the GoE for November); 
 
-- an incursion into Ecuadorian territory by the FARC or 
Colombian Armed Forces (anytime). 
 
USG Interests 
------------- 
 
5.  (S)  Despite his political vulnerability (and perhaps 
contributing to it), Gutierrez is a U.S. ally on many key 
issues (e.g. bolstering Northern Border security to prevent 
spill-over from Plan Colombia, fighting narcotics 
trafficking, supporting an FTA).  His growing weakness make 
him increasingly ineffective implementing this shared agenda. 
 But any scenario providing for his departure is unlikely to 
produce a more amenable ally or a noticeably stronger (lame 
duck) president.  Furthermore, support for the Vice President 
is nonexistent among the political parties, and within 
Congress there is no consensus candidate to replace the 
President should he be removed.  (Congress has the 
Constitutional power to replace the President if the Vice 
President resigns.) 
 
6.  (S) Particular USG interests are trumped by the broader 
U.S. interest in supporting constitutional democracy in a 
country with a shaky democratic track record.  Ecuador\'s 
irregular curtailment of presidential terms in 1997 and 2000 
were only loosely cloaked in constitutional guise, and 
continue to serve as an invitation to those whose interests 
would be served by Gutierrez\' early departure. 
 
7.  (S) The corruption that swirls within Gutierrez\' inner 
circle undermines public perceptions of this government and 
the public\'s commitment to democracy.  It also indirectly 
undermines public perceptions of the U.S. role.  While we 
publicly distinguish between USG support for constitutional 
democracy and Lucio Gutierrez, the man, the public makes no 
such distinction. 
 
8.  (S) We see no indications of military support among the 
middle ranks for a Gutierrez self-coup, and believe those at 
higher ranks loyal to Gutierrez support will ultimately 
support the constitution.  A constitutional move against 
Gutierrez is certainly conceivable, given the challenges he 
faces.  It is in the U.S. interest to prevent any such move, 
which most believe would only result in an even weaker 
government, and in the process would set back Ecuadorian 
democracy.  That there is no politically attractive 
alternative to replace Gutierrez (although the crusading 
Solicitor General is being mentioned by some as an aspirant) 
contributes to his longevity and may ultimately salvage 
Gutierrez\' term of office, despite his unpopularity and 
weakness. 
 
What We Can Do To Support Constitutional Democracy 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
9.  (S) We see opportunities in the political disorder that 
characterizes Ecuador\'s relatively young democracy, and see 
the following opportunities to support Ecuadorian democracy: 
 
By the Embassy and Consulate Guayaquil: 
 
-- make it clear to Gutierrez and the political opposition 
that the USG would not tolerate a Fujimori-style self-coup; 
 
-- similarly, reach out to the military leadership to send 
the same message; 
 
-- press Gutierrez to address perceptions of corruption 
within his inner circle; 
 
-- continue outreach to key GoE officials who represent 
maturity and stability in the Cabinet (Government Minister 
Baca, Economy and Finance Minister Yepez); 
 
-- continue outreach to political parties to encourage 
democratic stability; 
 
-- continue outreach to the indigenous movement to promote 
constitutional democracy; and, 
 
For Consideration by Washington Agencies or USG Visitors to 
Ecuador: 
 
-- support electoral democracy by supporting an OAS 
observation mission for upcoming October 17 local elections; 
 
-- use the UNGA as an opportunity to press Gutierrez to stay 
the democratic course; 
 
-- use high-profile visits to Ecuador to emphasize our 
messages to the Government, opposition, public and military; 
 
-- use visits to the U.S. of key GoE ministers to fortify 
democracy and economic reform. (The willingness of key USG 
economic officials to see Finance Minister Yepez as well as 
International Trade Minister Baki last week were very useful.) 
 
10.  (S) Ecuador Visit Specifics 
-------------------------------- 
 
-- General Hill\'s upcoming (early October) visit provides an 
excellent opportunity to press these themes with the military 
leadership. 
 
-- We recommend a visit by U/S Grossman, preferably after the 
October 17 local elections and before the Guayaquil FTA 
round, to send a signal of support for electoral processes 
and economic opportunity that is inherent to successful 
democracy. 
 
-- Senior NSC or WHA visits (October/November). 
KENNEY 
"
"20644","9/15/2004 15:06","04QUITO2499","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE179724","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 002499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR T: JANICE NEAL, CHRISTINE SAMUELIAN; 
WHA/PPC: CLARK LYNN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EC, KICC, UNGA 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR EVASIVE OVER NEW YORK BOLTON MEETING 
 
REF: STATE 179724 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (U) In response to Reftel, the Embassy August 20 
contacted the Ecuadorian MFA\'s Article 98 coordinator, 
attorney Renan Mosquera, to seek a New York meeting between 
Foreign Minister Patricio Zuquilanda and Under Secretary John 
Bolton.  Customary in the overly formal MFA, Mosquera 
requested the Embassy formalize the request via diplomatic 
note.  Our correspondence, dated August 24, sought a 
bilateral encounter on the margins of the UN General 
Assembly, to \"consult on a wide range of security and 
political-military issues, to include Article 98.\" 
 
2.  (C) Having received no written response, Poloff attempted 
to telephone Mosquera numerous times, with no success. 
Finally, on September 14, the reclusive diplomat made 
contact.  Speciously contrite for the delay in responding, 
Mosquera claimed he could not commit Zuquilanda to a Bolton 
get-together at UNGA, since the foreign minister was 
incommunicado in Manaos, Brazil, attending an Amazon Basin 
ministerial.  He instead suggested the U.S. delegation 
organize the call while on the ground in New York. 
 
3.  (C) COMMENT:  The meeting debacle is another example of 
MFA stalling and unwillingness to engage on Article 98 - we 
predict Zuquilanda\'s advisors at UNGA will swear the FM is 
\"fully booked\" and cannot receive the U/S.  Nonetheless, the 
Embassy is planning a renewed Article 98 offensive, to 
commence after Ecuador\'s October 17 elections.  We\'ll need a 
more serious working-level interlocutor than Mosquera to gain 
traction, however, and are considering options to bypass him. 
 END COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"20652","9/15/2004 16:02","04QUITO2500","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2449","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002500 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, EC 
SUBJECT: FIGHTING ELECTORAL FRAUD, MISCOUNTS WITH TECHNOLOGY 
 
REF: QUITO 2449 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  Ecuador\'s byzantine electoral process demands 
newspaper-sized ballots, seven-hour counts, and spawns 
unacceptable numbers of nullified votes.  Worse, its 
complexity raises the possibility of electoral fraud. 
Ecuador\'s supreme electoral authority sees a partial solution 
in increased use of automation, however.  The Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal (TSE) this year inked an agreement with 
its Brazilian counterpart and the OAS to utilize computerized 
voting stations in 271 precincts in five provinces.  TSE 
experts predict accurate results from the pilot system one 
hour after polls close.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  Ecuadorians go to the polls October 17 to elect prefects, 
mayors, and provincial/municipal councils.  The national 
electoral system mixes presidential and parliamentary 
elements; voters select one candidate for prefectural and 
mayoral races, but cast as many votes for council members as 
there are open seats (voting for a party list, or splitting 
votes among several parties).  At the close of the 
registration period, the TSE announced that some 150 
organizations would field candidates in October.  Taken 
together, in populous provinces like Pichincha and Guayas, 
ballots can look more like racing forms, producing headaches 
for vote counters and observers alike and making fraud more 
difficult to detect. 
 
3.  The TSE\'s track record modernizing Ecuador\'s electoral 
system is solid.  In 2000, it initiated a telephone-based 
quick count system, used to good effect in 2002 as well. 
Initial results for that presidential election arrived in 
Quito just 90 minutes after polls closed.  The system is 
limited, however, in that it still depends on manual ballot 
counts, precluding its use in complex, multi-seat 
congressional and council races.  It is also costly; TSE 
Technical Advisor Axel Villa told Poloff September 9 the TSE 
would pay a Spanish contractor $3 million for quick-count 
services. 
 
4.  Existing vote tabulation technology allowed accurate, 
quick results reporting, Villa claimed.  The TSE was 
committed to automating the vote 100 percent by 2012.  To 
that end, it had entered into an agreement with the OAS and 
Brazilian electoral authorities to use the latter\'s 
technology in a pilot program this October.  At 271 of 
Ecuador\'s 34,000 precincts, in Guayas, Pichincha, Manabi, 
Imbabura, and Azuay provinces, citizens would cast ballots at 
PC-based workstations.  Tabulation would occur automatically, 
once the precinct captain executed a few simple computer 
commands.  He then had only to transmit results to the TSE in 
Quito via a simple modem uplink. 
 
5.  Villa demonstrated the system\'s workings to Poloff. 
Party symbols, colors, and assigned numbers would aid 
illiterate and semi-literate Ecuadorians, especially 
important in heavily indigenous areas.  In response to 
remarks that the process was user-friendly but still complex, 
the TSE technician claimed all voters in pilot precincts must 
undergo a two-hour training course before accessing the 
machines. 
 
6.  Brazilian Commercial Attache Alfonso Netti September 8 
provided additional detail on the TSE/OAS/Brazil agreement. 
Brasilia earlier had provided electoral assistance to 
Paraguay; that impoverished country now features 
state-of-the-art vote tabulators at nearly half its 
precincts.  Under the Ecuador accord, Brazil had loaned the 
TSE nearly 800 machines.  A majority would not see duty 
 
SIPDIS 
election day, but rather appear in shopping malls and 
universities in the run-up, raising electoral and system 
awareness.  Brazilian experts had trained TSE trainers in 
April and technicians stood ready to assist throughout the 
campaign.  Should the pilot prove successful, Netti noted 
that the Brazilian manufacturer (a subsidiary of U.S.-based 
Diebold, Villa later revealed) would seek to sell Ecuador 
machines and service contracts. 
 
7.  Media have reported the pilot program favorably, in part 
due to a proactive TSE publicity campaign.  Tribunal 
authorities traveled to each province for kickoff events to 
raise awareness.  In addition, TSE President Nicanor Moscoso 
has trumpeted the system as an integral component in the 
fight against fraud.  He is lobbying party officials to make 
similar pronouncements. 
 
8.  COMMENT:  Embassy officers fanned out nationwide to 
witness Ecuador\'s 2002 presidential and congressional 
elections.  Each was impressed by the perseverance of poll 
workers, many tabulating results well past midnight, in cold 
and by candlelight.  Observers were mortified, however, by 
the ballots\' complexity and the null votes it produced.  The 
TSE pilot program thus appears both necessary and long 
 
SIPDIS 
overdue.  Choosing proven technology too seems prudent - 
Netti explained that 120 million voters would utilize similar 
machines in Brazil\'s own October elections.  But we\'re 
somewhat skeptical the TSE can train the pilot\'s 63,000 
voters, many uneducated, to use its systems.  And poor 
communications in Ecuador\'s rural regions might stymie the 
TSE in its goal of 100 percent automation by 2012.  END 
 
SIPDIS 
COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"20654","9/15/2004 17:02","04QUITO2502","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2464","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
>>>>>C O R R E C T E D  COPY - SBU marking removed"
"20687","9/16/2004 14:47","04QUITO2509","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2462","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2014 
TAGS: EPET, ETRD, ECON, EC, Oil Sector 
SUBJECT: OXY:  THE CALM BEFORE THE STORM - OR PROGRESS? 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2462 
 
     B. QUITO 2418: QUITO 2380 
     C. QUITO 2327 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Occidental Petroleum\'s (Oxy) meetings in the 
US and USG efforts have provided a temporary calm in the 
contract nullification process.  Oxy has still not been 
officially notified of its alleged violations of the 
hydrocarbon law, thus the statutory time period for it to 
respond has not commenced.  Privately, the Procurador 
(Solicitor General equivalent) has said he would support a 
negotiated settlement with Oxy, but said he could not say so 
publicly.  GOE sources think an offer for a negotiated 
settlement could be tabled in the next 2-3 weeks.  Oxy is 
pleased with the calm, but is also waiting for the possible 
storm ahead.  Canadian oil company EnCana\'s international 
arbitration is back on track.  Likely unrelated, but worth 
consideration, EnCana\'s pipeline was recently 
vandalized/sabotaged causing an oil spill and environmental 
damage.  End Summary. 
 
Washington Meetings Successful 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) Economy and Finance Minister Mauricio Yepez told 
Ambassador on September 14 that his meetings with Oxy in New 
York were productive and opened the door to a negotiated 
settlement.  He also mentioned that A/S Tony Wayne had raised 
the Oxy matter during their meeting.  When Yepez returned to 
Quito on September 13, he spoke with President Gutierrez, 
Minister of Government Raul Baca and the Procurador about 
Oxy.  All agreed that a negotiated settlement was the route 
to take and that none of them wanted to nullify Oxy\'s 
contract.  Though, Yepez told the Ambassador that the 
Procurador said he could not say so publicly.  Yepez said he 
did not discuss the Oxy matter with Minister of Energy and 
Mines Eduardo Lopez, because Lopez was too scared to take 
action.  Still, Yepez thought the parties could put an offer 
on the table within the next 2-3 weeks. 
 
3. (C) Minister of Trade Ivonne Baki also told Ambassador 
September 13 that she had received a strong message from USTR 
that Oxy and other commercial disputes had to be quickly 
resolved or Ecuador would face serious trade consequences. 
Baki said she too explained this to Gutierrez. 
 
Public Debate Less Polemical - For Now 
--------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Procurador Borja announced September 14 in the press 
that he would continue to review all oil company contracts 
for compliance with Ecuadorian law.  Next on the list is 
Canadian oil company EnCana.  However, Borja\'s statements 
were not inflammatory.  Ecuadorian Ambassador to the USA Raul 
Gangotena\'s comments on a local radio show were conciliatory 
towards Oxy and stressed the need to work out a long term 
relationship with the company. However, Minister of Energy 
Lopez is scheduled to appear before the Ecuadorian Congress 
on September 17 and it is unclear whether he will wilt under 
Congressional pressure and adopt a more nationalistic 
attitude. 
 
Oxy: Is It Progress or the Calm Before the Storm? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
5.  (C) Oxy President and GM of Ecuador Jerry Ellis told 
econoff September 14 that Oxy thought its meeting with Yepez 
in New York had been productive.  He also said that he was 
pleased that things were relatively calm in the press in 
recent days.  He added that Oxy continues to be willing to 
negotiate a settlement, but it is unclear with whom they 
would negotiate.  He agreed that Energy Minister Lopez was 
too afraid to take any action and that it was far from 
certain that the Procurador could be trusted, even though 
Borja eventually would probably have to approve any 
settlement agreement.  He was waiting to see what Lopez would 
say before Congress and moderately encouraged by the fact 
that Oxy has yet to be officially notified of its alleged 
hydrocarbon law violations and the statutory time for Oxy\'s 
response had not yet begun. 
 
EnCana Waiting in the Wings 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  (C) EnCana\'s GM John Keplinger told econoff on September 
14 that the GOE had appointed its replacement arbitrator for 
EnCana\'s international arbitration case on the value added 
tax (VAT) refunds.  Keplinger said that the final hearing in 
that VAT arbitration would be held on November 18 and they 
expected a decision in the first quarter of 2005.  EnCana had 
closely followed Oxy\'s international arbitration case on the 
same topic.  He noted that the Minister of Energy has refused 
to sign anything involving EnCana (the purchaser of Oxy\'s 40% 
share of Block 15, see reftels) or Oxy. 
 
7.  (C) Keplinger also told econoff that someone had either 
vandalized or sabotaged one of its pipelines.  He said the 
person had to know something about what they were doing 
because they dug 1.5 meters to get to the underground 
pipeline and then used a power drill to penetrate the pipe. 
However, the vandals/saboteurs were not that expert, as oil 
flows through that pipeline at 700 psi; thus, the person 
drilling the hole received quite a jolt when the pipe was 
penetrated.  He theorized that the shock scared the person/s 
off.  EnCana security personnel do not believe this was an 
act by any of the Colombian insurgents, but continue their 
investigation. 
 
8.  (C) Unfortunately, because of the small size of the hole, 
the oil leak was not discovered for some time, until a local 
farmer notified EnCana.  Some 11 hectares could be affected 
by the spillage of approximately 200 barrels of oil.  Local 
colonos (settlers from other parts of Ecuador) living in the 
area tried to extract a $25,000 payment from EnCana for 
access to repair the pipeline and clean up the environment. 
As a result, EnCana was forced to go to environmental 
authorities to get access to the land.  Keplinger hoped that 
the incident was not a reaction to the recent developments in 
the oil sector involving Oxy and EnCana. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  (C) Oxy is right to be wary of reaching a negotiated 
settlement with the GOE.  Still, the right people in the GOE 
are involved, Ministers Yepez, Baca and Baki and President 
Gutierrez.  However, the weak links are the two people that 
need to be most involved, Minister of Energy Lopez and 
Procurador Borja.  It is a good sign that the statutory time 
for Oxy to respond has not commenced and that both parties 
have agreed on that is imperative to reach a settlement and 
keep Oxy in Ecuador.  Our task now is to encourage the GOE to 
get a responsible person with the authority to act to sit 
down with Oxy sooner, rather than later.  As long as problems 
like Oxy\'s VAT and contractual problems remain, Ecuador 
cannot hope to attract the foreign investment in the oil 
sector it desperately needs.  As the case involving EnCana 
also points out, there are plenty more problems in the oil 
sector waiting for the GOE in the very near future. 
Responsible development of Ecuador\'s oil sector is crucial to 
its economic and political stability, both of which are in 
the USG\'s best interests. 
KENNEY 
"
"20695","9/16/2004 20:07","04QUITO2519","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2447","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002519 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR CONTINUES TO MOVE FORWARD ON TIP 
 
REF: QUITO 2447 
 
1. Summary. Ecuador continues its strong fight against 
trafficking in persons (TIP), commercial sexual exploitation 
of minors (CSEM), and child pornography and has made 
additional progress since the last update.  Congress is 
reviewing penal code reforms to change the definition of a 
minor to a child under 18 years of age and strengthen the 
GOE\'s laws against TIP.  Efforts to develop victim services 
continue, and a shelter will open in Machala by the end of 
October.  The police continue to conduct raids on 
prostitution houses and nightclubs on a regular basis.  A 
number of newspaper articles also illustrated the importance 
of TIP in Ecuador.  End Summary. 
 
PENAL CODE REFORMS SENT TO CONGRESS 
----------------------------------- 
 
2. On September 6, the President sent a bill with penal code 
reforms to Congress.  (The bill was emailed to WHA/PPC on 
September 15.)  The bill was drafted by the Ministry of 
Government and references the Inter-American Convention on 
International Traffic in Minors, the U.N. Protocol on TIP, 
and the U.N. Convention on Organized Crime.  The bill changes 
the definition of a minor to a child under 18 years of age. 
It also allows the government to confiscate money and 
property gained from illegal prostitution, TIP, pornography 
and CSEM.  Clients of illegal prostitutes, persons who 
partake in sex tourism, and elements of the tourism industry 
that support sex tourism can be prosecuted. 
 
3. The Ambassador hosted a lunch for Codel Weller and members 
of Congress\'s Ecuadorian-American interests group on August 
12.  The Ecuadorian congresspeople initiated discussion of 
TIP and child pornography.  They expressed their support of 
anti-TIP legislation, and the Embassy will maintain 
Congressional contact to facilitate passage of the bill. 
 
VICTIM SERVICES A PRIME CONCERN 
--------------------------------- 
 
4. PolOff met with ILO Director Magne Svartbekk on September 
13.  He said the ILO\'s headquarters in Geneva is currently 
approving a proposal to open a shelter for TIP victims in 
Machala.  In the ILO\'s 2002 report, Machala was the third 
worst city in Ecuador for CSEM. The shelter is expected to 
open by the end of October, and PolOff will visit it soon 
after it opens. 
 
5. On September 14, the political section hosted a lunch to 
bring together NGOs and GOE officials to discuss services for 
TIP victims.  The participants analyzed the special needs of 
TIP victims and potential solutions.  Lack of funding is a 
prime concern, but USAID is committed to showing the GOE how 
existing resources can be used to help victims.  The Embassy 
will continue to meet with these groups and encourage them to 
design a realistic plan for providing services. 
 
FREQUENT RAIDS FIND MINORS IN PROSTITUTION HOUSES 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
6. The unit of the police dedicated to protecting minors, 
DINAPEN, conducted an additional 33 raids from August 27 to 
September 1.  DINAPEN carried out these operations in 
brothels and nightclubs where minors work as prostitutes and 
rescued 30 minors.  The Embassy\'s DHS and AID offices will 
continue to assist DINAPEN in finding social services for 
rescued minors.  (Reports were faxed to WHA/PPC on September 
15.)  Highlights from the reports include the following 
information: 
 
--On August 27, police found 11 adolescents in a nightclub in 
Manabi province. 
--On September 1, four minors were found at an establishment 
in Guayas province. 
 
SUBSTANTIAL PRESS COVERAGE OF TIP CONTINUES 
------------------------------------------- 
 
7. TIP and child pornography continued to receive substantial 
press coverage.  Recent articles include: 
 
-- September 7: Quito\'s center-left \"Hoy\" (circ: 38,500) 
announced that the President presented TIP penal code reforms 
to Congress.  The article reports that the President urged 
Congress to analyze the proposals and pass them quickly. 
-- Quito\'s center-right \"El Universo\" (circ: 140,000), the 
country\'s most circulated newspaper, consistently updated the 
status of the Joseph Day child pornography case in a series 
of articles.  The most recent article was written on 
September 10.  The paper often has written articles about 
this case for several days in a row. 
 
-- September 11: According to \"Hoy\", the municipal government 
of Quito stated that registered prostitution houses have one 
month remaining to move to non-residential areas zoned for 
prostitution.  Residents of one neighborhood voiced their 
strong support for the zoning changes and said they would not 
allow sexual businesses to reopen in their neighborhood 
despite the industry\'s opposition. 
 
-- September 15: Quito\'s newspaper of record \"El Comercio\" 
(circ: 80,000), one of Ecuador\'s most prominent newspapers, 
reported that the city of Riobamba has developed a plan to 
assist adolescents engaged in prostitution.   Labor 
inspectors raided one prostitution house where minors work 
and discovered the facilities were in disrepair and had 
neither electricity nor potable water.  PolOff will follow up 
with municipal government officials to learn more about the 
plan and what services it will provide. 
 
-- September 15: Guayaquil\'s centrist \"El Expreso\" (circ: 
28,000) highlighted the Ministry of Government\'s actions to 
combat child pornography and sexual tourism after a computer 
expert found two child pornography websites originating in 
Quito.  One website touted child prostitutes from different 
regions of Ecuador as exotic and specifically catered to sex 
tourism.  PolOff spoke with Carlos Jativa in the Ministry and 
confirmed the GOE\'s plan to combat the problem:  an 
enlargement of DINAPEN, filters to find hidden child 
pornography websites, and by the end of October, a law to 
exclusively penalize child pornography over the internet and 
hold internet service providers responsible. 
 
8.  Comment.  The GOE continues to do an impressive job of 
moving forward in the fight against TIP.  Officials remain 
committed to changing and strengthening the existing laws. 
Social services providers are progressing on plans for a 
shelter in Machala and a pilot project in Santo Domingo, both 
of which should open in October.  Additional training is 
necessary, but the ILO has CSEM training planned for the end 
of the month, which PolOff will attend.  The Embassy will 
continue to work with GOE officials and NGOs to ensure 
Ecuador continues to make significant progress against TIP. 
End Comment. 
KENNEY 
"
"20750","9/17/2004 18:55","04QUITO2533","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2480","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002533 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF, USDOL FOR JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ, DRL/IL 
FOR GREG MAGGIO, EB FOR AMY HOLMAN 
SECSTATE FOR US TRADE REPRESENTATIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC 
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF LABOR SHARES CONCERNS ON CHILD LABOR 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2480 
 
     B. QUITO 2448 
 
1.  (U) Summary.  At a breakfast meeting at the Ambassador\'s 
residence on September 15, the Ambassador emphasized to MOL 
Raul Izurieta the importance of combating child labor and 
inquired into current MOL efforts to do so.  Izurieta 
described efforts the Ministry is already taking towards 
eliminating the worst forms of child labor, and looked 
forward to the implementation of the USDOL-funded education 
project.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) Izurieta said the MOL will conduct a study, with the 
help of INEC (the National Institute of Statistics and 
Census) to determine the actual number of child workers in 
Ecuador.  Previous studies by UNICEF estimated about 700,000 
child workers while First Lady Ximena Bohorquez, as head of 
INNFA (the Institute for the Child and Family) put the number 
around 1.2 million.  Izurieta believes the number is much 
lower-no more than 300,000. 
 
3.  (U) Izurieta expressed appreciation for the Department of 
Labor\'s planned $3 million education program to combat child 
labor.  Izurieta did not want the money spent on more 
studies, however, and would like \"99.9%\" of funds to go 
directly to project implementation.  Izurieta also spoke of 
the need for a publicity campaign to raise rural parents\' 
awareness of the importance of education for their children. 
Many of these parents pull children out of school to work on 
the family farm.  Izurieta said an awareness campaign was 
needed in the business sector as well. 
 
4.  (U) Izurieta also spoke enthusiastically of the work of 
the Banana Social Forum which brings together the government, 
banana industry and unions to combat child labor.  (The 
Banana Social Forum has conducted six inspection methodology 
workshops for inspectors and monitors in Guayas, Los Rios and 
El Oro Provinces.  They have also had six child labor 
awareness workshops for banana employers and workers.) 
Izurieta would like to emulate the model in a 
soon-to-be-created Flower Social Forum targeting Ecuador\'s 
expanding cut-flower industry. 
 
5.  (U) Izurieta said one child labor inspector resigned last 
week but that he would hire four more inspectors this week. 
Izurieta stated he believes his child labor inspectors have 
done a good job of identifying which of the larger companies 
are violating child labor laws. 
 
6.  (U) Comment.  We believe Izurieta is willing to \"do the 
right thing\" on child labor but needs our encouragement to 
push things forward.  Izurieta was eager to maintain a high 
level of communication and work with us on child labor issues. 
KENNEY 
"
"20751","9/17/2004 18:56","04QUITO2534","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2480","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE FOR US TRADE REPRESENTATIVE 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF, USDOL FOR JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ, DRL/IL 
FOR GREG MAGGIO, EB FOR AMY HOLMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: MOL PROMISES SUBCONTRACTING DECREE THIS WEEK 
 
REF: QUITO 2480 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  At breakfast with the Ambassador 
September 15, Minister of Labor Raul Izurieta said the 
President would sign the oft delayed labor decree on 
subcontracting by September 17.  On September 14, union 
leaders told PolOff they were worried the decree would not 
sufficiently limit subcontracting abuses.  End Summary. 
 
Minister Says Decree A Done Deal 
-------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The Ambassador thanked Izurieta for his hospitality 
during the recent labor delegation visit (reftel).  The 
Ambassador asked if there was any progress on the 
long-delayed subcontracting decree.  Izurieta said he would 
need until September 21 to consult with unions again and make 
additional changes.  The Ambassador emphasized the need for 
closure on this ATPDEA commitment by the GoE and suggested 
the President consider signing the decree before planned 
travel to Washington the week of September 20.  Izurieta 
agreed, and promised to recommend the President would sign 
the decree by September 17. 
 
3.  (U) Izurieta also described his good relations with the 
Labor Commission in Congress and its President, Andres Paez. 
Izurieta said he is also working with the unions and business 
to reach an agreement on hourly wages.  Izurieta provided the 
Ambassador a copy of the latest version of the subcontracting 
decree, which adds a clause requiring companies to have a 
maximum 75% of its employees hired through subcontractors. 
The change reflects union concerns. 
 
Unions Push For Subcontracting Limits 
------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) On September 14, PolCouns and PolOff attended a 
reception organized by Patricio Contreras of the Solidarity 
Center (AFL-CIO) with Izurieta and a broad selection of 
approximately 50 union leaders.  Jaime Arciniegas, President 
of the CEOSL union, told PolOff that he and other union 
leaders had met with the President and Izurieta on September 
8 to discuss the subcontracting decree.  In the meeting, 
union leaders asked for the decree to limit the number of 
subcontractors to no more than 15% of employees.  Arciniegas 
said the unions would be willing to support a decree if it 
limited the number of subcontractors to a maximum of 50%. 
Union leaders were very concerned about the clause in the 
decree stating subcontractors can be used \"indefinitely,\" 
which they feared could further weaken unions. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The last-minute concession to labor unions in the 
current version of the decree could provoke a legal challenge 
by business groups or even further delay.  Izurieta clearly 
understands the need for labor reform in Ecuador and is 
working with key stakeholders, including members of Congress, 
to this effect.  However, if the long-overdue subcontracting 
decree is any indication, the process for achieving more 
comprehensive labor reform will be tortuous. 
KENNEY 
"
"20795","9/20/2004 23:06","04QUITO2550","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO2502","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002550 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EC, ECON, EFIS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, SENV, Environment 
SUBJECT: GALAPAGOS NATIONAL PARK WORKERS CONTINUE TO STRIKE 
 
REF: QUITO 002502 
 
1.  (U) Summary.  On September 10, the Minister of the 
Environment (MOE) replaced the Galapagos National Park (GNP) 
Director.  In protest, the employees of the GNP went on 
strike.  The strike began peacefully and the strikers 
initially promised not to interrupt tourist operations if 
their demands were met.  The MOE offered to address the wage 
concerns of the employees (putting up $700,000 as a show of 
good faith) but has shown no willingness to budge on the 
strikers\' demand for reinstatement of the previous GNP 
Director.  The MOE offered to meet with strike leaders in 
Quito, but the strikers have rejected this offer, demanding 
that the MOE should come to the Galapagos.  Strikers have now 
closed tourist visitor\'s centers on the islands.  An 
international monitoring group is also calling for an 
international boycott on tourism to the Galapagos.  President 
Gutierrez told the Ambassador on September 20 that he plans 
to appoint a new Undersecretary of the Environment for the 
Galapagos.  End Summary. 
 
The State of the Strike 
----------------------- 
 
2.  (U) When the existing GNP Director was replaced on 
September 10, the roughly 300 employees of the GNP went on 
strike (Reftel), denouncing the instability created by the 
constant turnover of directors, demanding reinstatement of 
the previous director, and including some minor personnel 
issues in their list of demands.  Some 225 of the 300 workers 
are currently employed without a contract and many have not 
been paid for over a month. 
 
3.  (U) The strike began peacefully, but the strikers have 
threatened to use more radical methods if their demands were 
not met.  On September 15, they issued a bulletin stating 
that they would close all the tourist visitor\'s centers 
effective immediately, including the beloved 
tortoise-breeding park center.  The strikers\' bulletin also 
states that if the MOE continues to ignore their demands, 
they will cease collecting park entrance fees ($100 for 
non-residents and $6 for residents) and suspend control and 
monitoring of the Galapagos Marine Reserve. 
 
4.  (U) The MOE announced on September 19 that $700,000 is 
available to satisfy some of the wage concerns of the GNP 
employees.  It is unclear if this amount will be sufficient 
to pay for all the contract employees.  However, the MOE 
adamantly refuses to go to the Galapagos to meet with 
strikers to discuss the strikers\' demands about stability and 
reinstatement.  The MOE made it clear at a United Nations 
Development Programme meeting on September 17 that \"legal and 
institutional sovereignty\" are primary concerns with respect 
to the Galapagos.  The MOE also stated on September 19 that 
he will impose legal sanctions and other measures against the 
strikers.  There was no indication what these sanctions would 
be or when he would impose them. 
 
Call for Boycott on Tourism 
--------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) The Sea Shepherd Society, an international monitoring 
group, has called for an international boycott on tourism to 
the Galapagos.  The goal is to pressure President Gutierrez 
and the MOE to resolve this issue and stabilize GNP 
leadership. 
 
New GNP Director on the Job, Without Staff 
------------------------------------------ 
 
6.  (U) The new GNP Director is attempting to install himself 
in his office.  Reportedly, he went to the GNP Director\'s 
main office in Santa Cruz but was turned away by the 
strikers.  He then went to the GNP offices in San Cristobal, 
accompanied by the Governor, police and navy troops, and 
installed himself in that office.  The office in San 
Cristobal is considerably smaller than the main office in 
Santa Cruz (about 30 employees).  Despite being physically 
present in the office, he apparently has no supervisory 
control and is unable to execute his duties and 
responsibilities. 
 
Ambassador Meets with Gutierrez 
------------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) The Ambassador met with President Gutierrez on 
September 20 to discuss the Galapagos problem.  Gutierrez 
said he was cancelling his attendance at the UNGA to resolve 
outstanding crises, including the Galapagos.  Gutierrez said 
he might create a undersecretary position in the Ministry of 
the Environment to  oversee the archipelago. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  (SBU) The MOE\'s $700,000 wage offer will help, but the 
problem of park management stability and politicization of 
the park directorship will be harder to resolve.  A member of 
the Guayaquil conservation sector said that strike leaders 
are trying to send a letter to U.N. Secretary Kofi Anan 
through back channels in order to embarass Ecuador\'s 
representative at the 59th UNGA this week.  We know Gutierrez 
will not attend the UNGA.  It is difficult to see how the 
appointment of a new undersecretary would stabilize or 
depoliticize the park directorship. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"20821","9/21/2004 13:31","04QUITO2552","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE200879","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002552 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM/WRA: KATHERINE BAKER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KHDP, PREL, PGOV, EC, PE 
SUBJECT: FEW U.S.-MANUFACTURED LAND MINES IN ECUADOR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 200879 
 
1.  In response to Reftel, Poloff September 20 contacted 
Guillermo Leal, chief of the OAS Humanitarian Demining (HD) 
mission in Ecuador.  Leal noted the only U.S.-produced land 
mine found in Ecuador was the M18A1 Claymore device.  The GoE 
had destroyed seven in-stock Claymores in 2001, Leal 
recalled; he believed the Ecuadorian Army maintained at least 
ten more in its warehouses.  They were not subject to 
destruction under Ecuador\'s Ottawa Convention 
responsibilities, since the weapons were to be fired manually 
by GoE soldiers, not left unattended, to be triggered by the 
enemy. 
 
2.  Since the OAS HD program\'s inception three years ago, 
sappers had uncovered no/no U.S.-produced land mines.  For 
comparison, the total of mines cleared in Ecuador, including 
those uncovered in the Army\'s own efforts in the late 1990s, 
was 4438.  Most were of Chilean, Brazilian, or former Soviet 
Union fabrication.  According to the Army\'s own minefield 
documentation, however, there are 39 pressure-triggered 
Claymores remaining in Ecuador\'s remote Morona-Santiago 
province, where HD operations soon will commence. 
KENNEY 
"
"20869","9/22/2004 16:01","04QUITO2571","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE194082","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002571 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR COMMITED TO USG TIP RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 194082 
 
     B. SECSTATE 200150 
 
1. PolOff delivered reftel talking points including elements 
of a USG-supported action plan to combat TIP, to Carlos 
Jativa, the Minister of Government Raul Baca\'s assistant, on 
September 16.  In a follow-up meeting with PolOff on 
September 20, Baca and Jativa concurred with the Tier 2 Watch 
List action plan requirements.  PolOff informed the Minister 
that the Embassy is required to provide the Department a 
report of Ecuador\'s actions by November 15. 
 
2. Baca described his Ministry\'s proposal to open new 
shelters for TIP victims in Guayaquil and Quito and requested 
USG financial support.  (The proposal was faxed to WHA/PPC on 
September 22.)  He said he will also solicit support from 
other international donors, including UNICEF.  Baca told the 
PolOff he was working with Congress to ensure 
anti-Trafficking in Persons (TIP) legislation is passed; 
President of Congress Landazuria assured him TIP legislation 
would be among Congress\' priorities.  The Ministry is also 
working with the police to develop an online method of 
reporting crimes of child pornography. 
 
3. On September 21, PolOff delivered refel talking points to 
Denys Toscano in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.   Toscano 
said the MFA would strive to provide input on GOE progress on 
items in the action plan before November 15.  He is concerned 
the Ministry of Government\'s anti-TIP legislation is too 
narrow and that it does not make sufficient reference to the 
Palermo Convention and international protocols.  We are 
reviewing the legislation to ensure it meets international 
standards. 
KENNEY 
"
"20908","9/23/2004 17:38","04QUITO2578","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO2500","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002578 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, KCOR, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADORIAN ELECTIONS UPDATE 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2500 
 
     B. QUITO 2249 
     C. QUITO 2251 
     D. QUITO 2076 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  With less than a month remaining before 
Ecuador\'s October 17 elections, there remain several items of 
concern which, left unresolved, could prejudice a clean and 
orderly vote.  The Embassy will continue to work with 
electoral authorities to encourage resolution of these 
issues.  End Summary. 
 
Key Election Stats 
------------------ 
 
2.  (U) On October 17, an estimated six million of Ecuador\'s 
eight million eligible voters will visit 34,618 voting 
stations to elect 22 provincial prefects (prefects are 
governor-equivalents; governors are appointed by the 
President), 219 mayors, 91 provincial council members, 893 
municipal council members, and 3,970 members of rural town 
councils.  Although voting is mandatory, turnout rates 
normally vary between 60-70%.  The election campaign began on 
August 31 and ends on October 14.  Media and polling 
organizations are not permitted to publicize poll results 
after September 26. 
 
Electoral Preparations Underway 
------------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) has begun 
training vote station workers (a total of 276,974 nationwide) 
and 10,560 political party representatives, who will monitor 
those stations on election day.  TSE President Nicanor 
Moscoso has approached the Embassy to request that the 
Ambassador publicly sign an agreement codifying USG 
assistance to the TSE ($400,000 from USAID).  The Ambassador 
is disposed to do so once key election procedural issues (see 
below) are resolved. 
 
Key Issues Unresolved 
--------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Congress has not acted on a request by the TSE that 
it replace the previous scheme (struck down by the 
Constitutional Court) to allocate municipal and provincial 
council seats among parties.  President of Congress Guillermo 
Landazuri has announced, however, that Congress will resume 
debate on electoral reforms on September 23 (earlier, 52 
Congressional deputies made a written request of Landazuri 
that he kick-start the discussions).  TSE President Nicanor 
Moscoso has publicly pledged to issue a decree to resolve the 
seat allocation issue, should Congress fail to act. 
Supporting Moscoso\'s position and providing political cover, 
Solicitor General Jose Maria Borja, responding to a 
congressman\'s request for an advisory opinion, offered 
September 22 that the TSE was competent to emit such an 
order.  Until this issue is resolved, the potential for 
post-electoral conflict over the allocation of council seats 
among parties is high. 
 
5.  (SBU) Most political analysts concur that prospects for 
Congressional action on the allocation of council seats or to 
raise or eliminate campaign spending limits are dim.  Major 
parties (Democratic Left and the Social Christian Party) are 
unwilling to cede ground to proportional representation and 
oppose campaign finance reforms because, unlike their smaller 
challengers, the major parties do not fear punishment by TSE 
bodies, which they can manipulate. 
 
First Case of Election Violence 
------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) On September 16, according to press reports, a 
campaign worker was killed by a town council candidate from 
another party.  According to witnesses, Cely Garcia, the 
campaign worker for the PRIAN party, was shot by Galo 
Zambrano, the candidate for the Social Christian Party (PSC) 
while posting PRIAN electoral propaganda over that of the PSC 
in the town of Viche, San Lorenzo municipality, in Esmeraldas 
province.  Zambrano\'s driver was arrested, but Zambrano fled. 
 This appears to be an isolated incident. 
 
Observation Issues 
------------------ 
 
7.  (U) Citizens Participation, the most prominent Ecuadorian 
electoral observation NGO supported by USAID, plans to field 
3,100 volunteer electoral observers on election day.  The 
group is already monitoring candidates\' campaign expenses, 
including costs for access to the media.  On election day, 
Citizens Participation will conduct a quick count based on a 
sample of approximately 500 polling stations each in Quito, 
Guayaquil and Cuenca.  Executive director Cesar Montufar told 
PolCouns on September 21 that no final decision has been 
taken on when to publicize the results of the quick count; he 
implied it would likely be on the morning after the election. 
8.  (U) Local OAS representatives have not been informed 
whether the OAS will mount an observation effort.  TSE 
President Nicanor Moscoso sent an appeal on September 7 to 
OAS Elections Coordinator Elizabeth Spehar requesting, in 
addition to the observation mission requested by the Foreign 
Ministry, an OAS technical team to assist with monitoring of 
vote tabulation centers.  We believe a positive OAS response 
to these requests is likely.  Should the OAS send an 
observation mission, the Embassy will offer volunteers. 
 
Campaign Expenses Mount 
----------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) According to Citizens Participation, one candidate, 
Rodrigo Paz, has already exceeded artificially low campaign 
spending limits in the race for mayor of Quito.  By their 
calculation, achieved by monitoring the air-time for pro-Paz 
radio and TV advertising, as of September 21 Paz had spent 
$52,000, exceeding the $40,118 limit set by Congress. 
Overspending is punished by a fine determined in a 
post-electoral review by the TSE.  Paz told PolCouns on 
September 21 that his main competitor, incumbent Mayor Paco 
Moncayo, enjoyed an unfair advantage, as he was using 
municipal funds to publicize public works conducted during 
his tenure, which is not counted as a campaign expense. 
KENNEY 
"
"20959","9/24/2004 15:59","04QUITO2588","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2509","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002588 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ETRD, EC, Trade 
SUBJECT: MIXED VIEWS FROM INDIGENOUS ON FREE TRADE 
 
REF: QUITO 2509 
 
1.  Summary.  Indigenous leaders are not all opposed to a 
Free Trade Agreement (FTA); however, there is mounting social 
opposition from some indigenous organizations and unions. 
Starting October 1, various social groups will try to obtain 
one million signatures to demand a referendum on whether the 
GoE should negotiate an FTA with the US.  On a different 
topic, the leaders of indigenous groups FEINE and CONAIE both 
believe that the extradition of corrupt Ecuadorian bankers is 
crucial for the US to maintain a positive image in Ecuador. 
Discussing Ecuadorian politics, neither spoke of calling for 
a change in government.  End summary. 
 
----------------------- 
Indigenous Views On FTA 
----------------------- 
 
2.  On September 16, PolOff met with Marco Murillo, head of 
FEINE, an organization of evangelical indigenous.  Murillo 
said he is friends with Minister of Trade Ivonne Baki.  He 
stated he is not opposed to an FTA but wants the Ecuadorian 
public, including indigenous, to be included in the 
negotiation process. 
 
3.  On September 17, PolOff met with Leonidas Iza, president 
of CONAIE (Federation of Indigenous Nationalities of 
Ecuador).  Iza emphasized that he is not anti-US or against 
free trade, but he feels Ecuador is not ready for an FTA at 
this time.  He feels that economic competition would be 
unfair as the US is such a large power.  He also believes an 
FTA would take away Ecuadorian sovereignty, which he feels 
has already been compromised by the presence of the Forward 
Operating Location in Manta. 
 
---------------------------- 
Call For A Referendum On FTA 
---------------------------- 
 
4.  Iza said that, starting October 1, CONAIE will work on 
collecting a million signatures to demand a referendum on the 
FTA.  (According to the Article 105 in the Constitution, 8% 
of the electorate\'s signatures are needed for a referendum. 
One million votes represents approximately ten percent of 
Ecuador\'s population.)  Newspapers report that up to 30 
organizations will participate in the collection of 
signatures. 
 
5.  Unions such as the CEDOCUT labor federation, led by 
Mesias Tatamuez, also have voiced opposition to an FTA. 
Union boss Tatamuez stated to the press that the FTA 
negotiating team does not represent Ecuadorian society, but 
only the economic sectors.  According to the press, FENOCIN 
(National Federation of Peasant, Indigenous and Black 
Organizations) has called for Minister of Trade Ivonne Baki\'s 
and the FTA negotiating team\'s dismissal.  While FENOCIN has 
asked CONAIE to participate in protests at the FTA 
negotiating round in Guayaquil October 25-30, Iza said he has 
still not decided if CONAIE will participate. 
 
-------------------------------- 
US Image Hurt By Hosting Bankers 
-------------------------------- 
 
6.  Both Murillo and Iza raised the issue of corrupt bankers 
living in the US who have not been extradited back to 
Ecuador.  Iza said that, by allowing them to reside in the 
US, the USG is not helping Ecuador end corruption.  Murillo 
also echoed this statement and added that the US needs to 
show in the Occidental Petroleum case (reftel) that we are 
not just protecting our own interests, but that we support 
impartial justice. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Views On Ecuador\'s Political Future 
----------------------------------- 
 
7.  Murillo said that although FEINE does not support Ecuador 
President Lucio Gutierrez, they will not try to get rid of 
him.  He said they would join CONAIE in political 
mobilizations if there is a clear goal; however, they are not 
looking for a change in government.  (Murillo was not 
referring to FTA protests but instead to previous CONAIE 
mobilizations).  He said they would try to influence the GoE 
with a \"transparent voice.\" 
 
8.  Iza mentioned the three things he wants for Ecuador - 
transparency, foreign investment (Iza feels there is a public 
misperception that he opposes it) and an end to corruption. 
Concerning the upcoming October 17 municipal elections, Iza 
feels that Pachakutik will gain some posts. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  By mounting large protests, the indigenous and other 
social groups could disrupt the next round of FTA 
negotiations in Guayaquil, slated to begin October 25. 
Worse, should CONAIE and its allies succeed in obtaining one 
million signatures and forcing an FTA referendum, a clear 
display of no confidence in Gutierrez\'s chosen economic 
track, the GoE might reconsider the value of continuing free 
trade negotiations.  CONAIE has enjoyed little success lately 
in organizing mass protests, however, and Iza\'s talk appears 
more bluster than fact.  On corrupt bankers, Murillo and Iza 
seem to be jumping on the bandwagon of criticizing the US. 
The leaders are ignorant of the complexity of the cases and 
of the GoE\'s poor response to continuous USG requests for 
needed information. 
KENNEY 
"
"20960","9/24/2004 15:59","04QUITO2592","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","03QUITO1058|04SECSTATE205022","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002592 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM/DTCC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOMC, KSEP, ETTC, EC 
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN PROGRAM ANNUAL UPDATE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 205022 
     B. 03 QUITO 1058 
 
1.  In response to Ref A, Post provides the following 
information on its Blue Lantern program: 
 
-- Principal Point of Contact:  Political Officer Gregory 
Macris 
 
-- Telephone: 593-2-256-2890, ext 4409 
 
-- Fax: 593-2-254-0712 
 
-- Email:  macrisgp@state.gov (unclass); 
macrisgp@state.sgov.gov (classified) 
 
-- Estimated Departure Date:  7/2005 
 
2.  Due to Ecuador\'s proximity to Colombia and its historic 
role as a transit point for both northbound weapons and 
southbound narcotics, Post takes seriously its Blue Lantern 
(BL) responsibilities.  Most BL requests cover firearm and 
ammunition imports - Ref B outlines weapons licensing 
procedures in Ecuador.  Upon receipt of a BL telegram, Post 
conducts, at a minimum, the following namechecks on end users 
and middlemen: 
 
--  Regional Security Office (RSO) verifications 
 
--  Regional Affairs Office (RA) verifications 
 
--  Foreign Commercial Service (FCS) verifications 
 
3.  In addition, Post often verifies buyer bona fides with 
Ecuador\'s licensing office, a part of the military joint 
command, and requests assistance from local police to conduct 
site visits.  Emboffs endeavor to visit personally sites in 
the Quito area; when funds (and time) allow, they will travel 
to outlying areas.  The Front Office takes an active role in 
ensuring the accuracy and timeliness of Blue Lantern checks. 
KENNEY 
"
"20963","9/24/2004 18:28","04QUITO2594","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO1988|04QUITO2449","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002594 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR ELECTIONS: QUITO/PICHINCHA RACES 
STABILIZING IN FAVOR OF INCUMBENTS 
 
REF: QUITO 2449 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  With 19% of the national vote, the 
electoral battle for Pichincha province, which includes the 
capital of Quito (itself 15% of the national vote), is a key 
test of the Democratic Left\'s (ID) strength.  The Quito mayor 
race overshadows the Pichincha provincial prefect race in 
national significance.  Polls show popular incumbent mayor 
Paco Moncayo building a strong lead over his nearest rival, 
former mayor Rodrigo Paz.  Both candidates are supportive of 
USG interests in the capital.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (U) Pichincha province goes to the polls on October 17 to 
elect a provincial prefect (U.S. governor-equivalent) and 
seven provincial councilors, as well as 43 mayors and their 
corresponding city councilors and 59 town councils,  Of the 
1.7 million eligible voters in Pichincha province, 1.3 
million of them live in the capital of Quito. 
 
3.  (U) General (Ret) Paco Moncayo was elected mayor in 2000 
after a long and illustrious military career.  Moncayo won 
heading a Democratic Left Party (ID) ticket at the invitation 
of ID leader Rodrigo Borja.  However, Moncayo is quick to 
point out that he is not personally a member of the ID, but 
runs with their support.  Ecuador\'s largest indigenous party, 
Pachakutik, is also supporting Moncayo, having obtained in 
exchange the temporary post of acting mayor during the 
campaign. 
 
4.  (U) Moncayo\'s lead rival, Rodrigo Paz, served as mayor of 
Quito 1988-92.  Paz, who runs a major banking empire, is best 
known to the public as the flamboyant and successful owner of 
a major national league soccer team.  Paz entered politics 
from business at the invitation of then-president Jaime 
Roldos of the Popular Democratic Party (DP), and has 
distanced himself from the DP since the downfall of the 
Mahuad administration.  (Paz had groomed Mahuad to replace 
him as mayor in 1992.)  Paz is now running at the head of a 
local political grouping he created entitled \"Quito in 
Action.\" 
 
5.  (U) While the Quito race is essentially a two-man show, 
Ecuador\'s national parties are fielding candidates.  PRIAN, 
the party of billionaire banana magnate / two-time 
presidential runner up Alvaro Noboa, offers physician Marcelo 
Cruz, Noboa\'s 1996 running mate.  The Coast-based PRE, 
traditionally weak in the highlands, chose businessman 
Eduardo de la Cadena.  Predictably, his greatest aspiration 
lies in meeting party founder (and fugitive from justice) 
Abdala Bucaram.  Finally, President Lucio Gutierrez\'s PSP 
fields former Housing Minister Ermel Fiallo.  None of the 
three garners even five percent support in recent polling, 
however. 
 
Polls Show Moncayo Pulling Ahead 
-------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) Recent polls taken at the beginning of September show 
incumbent Mayor Paco Moncayo enjoying a 12-15 point lead over 
former Mayor Rodrigo Paz.  One poll indicated that Moncayo 
enjoys more support among women voters (55%) than men (46%). 
Moncayo also had high approval (56%) among youthful voters 
(ages 18-24 years). 
 
7.  (U) Polls also show a coattails effect benefiting the ID 
prefectural candidate for Pichincha, Ramiro Gonzalez, who 
leads Paz\'s prefectural counterpart, Wilma Salgado, by 37% to 
22%.  PSP candidate Napoleon Villa, the president\'s 
brother-in-law, scored less than 2%, likely due to recurring 
rumors of corruption. 
 
Paz: Unfair Playing Field 
------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) In a September 21 meeting with PolCouns, Paz 
accused Moncayo of using his incumbency as an unfair 
advantage to evade campaign finance limits.  Those limits are 
artificially low, he said, with just $40,118 as the limit for 
the mayoral race in the capital (second only to the $44,126 
limit for the mayorship of Guayaquil).  According to the 
electoral watchdog group Citizen Participation, Paz has 
already exceeded his limit, spending $52,000 on publicity by 
September 21.  Paz claimed Moncayo is using municipal funds 
to publicize public works under his administration. 
 
Electoral Issues 
---------------- 
 
9.  (U) Moncayo\'s popularity derives largely from a series of 
public works transportation projects and the successful 
clean-up of Quito\'s historic center.  Critics fault him for 
getting off to a slow start at the outset of his political 
career, but even Paz credits him with these more recent 
successes.  Paz promises to do Moncayo one better on public 
works, criticizing his slowness breaking ground for a new 
airport.  Paz has used the issue of citizen insecurity in the 
face of rising crime rates to attack Moncayo\'s performance. 
Paz told PolCouns he believes Moncayo, as an ex-General who 
has presided over the city at a time of rising crime rates, 
is vulnerable on the security issue.  Paz\' campaign has 
focused on poorer neighborhoods where crime concerns are 
highest. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  (SBU) The Embassy enjoys good working relationships with 
both Moncayo and Paz.  Either would continue to be supportive 
of Embassy administrative concerns, including the 
construction of a new Chancery compound, in which Moncayo has 
already been helpful. 
 
11.  (SBU) The Democratic Left Party carries the burden and 
enjoys the advantages of incumbency in these races.  It has 
most to lose in Pichincha, its heartland, and in Quito, a 
plum political stepping-stone to national office.  A loss of 
the mayorship or prefect would represent a stunning blow to 
the party\'s national standing.  By all accounts, such a 
reversal appears highly unlikely, and Mayor Moncayo seems set 
to repeat his term. 
KENNEY 
"
"20965","9/24/2004 19:15","04QUITO2595","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO2519","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002595 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: TIP IN ECUADOR:  TRAINING, RAIDS, AND THE ABA\'S 
PROJECT 
 
REF: QUITO 2519 
 
1. (U) Summary.  The International Labor Organization (ILO) 
and Ecuadorian police began their joint training series on 
September 23 to teach the police about commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors (CSEM).  The police conducted 25 raids 
from September 3 to 8 and rescued 30 minors.  The American 
Bar Association (ABA) continued its project to combat 
trafficking in persons (TIP) in Ecuador by sending experts on 
September 20 to analyze the problem and suggest additional 
solutions.   The press actively reported on alien smuggling 
and TIP issues, such as the accusations that several 
officials (including Jorge Poveda, the head of the National 
Police) supported alien smugglers, and the decision that 
Amcit Joseph Day, suspected of child pornography, will be 
prosecuted first in Ecuador and then in the U.S.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
DINAPEN:  CSEM TRAINING BEGINS AND RAIDS CONTINUE 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. (U) On September 23 - 24, the ILO kicked off its series of 
training sessions with DINAPEN, the unit of the police that 
protects children.  The police are providing partial 
financing. Seven two-day training sessions will occur to 
train all 250 DINAPEN police in Ecuador.  A full day of the 
training focuses on CSEM.  Sessions included an analysis of 
CSEM in Ecuador, the government\'s policy on protecting 
children, and a small group session to plan intervention and 
prevention strategies.  PolOff attended the opening session. 
 
3. (U) At a breakfast with the Ambassador on September 24, 
Minister of Government Raul Baca told her that at the 
training, the police offered to allocate additional vehicles 
to use in DINAPEN raids.   Baca also said he recently 
discussed the importance of TIP with President Gutierrez and 
encouraged him to make it a priority. 
 
4. (U) DINAPEN continued raiding establishments suspected of 
employing child prostitutes.  From September 3 to 8, DINAPEN 
conducted 25 raids and found 30 minors.  (Report faxed to 
WHA/PPC on September 22.)  All children were returned to 
relatives.  Fully two-thirds of the minors were found in 
Azuay province although only 3 raids were conducted there. 
In addition to the 30 minors believed to be engaged in 
prostitution, police found an additional 62 minors in these 
raids, some of whom were abandoned, living on the streets, 
and inhaling glue fumes. 
 
--------------------------------- 
ABA BEGINS ITS PROJECT IN ECUADOR 
--------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) The ABA sent two TIP experts from Johns Hopkins 
University to Quito from September 20 to 24.  The experts 
analyzed the TIP problem in Ecuador, met with charities and 
NGOs that may be able to assist victims, and will report on 
their findings and suggested ways for combating TIP to us. 
They are expected to attend some of the DINAPEN training 
sessions on September 24.  They also will return in November 
to conduct site visits to areas where TIP is a particular 
problem. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
PRESS REPORTS ACCUSATIONS OF ALIEN SMUGGLING AND PORNOGRAPHY 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
6. (SBU) A suspected migrant smuggler accused General Poveda, 
several other police officers, and members of the military of 
also being involved in alien smuggling.  Attorney General 
Mariana Yepez is investigating the accusations, and no 
charges have been made.  Embassy sources cannot confirm the 
accusations; they may be retaliatory or a ploy to gain 
leniency.  However, we will consider closely our ties with 
Poveda should facts bear out accusations. 
 
7. (U) On September 22, \"El Comercio\" newspaper reported that 
a judge in Guayaquil reaffirmed his decision to deny the 
attorney general\'s request to extradite Joseph Day to the 
U.S. on child pornography charges.  Day will be tried in 
Ecuador on charges of minor corruption.  (There are currently 
no laws penalizing child pornography, but the Ministry of 
Government is drafting a law to criminalize child pornography 
and use of the Internet for this purpose.)  The media reports 
that after being tried in Ecuador, he will be deported to the 
U.S. for a trial on child pornography charges.  This case 
appears in \"El Comercio\" and several other newspapers 
frequently and has raised public consciousness about child 
pornography. 
 
8. (U) At the ILO/DINAPEN training, Baca publicly spoke about 
the importance of fighting CSEM.  He said training the police 
was vital.  Media was present, and PolOff will notify the 
Department next week of any mention on television or in the 
newspaper of Baca\'s speech. 
 
9. (U) Comment.  PolOff recently gave Ecuadorian officials 
the Tier 2 Watch List action plan.  We will continue to work 
with them and NGOs to encourage them to comply and provide 
the Department with a report by November 15.  The Embassy 
will encourage congresspeople to speak out against TIP and 
enact the pending anti-TIP legislation in a quick manner.  We 
also will follow up with the ILO and DINAPEN to monitor the 
training series in other provinces.   End Comment. 
KENNEY 
"
"20966","9/24/2004 19:45","04QUITO2598","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 002598 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: ELECTIONS, NOT GOVERNANCE, DRIVING GUTIERREZ 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  President Lucio Gutierrez, consumed with 
improving his Patriotic Society Party\'s performance in 
Ecuador\'s October 17 local elections, is pressuring Cabinet 
officials to adopt populist, poorly conceived economic 
measures designed to garner votes.  Should the PSP fare 
poorly in October, as most experts expect, the president 
might throw blame at his recalcitrant ministers and 
ultimately clean house.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) Minister of Government Raul Baca, a rare Gutierrez 
administration bright light, was the Ambassador\'s guest at 
breakfast September 24.  Baca lamented that Gutierrez lately 
had cloistered himself with such \"inner circle\" denizens as 
brother Gilmar, brother-in-law Napoleon Villa, and cousin 
Renan Borbua.  All were PSP founders and had the boss\'s ear. 
They had convinced Gutierrez that his and the PSP\'s actual 
popularity dwarfed that reported in opinion polls (an August 
\"Monitor\" poll, for example, showed Villa garnering only 1.5 
percent in the Pichincha province prefect race).  They 
believed that GoE funds, spent correctly, could buoy the 
party further in October.  Xavier Ledesma, the 
administration\'s secretary general but not PSP, shared the 
three\'s position, Baca added. 
 
3.  (C)  Their analyses were ridiculous, the minister 
decried.  In one, the PSP leaders surmised that, by raising 
one stipend that Ecuador\'s poor received by $15, Gutierrez 
would win the votes of the entire affected population. 
\"Serious\" Cabinet officials, such as Finance Minister 
Mauricio Yepez, Trade Minister Ivonne Baki, and Baca himself, 
had pointed out holes in the PSP logic, but to little avail; 
Gutierrez appeared ready to adopt the populist measures. 
Worse, the president resented the Cabinet\'s attempts to keep 
him focused on good governance and sound economics.  Should 
the PSP fare as poorly as Baca thought it would, Gutierrez 
was likely to blame him and the financial team, claiming that 
more spending would have delivered more votes.  A putsch or 
mass resignation would surely follow. 
 
4.  (C) Baca did not want to go.  \"We\'re doing some great 
things now,\" he claimed, pointing in particular to recent 
progress combating trafficking in persons (Septel).  But the 
inner circle, and Gutierrez\'s faith in them, was making his 
public service difficult.  Baca saw no immediate solution. 
 
5.  (C) COMMENT:  We have long lamented that PSP party hacks 
and assorted hangers-on crowd Gutierrez\'s office and craft 
his agenda.  They are most often behind the president\'s worst 
decisions, from visiting disgraced ex-President Abdala 
Bucaram in Panama to picking fights with respected 
journalists.  Yet Gutierrez mostly has resisted their efforts 
to derail the GoE\'s admirable fiscal probity.  In 
working-level outreach and in coming calls on the president, 
we will emphasize the dangers of populist economic policies 
while lauding Ecuador\'s recent fiscal responsibility.  END 
COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"20967","9/24/2004 19:51","04QUITO2599","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2502","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

241951Z Sep 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002599 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EC, ECON, EFIS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, SENV, Environment 
SUBJECT: NEW GALAPAGOS PARK DIRECTOR LITERALLY FIGHTS HIS 
WAY INTO OFFICE 
 
REF: QUITO 2502 
 
1.  Summary.  On September 22, a group of local fishermen, 
who have long been at odds with the park leadership over 
environmental regulations, stormed the office of the GNP 
headquarters in Santa Cruz and helped Fausto Cepeda, the 
newly appointed director, install himself as park director. 
The violent confrontation has made both U.S. and 
international press. 
 
2.  While the fishermen were assailing the GNP headquarters, 
ten GNP strike representatives were in Quito having a series 
of meetings with the Minister of the Environment (MOE) to 
negotiate a resolution to the crisis.  In the end, the MOE 
publicly agreed to nothing, except to resume negotiations 
with the GNP representatives on Monday, September 27.  The 
Embassy received a report that ten fishing boats were spotted 
in a no-take zone in the Galapagos.  The Embassy continues to 
monitor the crisis closely and is pressing for quick 
resolution.  End Summary. 
 
Let\'s Talk Institutional Stability 
---------------------------------- 
 
2.  On September 21, the Ambassador hosted a luncheon for 
four leading Ecuadorian environmentalists intimately involved 
with the Galapagos Islands.  They were: Eliecer Cruz (leads a 
USAID-funded Galapagos Marine Reserve Project); Luis Suarez 
(Executive Director of Conservation International); Roberto 
Troya (Regional Representative of The Nature Conservancy); 
and Deborah Chiriboga (entrepreneur who is very involved in 
the Guayaquil conservation sector).  The group discussed the 
current crisis but focused on long-term institutional 
stability of the GNP. 
 
3.  The group concurred that the best approach would be to 
name an interim director for one month, to permit a cooling 
off period.  During this time, an independent commission 
comprised of members from various sectors would evaluate the 
current situation and propose a temporary solution to 
stabilize the park. 
 
4.  The broader goal of this commission would be to form a 
permanent body that would choose future park directors. 
That body ideally would include a mix of national and 
international stakeholders, but would clearly not impinge on 
the sovereignty of Ecuador as ultimate steward of the 
islands.  The NGO representatives said they would propose 
these ideas to the MOE and other executive branch members. 
 
Meanwhile Back at the Park... 
----------------------------- 
 
5.  On the same morning as the Ambassador\'s luncheon, Rogelio 
Guaycha, President of four fishing cooperatives and alternate 
congressional deputy, incited fishermen to band together, 
march to the gates of the GNP headquarters in Santa Cruz, and 
throw out the striking GNP employees.  His call for action 
worked.  About 60 fishermen showed up at the gates of the GNP 
and tried to forcibly enter the park grounds.  The local 
police used tear gas and riot shields to turn away the 
fishermen.  Some strikers were injured, but none severely. 
 
6.  The following morning, September 22, Guaycha called for 
another assault against the strikers.  This time the 
fishermen successfully pushed through.  They led Fausto 
Cepeda to the GNP headquarters, allowing him to assume his 
position as park director.  At that point, six of the GNP 
employees broke ranks and decided to support Cepeda.  The 
rest of the GNP employees remained on strike pending the 
outcome of scheduled meetings with the MOE. 
 
7.  The violent confrontation has received international 
attention.  Numerous articles about it have appeared in U.S. 
and foreign newspapers. 
 
GNP Employees and MOE Meet to Discuss the Crisis 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
8.  The strike representatives, the MOE, and members of the 
President\'s staff met on the evening of September 22 and the 
following morning to discuss a resolution of the crisis.  The 
MOE declined to comment publicly on the results of the 
meetings. 
 
9.  Privately, the MOE and the presidential advisors agree 
that a commission should be established and that the 
employees should be given long-term contracts to further 
stabilize the GNP as an institution (see Reftel for specifics 
on strikers\' demands).  The sticking point seems to be 
replacing Cepeda with an interim director. 
 
10.  The MOE is meeting with Cepeda on September 24 in 
Guayaquil to discuss the situation.  The MOE is disturbed by 
the fact that Cepeda partook in the violence and some believe 
he may be turning a blind-eye to illegal fishing after only 
one day in office.  The MOE and the GNP employees agreed to 
meet again on Monday, September 27. 
 
The Start of Illegal Fishing? 
----------------------------- 
 
11.  The Embassy received notification from WildAid that 
fishing vessels were spotted in no-take zones in the 
Galapagos Islands.  Cepeda was informed about the situation 
but reportedly stated that the vessel used to monitor and 
investigate these activities needed fuel.  The pilot of the 
small airplane that is also used to monitor these activities 
was sick.  WildAid, an environmental NGO, offered to fuel the 
monitoring vessel and charter a plane.  Cepeda accepted the 
offer. 
 
12.  WildAid flew over the Canal Bolivar, which is one of the 
most protected areas in the Galapagos.  They confirmed that 
there were at least ten boats in this strict no-take zone. 
WildAid will forward photos of this to Conservation 
International, who will present this to the appropriate 
government authorities. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
13.  It appears that naming Cepeda as park director was meant 
to appease fishing interests in the run-up to local 
elections.  Donor groups are formally expressing their 
concerns to the President over investments and park stability 
and have offered to help resolve the conflict. 
 
14.  Instability in park administration is one of the most 
serious problems affecting conservation in the Galapagos. 
Prior to Gutierrez,s administration there was one park 
director for eight years.  Since Gutierrez came into power in 
2003, there have been eight directors.   We continue to 
promote stability and conservation with all our contacts but 
with limited success. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"20968","9/24/2004 20:16","04QUITO2602","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002602 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PREL, SMIG, EC, HA, UN 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR SENDING ENGINEERS, TROOPS TO HAITI 
 
1.  The Government of Ecuador has directed that EC Army 
engineers and soldiers travel to Haiti to participate in 
UN-directed peacekeeping (PKO) operations and natural 
disaster (hurricane) relief.  Embassy officials learned 
September 23 that the first Ecuadorian deployment will 
include 66 combat engineers, heading to the Caribbean October 
16 as part of the Chilean contingent.  A second EC 
deployment, numbering 220, also is likely, and might assume 
southern Haiti duties now handled by Uruguayan soldiers. 
 
2.  Ecuador\'s high command enthusiastically supports the 
humanitarian mission, and the Embassy believes its forces can 
handle the demanding assignment.  Further, the EC joint 
command recently established an international peacekeeping 
training operation, and the UN just completed a PKO symposium 
in Ecuador. 
 
3.  COMMENT:  We too support Ecuador\'s involvement in 
multilateral peacekeeping and disaster assistance operations. 
 Experience gained working with the hemisphere\'s militaries 
in Haiti might even result in better cooperation with 
Colombia, a must if Ecuador desires an end to lawlessness and 
narcoterrorist incursions on its northern border.  END 
COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"21061","9/28/2004 19:18","04QUITO2608","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2499","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002608 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, EC, Democracy 
SUBJECT: ELECTORAL TRAINING EFFORT NOT WITHOUT HICCUPS 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2499 
 
     B. QUITO 2500 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  A successful October 17 vote depends partly on 
the 275,000 Ecuadorians manning the polls election day. 
Training this army is a Herculean task falling to Ecuador\'s 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE); $400,000 in USG assistance, 
channeled through international electoral NGO CAPEL, bolsters 
the instructional effort.  The TSE-CAPEL plan emphasizes a 
train-the-trainer methodology and enlists the support of the 
TSE\'s provincial branches and 30 universities nationwide. 
 
SIPDIS 
Poll worker training commenced September 11 and will continue 
until October 16, one day before the vote.  Electoral apathy, 
especially amongst Ecuador\'s youth, has complicated the TSE\'s 
mission, both in recruitment and education.  As of September 
23, many training bottlenecks existed on the coast, but few 
in the highlands.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------- 
Changes in 2004 Procedures 
-------------------------- 
 
2.  Poloff September 23 visited TSE Training Assistant Ana 
Patino, a key player in the development of the Tribunal\'s 
electoral education plan.  Patino offered thanks for the 
USG\'s continued support, in words and dollars, of the TSE. 
The training effort, which commenced in February, was 
entering the final stretch and she looked forward to its 
denouement (and a long vacation). 
 
3.  The education campaign had begun with selection of 
workers to staff the voting stations (JRVs).  Historically, 
legions of party members filled the JRVs, an obvious conflict 
of interest.  Even attracting party faithful required 
financial incentives, however.  Predictably, graft and 
corruption followed, the provincial electoral tribunals 
(TSPs) not disbursing funds promptly (or at all) to JRV 
staff.  For the 2004 vote, the TSE requested the TSPs to 
study voter lists, seeking primarily students and educators. 
The culled lists were then subjected to a specialized TSE 
computer program that selected the final slate.  \"Volunteers\" 
will receive either two days paid leave (for government 
workers) two additional grade points (for students), or a 
certficate of appreciation (for all others). 
 
4.  An experienced Tribunal official, Patino described the 
greatest training change between Ecuador\'s 2002 and 2004 
elections.  Two years ago, the TSPs enjoyed great autonomy in 
training JRV staff, whether directly or via contractor. 
Unfortunately, international observers noted great 
discrepancies in procedures employed, even within the same 
precinct.  To correct this and other shortcomings, the TSE, 
with USAID financial assistance, contracted CAPEL, the Center 
for Electoral Promotion and Assistance.  While still working 
closely with the TSPs, CAPEL has enlisted 30 universities and 
305 professors to establish teams of trainer-specialists that 
will actually conduct the JRV education courses.  Not 
surprisingly, many TSPs felt slighted by the change, and have 
not cooperated fully with their university partners. 
 
---------------------- 
The Courses Themselves 
---------------------- 
 
5.  The JRV course lasts 2-4 hours, depending on trainee 
aptitude.  Approximately 25 percent is theory, 75 percent 
hands-on -- verifying identity documents, determining vote 
validity, counting ballots and completing required forms. 
Training began in 12 provinces September 11 and in the 
remainder September 13 or 18.  Due in equal parts to TSP 
intransigence, JRV apathy, and TSE delays, the training 
effort likely will continue until election eve, October 16. 
Despite these efforts, Patino admitted some JRVs might report 
for October 17 untrained. 
 
6.  She asserted that neither carrot (paid leave and higher 
grades) nor stick (withholding privileges to JRV no-shows) 
would increase participation and interest long-term.  Rather, 
Ecuador needed better civic education.  Patino claimed the 
TSE and Education Ministry were drafting a pilot program to 
 
SIPDIS 
begin educating elementary school students on democratic 
responsibilities. 
 
----------- 
How it Goes 
----------- 
 
7.  As of September 23, training completion rates in 
highlands and Amazon provinces, excluding Pichincha (home to 
capital Quito) were at nearly 70 percent.  Ecuador\'s coastal 
provinces are lagging, however, especially Guayas (home to 
Guayaquil), El Oro and Manabi.  TSPs there have protested 
loudly against the TSE/CAPEL changes and are not cooperating 
with their university partners.  The delays worry TSE 
leaders, Patino claimed, but they are confident they can 
overcome them by election day (the Manabi province TSP 
president told visiting Polcouns September 29 that JRV 
training there would complete by October 2). 
 
8.  Media on September 22 reported on another worrisome 
complication.  The Military Geographic Institute (IGM), which 
prints ballots for all Ecuadorian elections, was allegedly 
far behind in its production schedules.  Patino confirmed the 
story, but noted similar (and eventually overcome) slowdowns 
in the run-up to the 2002 vote.  The IGM\'s local election 
workload was far greater, however, since each province, 
municipality, and rural canton required unique ballots. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9.  We admire the TSE\'s commitment to training and judge our 
electoral education assistance well-spent.  That said, we 
hope that, in pulling training \"all-nighters\" October 16, the 
TSE remains focused on an equally vital task, preparing 
 
SIPDIS 
precincts for the next-day vote.  Embassy election observers 
in 2002 saw JRV openings delayed for lack of basic materials, 
from masking tape to indelible ink.  Preventing a repeat is 
paramount. 
KENNEY 
"
"21066","9/28/2004 22:16","04QUITO2612","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002612 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: ELECTION NO THREAT TO FOL IN MANTA 
 
 
This message has been cleared by AmConsul Guayaquil. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  A pre-electoral visit to the city of 
Manta and Manabi provincial capital Portoviejo confirmed that 
the incumbent mayor of Manta, who has been largely supportive 
of the USG presence at the Forward Operating Location (FOL), 
is likely to be re-elected in local elections on October 17. 
Regardless, a variety of local and provincial officials, and 
other electoral observers confirmed that the USG-maintained 
FOL for counter-narcotics operations located on the 
Ecuadorian Air Force Base in Manta is not a campaign issue; 
the base enjoys broad support at the local level for its 
positive economic effects on the region.  End Summary. 
 
Background Information 
---------------------- 
 
2.  (U) PolCouns visited Manta and Portoviejo, in Manabi 
province, for meetings with local election officials, party 
officials, FOL commander, and independent electoral observer 
on September 23-24.  Manta is the second-largest city and 
recently-booming commercial hub of largely rural, 
agricultural Manabi province.  Manabi has a total of 914,841 
eligible voters (11% of the national total) who will visit 
3,112 voting stations on October 17 to select a provincial 
prefect (U.S. governor-equivalent), and from among 22 mayors 
(19 of whom are seeking re-election), six provincial 
councilors, 95 municipal councilors and 53 rural councils 
representing 185,175 rural voters.  Manta is Ecuador\'s 
second-largest Pacific port, after Guayaquil.  Manta\'s 
seaside location makes its port operations substantially 
cheaper than Guayaquil, causing economic competition and some 
recent political strains. 
 
3.  (SBU) Manta has experienced an economic boom since the 
GoE agreed in 1999 to host the USG-maintained FOL at Manta 
airport.  The city boasts has 131,166 eligible voters (second 
only to provincial capital Portoviejo, located 30 km. inland) 
which will be distributed among 465 voting stations. 
Political power in Manabi is divided between the Social 
Christian Party (PSC), which currently controls three of 
seven Congressional seats and 11 of 22 municipal mayors, 
including Manta\'s; the National Action Institutional Renewal 
Party (PRIAN), with two Congressional seats; and the 
Ecuadorian Roldosista Party (PRE), which currently controls 
the provincial prefect and 5 mayors.  The Popular Democracy 
Party (DP) has 3 mayors and the last of Manabi\'s seven seats 
in the national Congress.  PRIAN presidential candidate 
Alvaro Noboa swept Manabi (with 375,052 votes to Gutierrez\' 
180,895) in the second round of the 2002 presidential 
election.  Gutierrez\' ruling Patriotic Society Party (PSP) is 
represented in Manabi by Governor Virginia Garcia.  Garcia, 
who took office in June, is Gutierrez\' fourth appointee to 
the post; a previous appointee, Cesar Fernandez, is currently 
on trial for his alleged involvement in narco-trafficking. 
Garcia told PolCouns the PSP has hopes to win the prefect 
race and the Portoviejo mayorship. 
 
Electoral Preparation and Other Concerns 
---------------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Kausman Quinonez, President of the Manabi Provincial 
Electoral Tribunal (representing the PSC), told PolCouns on 
September 24 that arrangements for the elections were 
proceeding smoothly after initial glitches due to low 
participation rates by younger prospective poll workers.  New 
lists of poll workers targeting more stable professionals had 
recently been received from the national Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal.  Most of the newly-named poll workers will receive 
training by October 2, he said.  (SepTel reports on 
nationwide training of poll workers.) 
 
5.  (SBU) Jacqueline Terranova de Batallas, provincial 
coordinator for electoral watchdog NGO Citizen Participation, 
said local elections are traditionally not violent and she 
does not expect violence on election day.  Voters remain 
largely apathetic about the elections.  However, she reported 
one violent incident which took place in the pre-campaign 
period in Portoviejo in August, when a political party worker 
was injured in a fight with rivals. 
 
6.  (SBU) Terranova was more concerned about misuse of public 
funds for campaign purposes.  She provided photographic 
evidence (Manta municipal vehicles and earth-moving machines 
sporting campaign material and bumper-stickers in favor of 
the mayor\'s candidacy) and her public declarations and formal 
complaints against it.  She dismissed as unfounded 
accusations from a rival politician against Zambrano for 
using municipal resources to work on his personal property. 
She put a recent challenge from a rival candidate about 
Zambrano\'s Mexican university credential in the same 
category.  Press reported on September 24 that PRE 
Congressional deputy Mario Coello, alleged (without 
presenting proof) that several municipal councilors in Manta 
are implicated in drug trafficking.  According to Terranova, 
most candidates have been reluctant to reveal their sources 
and amounts of financing.  Citizens Participation will field 
90 observers throughout the province on election day. 
 
Incumbents Hopeful, but not Secure 
---------------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Congressional deputy Simon Bustamante (PSC) said he 
was perplexed why the PRIAN was so weak in Manabi after 
Alvaro Noboa\'s strong local showing in the second round of 
the presidential race in 2002.  The reason, he believed, was 
a combination of neglect and tactical errors by the PRIAN 
since then.  Noboa was expected to campaign in Portoviejo on 
September 26, but, according to Bustamante, had largely 
abandoned the province to the PSC and PRE.  Meanwhile, the 
PSC is confident it may pick up two more mayorships in 
upcoming elections, bringing its total to 13 of 22.  Manta 
mayor Jorge Zambrano is certain to be re-elected, he said. 
(Most people PolCouns consulted, including in informal street 
polling, said the same.)  Zambrano, seeking a third term, is 
credited with initiating (but not completing) major public 
works projects, including a new highway from the airport to 
the port and a major waterfront facelift. 
 
8.  (SBU) Terranova, however, cited a recent media poll 
showing Jose (Tucho) Velasquez of the Popular Democracy Party 
(DP), leading the race, followed by PRE candidate Ricardo 
Bowin, with Zambrano trailing in third.  She claimed that 
criticism of Zambrano for misuse of public funds was having 
an effect. 
 
9.  (SBU) Provincial prefect Humberto Guillen (PRE) is also 
expected by many to gain re-election.  Bustamante and 
Quinonez, however, boosted the chances of PSC challenger 
Mariano Zambrano (no relation to the Manta mayor), claiming 
recent private polls revealed Zambrano taking a lead of two 
points and Guillen falling dramatically.  Governor Garcia 
claimed the PSP candidate, Patricia Briones de Poggi, has a 
real chance of winning the prefecture.  Others predicted that 
the PSP would not win one elected position in the province. 
 
FOL Not An Issue 
---------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) All individuals consulted by PolCouns concurred 
that, to their knowledge, the issue of a U.S. presence at the 
FOL is neither unpopular nor a live political issue locally. 
Critics of the FOL at the national level are motivated by 
ideological concerns, they said; those critics are largely 
absent at the local level. 
 
11.  (SBU) Bustamante credited the USG presence with Manta\'s 
recent commercial development.  The new highway linking the 
airport with the maritime port will further strengthen Manta 
as a regional rival to Guayaquil.  The expanded runway and 
facilities at the airport have also raised hopes for 
international designation.  The FOL Commander confirmed that 
FOL fire-fighting capability will soon allow the airport to 
meet ICAO standards for an international airport. 
 
12.  (SBU) Quinonez said the FOL was not an electoral issue 
in Manabi and suggested that the current air of mystery 
surrounding the FOL works in USG interests.  Local people do 
not have direct access to the FOL, and assume that FOL 
personnel and vehicles may be monitoring local 
narco-activity.  This uncertainty acts as a brake on criminal 
activity in the area, he suggested.  For that reason, 
Quinonez recommended that the FOL not take actions to 
demystify its presence by opening the FOL to public events. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
13.  (SBU) It was encouraging to hear the strong level of 
support among local officials and others for the FOL presence 
and its positive spin-off effects on the region, although the 
FOL remains a live national political issue which we will 
review SepTel.  Given this situation, prospects are good for 
continued cooperation and local support for the FOL.  More 
generally, the situation in Manabi will test PSC strength in 
its coastal heartland. 
KENNEY 
"
"21068","9/28/2004 23:05","04QUITO2613","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2509","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USTR BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2014 
TAGS: EPET, ETRD, ECON, PREL, EC, Oil Sector 
SUBJECT: TIDE TURNING IN OXY\'S FAVOR BUT A LONG WAY TO GO 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2509 
 
     B. QUITO 2462 
     C. QUITO 2418 
     D. QUITO 2380 
     E. QUITO 2327 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reason 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  The efforts of Occidental Petroleum (Oxy) 
and the Mission are gathering momentum in blunting 
misperceptions raised by the Procurador\'s (solicitor general 
equivalent) allegations against Oxy.  Business chambers, 
financial analysts and GOE officials are coming to understand 
what Ecuador has to lose if it nationalizes Oxy\'s Block 15 
oil interests, but more work needs to be done.  The 
Procurador continues to send mixed messages, allegedly 
seeking a negotiated solution in private while making 
inflammatory statements calling for the review of the 
US-Ecuador Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) and vigorously 
defending the national patrimony in public.  With Embassy 
assistance, Oxy is seeking an amicable resolution, using two 
different tracks.  Still, a final resolution will require the 
Procurador\'s buy-in, which is by no means assured.  In the 
meantime, Oxy filed its answer to the allegations to the 
President of state-owned Petroecuador, who assured Emboffs 
that he would need time to fully and fairly review the 
matter.  End summary. 
 
Public and Opinion Leaders - Getting the Message 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. (C) Over the last several days, a number of media have 
carried stories about the risks of \"persecuting\" Oxy (quoting 
business chamber representatives) and expropriating (in 
another article by a respected financial analyst) Oxy\'s 
assets. They warned that Ecuador was putting at risk current 
trade benefits and a future FTA with the United States. 
Minister of Economy and Finance Mauricio Yepez publicly 
warned that Ecuador risks losing USG support in its efforts 
to obtain financing from multilateral development banks if it 
did not act fairly in the Oxy case.  The Ambassador continues 
to press for the fair treatment of Oxy through her daily 
meetings with the GOE, business and opinion leaders, pressing 
the same message that Ecuador has much to lose, including in 
its efforts to attract new investment to the country. 
 
The Procurador - Getting Nervous? 
--------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) We have also received several reports that Procurador 
General Jose Maria Borja wants to discuss the case to explain 
his views, including his desire to reach an agreement with 
Oxy.  He has reached out privately, through intermediaries, 
to Oxy and the Ambassador.   Still, his public comments belie 
his private overtures.  Last week he publicly called on 
Congress to review the US-Ecuador Bilateral Investment Treaty 
(BIT).   (Note: The earliest Ecuador could file notice of 
terminating the BIT is 2007; a legal fact that escaped Borja, 
the GOE\'s lead attorney.) On September 27, he again claimed 
to be defending the national sovereignty of Ecuador in his 
prosecution of cases against Oxy and Canadian oil company 
EnCana.  He is also publicly defending himself against 
comments from the business chambers.  One of the attorneys in 
Borja\'s office told econoff that Borja\'s statements, like his 
call to review the BIT, had been misunderstood and that he 
would like the chance to explain himself in a private meeting 
with the Ambassador.  The Ambassador has made clear there 
will be no meeting with Borja until he changes his public 
posture in line with what his intermediaries claim to be his 
real intentions. 
 
 
4. (C) Minister of Economy Yepez and Minister of Government 
Baca have told the Ambassador that Borja is a reasonable 
person who will approve a settlement reached by Oxy and the 
Minister of Energy, who is the person charged with finally 
deciding the fate of the accusations against Oxy (see 
reftels).  However, past experiences in the Duke Energy and 
BellSouth cases indicate that Borja may not be true to his 
word.  Still, Borja now appears to be on the defensive.  This 
is likely due in part to Oxy\'s voluminous response to 
Petroecuador on the allegations and other efforts to get the 
full story out in the public.  Yepez told the Ambassador on 
September 28 that Borja wanted to find a solution and did not 
want Oxy to leave Ecuador.  Yepez and Baca have also been 
speaking with Borja, whom they now believe is coming to 
understand the gravity of the situation.  Borja also met with 
Oxy GM Jerry Ellis on September 27, to enlist Oxy in 
promoting the formation of a commission to review the matter. 
Pursuing Two Tracks 
------------------- 
 
5. (C) Econoff and Commercial Attach met privately with 
state-owned oil company Petroecuador President Luis Camacho 
on September 23.  Camacho said that once he received Oxy\'s 
response to the allegations, he would take his time to fully 
and fairly review the matter.  He said he would not bow to 
public or private pressure to speed up his review or be 
prejudiced against one side or the other.  He said he would 
like to appoint a respected, independent commission to help 
review the matter, stating that he would receive no help from 
those within Petroecuador.  Camacho believed that, whether or 
not there was a commission, his review of the matter would 
not be completed before the October 17 local elections in 
Ecuador, reducing the possibility that the Oxy case could 
become an election issue.  In a separate meeting between 
Emboffs and Oxy GM Ellis, he too welcomed the commission 
approach and hoped to discuss the matter with Camacho. 
 
6. (C) Ellis said that Oxy is also continuing its work with 
the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) on a possible 
resolution.  Oxy is providing the MEF with a variety of data 
to allow the GOE to analyze the impact of the transaction 
between Oxy and EnCana (the most serious allegation against 
Oxy concerns that transaction).  Minister of Economy Yepez 
told the Ambassador that the MEF hopes to present an offer to 
Oxy within the next two weeks. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7. (C) Oxy\'s side of the story on the allegations lodged 
against it by the Procurador is finally coming to light in 
the press.  Our education efforts with GOE interlocutors and 
business chamber leaders also appear to be working.  The 
Procurador\'s outreach efforts are a good indication that 
those efforts are having some impact.  Oxy continues to say 
it is willing to talk while also forcefully arguing its 
strong case.  Petroecuador\'s Camacho and the MEF are sending 
positive signals that the case can be resolved without 
declaring a contract nullification and expropriation.  Oxy is 
also sending its public relations representatives from Los 
Angeles, with whom Post will work with to keep up the 
positive momentum in the press and with local opinion 
leaders. 
 
8. (C) It appears that any further official GOE pronouncement 
on contract nullification will not be made until after the 
October 17 elections, but it cannot be totally ruled out. 
The additional time will allow for more discussions between 
the parties and a cooling off period.  We can also use that 
time to reach out to business, GOE and opinion leaders, many 
of whom have not yet heard the full story on the matter or do 
not fully appreciate what is at risk for Ecuador.  In the 
end, the Procurador will also have to be brought on board to 
finalize any agreement, which is by no means assured.  We 
will continue to encourage Ministers Yepez and Baca to engage 
with Borja to ensure he will back a fair and rational 
resolution to the problem that he largely created. 
KENNEY 
"
"21069","9/28/2004 23:35","04QUITO2614","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2599","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002614 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EC, ECON, EFIS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, SENV, Environment 
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF THE ENVIRONMENT ANNOUNCES INITIATIVE 
TO STABILIZE GALAPAGOS NATIONAL PARK 
 
REF: QUITO 2599 
 
1.  Summary.  The Minister of the Environment (MOE), Fabian 
Valdivieso, announced to the press on September 27 that 
Fausto Cepeda had been replaced as Galapagos National Park 
(GNP) Director by GNP employee Victor Carrion.  The MOE will 
form a commission to oversee any future selections of the GNP 
Director, and will sign work contracts with all GNP employees 
to stabilize the park as an institution.   The MOE\'s decision 
pleased GNP employees, NGOs and donors.  The leader of the 
fishermen, however, publicly derided the MOE\'s decision on 
September 28 but did not call for any retaliatory action. 
The Embassy is actively promoting an independent commission 
that is transparent and politically neutral.  End Summary. 
 
The MOE Cans Cepeda, Installs Interim Director 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2.  The GNP strikers waited over the weekend to resume talks 
with Minister of the Environment on September 27.  Throughout 
the weekend, rumors swirled that Cepeda would be ousted for 
his role in the violence at the park (Reftel) and an interim 
director named.  On Monday, the MOE confirmed the rumors that 
Cepeda was out and Victor Carrion (a current mid-level 
functionary at the GNP) was in for at least two months, 
during which time a commission would be established to pick 
all future park directors.  The MOE also agreed to provide 
work contracts to all the GNP employees to bolster 
institutional stability. 
 
3.  The announcement was well received by the striking 
employees, NGOs, and donors, all of which pushed for these 
measures to ensure institutional stability in the GNP. 
However, the decision angered the fishing sector, to which 
Cepeda was a favorite son.  Rogelio Guaycha, President of 
four fishing cooperatives and alternate congressional deputy, 
wasted no time scorning the decision.  The following morning 
he was on local radio deriding international groups for 
meddling in Ecuador\'s affairs and calling this decision an 
encroachment on Ecuador\'s sovereignty.  He has not yet called 
on the fishermen to march on the GNP and commandeer the park, 
as some suspected he would. 
 
4.  The striking employees did not gloat over their victory 
and agreed not to go to work the following day, September 28, 
to avoid provoking the fishermen.  Twenty armed policemen 
were stationed at the gates of the GNP to maintain control of 
the park. 
 
The MOE Convokes Donor Meeting 
------------------------------ 
 
5.  The MOE invited donors to a meeting at the Ministry of 
the Environment on September 28.  He laid out his vision of 
the process to form the commission.  The MOE noted 
specifically that the process should be led by the Ministry 
of the Environment, and requested donors maintain a low 
profile.  To that end, the MOE agreed to collaborate on a 
communication strategy to inform the public and maintain the 
necessary transparency to prevent political interference. 
 
6.  The MOE hoped to have a permanent GNP Director in place 
by January 1, 2005.  He asked for assistance from the donor 
groups to achieve this goal.  USAID, the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB), and the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) offered technical assistance.  They agreed 
that one international and local consultant should be hired 
to provide the needed technical know-how.  The donors agreed 
to suggest qualified consultants from their respective pools 
of technical assistants.  The MOE requested another meeting 
on October 1. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  The removal of Cepeda is clearly intended to defuse the 
strike and continuing political uproar caused by the removal 
of the previous director, Edwin Naula, who was reportedly an 
ally of the main opposition Social Christian Party.  The 
naming of Cepeda was intended to assure the loyalty to the 
government of an independent Congressional deputy 
representing the Galapagos, Vinicio Andrade, who is allied to 
Galapagos fishing interests.  It is unclear how the removal 
of Cepeda will affect President Gutierrez\'s fortunes in an 
increasingly hostile Congress. 
8.  Victor Carrion is a Galapagos native who has a reputation 
for being steady and apolitical.  While the fishermen were 
upset about Cepeda\'s ousting, they never quite called for 
Carrion\'s head on a platter.  Mission Ecuador will encourage 
the parties to respect the truce at least long enough to 
permit the proposed commission to be formed and make its 
recommendation.  We are promoting an independent commission 
that is transparent and politically neutral.  Such a 
commission could prove to be the solution to the 
politicization of the GNP Directorship under the Gutierrez 
administration and return stable management to the Galapagos. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"21157","9/30/2004 20:38","04QUITO2642","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUAYAQUIL1064","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SECSTATE FOR USTR 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF, USDOL FOR JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ, DRL/IL 
FOR GREG MAGGIO, EB FOR AMY HOLMAN, GENEVA FOR JOHN 
CHAMBERLIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR LABOR UPDATE 
 
REF: A. GUAYAQUIL 1064 
 
     B. QUITO 2614 
 
1.  (U) Summary.  Following are labor-related developments of 
interest: 
 
--MOL to Consult Unions on Subcontracting Decree (para. 2) 
--Rules Proposed for National Labor Council (3) 
--MOL Computers for Child Labor Inspectors (5) 
--National Campaign to Eliminate Child Labor in Trash Sector 
(8) 
--Public Sector Protests Salary Standardization (9) 
--Strike Affects 120 Hospitals (11) 
--Galapagos Park Strike Ends (12) 
--Illegal Peruvian Migrant Workers Deported (13) 
--Profit Sharing Benefits Selected Workers in 2003 (14) 
--Unemployment and Informal Sector Stats (15) 
 
MOL to Consult Unions on Subcontracting Decree 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The Minister of Labor told LabOff on September 29 
the decree will be signed no later than October 1 by the 
President and published officially the following week. 
Patricio Contreras of the Solidarity Center (AFL-CIO) told 
LabOff that Minister of Labor Izurieta will meet with unions 
again regarding the draft subcontracting decree on September 
30. 
 
Operating Rules Proposed for National Labor Council 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
3.  (U) According to the Sandra Jacomi, assistant to Minister 
of Labor Raul Izurieta, the National Labor Council has met 
three times since its creation in July.  Council members have 
been named.  On September 9, the ILO and the Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry separately proposed operating rules for 
the National Labor Council but these are still being studied 
and have not been approved yet.  The MOL has yet to name the 
Technical Secretariat who will staff the National Labor 
Council.  The ILO has proposed a profile for members of the 
Technical Secretariat. 
 
4.  (U) The Minister proposed on September 27 that Labor Code 
reform be one of the themes to be discussed in the Council. 
This includes the issues of company retirement and hourly 
work.  There are no proposals pending from the union or 
business sectors on Labor Code reform. 
 
MOL to Provide Computers to Child Labor Inspectors 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
5.  (U) Jenny Cepeda, Technical Secretary of the Division of 
Child Labor in the MOL, told LabOff on September 27 the MOL 
is acquiring computers for the child labor inspectors which 
should be in place by mid-November.  She said the MOL has set 
aside $2000 a month for transportation funds for the 
inspectors.  Currently, two child labor inspectors use the 
Institute of the Child and Family (INNFA) offices in Los Rios 
and El Oro.  Four inspectors use INNFA vehicles in Guayas, El 
Oro, Los Rios and Pichincha.  Bladimir Chicaiza of the ILO 
told PolOff there is a critical lack of resources for the 
rehabilitation of child workers.  In Guayas, Los Rios and El 
Oro provinces, he said, transportation is provided by the 
Association of Banana Exporters. 
 
6.  (U) Ruth Mosquera, Director of the Division of Child 
Labor in the MOL, told PolOff on September 28 that two child 
labor inspectors had recently resigned.  She said they will 
work until the end of the month when they will be replaced. 
Chicaiza said two training sessions have provided child labor 
inspectors with adequate knowledge of the legal framework 
related to child labor.  He said there is willingness on the 
part of the MOL to offer further training to the inspectors. 
 
7.  (U) To confirm information in Ref A regarding inspections 
of Dole banana plantations, PolOff spoke on September 27 with 
Juanita LaRosa, the child labor inspector for Guayas 
province.  LaRosa said that 18 out of the 55 banana farms she 
has inspected in Guayas since August 2004 have belonged to 
Dole (around 33%).  She said this is because they are located 
close together and the MOL conducts inspections by geographic 
zone.  LaRosa said that there are 50 Dole farms in this zone. 
 Patricia Paez, Undersecretary in the MOL for the Coastal 
Region told PolOff on September 27 that all companies are 
getting equal treatment.  Patricia Hoyos of UNICEF told 
PolOff on September 29 she believes the inspection sites are 
being selected impartially.  Hoyos said there is no way for 
the inspector to know who the owner is of the haciendas 
marked on inspection maps. 
 
National Campaign Focuses on Children 
------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (U) Press reported that on September 23, the second phase 
of a national campaign \"Child Hope\" began which aims to gain 
public support for eliminating child abuse.  The first phase 
of the campaign, developed by UNICEF, focused on eliminating 
child labor in the trash sector by creating 25 
micro-enterprises generating family income, educational 
scholarships and health services. 
 
Public Sector Protests Standardization of Salaries 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
9.  (U) Patricio Contreras of the Solidarity Center (AFL-CIO) 
told LabOff on September 27 that various public sector 
workers were considering protesting the January 2004 Civil 
Service Law on standardizing public sector salaries.  The law 
was proposed by the GoE as part of the last agreement with 
the IMF.  The National Confederation of Public Workers 
(CONASEP) along with electrical, petroleum, 
telecommunication, health and municipal workers is 
participating and Ministry of Government workers announced 
they would strike if the law is not overturned by the 
Constitutional Court.  On September 29, the Court ruled the 
law was constitutional. 
 
10.  (U) Unions are against the law because it sets maximum 
salaries that limit collective bargaining.  The law also caps 
severance for fired workers at a maximum of $1000 per year of 
service.  The law also adds new requirements for collective 
bargaining by stating that parties must have the approval of 
the Ministries of Finance and Labor as well as the Prosecutor 
General to begin collective bargaining. 
 
Health Workers Strike - 120 Hospitals Affected 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
11.  (U) Press reported that health workers held a 48-hour 
work stoppage September 27-28 to demand respect of the 2005 
budget and the signing of a ninth collective bargaining 
agreement.  The strike affected 120 hospitals and 14,059 
health workers participated.  The agreement would provide 
higher wages, better work stability and overtime pay.  If no 
solution is reached by October 4, health workers have 
threatened an indefinite strike. 
 
Galapagos Park Workers Strike Ends 
---------------------------------- 
 
12.  (U) On September 28, the 19-day strike of 250 
non-unionized workers in Galapagos National Park ended after 
Minister of Environment Fabian Valdivieso replaced Fausto 
Cepado with Victor Carrion as Park Director (Ref B).  The 
Ministry of Environment agreed to issue individual work 
agreements with the park employees, a demand of the 
association of park workers.  Park worker Carlos Macias 
stated to the press that the Government had also promised 
$700,000 for wage increases. 
 
Illegal Peruvian Workers Detained 
--------------------------------- 
 
13.  (U) On September 13, Immigration officials detained 118 
Peruvians for violating conditions of the Andean Migration 
Card to work on the sugar plantation Hacienda Sausalito in 
Guayas province, according to press reports.  The Peruvian 
workers claimed they had worked twelve hour days, seven days 
a week for $130 a month.  The workers were deported to Peru 
on September 16. 
 
Profit Sharing For Some Workers in 2003 
--------------------------------------- 
14.  (U) Press reported that, according to the Ministry of 
Labor, in 2003, 3,518 companies distributed $102.2 million to 
160,193 employees as mandatory 15% profit-sharing as required 
under the Labor Code.  This represented a six percent 
decrease in payments compared with 2002.  According to 
Ecuadorian law, 10% of a company\'s profits must be 
distributed to employees and 5% goes to employees\' families. 
The largest sum paid to a single worker was $66,616 and eight 
companies paid out over one million dollars to their workers. 
 The portion going to women increased by 129 percent from 
1997 to 2003.  In 2003, 51,861 women received $25.1 million 
in profit sharing. 
 
Unemployment and Informal Sector Statistics 
------------------------------------------- 
 
15.  (U) The press reported that, according to the Central 
Bank of Ecuador, unemployment in Ecuador has risen from 9.3% 
in December 2003 to 11.53 percent in May 2004.  According to 
the National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC), 1.5 
million Ecuadorians are currently employed in the informal 
sector. 
KENNEY 
"
"21189","10/1/2004 16:30","04QUITO2651","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE209789","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002651 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, PARM, PREL 
SUBJECT: 59TH UNGA: ECUADOR SUPPORTIVE ON FIRST COMMITTEE 
DEMARCHE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 209789 
 
1.  (SBU) We provided talking points and text of U.S. draft 
UNFC improvement resolution to Amb. Julio Prado, MFA U/S for 
Multilateral Affairs on September 29.  On September 30, Prado 
told PolCouns that the GoE is eager to participate in 
dialogue through our respective UN missions in New York on 
this issue.  The GoE shared USG goals of streamlining and 
improving First Committee procedures. he said, and believed 
that doing so would help make First Committee resolutions 
more effective and credible. 
KENNEY 
"
"21192","10/1/2004 19:22","04QUITO2655","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PLEASE PASS TO USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, AORC, PREL, PGOV, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADORIAN VFM ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND ALADI 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: Perhaps to signal his willingness to act 
as a U.S. ally in his new position on the UN Human Rights 
Commission, FM Edwin Johnson expressed concern to DCM about 
Venezuelan and Cuban diplomatic activities in Ecuador and the 
politicization of the Latin American Integration Association 
(ALADI).  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) On September 30, DCM met with Johnson, who was 
recently elected to the UN Human Rights Commission.  Johnson 
was very grateful for USG support for his UNHRC candidacy and 
said he looked forward to working with the U.S. delegation. 
 
3.  (SBU) Johnson said he had once been a supporter of the 
NAM in the 1970s but is now more cynical about the motives of 
ideologically-based groups.  He said he and FM Zuquilanda had 
called in the Cuban and Venezuelan ambassadors to protest 
support for local Bolivarian movements and anti-globalization 
groups.  (Press reported the creation of the Bolivarian 
Republican Movement of Ecuador on September 2.)  The GoE 
perceives these groups as anti-government and any outside 
support as meddling in Ecuador\'s domestic affairs.  The Cuban 
ambassador denied any GoC support to local groups, according 
to Johnson. 
 
4.  (SBU) Johnson also expressed concern that ALADI had 
become increasingly distracted from its mission of economic 
integration by the efforts of members nations, including 
Venezuela, Cuba and others, to insert political issues to its 
agenda.  Separately the same day, MFA Acting U/S for 
Multilateral Affairs Julio Prado raised the same issue with 
PolCouns.  He suggested the USG to weigh in with the 
Uruguayan government on the upcoming October 18 ALADI Foreign 
Minister\'s meeting in Montevideo, to discourage discussions 
of political issues better left to other venues such as the 
OAS.  Prado said the topics currently being proposed include: 
terrorism/arms (Venezuela and Cuba), foreign debt 
(Argentina), Malavinas/Falklands (Argentina), 
counter-narcotics (Colombia). 
 
5.  (SBU) Comment:  The GoE\'s pique over Cuba and Venezuelan 
meddling in Ecuador\'s domestic politics might make Johnson 
more of an ally in the UNHRC than we might have expected. 
KENNEY 
"
"21299","10/5/2004 15:55","04QUITO2680","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO2578","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002680 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, KCOR, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADORIAN ELECTIONS UPDATE #2 
 
REF: QUITO 2578 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  This cable provides an update of 
developments related to the upcoming October 17 provincial 
and local elections.  Most procedural issues are moving 
toward resolution, the OAS has confirmed an electoral 
observation mission which Embassy volunteers will participate 
in, and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) has preempted 
Congress on the issue of how to allocate council seats.  End 
Summary. 
 
TSE \"Resolves\" How to Allocate Seats 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) On September 28, the TSE approved the \"Imperial\" 
method to divide seats on provincial and municipal and rural 
councils among political parties based on the number of votes 
won by party.  By doing so, the TSE filled a vacuum in the 
electoral law since the previous, which had artificially 
boosted representation by smaller parties, was challenged and 
struck down as unconstitutional.  The accord was supported by 
the three largest parties (PSC, ID and Pachakutik), and by 
the TSE president (of the PRIAN).  Small party leaders 
(including President Gutierrez) have criticized the right of 
the TSE to \"legislate\" electoral law, and hope to muster 
enough votes in Congress to pass a new law.  Cesar Montufar, 
coordinator of the electoral watchdog NGO \"Citizens 
Participation,\" has also challenged the constitutionality of 
the TSE move and urged Congress to act to correct it. 
 
OAS Observation Mission Confirmed 
--------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) The OAS has confirmed it is sending an Election 
Observation Mission led by Edgardo Reis and composed of 5 
core staff who arrive in Quito on October 5.  This group will 
be supplemented by 15 additional observers who will arrive 
shortly before the election. 
 
Embassy Observation Plans 
------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) The Embassy will offer volunteers to supplement the 
OAS Election Observation Mission.  The tentative plan is to 
deploy 5-10 teams of two U.S. mission observers to 
Quito/Pichincha, Guayaquil/Guayas, Esmeraldas, Manta/Manabi, 
Cuenca/Azuay and possibly Tena/Napo and/or Otavalo/Imbabura 
province.  Details remain to be worked out this week with OAS 
EOM chief Reis. 
 
Electoral Dry Runs Go Smoothly 
------------------------------ 
 
5.  (U) On October 2, provincial electoral councils conducted 
a successful simulation of election procedures with 
assistance from the OAS electoral unit.  On the same day, 
Citizens Participation (PC) carried out its own electoral 
observation simulation throughout the country.   A total of 
2,300 volunteer electoral observers simulated observation 
activities and 120 young volunteers registered the data at 
PC\'s call centers in the capital.  Data was then processed by 
PC\'s divisions of Analysis, Recovery, Emergencies, and 
Communications in order to test the entire set of operations 
planned for its observation and quick count on election day. 
 Minor technical and communications problems were detected 
and will be adjusted before October 17th. 
 
TSE Improves Observation Rules 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) On October 4 the TSE issued the final version of the 
regulation for Electoral Observation, which eliminated 
cumbersome requirements in earlier drafts.   The modification 
was praised by Citizen Participation, which plans to field 
3,100 domestic volunteer observers on elections day. 
 
Campaign Spending Excesses 
-------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) According to Citizens\' Participation, some candidates 
have already exceeded artificially low campaign spending 
limits in the races for mayor of Guayaquil and Quito, and for 
prefect of Pichincha, including Jimmy Jairala (PRE), Rodrigo 
Paz (Quito in Action), and Federico Perez (DP), respectively. 
 PC also reported major increases in municipal spending on 
publicity during the electoral campaign in Quito and 
Guayaquil, and by the national government ($536,633) to 
publicize public works. 
Invitation to Federal Elections Commission 
------------------------------------------ 
 
8.  (SBU) The TSE has provided the Embassy with a copy of a 
letter sent September 21 inviting Bradley A. Smith, President 
of the Federal Election Commission, to witness Ecuador\'s 
local and provincial elections October 17 (copy of letter 
faxed to WHA/AN D). 
Quito Gun Threat 
---------------- 
9.  (U) On September 28, Rodrigo Paz, the challenger for 
mayor of Quito, filed a complaint with authorities claiming 
his life had been threatened by a guard at municipal 
trolley-bus station.  The incident reportedly occurred while 
Paz and his campaign workers were attempting to distribute 
campaign material.  The guard, who was subsequently taken 
into custody by police, reportedly shot twice in the air 
during the confrontation.  Trolley officials claimed the 
guard was reacting to physical threats from the campaign 
workers after attempting to enforce the ban on campaign 
activity on public property. 
KENNEY 
"
"21308","10/5/2004 21:43","04QUITO2690","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002690 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF. USDOL FOR 
JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT SIGNS SUBCONTRACTING DECREE 
 
 
1.  Minister of Labor Raul Izurieta informed LabOff on 
October 5 that the President had signed the long-promised 
subcontracting decree (Executive Decree #2166) late on 
October 4.  The decree will be published in the official 
register next week, he said.  After the decree is published, 
the GoE will hold a press conference to publicize it. 
 
2.  Minister Izurieta provided the Embassy a copy of the 
decree, which we have faxed to WHA/AND, WHA/PPC, DRL/IL, 
USDOL/ILAB and USTR.  The decree regulates the use of three 
kinds of third-party contractors: subcontractors for 
temporary services, subcontractors for complimentary services 
and subcontractors who provide primary services indefinitely. 
 For the last category, the number of subcontracted workers 
cannot exceed 75% of the company\'s total employees.  The 
decree guarantees subcontracted workers\' right to collective 
bargaining and states that subcontracted workers will receive 
the same benefits (including profit sharing and social 
security) and salaries as directly hired workers, in partial 
fulfillment of commitments made to the USG under ATPDEA. 
KENNEY 
"
"21364","10/6/2004 21:01","04QUITO2702","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002702 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: MAYOR\'S RACE A TOSS-UP IN ECUADOR\'S THIRD CITY 
 
 
1.  Summary.  The Cuenca mayoral race is too close to call 
between two strong candidates, Fernando Cordero (New 
City-Pachakutik alliance), the incumbent, and Marcelo Cabrera 
(Democratic Left), recently the provincial prefect of Azuay. 
Meanwhile, Xavier Munoz, of Popular Democracy is the clear 
front-runner for prefect of Azuay.  The mayoral race in 
Ecuador\'s third largest city is interesting because it pits 
two popular incumbents against each other.  End Summary. 
 
Background Information 
---------------------- 
 
2.  PolOff visited Cuenca, provincial capital of Azuay 
province September 30-October 1 for meetings with local 
election officials, party officials and an NGO (independent 
electoral observer).  Cuenca, a charming town with 
distinguished colonial architecture best known for the Panama 
hats woven there, is also the third largest city in Ecuador, 
located in the southern Sierra region.  Azuay province has a 
serious out-migration problem with many towns depopulated of 
working aged men who have emigrated to the US and Spain. 
Azuay has a total of 447,587 eligible voters (5.2% of the 
national total) who will vote on October 17 to select a 
provincial prefect (U.S. governor-equivalent), 5 provincial 
councilors, 15 mayors, 64 municipal councilors and 59 rural 
councils.  Electoral officials predicted 30% absenteeism on 
election day in Azuay province. 
 
Mayoral Race Close 
------------------ 
 
3.  The mayoral race is too close to call between the 
incumbent, Fernando Cordero of the New City party (allied 
with Pachakutik) and Marcelo Cabrera, of the Democratic Left 
(ID) party.  Cabrera has served as Prefect of Azuay Province 
for the last 8 years.  Electoral watchdog NGO Citizens 
Participation charged both candidates with posting signs on 
public works, a violation of campaign rules.  In response, 
Cordero\'s campaign coordinator, Gabriel Ledesma, blamed 
undisciplined supporters for the infraction.  Cabrera 
subsequently took down his signs. 
 
4.  New City campaign coordinator Gabriel Ledesma told PolOff 
that Ecuador had suffered through 25 years of \"party-ocracy.\" 
 Ledesma described New City as different in that it does not 
make promises and had no party doctrine.  In fact, New City 
is not a party, but a local movement which has allied with 
the Pachakutik party.  While the Democratic Left accuses 
Cordero of concentrating power in himself, Ledesma pointed 
out that Cordero had passed 173 ordinances in cooperation 
with the city council (showing he could work with others) 
versus one ordinance passed by Prefect Cabrera.  Ledesma 
accused Cabrera of corruption in contracts for public works. 
 
5.  Orlando Albornoz, campaign manager of the ID in Cuenca, 
emphasized that the ID is an ideologically-based party and as 
eager to pronounce on local and national issues.  He argued 
that without the structure of a party, politicians are not 
accountable for their actions.  Albornoz echoed Munoz\' public 
statements in favor of greater decentralization of taxing 
authority.  Azuay province needs more power to directly 
administer projects, such as new roads, he said.  Albornoz 
said Ecuador should work with international organizations 
such as the World Bank and Inter-American Bank to fund 
development projects.  He also felt the US should look to 
Latin America first for allies.  Albornoz worried that 
Ecuadorian markets would be invaded by American products 
should an FTA be signed. 
 
6.  There are also two well-respected female candidates for 
mayor, Susana Gonzalez, a former President of Congress (of 
the For Cuenca Party) and Angelica Garcia of President 
Gutierrez\' Patriotic Society Party).  The Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal requires parties to allocate at least 40% of its 
candidate lists to women.  There are no female candidates for 
Prefect of Azuay. 
 
Munoz the Favorite in Prefect Race 
---------------------------------- 
 
7.  Xavier Munoz (Popular Democracy Party), a former mayor, 
prefect and Congressman, stood out as the clear favorite in 
the race for Prefect of Azuay province.  Paul Carrasco of the 
Democratic Left Party (ID) and Paul Granda of the New 
City-Pachakutik alliance trailed Munoz in the polls.  PolOff 
attended a forum of the candidates for prefect organized by 
Citizens Participation.  All but Carrasco attended.  A key 
theme all candidates mentioned was the need for a better 
highway system in Azuay province.  Granda argued a better 
road system was linked with improvements in the economy 
health, education and tourism.  Granda also felt these 
improvements could stem the serious migration problem in 
Azuay province.  There were no other concrete solutions to 
migration presented.  Munoz instead proposed Congressional 
reforms to allow local governments to make use of income 
taxes to increase municipal autonomy from the central 
government. 
Citizen Participation Will Monitor Elections 
-------------------------------------------- 
8.  Citizens Participation (PC) regional coordinator told 
PolOff that PC will have 500 volunteers monitoring elections 
on October 17.  These volunteers are aged 16-18 and represent 
ten public and private schools.  On October 2, a practice 
session was held for the volunteers.  Rodas touted PC\'s 
sponsorship of the candidate forums as an important service 
to voters.  He described the meetings as civil, with no 
personal attacks.  (PolOff confirmed this at the session she 
attended.)  The forums have good turnout and were broadcast 
on the radio.  Previously, prefect candidate Munoz had been 
attacked for his relationship with unpopular former President 
Mahuad. 
 
Electronic Vote to be Tested 
---------------------------- 
 
9.  The town of Totoracocha, with 12,724 eligible voters, has 
received 80 electronic voting booths, lent to the GoE by the 
Government of Brazil.  Thirty-seven of the machines will be 
used for voters to practice and forty-three will be used for 
voting on election day.  Each machine will be used by about 
300 people.  (Voting booths are divided by gender; 
Totoracocha has 20 male booths and 23 female booths.)  Voters 
will not be allowed to vote electronically unless they have a 
certificate proving that they have received prior training. 
According to Dr. Jorge Moreno, President of the Provincial 
Electoral Tribunal, as of September 30, 7,000 of the eligible 
voters had received the necessary training.  From October 
1-15, additional training sessions will be offered.  Voters 
will also be able to practice on 30 machines on election day. 
 The Provincial Electoral Tribunal has been handing out 
flyers door-to-door and using cars with loudspeakers to 
announce the practice days and locations. 
 
10.  According to Moreno, minor parties such as New City and 
For Cuenca have complained to the Provincial Electoral 
Tribunal that voters can only see the majority party logos on 
the electronic screen.  Minority parties fear this could 
influence voters on election day.  Ledesma said that this 
omission in the test voting machines could cause confusion on 
election day, putting the votes of approximately 5% of Azuay 
voters into question.  Albornoz also feared electronic voting 
could permit fraud through electronic manipulation.  Post 
expects the OAS to field a team of electoral observers to the 
province. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11.  The election in Cuenca is interesting because it pits 
two popular incumbents - one from a major established party 
(ID) and one running against what established parties 
represent.  A Cordero win would reflect growing public 
disenchantment with politics as usual.  Conversely, a Cabrera 
win would reinforce the ID\'s strength in the province and 
nationally. 
KENNEY 
"
"21397","10/7/2004 13:34","04QUITO2704","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2599","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002704 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EC, ECON, EFIS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, SENV, Environment 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR TRYING TO STABILIZE GALAPAGOS PARK 
MANAGEMENT 
 
REF: QUITO 2599 
 
1. Summary.  The Minister of the Environment, Fabian 
Valdivieso, is attempting to change the process for selecting 
directors of the Galapagos National Park (GNP), hoping that 
an independent procedure will purge politics from this 
position and stabilize park management.  The Minister 
proposes hiring independent consultants to devise a 
methodology for selecting potential candidates.  The Embassy 
is backing this approach, encouraging an independent and 
transparent selection process.  The Carter Center has invited 
Valdivieso to visit its facility to begin laying the 
groundwork for an international forum on the Galapagos that 
the center is planning for next year.  The situation in the 
GNP remains calm.  End Summary. 
 
Proposed Format for Selecting Park Directors 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  Valdivieso has convened three meetings since announcing 
his initiative to depoliticize the directorship of the GNP 
(Reftel).  He proposes hiring independent consultants to 1) 
develop a manual for selecting, contracting, and evaluating 
directors of the GNP, 2) draft a Presidential decree 
incorporating the procedures manual into the selection 
process, and 3) develop a short list of candidates to replace 
the interim director.  The consultants will also produce a 
public relations strategy ensuring that there is sufficient 
transparency in and support of the selection process. 
 
3.  The proposed consulting team will be comprised of three 
people - a human resources specialist with at least five 
years of international experience, an administrative law 
specialist with knowledge of the norms and processes in the 
Galapagos, and a communications specialist also familiar with 
the problems of the Galapagos.  Donors are suggesting that 
Valdivieso use international consultants to maintain 
independence in the process. 
 
Embassy Promotes Stability from All Sides 
----------------------------------------- 
 
4.  The Embassy has always pushed conservation as the 
overriding goal in the Galapagos.  We are promoting the use 
of international consultants in this selection process and 
independent selection of the director to stabilize the GNP. 
 
5.  The DCM met with Valdivieso to reiterate this point. 
Valdivieso commented that while the selection process is 
critical for stabilizing leadership in the GNP, the 
underlying problem also needs to be addressed - that is, the 
fundamental conflict between fishing and conservation. 
Industrial fishing cannot be sustained on the Galapagos and 
those living off its ever-diminishing resources need to be 
trained in other livelihoods.  The DCM agreed but pointed out 
that the world is watching and there is mounting pressure to 
quickly stabilize the current situation.  Valdivieso asked 
that we lobby President Gutierrez on his behalf in order to 
stabilize his position. 
 
6.  The Carter Center sent a letter to President Guiterrez 
proposing an international forum to discuss the Galapagos. 
The DCM urged Valdivieso to visit the Carter Center as soon 
as possible to begin laying the groundwork for this forum. 
The Carter Center is a neutral party that could bring 
together donors and other interested parties to devise a 
lasting solution for the Galapagos.  The DCM also encouraged 
Valdivieso to develop a public relations strategy to take 
advantage of this trip, as well as other successes that arise 
from this process. (Valdivieso tentatively plans to visit 
Atlanta the week of October 25.) 
 
7.  The Embassy is also encouraging other countries to engage 
the Ministry of the Environment on this topic.  German 
Embassy officials say they will soon begin bilateral 
negotiations with Ecuador and that management of the 
Galapagos will be an issue of discussion.  The Canadians and 
the British report that they are also pushing for stability 
and conservation. 
 
All Quiet on the Western Front 
------------------------------ 
 
8.  The truce between the fishermen and the GNP employees 
seems to be holding, due in large part to the presence of 
approximately 50 armed police at the GNP.   The Embassy is 
following the situation closely and will warn American 
Citizens that live in or around the GNP to leave the area 
should violence erupt. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  Valdivieso, while sincere and well qualified, is 
politically weak.  With President Gutierrez publicly and 
privately signaling a post-electoral cabinet adjustment, we 
fear Valdivieso may not be around long enough to oversee this 
process.  For this reason, we are advising him to visit the 
Carter Center in the hope that his visit may bolster his 
public standing and boost the selection process, and lay the 
groundwork for a definitive solution to the Galapagos problem. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"21480","10/8/2004 21:07","04QUITO2723","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2449","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002723 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, MOPS, PGOV, PHUM, EC 
SUBJECT: ELECTIONS IN ECUADOR:  THE ROLE OF THE MILITARY 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2449 
 
     B. 02 QUITO 3085 
 
1.  This cable is an update of Ref B, transmitted in 
September 2002, just prior to Ecuador\'s most recent national 
elections. 
 
2.  SUMMARY:  Although soldiers, sailors and airmen (and 
police) cannot vote, the military nonetheless will play a 
prominent part in Ecuador\'s October 17 local elections. 
Printing the ballots, securing the voting stations, and 
delivering results to Quito are just a few of its logistical 
responsibilities; 35,000 military will take part in the 
electoral effort.  Despite perceptions that the military 
supports the Gutierrez government and recent declines in 
public approval ratings, the armed forces remain an admired 
institution in Ecuador, and their visibility on election day 
both inspires public confidence and helps ensure a free and 
fair vote.  END SUMMARY. 
 
3.  Ecuador\'s 1998 constitution bars active duty military 
(and police) from casting ballots.  The armed forces\' 
electoral role is robust, however, before, on, and after 
election day.  As the only GoE institution with truly 
national reach, the military has assumed duties, from 
printing the ballots to transporting them for final 
tabulation, handled in most democracies by civilian 
organizations. 
 
------------------- 
Pre-vote Activities 
------------------- 
 
4.  In 2002, Carlos Aguinaga, then-president (and current 
member) of Ecuador\'s Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE), 
provided a review of the military\'s electoral 
responsibilities that remains accurate today.  Aguinaga noted 
the Ecuadorian public had deep faith in and admiration for 
the armed forces.  They historically have provided logistical 
support for elections, and the TSE in 2002 signed an 
agreement with the Ministry of Defense that expanded even 
further the armed forces\' role. 
 
5.  The Ecuadorian Army\'s Institute of Military Geography 
(IGM) just finished printing 36 million paper ballots needed 
for the upcoming October 17 contests (Ecuador\'s 8 million 
voters will elect governor-equivalents, mayors, provincial 
councils, city councils, and some rural councils, using 
separate ballots for each).  When asked in 2002 if private 
firms had been able to bid on this seemingly lucrative 
contract, Aguinaga chuckled and recounted the mistake 
electoral authorities had made in 1996, when they contracted 
the task to the private sector.  Protesters and/or vandals 
had breached the company\'s weak security and torched the 
just-printed ballots, causing major havoc in the 
pre-elections timetable.  Aguinaga asserted the TSE would not 
repeat its earlier mistake, and was generally satisfied with 
IGM\'s performance. 
 
6.  In a recent meeting to discuss the TSE\'s voter education 
campaign in advance of the 2004 vote, Tribunal training 
expert Ana Patino praised the military\'s professionalism in a 
task outside its core mission.  Under an accord signed 
earlier this year, the TSE trained the armed forces in 
electoral materials distribution/collection and precinct 
security.  Patino claimed the TSE\'s education of the armed 
forces had proceeded far more smoothly than its training of 
civilian poll workers.  Press accounts note the first of 13 
Army-orchestrated election materials deliveries will occur on 
October 8, with all of Ecuador\'s 22 provinces receiving 
materials well in advance of the vote.  The logistics then 
get tougher, as the military must transport the electoral 
kits to all of Ecuador\'s 35,000 voting stations; nonetheless, 
Patino was confident the military would mount a successful 
operation. 
 
----------------------- 
Election Day Operations 
----------------------- 
 
7.  The armed forces and Ecuadorian National Police will also 
provide security on election day, the military standing guard 
inside the voting places, the police patrolling the 
perimeters.  Should a member of the armed forces security 
contingent suspect wrongdoing at the voting stations, he/she 
is empowered to temporarily halt the voting and/or vote 
counting and request that the precinct\'s civilian coordinator 
investigate and rectify the situation.  Once the polls have 
closed and the election workers have tallied the votes, the 
military will transport copies of the tally sheets to the TSE 
and the provincial electoral tribunals. 
-------- 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
 
7.  The armed forces play a vital role in Ecuadorian 
elections, as the only institution capable of handling 
logistical support and security nationwide.  But they provide 
more than printing presses, trucks, and hired muscle. 
Respected analysts argue that the Army\'s involvement in 
elections, rather than provoking suspicions of fraud or 
intimidation among voters, in fact reassures the public of 
the process\'s probity.  Unlike in neighboring countries, 
election day violence is rare in Ecuador, thanks in part to 
the military\'s visible presence. 
CHACON 
"
"21481","10/8/2004 21:20","04QUITO2724","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2690","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

082120Z Oct 04
","UNCLAS QUITO 002724 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USTR FOR WILLIAM CLATANOFF. USDOL FOR 
JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ. DEPT FOR WHA/AND, WHA/PPC, DRL/IL, EB. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY ANALYSIS OF SUBCONTRACTING DECREE 
 
REF: QUITO 2690 
 
1.  Summary:  President Gutierrez signed Executive Decree 
2166 regulating subcontracting (Reftel) on October 5, which 
will be published in the Official Register on October 12. 
While several articles in the decree differ from the version 
Minister of Labor Raul Izurieta originally gave us, we 
believe the agricultural workers exemption in contracting 
does not represent a loophole exempting subcontractors from 
protections in the decree.  Congressional Deputy Andres Paez 
plans to submit draft legislation on subcontracting to 
Congress with similar content to the decree during the week 
of October 11.  End Summary. 
 
Changes to Decree May Provide Less Protection 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  Several articles in the latest version of the decree 
differ from the last version the MOL had provided to LabOff. 
For example, Article 2 of the decree states that \"all 
third-party services should be provided by societies that 
have the exclusive purpose of providing these services. 
Excepted are third-party services that are provided in the 
rural agricultural sector which can be provided by natural 
persons.\"  LabOff is attempting to confirm with Izurieta that 
this does not exclude agricultural workers from other 
provisions in the decree. 
 
3.  In addition, the previous draft version of the decree 
provided by the MOL on September 14, Art. 3 stated that if 
the decree were violated, subcontracted workers would be 
considered direct employees of the main company, since the 
date they were hired.  This article was deleted from the 
signed version.  However, Art. 21 of the signed decree states 
if the decree is violated, the main company will take over 
the contracting of the workers indefinitely, with all the 
legal labor obligations and social security benefits. 
 
4.  Art. 11 now states that subcontracted workers cannot 
receive less pay than what is stated as the minimum wage for 
each sector.  In the case that there is no specified minimum 
wage for a sector, workers must receive the national minimum 
wage.  In the previous version, the decree said subcontracted 
workers had the right to equal pay, benefits and conditions 
of work as the main companies\' direct-hire employees. 
 
5.  The decree states that companies may contract 
subcontractors to hire workers to perform the companies\' 
primary activities indefinitely.  Art. 9 of the decree was 
not changed and limits the number of subcontracted work force 
to 75%.  This is significantly higher than the percentage 
requested by union leaders (15%), and was added after a 
Presidential meeting with union leaders. 
 
Subcontracting Law Project in Congress 
-------------------------------------- 
 
6.  Andres Paez, President of the Congressional Labor 
Committee, told LabOff on October 7 that there are currently 
four draft bills on subcontracting.  He is working on 
harmonizing them and said he plans to present a report to 
Congress the week of October 11.  The majority of points in 
the law project will be the same as those in the executive 
decree, he said, including guarantees of indemnization and 
benefits.  He hopes to have a first debate on the topic later 
this month and a second debate in November.  Paez said he is 
optimistic about prospects for Congressional approval. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 7.  The decree is not law until it is published in the 
Register, currently planned for October 12.  While the news 
of its signing is now public, the text is not yet available 
to the public or press.  We believe the agricultural workers 
exemption on contracting does not represent a loophole 
exempting subcontractors from the rest of the protections in 
the decree, and are attempting to confirm this. 
Unfortunately MOL Izurieta has been unavailable due to his 
efforts to resolve health workers strike. 
CHACON 
"
"21571","10/13/2004 17:04","04QUITO2739","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002739 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSISTIVE 
 
E.O. 12985: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: POLITICAL LANDSCAPE CHANGING IN ESMERALDAS 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  A pre-election visit to Esmeraldas 
province suggests that incumbent Esmeraldas Mayor Ernesto 
Estupinan\'s rise in political popularity has triggered 
initial changes to the political landscape in this coastal 
border region.  Estupinan, a member of the leftist Popular 
Democratic Movement (MPD), has all but assured his re- 
election after successful initiatives reinforcing basic 
public services in the provincial capital of Esmeraldas. 
More importantly, these efforts have exposed the past 
failings of the traditionally dominant Partido Roldosista 
Ecuatoriano (PRE), in turn undermining the re-election 
efforts of PRE provincial prefect Homero Lopez and eroding 
the PRE\'s regional support.  END SUMMARY. 
 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
---------------------- 
 
2. (U) On October 7 and 8, PolOff and ConOff met with local 
election officials, party officials, independent electoral 
observers, and business leaders in the cities of Esmeraldas 
and Atacames, in coastal Esmeraldas province, which borders 
on Colombia.  Voters in Esmeraldas\' 7 municipalities will 
visit 950 voting stations on October 17 to select a 
provincial prefect (US governor-equivalent), 7 mayors, 4 
provincial councilors, and 31 municipal councilors.  While 
Esmeraldas\' 263,933 voters represent just over 3% of the 
national total, the region\'s political history is 
intriguing.   It is the base of former Ecuadorian President 
Abdala Bucaram of the PRE, who fled to Panama in 1997 after 
Congress declared him \"mentally unfit\" for office. 
 
3. (U) Poverty and illiteracy characterize the coastal 
province of Esmeraldas, which lies on the Colombian border 
and whose population is over 70% Afro-Ecuadorian. Voter 
participation has historically hovered around 70% and 
localized fraud and violence are not uncommon.  The coast- 
based PRE traditionally has shared political power in the 
province with the Social Christian Party (PSC) and the 
National Action Institutional Renewal Party (PRIAN). 
However, growing public perceptions of instability along the 
Colombian border, public concern regarding the recent 
closing of dozens of schools in the region, and the ongoing 
widespread belief that past elected officials have stolen 
millions of dollars of public funds opened the door for new 
political leadership. 
 
ELECTORAL PREPARATIONS 
---------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Meetings with election officials and independent 
electoral observers suggest that arrangements for the 
elections are proceeding relatively smoothly.  Roy Torres 
Estacio, President of the provincial office of the Supreme 
Election Tribunal (TSE), said scheduled training sessions 
for voting station officials were proceeding apace.  He also 
noted that none of the new electronic voting booths used as 
part of a pilot project will be located in Esmeraldas 
province, easing the preparation process.  Piedad Ortiz, 
regional coordinator for the NGO Citizen\'s Participation, 
noted that nearly all of her 41 observers were trained and 
ready for Election Day independent monitoring activities. 
Also the OAS will send a team to monitor the elections. 
 
5. (SBU) With respect to potential problem areas, both 
Estacio and Ortiz claimed that any irregularities would 
probably occur at the local level and include violations 
associated with improper advertising near voting stations 
and isolated incidences of incorrect voting procedures.  To 
prevent inadvertent voting irregularities, Citizen\'s 
Participation has a new voter information program in 
conjunction with eight other international and national 
organizations.  As elsewhere, Ortiz, Estacio, and all party 
officials interviewed reinforced the belief that election- 
spending limits were ludicrously low.  For example, the 
spending limit for candidates in the race for Mayor and 
Provincial Council member is $8,000, while the limits for 
the municipal council races range from $2 to $133 per 
candidate.  Party officials tacitly acknowledged that their 
candidates were overspending. 
 
SHIFTING POLITICAL LANDSCAPE 
---------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) While the PRE has historically garnered much of the 
country\'s support in past elections, most of the attention 
in this year\'s campaign was focused on the accomplishments 
of Estupinan and the positive prospects of the MPD.  Even 
PRE supporters agree that Estupinan, the first Afro- 
Ecuadorian elected as mayor of the provincial capital, has 
transformed Esmeraldas from a trash-infested and decrepit 
city to a clean, and more importantly, well-functioning 
port.  The president of the province\'s chamber of tourism 
and other business leaders, including former PSC congressman 
Carlos Saud, report that Estupinan\'s efforts have generated 
sustainable business opportunities.  Polls show Estupinan 
leading his PRE rival Carlos Canizares, with 41% to 15% 
respectively.  Even PRE\'s own internal polls, provided by 
acting prefect Cesar Pimentel of the PRE, revealed an 8% 
lead for Estupinan. 
 
7. (SBU) Meanwhile, the race for provincial prefect (US- 
governor-equivalent) between MPD candidate Lucia Sosa and 
current prefect Homero Lopez is too close to call.  Lenora 
Neira, an official with the TSE, candidly noted that without 
the recent MPD rise associated with Estupinan, Sosa would 
otherwise have had no chance against an incumbent PRE 
candidate.  The turnout at two political rallies observed by 
ConOff and PolOff - supporters for the MPD rally numbered 
more than 400 while those of the PRE numbered around 100 - 
suggested that the MPD has greater popular support or 
organization capacity.  PolOff and ConOff spoke informally 
with local from various socioeconomic classes who reinforced 
this perception. 
 
8. (SBU) Party officials, election officials, and 
independent election observers all noted that Estupinan\'s 
Afro-Ecuadorian roots reflect an important shift for that 
population\'s interest in the political process.  While it 
may not trigger an increase in the absolute number of Afro- 
Ecuadorians actually voting, they believe that the MPD\'s 
successes and Estupinan\'s presence will make this population 
take greater ownership in party activities and raise issues 
that are of concern to the poorer regions of the province. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9. (SBU) It was heartening to note Estupinan\'s popular 
appearance is based on a solid record of accomplishment. 
However, while the general perception was of a political 
shift away from the PRE and toward the MPD, seasoned 
political officials observed that Estupinan\'s support is 
based on his personal qualities and record of 
accomplishment, rather an ideological following for his 
party.  That support could have a coattail effect which 
changes the political balance in Esmeraldas, at least in the 
short run. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"21575","10/13/2004 17:46","04QUITO2740","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002740 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/AND, WHA/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, ECON, EC, Democracy 
SUBJECT:  HOW FREE IS THE PRESS IN ECUADOR? 
 
REF:  03 Quito 3782 
 
1.  Summary.  Continuing a longstanding battle with the 
press (Reftel), President Gutirrez recently called for a 
judicial investigation of a prominent radio director for 
possible seditious remarks in suggesting the president had 
received campaign contributions from Colombia\'s FARC in the 
2000 presidential campaign.  The media cried foul, and 
charged the president with yet another attempt to stifle 
free speech.  At the same time, a recent battle between two 
national television channels demonstrates the chilling 
impact on freedom of expression of business and private 
interests on the media.  Although the media has covered this 
media controversy in-depth, its consequences have received 
little scrutiny or analysis.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Gutierrez picks yet another fight with the press 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
2.  During his presidency, President Gutirrez has picked 
several fights with the media.  Last year, exasperated over 
negative coverage, he considered proposing a gag law to 
suppress articles he considered biased against him.  He also 
threatened to sue leading daily \"El Comercio\" for alleging 
that he had received campaign contributions from a former 
provincial governor under arrest for drug trafficking.  In 
all cases, after riling the press and causing a firestorm 
among media analysts, he has backed down. 
 
3.  Last month, at the presentation to the media of his new 
Secretary of Communications and Spokesperson, Ivan Oa (the 
 
SIPDIS 
fourth person in the 22 months of the Gutierrez 
Administration to hold this position), President Gutirrez 
ez 
singled out a number of media, including leading newspapers 
\"El Universo\" and \"El Comercio\", major television channels 
\"Ecuavisa\" and \"Teleamazonas\" and the Director of \"Radio 
Vision\" Diego Oquendo for telling \"half-truths\".  After a 
predictable outcry from the media, which accused the 
administration of once again attempting to stifle freedom of 
press, Oa appeared on Oquendo\'s morning interview program, 
denied that the Administration had proposed legal action 
against any media outlet, and said that the only intent was 
to initiate a discussion of ways to eliminate rumors that 
harm the successful governance of the country. 
 
4.  Shortly after Oa\'s conciliatory appearance with Oquendo 
on \"Radio Vision\", President Gutirrez sent a letter to the 
Quito provincial prosecutor requesting an investigation of 
Oquendo for what he characterized as possibly criminal 
remarks against national security made in an interview with 
an ex-minister close to Gutirrez.  In the interview, 
ew, 
Oquendo stated he had information from reliable, highly 
placed sources that Colombia\'s FARC had contributed to 
Gutirrez\'s 2000 presidential campaign and asked if this 
were true.  (The ex-minister responded in the negative.)  In 
the wake of Gutirrez\'s request for an investigation, 
Oquendo, a longtime critic of Gutierrez, has used his 
morning radio program as a bully pulpit to lash out against 
the Administration and its  \"campaign against the press\". 
The media, which, in general, has no great affection for the 
president, has rallied behind Oquendo.  The president, 
through Oa, has unsuccessfully tried to calm the debate by 
claiming he was not accusing Oquendo of a crime, but was 
merely asking the prosecutor to determine the facts. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Pressures from the private sector 
--------------------------------------- 
 
5.  In September, Teleamazonas, one of four major national 
channels in Ecuador, began a series of programs on the bank 
nk 
collapse of 1999-2000 and individuals connected with it. 
Teleamazonas is owned by Fidel Egas who is the majority 
stockholder of Banco del Pichincha, the largest Ecuadorian 
bank.  One segment was to have focused on Roberto Isaias, a 
member of a family that owns television stations Gamavision 
and TC in Guayaquil, as well as CN3, a cable news station. 
Isaas is now a fugitive and is residing in the U.S.; he was 
convicted in absentia of fraud in the collapse of Filabanco 
and his case is now before an appellate court. 
 
6.  Officials from Teleamazonas and Banco de Pichincha 
reported to Embassy officials that Roberto Isaas contacted 
the station and threatened retaliation if the segment on him 
aired.  Those involved believed Isaas was concerned that 
negative media coverage could adversely affect the pending 
appellate decision in his case.  Teleamazonas offered to 
send a crew to Florida to allow Isaas to appear on camera 
and give his side of the story, but he declined and the 
the 
station proceeded to run the story.  At the same time, 
Teleamazonas ran a story on Congressional deputy Patricio 
Dvila, former head of the Agency of Security Deposits, 
which implied that he had unjustly profited from Ecuador\'s 
banking collapse. 
 
7.   TCTV responded with a series of news stories 
questioning the solvency of the Banco del Pichincha (despite 
official government audit reports to the contrary), which 
resulted in significant withdrawals and speculation of 
collapse.  At the same time, Davila accused the Bank of 
accounting irregularities.  Also, Social Christian Party 
leader Leon Febres-Cordero, a congressional deputy, former 
president, and Isaas ally, initiated a legal process to 
withdraw Teleamazonas\' license based on a law prohibiting 
banks from owning communication media. 
 
8.  Faced with this onslaught, Teleamazonas and Banco del 
Pichincha sued for peace.  Catholic church leaders brokered 
talks resulting in a \"non-aggression pact\" whereby 
y 
Teleamazonas agreed to back off coverage of the Isaas 
family connection to the Filibanco banking failure, and TCTV 
agreed to stop its attacks on the Banco del Pichincha. 
Concurrently, Teleamazonas promised to cease coverage of the 
accusations against Dvila, and he in turn agreed to desist 
from making allegations of banking improprieties.  Thus far, 
the truce has held.  Bank officials told Embassy officers 
that the bank is regaining its heretofore-solid credibility 
and depositors are returning.  Teleamazonas believes the 
legal case against it will soon be dropped.  A leading 
Teleamazonas producer told us, however, that this \"soap 
opera\" has had a chilling effect on Teleamazonas and the 
station will be more careful about whose interests it 
offends in the future. 
 
----------- 
Comment 
------------ 
 
9.  During his tenure, Gutirrez has often been at odds with 
the press.  His efforts to reign in the media, however, have 
been unsuccessful, and served only to create an outcry by 
by 
and rally to arms of the media themselves.  Such incidents 
as the Oquendo case have served to provoke discussion of the 
importance of freedom of the press and the need to resist 
governmental intimidation and interference. 
 
10.  More troubling is the chilling effect of private and 
business interests on the media demonstrated by the TCTV- 
Teleamazonas dispute.  It is an example of the economic 
interests which limit freedom of the press by inhibiting the 
press from performing its watchdog function.  In contrast to 
the Oquendo case, there was scant coverage or analysis of 
this dispute.  The fact that the press feels free to 
criticize the government, but not a fugitive banker and his 
family business interests, reveals much about where the 
power lies in Ecuador. 
 
Kenney 
"
"21624","10/14/2004 20:51","04QUITO2759","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, KCOR, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: FINAL ECUADORIAN ELECTIONS UPDATE 
 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  This cable provides information about the 
upcoming October 17 provincial/local elections, their 
significance, a summary of Embassy involvement in the OAS 
electoral observation mission, information on how to reach us 
on election day, suggested press guidance, and a synopsis of 
recent election-related developments.  End Summary. 
 
Why This Election is Important 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) This election could spell the end of President 
Gutierrez\' Patriotic Society Party (PSP), which must win at 
least 5% of the national vote for council seats to stay in 
business.  President Gutierrez has defied tradition and 
generated controversy by stumping openly for his party\'s 
candidates in an effort to stave off a humiliating defeat. 
Despite the President\'s campaign efforts and largesse, 
experts differ on whether this effort will be sufficient to 
clear the 5% hurdle.  In addition to the PSP, four other 
parties are facing the same prospect of electoral oblivion. 
De-certification of a political party is not automatic, 
however, and the PSP could find allies among other parties 
represented on the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE).  The TSE 
will deliberate on the issue 35-45 days after the election, 
when results become official.  To re-constitute a 
de-certified party under a new name requires the collection 
of 85,000 signatures. 
 
3.  (SBU) A well-run election should help regenerate faith in 
the democratic process, and encourage the opposition to 
channel its anti-government energies into competing in the 
2006 presidential and congressional elections.  We believe it 
is in the U.S. interest to promote this result.  Conversely a 
badly run election or even a bad PSP loss might embolden the 
President\'s political enemies to step up ongoing challenges 
to this government\'s legitimacy. 
 
4.  (SBU) Beyond their national implications, these local 
elections should help strengthen Ecuadorian democracy.  A 
recent USAID-commissioned survey showed that among eight 
Latin American countries surveyed, citizens of Ecuador had 
the highest level of trust in local governments, and one of 
the lowest levels of trust in national institutions.   The 
study also showed a direct link between trust for local 
governments and support for democracy. 
 
Embassy Participation in OAS Mission 
------------------------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) We will contribute 37 volunteers from the Embassy 
and CG Guayaquil to the OAS observation effort.  Seven teams 
of two volunteers will deploy outside of Quito/Pichincha and 
Guayaquil/Guayas, to observe the elections in Babahoyo, 
Machala, Cuenca, Tena, Manta, Esmeraldas and Otavalo.  Three 
teams of will participate in an OAS quick count in Quito. 
Two teams with a total of five volunteers will cover 
Guayaquil. 
 
How to Reach Us on Election Day 
------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) The polls will be open from 0700 to 1700 on election 
day; it will take officials several hours to count and report 
election results.  On October 17, the Embassy will maintain 
an election coordination center to field calls from Embassy 
observers and maintain contact with the OAS, TSE and 
electoral watchdog NGO Citizens Participation.  We will 
report any significant developments to the Department\'s 
Operations Center on October 17, and will report final 
results by cable on October 18. 
 
7.  (U) The Embassy election coordination center can be 
reached at: 
(593) (2) 256-2890 ext. 4471 or 3471 
(593) (2) 254-0502 
(593) (9) 984-2841  (PolChief Erik Hall cell) 
 
Suggested Press Guidance 
------------------------ 
 
8.  (U) Assuming the elections take place without incident or 
serious challenge, we suggest the Department respond to any 
queries with the following guidance:  \"Ecuador recently 
celebrated 25 years of democracy.  We congratulate the 
Ecuadorian people on continuing Ecuador\'s democratic 
tradition with free, fair, and transparent elections.\" 
 
Latest Electoral Developments 
----------------------------- 
 
9.  (U) Proportional Representation:  On October 12, small 
parties in Congress failed in a sixth and probably final 
attempt to legislate a system to allocate council seats among 
parties.  The vote in favor of debate on the issue was just 
three short of a simple majority.  Interestingly, two 
Congress members whose parties were in favor, from the PRIAN 
and PRE, were absent for the vote.  As a result, the system 
chosen earlier by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, known as 
the \"Imperial\" or \"Webster\" system, will remain in effect. 
This system provides for proportional representation but is 
less favorable to the small parties than the \"d\'Hont\" system 
struck down as unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court. 
While a post-electoral legal challenge to the TSE\'s selected 
system is likely, most observers expect the Constitutional 
Court to support the TSE. 
 
10.  (U) Electoral Watchdog Upbeat but Alert:  Citizens 
Participation director Cesar Montufar told PolChief on 
October 13 that his objections to the TSE decision were 
procedural in nature.  Although the constitution makes it 
clear that Congress, not the TSE, should have resolved the 
issue, Montufar believes the courts will reject any 
post-electoral challenges from small party candidates. 
Montufar downplayed his public statements warning that this 
issue could undermine the credibility of the elections, and 
said he expected the elections to proceed smoothly overall. 
He expressed greatest concern about the possibility for 
irregularities after the voting booths close and report their 
results to provincial electoral tribunals.  His concern is 
that in some provinces (Guayas, Esmeraldas) the provincial 
tribunals might annul significant numbers of results on 
questionable (and partisan) grounds.  These deliberations 
will take place outside the electoral observation process, 
and could take weeks to play out behind closed doors, he 
said.  For its part, Citizens Participation plans several 
press conferences on election day to report on qualitative 
aspects of the process, and will conduct a quick count for 
the mayor\'s races in Quito, Guayaquil, and Cuenca.  Results 
could be released late on election night or on October 18. 
 
11.  (U) Electoral Violence:  A candidate for provincial 
council in El Oro province for the PRIAN party was shot and 
killed on October 8 in Guayaquil.  Press reported that Jhon 
Lamota was shot during an attempted car-jacking.  A PRIAN 
party spokesman called for a full investigation of the crime 
and denounced a pattern of violence against party members and 
workers, including the murders of two other PRIAN party 
members (in Esmeraldas and El Oro provinces) on September 11, 
and violence against another in Guayas province on August 17 
and September 25. 
 
12.  (U) AID Candidate Fora Great Success:  On October 12, 
Citizens Participation and other civil society groups 
completed a series of over 50 fora for citizens to meet with 
candidates to hear about their technical and financial 
proposals.  The fora were successful at better informing 
voters, especially young voters, by raising public awareness 
about the candidates\' platforms and encouraging civil debate 
among candidates. 
 
13. (U) Campaign Spending:  The 45-day election campaign 
formally ends on October 14, when campaign activity must 
cease.  According to Citizens Participation, as of October 
13, two of the four mayoral candidates for Quito have 
exceeded legal spending limits and incumbent mayor Paco 
Moncayo is very close to doing the same.  Traditionally, 
violators of campaign spending limits are required to pay a 
fine after the elections.  Meanwhile, incumbent mayor of 
Guayaquil Jaime Nebot has publicly called on the Comptroller 
General investigate the private firm \"Interview,\" contracted 
by the Electoral Tribunal to monitor campaign spending. 
Citizens Participation has also asked the TSE to make public 
the data gathered by Interview. 
KENNEY 
"
"21654","10/15/2004 12:41","04QUITO2761","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE218465","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002761 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/UNP, S/WCI, L/UNA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, PHUM, EC 
SUBJECT: MFA OFFERS VOTE SWAP ON U.S. ICTY NOMINEE 
 
REF: STATE 218465 
 
1. In response to Reftel, the Embassy October 12 delivered to 
the Ecuadorian foreign ministry a non-paper and CV in support 
of Judge Theodor Meron, the USG\'s candidate for re-election 
to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia.  In a follow-up meeting October 14, Luis 
Arellano, the MFA\'s office director for UN affairs, told 
Poloff that Ecuador\'s UN mission was receiving CVs and 
candidacy letters from numerous countries.  In early 
November, the mission would assemble the package, attach a 
recommendation, and pouch the materials to Quito for the 
MFA\'s final determination. 
 
2.  Arellano agreed that Judge Meron\'s qualifications were 
impressive, but offered no hint of Ecuador\'s intended vote. 
The GoE had no candidate in the ICTY election, but was 
looking for USG support for MFA Legal Advisor Marcelo 
Vasquez, Ecuador\'s nominee for the International Law 
Commission.  Aware (from prior Embassy demarches) the USG did 
not engage in vote trading, Arellano nonetheless pitched a 
tit-for-tat arangement. 
 
3.  Post requests instructions should Department wish to 
break from standard practice and support a vote swap for the 
USG\'s ICTY candidate. 
KENNEY 
"
"21665","10/15/2004 14:42","04QUITO2762","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE215870","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002762 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ETRD, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR TO SUPPORT CUBAN UNGA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 215870 
 
1.  (U) In response to Reftel, the Embassy October 7 
delivered pro-embargo, anti-resolution talking points to the 
Ecuadorian foreign ministry.  In a follow-up meeting October 
14 with MFA Director General for Multilateral Policy Miguel 
Mendes, Poloff emphasized three points:  the U.S. embargo was 
a bilateral matter not relevant for multilateral discussion, 
it was but one tool the USG was utilizing to foment 
democratic opposition and a peaceful transition in Cuba, and 
the international community should focus instead on Castro\'s 
documented human rights abuses. 
 
2.  (U) Mendes claimed to have visited Cuba recently and 
there saw great suffering.  Not only Castro\'s lackeys, but 
the rank-and-file too, blamed the embargo for their 
deplorable living standards.  Mendes erroneously believed the 
U.S. measure prevented foreign-based multinational 
corporations from doing business in Cuba, and called for its 
lifting on humanitarian grounds.  The GoE deplored Castro\'s 
imprisonment of dissidents and other draconian policies, 
however, and would continue to push for glasnost on the 
island. 
 
3.  (SBU) COMMENT:  Pressed, Mendes admitted Ecuador would 
follow its long-standing policy of supporting Cuba\'s 
anti-embargo UNGA vote.  His professed concern over GoC human 
rights abuses was disingenuous, unfortunately, as Castro 
remains a beloved figure in Ecuador, especially amongst its 
left-leaning diplomats. 
KENNEY 
"
"21732","10/18/2004 15:10","04QUITO2769","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002769 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF AND BENNET HARMON, 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB: JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ AND CARLOS 
ROMERO, DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/AND, WHA/PPC, DRL/IL AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY VIEWS ON GOE LABOR DECREE 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The publication on October 14 of the 
presidential decree on subcontracting is an important if not 
ideal step forward that comes at some political cost to 
President Gutierrez and Labor Minister Raul Izurieta. 
Ecuadorian and U.S. private sector interests are already 
attacking the decree, confirming our view that this attempt 
to regulate subcontracting will raise the costs to employers 
of abusing subcontracting to curtail worker rights.   Though 
not ideal, we believe the decree represents a good faith 
effort by the GoE to fulfill one of its commitments under the 
ATPDEA.  We firmly agree that more substantive labor reform 
is needed and will require a sustained USG effort to support 
and Congressional action.  The decree drafting process shows 
that will not be easy; we can best advance the prospects for 
reform by welcoming the decree and supporting further reform. 
 End Summary. 
 
Despite Delays and Disappointments... 
------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) We have been as frustrated as our colleagues in 
Washington by the agonizing process of change and missed 
deadlines that plagued the drafting of this decree.  Delay 
and disappointment with regard to decrees, far from being 
exceptional, are the norm here, where any presidential action 
has the potential to destabilize a weak and unpopular 
government.  Labor rights, as elsewhere, are inherently 
sensitive political issue here, alternately able to alienate 
powerful economic interests and to mobilize the labor sector. 
 The 75% limitation on subcontracted employees is much higher 
than labor unions wanted, but any limitation is too much for 
business.  The treatment of contracting by individuals in 
agriculture may open an unfortunate loophole, but the extent 
to which that loophole really allows for abuses will not be 
clear until we see how the decree is applied. 
 
...We See Progress 
------------------ 
 
3.  (SBU) Although all of our concerns have most definitely 
not been met, it does seem that the decree is a significant 
step forward and limits the scope for abuse of subcontracting 
to curtail labor rights.  Local AFL-CIO Solidarity Center 
representative Patricio Contreras characterized it as 
positive to LabOff on October 15, although we understand the 
AFL-CIO is still considering its position.  The decree 
imposes regulation specific to subcontracting for the first 
time in Ecuador.  Registration and reporting requirements 
will allow the Ministry to get a handle on subcontracting and 
to resolve abuses.  Another indication the decree has merit 
is the fact that business lawyers are working overtime on the 
constitutional challenge they say will be presented within 
days (it will focus on the 75% rule and the fines being 
levied per worker affected by a violation, rather than per 
violation).  A U.S. business leader came in to see the 
Ambassador before the decree was published to request Embassy 
assistance to prevent the issuance of what he considered a 
\"anti-democratic\" labor regulation.  In our view the decree 
will make it significantly more costly and more difficult for 
employers in Ecuador to use subcontracting as a way of 
thwarting employees in the exercise of their rights. 
 
4.  (SBU) The GoE\'s efforts on child labor this year have 
been even more impressive.  We asked for new child labor 
inspectors to be appointed by the end of the year.  Given 
Ecuador\'s track record, one might have expected appointment 
on December 31 followed by months of wrangling about 
salaries, transportation, and other facilities.  Instead, the 
GoE moved very rapidly to appoint and has been working on the 
logistical issues diligently ever since.  They are not 
resolved, but they may be by the end of the year. 
 
The Way Ahead 
------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) There is no doubt that issuing the decree was 
difficult for this government, and we believe the effort 
demonstrates the GoE\'s commitment to labor reform.  The 
decree comes from a very weak government and in the face of 
staunch opposition from the business community.  We know the 
GoE worked hard to come up with a decree which would meet 
U.S. concerns and be acceptable to labor and business here. 
Minister of Labor Izurieta has invested his personal 
credibility in the effort, as has the President.  With all 
his flaws, we believe Izurieta is an ally of labor reform and 
a star in this government.  Any replacement would be very 
unlikely to be an improvement.  Izurieta is now going to pay 
a political price for his efforts, with the constitutional 
challenge from the business community.  In this context, it 
is essential to carefully calibrate our reaction to the 
decree to maximize the prospects for labor reform as we go 
forward. 
 
6.  (SBU) This Embassy defers to and respects the interagency 
process to set policy on ATPDEA labor petitions and FTA labor 
strategy, and offers the following points for your 
consideration.  Real labor reform will take time for labor 
and business to develop common ground.  We believe the USG 
can best help focus debate by making it clear that labor 
reform is a necessary condition for any FTA with the U.S., 
while being very careful not to convey this message as an 
ultimatum.  Concluding the review on last year\'s petitions 
would turn the page on the decree, and allow the GoE to move 
toward legislative reforms.  Accepting the new ATPDEA 
petitions for review would also help leverage the reform 
process. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"21743","10/18/2004 19:34","04QUITO2771","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002771 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, KCOR, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: PRELIMINARY ECUADORIAN ELECTION RESULTS, 
IMPLICATIONS 
 
 
This cable was cleared by CG Guayaquil. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Ecuadorian voters went to the polls to 
elect provincial and municipal officials on October 17 in 
elections the OAS characterized publicly as \"free and 
transparent.\"  Some irregularities were reported but in most 
polling places voting proceeded relatively smoothly. 
Preliminary results confirm that incumbents from the larger 
parties consolidated and strengthened their representation, 
at the expense of smaller party candidates.  Press 
immediately christened the re-elected mayors of Quito and 
Guayaquil as favorites for the 2006 presidential race.  It 
also appears that President Gutierrez\' Patriotic Society 
Party surpassed the 5% hurdle to stave off extinction. 
Gutierrez continued to stir controversy on election day by 
threatening to overturn through regulation the method 
selected by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) to allocate 
council seats to permit some degree of proportional 
representation.  Post-electoral controversy will now move to 
the courts and Congress.  End Summary. 
 
Process Smooth Overall, Rough in Places 
--------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) Ecuadorian voters elected 219 mayors, 22 provincial 
prefects, 91 provincial councilors, 893 municipal councilors, 
and 3,970 rural council representatives.  OAS Election 
Observation Chief of Mission Edgardo Reis issued a press 
statement on October 18 thanking the GoE for its 
collaboration with the OAS mission and stating that \"the 
electoral process proceeded in a generally calm and ordered 
manner, with the exception of some incidents reported in the 
provinces of Guayas, Bolivar, and Los Rios.\"  Ninety percent 
of voters interviewed by OAS observers expressed satisfaction 
with the decision of the TSE to separate voting lines by 
gender.  Eighty-five percent of the sample of voters who used 
special electronic voting machines rated their use as easy, 
and 82% supported use of the machines more widely.  The 
results of the OAS quick count in the race for mayor of Quito 
coincided with official results.  The OAS statement also 
praised the work of electoral watchdog NGO Citizen 
Participation and the unprecedented indigenous observation 
effort mounted by the Q\'ellkaj Foundation (both with USAID 
support).  It also expressed concern about gaps in the 
election law about campaign financing and allocation of 
council seats. 
 
3.  (U) Although actual voting proceeded without incidents of 
violence, media reported and police sources have confirmed 
the shooting death of Pasquale Bustamante, a PSP candidate 
for town councilor in Los Rios province, in the evening after 
the polls closed.  In addition, the elections were suspended 
and will be re-run in two small municipalities (El Empalme in 
Guayas province and Pajan in Manabi province), and incidents 
were reported in the Tarqui area in Guayaquil municipality, 
in the municipality of Simon Bolivar in Guayas, and in 
Bolivar province.  Citizen Participation reported a variety 
of problems noted by its 3,100 young volunteer observers 
stationed in 42% of the voting stations nationwide, including 
campaign activities within voting areas (28%), and police 
impeding access by political party or observers to voting 
stations (17%).  Citizen Participation director Cesar 
Montufar urged Congress to address gaps in the electoral laws 
to better regulate campaign spending and the allocation of 
council seats. 
 
Embassy Volunteers Support OAS 
------------------------------ 
 
4.  (U) Thirty-eight U.S. mission volunteers participated as 
election observers under the OAS Election Observation 
Mission.  In addition to Quito and Guayaquil, Embassy and CG 
Guayaquil volunteers traveled to Babahoyo, Los Rios province; 
Manta, Manabi province; Esmeraldas; Cuenca, Azuay province; 
Ibarra, Imbabura province; and Tena, Napo province.  Embassy 
participation contributed to a successful OAS quick count in 
Quito, and provided over half of the OAS\' qualitative 
observation. 
 
Large Parties Advance, PSP Fate Uncertain 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) As expected, Paco Moncayo, the incumbent mayor of 
Quito (ID), was re-elected, as was Jaime Nebot (PSC) as mayor 
of Guayaquil.  Both were gracious and conciliatory in their 
victory speeches.  In Cuenca, the ID defeated the incumbent 
Pachakutik-endorsed mayor and won the Azuay prefect race as 
well.  In Machala, Los Rios, the PSC candidate defeated the 
PRE incumbent, although the PRE retained the prefecture.  In 
Manabi, the PSC mayor of Manta was re-elected and the PSC won 
the prefect race, also at the expense of the PRE.  The 
indigenous party, Pachakutik, appears to have preserved its 
strength in its Sierra heartland, but lost the prefecture of 
Bolivar. 
 
6.  (U) Overall, the ID won six prefectures, followed by the 
PSC and Pachakutik with five each.  The PRE won in three 
prefectures, as did the Popular Democracy Party (DP), some in 
coalitions.  The Coalition of Popular Forces (CFP) and 
Popular Democratic Movement (MPD) both won in two.  The 
National Action Institutional Renewal Party (PRIAN) won just 
one prefecture (Imbabura) and the PSP was part of a coalition 
which won in the Galapagos.  (These numbers total more than 
Ecuador\'s 22 provinces because of alliances made in several 
races.) 
7.  (U) It appears that President Gutierrez\' PSP cleared the 
5% hurdle required to retain its party registry.  The PSP won 
the mayorships of Tena, in Gutierrez\' home province of Napo; 
and of Pastaza, Morona Santiago province; in addition to the 
Galapagos prefecture.  (The 5% rule applies only to 
provincial, municipal, and rural council seats, however, and 
results in these races is still limited.)  Despite these 
advances by the PSP, opposition opinion makers are claiming 
the PSP\'s relatively poor showing constitutes popular 
rejection of the Gutierrez government\'s performance and 
program. 
 
Gutierrez: Snatching Defeat from Jaws of Victory 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
8.  (U) President Gutierrez marked the opening of polls in a 
brief address at the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) in 
which he called on winners and losers to come together in 
support of unity and national interests.  Later, in an 
impromptu press conference at his polling station and in 
post-election interviews, Gutierrez was less statemanlike 
There he continued his criticism of the method adopted by the 
TSE to allocate council seats (which likely cost his small 
 
SIPDIS 
party by reducing proportional representation), and 
criticized Congress for abdicating its responsibility to 
legislate a better method.  Gutierrez said he was holding off 
issuing his own regulations replacing the TSE\'s method until 
greater consensus emerged on the subject in Congress. 
 
9.  (U) Gutierrez also used the opportunity to take a swipe 
at \"a certain desperate ex-President\" for attacking 
Gutierrez\' criticism of the judiciary (for supposed 
politicization in favor of the PSC) and his meeting with 
disgraced ex-president Abdala Bucaram in Panama.  PSC leader 
and ex-president Leon Febres-Cordero responded in kind, 
calling Gutierrez \"corrupt, incapable, and an ignoramus.\" 
Guayaquil mayor Nebot, goaded by press to react to Gutierrez\' 
threat to issue new post-electoral regulations, warned the 
President against any such move, saying the PSC and possibly 
other parties would \"take to the streets\" to defend what it 
won in the ballot box. 
 
Implications 
------------ 
 
10.  (SBU) It appears that President Gutierrez\' efforts on 
behalf of PSP candidates staved off de-certification of his 
party.  Regardless, it is clear today that the PSP\'s gains 
were modest, at best.  Opposition press are claiming the 
election results constituted a referendum on Gutierrez\' 
performance as President.  We find that claim overdrawn, but 
will monitor closely the effects of the ensuing spin battle. 
 
11.  (SBU) The big ID and PSC wins in their respective 
heartlands immediately fueled speculation that Paco Moncayo 
and Jaime Nebot will likely be competitors in the 2006 
presidential election (in response, both claimed only to be 
interested in serving their new four-year terms as mayor). 
Pachakutik\'s political stasis in its indigenous heartland 
might make it less anxious to challenge democratic stability 
than had it suffered a major reverse.  Alvaro Noboa, the 
PRIAN presidential runner-up in 2002 and presumptive 
presidential candidate in 2006, did his best to paint the 
PRIAN\'s middling results (many second and third places, few 
winners) as a victory placing the PRIAN among the four 
largest parties after only two years in existence.  He 
contrasted his party\'s national results with the strong 
regional identification of the PSC and ID. 
 
12.  (SBU) We believe the President\'s election-day threat to 
regulate the allocation of council seats might well have been 
election-day posturing.  The controversy over the allocation 
of seats will continue regardless, since small party losers 
are expected to mount legal challenges to rules adopted by 
the TSE which cut down on proportional representation.  Those 
challenges are unlikely to convince the courts, which are 
considered more receptive to the views of the large parties. 
Post-electoral controversy will also play out in the 
Congress, which could distract it from returning to its 
stalled legislative agenda. 
KENNEY 
"
"21745","10/18/2004 21:10","04QUITO2773","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2447|04QUITO2595","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002773 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, G/TIP, AND AID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR TIP UPDATE 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2595 
     B. QUITO 2447 
 
1.  Summary.  Ecuadorian police conducted nearly 50 raids 
September 16 - 30 and found 55 minors suspected as victims of 
trafficking in persons (TIP).  USAID signed a $300,000 
agreement with Geneva Global to begin a small grants program 
aimed at prevention, prosecution and protection of TIP. 
Press play was heavy on the Angel Mariscal and Burdet Cedeno 
child pornography cases.  The Embassy has provided TIP 
messages to local media.  Several TIP-related reform bills 
are pending in Congress.  End Summary. 
 
 
Minors Found in Police Raids 
---------------------------- 
 
2.  DINAPEN, the police unit dedicated to protecting 
children, reported that from September 16 - 23, the police 
rescued 77 minors in 26 raids of bars, brothels, and 
nightclubs, 22 of whom are believed to have engaged in 
prostitution, in these raids.  Most of the children were 
found in southern Ecuador in the provinces of Guayas, Azuay, 
and Loja.  In raids conducted September 24 - 30, police 
rescued 122 minors, of whom 43 were believed to be involved 
in prostitution.  Twenty-five of the 43 minors were found in 
one disco bar, that prostitutes frequent, in Esmeraldas. 
Most minors found in both weeks\' raids were returned to 
relatives, except those found in Guayas province who were all 
taken to \"Patio de Mi Pana\", a group that shelters 
adolescents.  We plan to visit shortly to learn more about 
its services to TIP victims. 
 
USAID Launches Grants to Combat TIP and Assist Victims 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
3.  On September 30, USAID and NGO Geneva Global signed a 
cooperative agreement establishing a small grants program to 
combat TIP in the areas of prevention, rehabilitation, and 
prosecution.  USAID provided $300,000, and from November 2004 
to September 2006, the grant should fund 12 to 16 projects. 
If successful, the grants would provide:  education of 
potential 40,000 potential victims about the risks of 
trafficking; education of 10,000 community members, teachers, 
and leaders about the dangers of trafficking in their 
communities; job skill training for 1,500 victims; 
psychological and medical treatment for 1,000 victims; legal 
assistance for 250 victims; and training on combating TIP for 
150 public officials and lawyers.  The AID grants are part of 
our strategy to supplement Ecuadorian government and civil 
society\'s existing efforts and lead to the creation of a 
self-sustaining network of integrated victims assistance 
centers throughout the country. 
 
 
Getting the Message Out to the Public 
------------------------------------ 
 
4.  On October 4, PAS distributed a Voice of America 
editorial that spoke out against TIP. Sixty radio stations in 
Ecuador aired the program. 
 
Child Pornography Cases Advance in Courts 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5.  On September 24, a U.S. judge sentenced Angel Mariscal, 
an Ecuadorian citizen and legal permanent resident in the 
U.S., to 100 years on 7 charges of child pornography.  In 
Cuba and Ecuador, he filmed pornography videos involving 150 
children, some of whom were less than 12 years old.  Jesenia 
Rezabala, Mariscal\'s ex-girlfriend, was sentenced to three 
years in Guayaquil for corruption of minors.  U.S. 
prosecutors said Mariscal made more than 300 videos.  Police 
in Guayas province determined that Mariscal\'s child 
pornography network abused more than 80 Ecuadorian children. 
National press play on this case was heavy. 
 
According to media, a court will try the Burdet Cedeno couple 
on four charges of raping minor girls and one charge of 
drugging minors.  These charges are related to the couple\'s 
well-known child pornography and sexual abuse case where a 
court convicted the couple on three charges and sentenced 
them to 12, 16, and 20 years.  (Ref B) 
 
Competing Reforms Before Congress 
--------------------------------- 
 
6.  Several bills to codify TIP and penalize involved parties 
are still pending in Congress.  We are reviewing them to 
determine how well they address trafficking, and will 
encourage Congress to move quickly on the most promising 
legislative reforms.  Septel will analyze the proposed 
reforms. 
KENNEY 
"
"21924","10/22/2004 12:04","04QUITO2810","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002810 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC, President 
SUBJECT: RETURN TO NORMALCY: PRESIDENT SURVIVES ANOTHER DAY 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, for reasons 1.4 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Minutes after local elections concluded on October 
17, Ecuador\'s opposition returned to its game of political 
\"chicken,\" calling for the impeachment of President Gutierrez 
for illegal use of public funds for campaign purposes.  The 
judiciary, for its part, issued what some charaterize as a 
\"moral sanction\" of the President.  Despite the impression 
promoted by the opposition press of buzzards circling the 
Gutierrez government, GoE insiders tell us that the President 
is maneuvering behind the scenes stave off these challenges 
in the short run by shoring up its alliances and mollifying 
the main opposition.  End Summary. 
 
Congress Back At It:  Impeachment Talk from ID and PSC 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
2.  (C)  During an election night press conference, PSC 
leader Leon Febres-Cordero accused President Gutierrez of 
corruption and incapacity and pledged to renew efforts toward 
his ouster.  The next morning, Democratic Left Party (ID) 
leader Rodrigo Borja reinitiated debate over President 
Gutierrez\' fate by calling for impeachment for improper use 
of public funds for campaign purposes.  Pachakutik leaders 
immediately endorsed the measure, and media focused on the 
emerging vote count in Congress.  As of October 20, no vote 
had been called, but the opposition claimed to have mustered 
62 of the 67 votes necessary. 
 
Judiciary Up In Arms Too 
------------------------ 
 
3.  (C) The Supreme Court, meanwhile, smarting from criticism 
from Gutierrez on the campaign trail that the judicial system 
was partial to political interests (read PSC), emitted a 
statement on October 20 \"energetically rejecting\" Gutierrez\' 
public warning that the people might burn down the courts in 
a repeat of the events of January 21, referring to the 
popular ouster of former president Jamil Mahuad in 2000.  The 
court stopped short of accusing Gutierrez of a crime; PSC 
leaders claimed it represented a \"moral sanction.\" 
 
An Insiders View 
---------------- 
 
4.  (C) Presidential Secretary Carlos Polit told the 
Ambassador on October 20 that he personally oversaw campaign 
spending for the Government and has the documentation to 
counter any claims of improper use of public funds.  He also 
said that Government Minister Raul Baca has recently engaged 
in secret (separate) talks with Febres-Cordero, President of 
Congress Landazuri (ID), and President of the Supreme Court 
Hugo Quintana on these issues.  The talks had largely (75%) 
resolved these challenges to the Gutierrez government, 
despite media hype to the contrary.  The discussions with 
Febres-Cordero and Landazuri (of the ID) produced an deal 
whereby the government promised to get members of Gutierrez 
family out of the public spotlight in return for the ID and 
PSC backing off their efforts to generate a 2/3 majority in 
Congress in favor of impeachment.  The family members include 
Renan Borbua, the President\'s cousin, reviled by 
Febres-Cordero, who will be sent abroad for several months as 
an itinerant ambassador.  Napoleon Vila, the President\'s 
brother-in-law, also will not be given a government position 
in the wake of his failed candidacy for prefect of Pichincha. 
 Asked by the Ambassador about the fate of Oscar Ajerve, the 
president\'s campaign advisor blamed for several recent 
Gutierrez\' missteps, Polit said there was no plan for Ajerve 
to go \"for the moment.\" 
 
5.  (C) Polit said that he and Baca had won a commitment from 
Gutierrez to turn Presidential appointment decisions over to 
them, to prevent future blunders.  He cited as ludicrous the 
petition by disgraced former Social Welfare minister Patricio 
Acosta to Gutierrez for a new posting as Minister or 
Ambassador with ministerial rank.  Polit said he promptly 
turned the corrupt Acosta down flat, causing Acosta to 
publicly disaffiliate from the PSP which he co-founded with 
Gutierrez.  Polit said that Ajerve has been a disaster as 
campaign advisor to the President for the local elections; 
Polit expressed shocked that the President would appear to 
television studios to be interviewed on election day.  This 
gave the impression of presidential desperation over vote 
results, he said.  To counter that impression, Polit and Baca 
urged the President take the higher road in a brief televised 
address to the nation the day after the election, in which 
the President congratulated winners and losers, and called 
for dialogue with the opposition on national interests. 
 
 
Possible Cabinet Changes Imminent 
--------------------------------- 
 
6.  (C) Asked about possible changes in the Cabinet which 
Gutierrez has hinted publicly, Polit said that the Education, 
Health and Social Welfare ministers might be changed.  Polit 
said Baca\'s position, and that of Finance Minister Mauricio 
Yepez was secure.  FM Zuquilanda is also secure, although 
past protocol gaffes (including the seating of Secretary 
Powell at the FM\'s and not the President\'s table during an 
OASGA lunch) allowed Polit to secure veto power over the 
Foreign Ministry on all protocol decisions.  The next big 
event scheduled is President Fox\'s November 8-9 visit.  The 
Ambassador requested Polit\'s assistance scheduling Secretary 
Rumsfeld\'s appointment on November 15.  Polit was unaware of 
the Defense Ministerial of the Americas, but pledged to 
support the request. 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (C) Senior opposition leaders Febres-Cordero and Rodrigo 
Borja immediately wrested the political spotlight from their 
respective charges (the victorious Moncayo in Quito and Nebot 
in Guayaquil) to re-focus it instead on their challenge to 
the president.  Gutierrez\' more able lieutenants are 
maneuvering behind the scenes to help the President survive 
another day.  The combination of moves to stave off 
Congressional action against the President and quiet his 
critics may succeed in the short run, since there is no 
likely successor acceptable to both Febres-Cordero and Borja. 
 However, Gutierrez is unlikely to disappoint those eagerly 
awaiting new controversy. 
KENNEY 
"
"22091","10/27/2004 13:48","04QUITO2861","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR\'S TIP LEGISLATION AND CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A. 2519 
 
     B. 2773 
 
1. (U) Summary.  Ecuador took additional steps forward in 
combating Trafficking in Persons (TIP) over the past week. 
Congress debated the draft of anti-TIP legislation that 
criminalizes TIP, sexual tourism, child pornography, and 
child prostitution.  On October 22, the MFA and United 
Nations co-sponsored a TIP conference, where government 
officials spoke out against trafficking.  The Ambassador\'s 
October 21 visit to Fundacion Quimera, the NGO that will set 
up the Machala TIP shelter, showed that the organization 
thoroughly understands the problem and is committed to the 
cause.  The police conducted 37 raids from October 7 - 14. 
Also the Ministry of Government (MoG) plans to provide 
alternative employment training to adolescent prostitutes in 
mid-November, and the Burdet-Cedeno couple was sentenced to 
an additional 25 years for a rape related to their ongoing 
child pornography case.  End Summary. 
 
--------------- 
TIP Legislation 
--------------- 
 
2. (U) According to media reports and MoG official Carlos 
Jativa, the Congressional Committee on Civil and Criminal 
Legislation has reviewed all anti-TIP bills submitted by 
several congresspeople and the Ministry of Government.  The 
committee combined all proposals into one bill, and Congress 
held the first debate on October 20.  Jativa expects the 
anti-TIP legislation pending in Congress to be passed within 
30 days.  He claimed Minister of Government Raul Baca will go 
to the press if the bill is delayed.  Pertinent facets of the 
bill include the following: 
 
a. The definition of TIP complies with G/TIP\'s model 
legislation. 
b. Child is defined as a person under 18 years for 
pornography and prostitution. 
c. Penalty of 12 to 25 years for traffickers 
d. Penalties for clients and persons who facilitate the crime 
of sexual tourism with minors under 18. 
e. Penalty of 4 to 25 years for people who produce child 
pornography. 
f. Presumption that a person cannot give consent for TIP and 
sexual exploitation when: 
1. the person is under 18 years of age 
2. the person has a disease that doesn\'t allow him/her to 
resist violence or threats 
3. the perpetrator takes advantage of a situation of 
superiority over the victim. 
 
3. (U) G/TIP is requested to review the legislation which was 
faxed on October 26.  Jativa has told us we can submit 
changes to him, and if the MoG agrees with them, Jativa will 
submit them to Congress. 
 
-------------------- 
MFA\'s TIP Conference 
-------------------- 
 
4. (U) The MFA and UN co-sponsored a two-day conference on 
alien smuggling and TIP on October 21 and 22.  Approximately 
50 people attended, of whom 10 were DINAPEN officers (the 
police unit dedicated to protecting children).  Several 
high-level Ecuadorian government officials spoke at the 
meeting.  Director of CONAMU (the National Women\'s Council) 
Rocio Rosero spoke out against TIP and CSEM.  Minister of 
Labor Raul Izurieta described the evils of child prostitution 
and the circumstances that lead some Ecuadorian families to 
domestically traffic their children as prostitutes.  Attorney 
General Mariana Yepez stated there is a pilot program to 
facilitate minors\' testimonies and avoid victimizing them 
again in legal proceedings.  However, most speakers confused 
alien smuggling and TIP, and many discussed issues unrelated 
to TIP for a large portion of their speeches. 
 
---------------------- 
NGO in Machala Gets It 
---------------------- 
 
5. (U) On October 21, the Ambassador and PolOff visited 
Fundacion Quimera, a NGO in Machala that has worked on 
commercial sexual exploitation of minors (CSEM) and related 
issues for several years.   The NGO will set up a Machala 
shelter for TIP victims in conjunction with the International 
Labor Organization (ILO), through a grant from the Department 
of Labor (Ref A).  The ILO\'s headquarters in Geneva should 
give official approval for the project shortly, and the 
shelter should open in January 2005.  The facility will 
accommodate 50 minors who were sexually exploited, and 
management also will educate potential TIP victims.  The 
NGO\'s leaders were very energized, committed to fighting TIP, 
and understood the problem in depth. 
 
------------ 
Police Raids 
------------ 
 
6. (U) From October 7 - 14, DINAPEN conducted 37 raids of 
nightclubs and bars and found 35 minors, who are believed to 
have engaged in prostitution.  Almost all of them were handed 
over to family members.  Twenty-nine of the 35 minors were 
males.  DHS is investigating to determine why so many males 
were found. 
 
----------------------- 
MoG Plans More Training 
----------------------- 
 
7. (U) PolOff met with Jativa on October 20.  Jativa\'s office 
is canvassing a group of 19 adolescent prostitutes to study 
their entry into the trade and better understand their social 
service needs.  He reported that Baca met with the leaders of 
this group on October 15 and that the MoG and ILO are funding 
alternative vocational training sessions for 25 adolescent 
prostitutes and their families.  They will occur by 
mid-November. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Burdet-Cedeno Sentenced to 25 Years 
----------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) According to press reports, a court in Guayas province 
sentenced the Burdet-Cedeno couple on October 19 to 25 years 
for the rape of their ten-year old niece.  The crime occurred 
in conjunction with their child pornography videos.  There 
are three remaining charges against the couple (Ref B). 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (SBU) The legislation in Congress is a good sign and shows 
the determination of the MoG and many congresspeople to fight 
TIP.  With Jativa\'s offer to accept our input, we hope 
Ecuador will eventually pass a strong anti-trafficking law. 
The raids and MoG training sessions also show a commitment to 
stopping the crime, prosecuting the perpetrators, and 
attending to victims\' needs.  Substantial press coverage of 
the Burdet-Cedeno case has kept the problem in the public eye. 
 
10. (SBU) The MFA\'s conference, however, revealed there still 
is a lack of understanding of the difference between TIP and 
smuggling, and very few new ideas and information were 
presented.  We will continue to meet with government 
officials to discuss their actions and remind them of the 
need to provide as much information as possible for the 
November 15 report. 
KENNEY 
"
"22109","10/27/2004 22:11","04QUITO2868","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04GUAYAQUIL1231","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002868 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC, President 
SUBJECT: GUTIERREZ CANCELS NEW YORK TRIP 
 
REF: GUAYAQUIL 1231 
 
1.  Summary.  On October 27, President Gutierrez told the 
Ambassador he had canceled his planned early November trip to 
New York in order to work in Ecuador on judicial reform 
projects and programs to spur economic growth.  Gutierrez 
hopes the press will portray his decision as a need to focus 
on important national issues and not as a fear of leaving the 
country in light of impeachment rumors.  End Summary. 
 
2.  In an October 27 meeting with the Ambassador, Gutierrez 
informed her he had canceled his trip to New York.  Gutierrez 
had planned to travel on November 1 to meet with business 
leaders and promote trade with Ecuador. 
 
3.  Gutierrez told the Ambassador he envisions judicial 
reform and economic growth to be his legacy.  Gutierrez said 
he plans to work over the Ecuadorian holiday weekend (October 
30 - November 3) and was particularly concerned about 
corruption in the judicial system.  He wants to stop the 
common practice of people filing legal complaints (often 
without much cause) as a means of retaliation. 
 
4.  Gutierrez also recognized that the media might portray 
the cancellation of his trip as a victory for the Social 
Christian Party (PSC) in its efforts to impeach him for 
alleged inappropriate use of public funds for campaign travel 
(Reftel).  The Ambassador suggested that if pressed, 
Gutierrez tell the press that she recommended he not travel 
at this time due to elections in the U.S. on November 2. 
Moreover, he had recently met with USTR negotiator Regina 
Vargo to discuss commercial and labor issues and was in 
regular touch with other USG officials (Septel). 
 
5.  Comment.  We believe Gutierrez made the right decision by 
staying home to work.  He would have trouble getting the 
meetings he wants on such short notice, with potential U.S. 
interlocutors focused on elections.  He has a full 
international calendar in November with the Ibero American 
Summit, CAN events, and President Fox\'s visit.  Finally, as 
Ecuador suffers from rampant corruption and grave poverty, 
any dedicated time spent on judicial reform and programs to 
spur economic growth is time well spent.  End Comment. 
KENNEY 
"
"22111","10/27/2004 23:09","04QUITO2869","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUAYAQUIL1231","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002869 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, KCOR, PREL, EC, President 
SUBJECT: \"POWER-BLINDED\" LFC DRIVES IMPEACHMENT PUSH 
 
REF: GUAYAQUIL 1231 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Leon Febres-Cordero (LFC), the cantankerous 
leader of Ecuador\'s Social Christian Party (PSC), is 
determined to destroy President Lucio Gutierrez by any means 
possible, according to two thoughtful PSC legislators. 
Brothers Luis Fernando Torres and Carlos Torres, the former 
the head of Congress\'s Constitutional Affairs committee, 
claim the facts do not support charges of embezzlement, on 
which LFC has based the current impeachment effort (reftel). 
Yet Febres-Cordero has ordered the PSC legislative contingent 
to begin lobbying other blocs in support of the trumped-up 
charges.  In cahoots with newfound ally Vice President 
Alfredo Palacio, LFC is offering lavish gifts to independent 
and small party congressman, whose yes votes are needed to 
remove the sitting president.  Despite dissension in the 
ranks and chafing at Febres-Cordero\'s \"counterproductive\" 
instructions, the brothers claimed PSC legislators were 
unlikely to break ranks.  In a same day conversation with 
Ambassador Kenney, however, Minister of Government Raul Baca 
believed PSC \"rebels\" were ripe for recruitment.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Congressmen Swallow Hard and March Forward 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2.  (U) Poloff joined the siblings October 27 for a working 
breakfast, covering upcoming U.S. elections, ongoing 
U.S.-Ecuador free trade talks, and the Colombia-Ecuador 
relationship.  Yet Ecuador\'s current bout of political 
instability, more specifically Febres-Cordero\'s attempt to 
impeach Gutierrez, dominated the discussion.  Media had 
reported correctly that PSC legislators had not introduced an 
impeachment motion the previous day, as was widely expected. 
It would be introduced October 27, Luis Fernando revealed, a 
fact that clearly troubled him. 
 
3.  (U) The motion was pure Febres-Cordero - he hadn\'t 
bothered to consult beforehand with fellow party members or 
the PSC Congressional leadership.  In reality, the bloc 
leader, Pascual del Cioppo, was only a figurehead, since LFC 
called all shots.  There was little rank-and-file Social 
Christian support for impeachment, Luis Fernando claimed, but 
legislators, especially first-termers and those running for 
re-election in 2006, feared angering the irascible Leon (not 
ironically, \"lion\" in English).  There would be no PSC 
dissenters in Congress. 
 
4.  (U) LFC wanted Gutierrez imprisoned or exiled, Luis 
Fernando asserted.  The reasons were many, ranging from 
Gutierrez cousin Renan Borbua\'s insults toward the PSC leader 
to recent GoE efforts to collect seven-figure debts from 
LFC\'s brother.  Febres-Cordero thus had chosen embezzlement 
as the focus of the impeachment motion.  Were a majority of 
legislators to \"admit\" the charges (a grand jury-like 
determination of probable cause to investigate), Ecuadorian 
law mandated preventative detention for the accused chief 
executive.  Were this to occur, Gutierrez would have no 
political pulse; his removal from office would be gravy, but 
not imperative. 
 
5.  (U) Little proof existed to substantiate LFC\'s 
accusations, Carlos noted.  There were photos of Gutierrez 
with candidates from his Patriotic Society party (PSP), 
handing out embossed T-shirts and calendars, but little else. 
 His many trips in the run-up to Ecuador\'s October 17 local 
elections always featured official business, whether 
inaugurating public works or promising others.  Media were 
claiming that fellow large parties ID and Pachakutik too 
supported impeachment, guaranteeing the 51 votes to admit. 
What they were not emphasizing, Luis Fernando explained, was 
that these organizations wanted Gutierrez\'s head for other 
reasons, including his \"neo-liberal\" economics and gringo 
\"kowtowing.\"  Pachakutik and ID support for the PSC\'s motion 
thus was not certain. 
 
6.  (U)  Social Christian legislators had impeachment 
marching orders, however, and were following them.  Luis 
Fernando himself had swallowed his personal beliefs and, in 
remarks to Quito daily El Comercio October 26, \"sold\" LFC\'s 
arguments and exclaimed that \"in the course of the 
proceedings, we hope other parties will join us in seeking 
the president\'s dismissal.\"  Worse, Febres-Cordero was 
targeting potential turncoat independent legislators with big 
payoffs.  Gutierrez and the PSP already had sent large sums 
their way; LFC likely would have to pay double to turn them. 
VP Palacio, whom LFC now supported to complete Gutierrez\'s 
term, had joined the PSC leader in the recruitment effort. 
7.  (U) Despite his advanced age, Febres-Cordero sought a 
second presidential term, Luis Fernando argued.  The 
ex-president (1984-88) was bolstered enormously by recent 
press accounts that credited him with the PSC\'s strong 
showing in the October 17 vote.  LFC\'s political maneuverings 
to remove Gutierrez had delivered him the spotlight, boding 
well for his comeback attempt.  Regrettably, no PSC luminary 
would challenge Febres-Cordero, Carlos revealed.  Guayaquil 
Mayor Jaime Nebot, who had the charisma and credentials to do 
so, was awaiting a biological solution (LFC\'s death) before 
seeking the presidency again. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Political Veteran Sees Chinks in PSC Armor 
------------------------------------------ 
 
8.  (C) More optimistic, Minister of Government Raul Baca 
believes Gutierrez will weather this crisis as he has the 
dozen before it.  In an October 27 meeting with the 
Ambassador, Baca expressed doubts that LFC could enforce 
party discipline during impeachment proceedings.  An obvious 
PSC schism existed, the minister explained.  Over the long 
Ecuadorian weekend (October 30-November 3), he intended to 
wear out his Rolodex, seeking Social Christian and other 
party support for the president\'s defense.  Baca\'s talking 
points were two:  Gutierrez had not embezzled public funds, 
and further political instability spelled disaster for 
Ecuador. 
 
-------- 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
 
9.  (C) Though twenty-five years a democracy, Ecuador suffers 
from political parties rooted firmly in the strongman era. 
The PSC is the perfect example; despite a plethora of able, 
modern politicians, Febres-Cordero remains the iron fist, 
those daring to challenge him rapidly returning to the 
private sector.  Legendary for his \"palanca\" (connections), 
LFC also enjoys deep pockets, and buying allegiances from 
Ecuador\'s Congressional Hessians is no Herculean labor.  Nor 
do we question his ability to deliver the PSC legislative 
bloc\'s impeachment votes en masse, despite Baca\'s contrary 
opinion.  Yet we join Luis Fernando Torres in doubting blind 
Pachakutik/ID support for the PSC motion.  These are 
left-leaning organizations; right-winger Febres-Cordero, who 
regularly reminisces about his \"close\" friendship with former 
President Reagan, is even less welcome in their confines than 
political chameleon Gutierrez.  And pragmatically, allowing 
the PSC to shape removal proceedings would give 
Febres-Cordero the upper hand in organizing the successor 
government, anathema to Ecuador\'s political left.  END COMMENT 
KENNEY 
"
"22219","10/29/2004 20:45","04QUITO2879","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2602|04SECSTATE228071","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002879 
 
SIPDIS 
 
>>>>>C O R R E C T E D COPY"
"22222","10/29/2004 21:32","04QUITO2886","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2874","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002886 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, EC, Democracy 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY PUSHING STABILITY MESSAGE HARD 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2874 
 
     B. GUAYAQUIL 1231 
     C. QUITO 2869 
     D. QUITO 2868 
     E. QUITO 2859 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  Reftels outline the current political quicksand 
enveloping GoE President Lucio Gutierrez.  Believing further 
instability runs counter to Ecuadorian and U.S. interests, 
the Embassy is immersed in an outreach campaign to bolster 
rank-and-file support for constitutional democracy and the 
country\'s freely elected leader.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  Four political parties are arrayed against Gutierrez: 
the PSC, ID, MPD, and Pachakutik.  Impeachment proceedings 
began October 28 and may run until year-end.  Although most 
experts doubt the opposition can sum the necessary votes in 
Congress to remove the president, he undoubtedly will emerge 
further weakened (Gutierrez\'s approval ratings hover around 
10 percent).  Believing such volatility damaging to 
Ecuadorian and U.S. goals, the Embassy has stepped up public 
and private outreach in an effort to buoy the GoE.  We have 
seen some success already, as anti-Gutierrez media play has 
diminished in recent days. 
 
3.  Our private contacts are regular and numerous.  During 
this week\'s round of Andean Free Trade Agreement talks in 
Guayaquil, the Ambassador and Guayaquil CG called on two key 
opposition politicians, Guayaquil Mayor Jaime Nebot and 
Guayas Prefect Nicolas Lapentti. Both hail from the Social 
Christian Party (PSC), whose leader, Leon Febres-Cordero, is 
leading the impeachment crusade (Reftels).  In Quito on 
October 27, the Ambassador talked instability and its side 
effects with Gutierrez.  She discussed the president\'s 
defense strategy the same day with Minister of Government 
Raul Baca.  Last, in an October 22 working lunch with Defmin 
Nelson Herrera and Joint Forces Chief Admiral Victor Rosero, 
the Ambassador reviewed, amongst other topics, the 
potentially stabilizing role of the military in weak 
democracies like Ecuador (Ref E). 
 
4.  The Embassy\'s PA campaign is equally robust.  From JOs to 
counselors and agency heads, Embassy staff have deployed 
throughout Ecuador, ostensibly to discuss U.S. elections but 
driving home a between-the-lines message:  modern democracies 
change administrations via the ballot box, not the gun barrel 
or the smoke-filled room.  Post\'s Information Officer gave 
print and radio interviews in Cuenca, Ecuador\'s third city. 
And in trips to coastal cities Manta and Machala, the 
Ambassador emphasized the USG\'s firm support for Ecuadorian 
democracy and GoE institutions.  We back our dialog with 
dollars, she clarified, funding projects in Ecuador to 
advance the rule of law, strengthen local governance, and 
augment law enforcement. 
 
5.  Consulate General Guayaquil has leveraged the Embassy 
effort with its own outreach campaign.  As three of Ecuador\'s 
five largest political parties hail from the coast, the 
Consulate is well-placed to advance the stability message. 
Non-Mission USG personnel too have joined the media campaign. 
 USTR\'s Regina Vargo, leading the U.S. FTA negotiating team, 
has not missed an opportunity to promote Gutierrez\'s 
commitment to free trade, calling it a boon to Ecuador\'s 
long-term prosperity. 
 
6.  COMMENT:  Gutierrez\'s survival depends on Gutierrez, of 
course, and Ecuador\'s democracy on Ecuadorians.  Yet the 
Embassy can employ weapons to help prevent the nation from 
entering another self-inflicted, political death spiral.  We 
walk a fine line between loitering by and \"uninvitedly 
involving ourselves in internal Ecuadorian matters\" (and face 
criticism for either tack).  But a political meltdown, and 
the real possibility of an accompanying economic collapse, 
make inaction unthinkable.  END COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"22224","10/29/2004 22:16","04QUITO2891","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2874","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002891 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, ETRD, EC, CH, Regional 
SUBJECT: ECUADORIAN, CHILEAN FM\'S TALK BORDERS, TRADE 
 
REF: QUITO 2874 
 
 1.  Summary.  Chilean Foreign Minister Ignacio Walker met 
with Ecuadorian officials in Quito on October 28.  In a 
subsequent joint declaration, the countries committed to 
begin FTA negotiations in 2004, respect existing 
international treaties (in reference to Chile\'s maritime 
disagreements with Peru and Bolivia), and investigate ways to 
increase Chilean investment in Ecuador.  Walker spoke 
publicly in support of Gutierrez and Ecuadorian democracy, 
and Chilean and Ecuadorian officials later told Emboffs they 
believed the comments could strengthen Gutierrez\'s hand 
against possible impeachment.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Chilean FM Ignacio Walker visited Quito October 28, 
seeking Ecuadorian support in Chile\'s territorial disputes 
with Peru and Bolivia, and searching for opportunities to 
increase Chilean investment in Ecuador.  Media reported the 
following day that Walker had met with President Gutierrez, 
Ecuador\'s Foreign Minister Patricio Zuquilanda, President of 
Congress Guillermo Landazuri, the Congressional Committee on 
International Subjects and National Defense, the 
Ecuadorian-Chilean Parliamentary Committee, and Quito Mayor 
Paco Moncayo.  To obtain a more direct readout, Poloff 
October 28 called on Chilean Ambassador Nelson Haddad. 
 
3.  Haddad claimed Walker had achieved three major 
breakthroughs in the bilat.  The foreign ministries signed an 
agreement to begin negotiating an FTA at the end of 2004 and 
sign the agreement by 2005.  Both governments affirmed the 
importance of respecting international law and the maritime 
treaties that Chile, Ecuador, and Peru had signed in 1952 and 
1954.  Finally, Chile\'s National Petroleum Company will 
strengthen its relations with Petroecuador and invest in 
additional petroleum infrastructure and exploration in 
Ecuador.  The last point is of particular sensitivity in 
Ecuador, as Chilean investment here has decreased since 2001. 
 Recent press reports note the countries will begin a 
dialogue over ramping up Chilean investment, particularly in 
infrastructure projects along Ecuador\'s southern border. 
 
4.  During public appearances, Walker expressed support for 
Gutierrez and Ecuadorian democracy and institutions.  In 
later readouts, Chilean and Ecuadorian diplomats told poloffs 
they believed the Chilean FM\'s statements could strengthen 
the Gutierrez government, as Chile\'s leaders and democracy 
are well respected in Ecuador. 
 
4.  Comment:  Ecuadorians do respect Chile.  In fact, we\'ve 
often suggested Gutierrez seek bilats with Ricardo Lagos, 
hoping the latter\'s statesman status would rub off on the 
younger GoE leader.  Yet we\'re dubious the Chilean FM\'s 
comments will do much to lower political temperatures here, 
currently running hot.  And while we applaud free trade and 
the GoE\'s efforts to seek an FTA with Chile, we doubt Ecuador 
has the staff or capacity to simultaneously negotiate deals 
with that nation and the United States.  End Comment. 
KENNEY 
"
"22554","11/5/2004 17:39","04QUITO2922","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002922 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SECSTATE PLEASE PASS TO US TRADE REPRESENTATIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: MOL CONSIDERS LABOR REFORM; UNIONS URGE RESIGNATION 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Meeting in Guayaquil with USTR and 
Department of State officials, two key Ecuadorian labor 
leaders stated they will challenge the recently published 
executive decree on subcontracting as unconstitutional, and 
also repeated a call for Minister of Labor Raul Izurieta\'s 
removal from office.  They also will file a complaint with 
the ILO and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 
regarding a decision by Ecuador\'s Constitutional Tribunal on 
the Civil Service Law, which they feel violates collective 
bargaining rights.  Izurieta told USTR, DOL, and State 
Department representatives in Guayaquil that he was working 
on promoting labor code reform, but was facing difficulties 
in getting the labor sector engaged.  He implied he might 
propose legislation permitting sector-wide unions, but did 
not react to other proposed reforms.  End Summary. 
 
Union Leaders Unhappy With Subcontracting Decree 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2.  (SBU) On October 26, William Clatanoff, AUSTR for Labor; 
Michael Puccetti, WHA/PPC; Greg Maggio, DRL/IL; and LabOff 
met three labor leaders in Guayaquil to discuss the 
recently-issued Presidential decree on subcontracting and 
prospects for further labor law reform in the country.  Jaime 
Arciniegas, President of the labor federation CEOSL; and 
Guillermo Touma, president of the labor union, FENACLE; were 
accompanied by Patricio Contreras, AFL-CIO Solidarity Center 
representative.  The three were in Guayaquil to participate 
in protests against the fifth round of negotiations of the 
Andean Free Trade Agreement, held between October 25th and 
29th. 
 
3.  (SBU) Arciniegas, Touma and Contreras expressed 
displeasure with the content of the decree and stated that 
they would file a lawsuit charging that the document violates 
Ecuador\'s constitution.  They were particularly opposed to 
Article 9, which states that subcontracting can be used for 
\"indefinite\" periods of time.  They also believe that the 75% 
cap on subcontracting at any individual primary company will 
not protect workers against employer abuse and, furthermore, 
is contradicted in the same article by a phrase that says 
workers can be subcontracted indefinitely to do the primary 
work of a company \"in part or in total.\"  The unions had 
previously proposed to the Ministry of Labor a 15% cap on 
subcontracted workers.  The three also asserted that because 
there is no Ecuadorian law on subcontracting, it is 
unconstitutional to regulate this activity by means of an 
executive decree.  They did not bring up the provision in the 
decree that allows \"natural persons\" to act as subcontractors 
in the agriculture sector.  When asked, they stated they were 
very concerned it could be used as a legal loophole by 
companies.  On the positive side, the three conceded that the 
decree at least represents a first attempt to regulate 
subcontracting and prohibits employers from hiring false 
subcontractors directly linked to company management. 
 
4.  (SBU) Arciniegas and Touma expressed concern that the 
decree had never been submitted for review to the National 
Labor Council, which was set up in March 2004 to coordinate 
input from workers, employers and the government on labor law 
reform and related developments.  While the President and 
Minister of Labor (MOL) met with trade union leaders, 
including Arciniegas, to discuss earlier versions of the 
decree, they now asserted that labor\'s positions and 
suggestions were not taken into account.  Furthermore, they 
said, the MOL had not responded to their recommendations and 
had failed to show them the final version of the text before 
it was published in the official register.  They said the 
labor movement is considering mobilizing workers to protest 
the decree and may even call for a national strike and an 
international campaign to draw attention to the situation. 
They repeated their call for Izurieta\'s removal, asserting 
that he represents the nation\'s business interests rather 
than its workers. 
 
5.  (SBU) Arciniegas and Touma also voiced concerns about the 
Constitutional Tribunal\'s ruling on the Civil Service and 
Administrative Career Law.  The Tribunal classified the law 
as \"organic\" in a ruling published in the Official Register 
on September 28.  This means the law overrides the labor 
code.  With no additional recourse since the Tribunal has 
ruled, the union leaders stated they would be making formal 
complaints to the ILO and the Inter-American Court of Human 
Rights.  The unions believe this new law, passed in January 
2004, takes away public sector workers\' right to collective 
bargaining by setting maximum salaries (while still allowing 
them to form a union).  Under Ecuadorian law, manual laborers 
are defined as \"workers\" and those that do intellectual tasks 
as \"employees.\"  \"Workers\" have the right to collectively 
bargain under the labor code, while \"employees\" fall under 
the Civil Service Law, which prohibits collective bargaining. 
 Union leaders feel the government is labeling many who 
should be \"workers\" as \"employees\" to deny them collective 
bargaining rights. 
 
6.  (SBU) Arciniegas said that MOL Izurieta had refused a 
request by cut flower sector workers to form an industry-wide 
union.  Touma stated that there had been no repeat of 
violence similar to what occurred at the Los Alamos 
plantation.  He said this was due to USG attention to labor 
issues in Ecuador. 
 
Minister of Labor Accepts Responsibility for Labor Code Reform 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) In a meeting on October 26 with AUSTR Clatanoff, 
ADUS Jorge Perez-Lopez (USDOL), PolCouns and LabOff, 
Clatanoff made clear that he believed that the US Congress 
would not pass a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) without Ecuador 
reforming its Labor Code to make it ILO-consistent. 
Perez-Lopez and Clatanoff told Izurieta of a meeting they had 
had with an Inter-American Development Bank staff member, who 
stated there were funds available for a Labor Code reform 
project.  Post is also working on putting MOL staff in 
contact with AID to discuss AID-funded Trade Capacity 
Building projects. 
 
8.  (SBU) Izurieta agreed that additional labor reforms are 
desirable, but complained that labor union leaders had 
perspectives that were out of date and were unwilling to 
negotiate in good faith with him.  Izurieta urged the Embassy 
to intervene and speak with labor leaders to convince them to 
come to the table for Labor Code reform.  Clatanoff offered 
to return to Quito in November to speak with union leaders, 
business leaders and the National Labor Council, an idea that 
pleased Izurieta.  Clatanoff told Izurieta that unions\' total 
acceptance of Labor Code reform was not necessary; more 
importantly, he said, the reforms needed to be 
ILO-consistent. 
 
9. (SBU) Izurieta said the National Labor Council was 
currently working on a forthcoming Presidential decree 
regulating the hiring of workers paid by the hour.  Izurieta 
feels there is strong support from all sectors for this 
regulation.  Izurieta seemed to react positively to 
Clatanoff\'s suggestion to permit industrial or sector unions 
such as the flower-industry union Touma discussed in the 
earlier meeting, although he claimed this would require 
legislative reforms.  Sector-wide unions could serve to 
provide freedom of association to subcontracted workers who 
do not meet the 30-person legal minimum to organize a 
stand-alone union.  Izurieta did not react to other possible 
labor code reforms suggested by Clatanoff, including 
reinstatement of workers fired for union organizing and 
prohibition of hiring discrimination against union members. 
 
10.  (SBU) In meetings with the Ecuadorian business community 
and President of Congress Guillermo Landazuri, AUSTR Regina 
Vargo highlighted the importance of labor reform to building 
US Congressional support for an FTA with Ecuador.  Both 
business leaders and Landazuri understood and accepted her 
point.  Suprisingly, business leaders did not return to their 
well-known objections to the subcontracting decree in the 
meeting, focusing instead on the need to move forward on 
labor reform, and on their other FTA concerns. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11.  (SBU) While labor code reform will not be easy, to have 
any chance, Izurieta must show greater leadership.  We will 
continue to push for cooperation with partners such as the 
ILO and IDB, which will also be crucial for this endeavor. 
However, coordination with union leaders will be a challenge. 
 The signing of an FTA may be an incentive for the GOE to 
pass labor code reform.  The business community, which 
expects labor reform to result in a more dynamic and 
competitive labor market, can be an important force 
supporting reform.  Union leaders, who oppose the FTA and any 
increase in labor market flexibility, are unlikely to be 
supportive. 
KENNEY 
"
"22556","11/5/2004 17:51","04QUITO2923","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002923 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EC, ECON, EFIS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, SENV, Environment, Trade 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR BANS EXPORT OF SHARK FINS 
 
1.  Summary.  President Gutierrez has issued a decree banning 
the export of shark fins.  The ban applies to all shark fins, 
whether they are intentionally harvested or are the result of 
bi-catch.  Despite having been consulted prior to the 
decree\'s issuance, a local fishing group is asking President 
Gutierrez to revoke it.  End Summary. 
 
2.  President Gutierrez signed a Presidential decree on 
October 7, 2004 banning the export or internal sale of shark 
fins taken in Ecuadorian territorial waters.  The ban covers 
all shark fins, whether they were intentionally harvested or 
are the result of bi-catch.  Those caught harvesting shark 
fins will have their fishing licenses suspended until a 
judicial authority issues an appropriate sanction.  The 
decree also bans the importation of equipment used to harvest 
shark fins and prohibits discarding sharks on the high seas. 
 
3.  The decree was issued only after the proposed ban was 
presented to and discussed by all parties which it would 
affect, including the Consejo Pesquero (Fishing Council), a 
group that represents fishing interests in the islands.  The 
Consejo approved of the ban, but has since withdrawn its 
support because of protests from some of its members.  The 
Consejo is now calling on the President to revoke the decree. 
 Environmental groups praise the ban. 
 
4.  The decree could have a positive impact on conservation 
efforts in the Galapagos.  We have congratulated GOE 
officials on the decree and will urge that they keep it in 
place.  Political support for the fishermen is limited to 
coastal Manabi and Guayas provinces. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"22557","11/5/2004 19:43","04QUITO2927","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002927 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-CR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, OPDC, EC, President 
SUBJECT: CONGRATULATORY LETTER FROM PRESIDENT GUTIERREZ TO 
PRESIDENT BUSH 
 
 
1.  Embassy received a congratulatory letter from President 
Gutierrez to President Bush dated November 2 on November 4 
under a cover letter from acting Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Edwin Johnson. 
 
2.  Text of Letter from President Gutierrez: 
 
Your excellency: 
 
On behalf of the Ecuadorian people and the Government I 
preside, it is a great pleasure for me to extend to Your 
Excellency my warmest congratulations for your recent 
re-election as President of the United States of America. 
 
I am convinced that the task entrusted to you by your people 
to continue exercising the highest mandate of your country is 
the motivation that will allow your Administration to 
decisively face the new challenges of the international 
agenda and to contribute with your best efforts to the 
well-being of the American people. 
 
I make vows for your success in this new stage in the 
performance of your delicate duties, and I would like to 
extend an invitation for you to visit my country, at a date 
suggested by Your Excellency through the Department of State. 
 
 
Your visit will be an occasion to strengthen even more the 
excellent relations of friendship happily existing between 
our countries, and it will allow us to set new goals in the 
common road of cooperation and understanding that we 
personally and our Governments have been able to develop. 
 
I avail myself of this opportunity to reiterate to Your 
Excellency the assurances of my most distinguished 
consideration. 
 
Lucio Gutierrez Borbua, Constitutional President of the 
Republic of Ecuador. 
KENNEY 
"
"22562","11/5/2004 21:15","04QUITO2929","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2900","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MARR, EC, President 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT GUTIERREZ CONFIDENT IN FACE OF 
IMPEACHMENT THREAT 
 
REF: QUITO 2900 
 
Classified By: DCM Arnold Chacon for reason 1.4 (b&d) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  The GoE reacted calmly to the initiation of 
impeachment proceedings against President Gutierrez by 
Congress on November 4.  The Ambassador spoke with President 
Gutierrez by telephone on November 4 and on the margins of an 
unrelated event on November 5.  Gutierrez thanked the USG for 
our efforts in support of democratic stability and when 
pressed by the Ambassador had no further request for USG 
action.  He said there was no justification for charges 
against him, and expressed confidence that the 
pro-impeachment opposition would fail in its attempt to oust 
him.  He had every intention of staying the course, and not 
letting impeachment proceedings distract him from governing. 
The Ambassador also spoke on November 4 with Defense Minister 
Herrera, who said the President was in good spirits during a 
Cabinet meeting earlier that day, and that the military would 
respect Constitutional rights and Congressional prerogatives. 
 End Summary. 
 
GoE Reacts Calmly 
----------------- 
 
2.  (U) President Gutierrez and other GoE officials took the 
news of impeachment proceedings calmly and reacted 
cautiously.  Minister of Government Baca told reporters that 
the President was not required under the Constitution to 
attend impeachment hearings, should they occur, and seemed 
critical of Foreign Minister Zuquilanda for requesting Rio 
Group mediation.  Economy Minister Yepez commented that a 
prolonged conflict with Congress could put at risk reforms 
needed to promote economic growth.  VP Palacios was nowhere 
to be seen, skipping a Cabinet meeting without public 
explanation. 
 
3.  (C) The Ambassador called Minister of Defense Nelson 
Herrera shortly after the impeachment event took place in 
Congress.  Herrera said the President was in good spirits 
during a Cabinet meeting earlier that day which focused on 
\"national issues\" rather than impeachment.  He expressed 
concern that the impeachment debate had turned personal 
between Gutierrez and Febres-Cordero.  The Ambassador also 
discussed impeachment on November 5 with Finance Minister 
Yepez and other Cabinet members (SepTel). 
 
4.  (C) The Ambassador spoke later on November 4 by telephone 
and on November 5 on the margins of an unrelated public event 
with President Gutierrez, who denied any justification for 
charges of misuse of public funds and proceeded to denounce 
Febres-Cordero\'s motives.  He thanked the Ambassador for USG 
efforts to support democratic stability.  The Ambassador 
expressed regret that the impeachment process had turned 
personal with Febres-Cordero, and concern that political 
conflict could undermine economic stability.  Gutierrez said 
he would fight off baseless impeachment charges, saying he 
was convinced he was in the right.  Asked by the Ambassador 
if there was anything we could do to help, Gutierrez had no 
requests. 
 
5.  (SBU) Gutierrez used the occasion of the Ambassador\'s 
call to congratulate the United States for its successful 
election and President Bush for his re-election.  The 
Ambassador emphasized the gracious victory and concession 
speeches and joint calls by both candidates for national 
unity.  Gutierrez said he had drafted a letter of 
congratulations to President Bush (Quito 2927).  After the 
Ambassador noted that Senator Kerry would remain an 
influential leader in the U.S. Senate, Gutierrez said he 
might send a letter to Kerry as well. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (C) The GoE appears confident it has the votes to stave 
off impeachment and has not requested USG assistance to help 
it do so.  For our part, we will continue to reach out to the 
GoE and both the pro and anti-impeachment opposition forces 
to encourage fuller consideration of the consequences of 
political instability.  We will also review and suggest 
opportunities to reinforce our stability message in coming 
weeks. 
 
Additional Procedural Background 
-------------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) On November 4, three major parties and one minor 
party submitted 50 (not 52, as previously reported) 
Congressional signatures in favor of initiating impeachment 
proceedings against President Gutierrez on various grounds 
(see below).  President of Congress Landazuri formally 
accepted the request and said he would propose the approval 
by the plenary of a Special Committee comprised of 
representatives from all parties with 10 or more seats in 
Congress.  A simple majority of a quorum (51 members) is 
required to approve the special committee, which would have 
five days to issue an opinion.  If conformed, the committee 
is expected to issue majority and minority reports, one of 
which will recommend impeachment proceedings. 
 
8.  (C) PSC Congress member Luis Fernando Torres told PolOffs 
on November 5 that despite believing impeachment to be a 
mistake, he hoped to become the PSC representative on the 
special commission.  However, he said it is not clear that 
the pro-impeachment forces will have the simple majority of 
the quorum to assure the creation of the special commission, 
since some signers are wavering.  Due to the closeness of the 
vote, he said, the PSC was forced to accept separate grounds 
for impeachment from each party.  Torres provided us a copy 
of the documents presented to Landazuri, which call for 
impeachment under article 130 of the Constitution, on the 
following grounds: 
 
-- PSC (25 signatures, plus one ex-PRIAN independent):  for 
embezzlement, \"for having arbitrarily spent funds, resources 
and public property in favor of PSP candidates of his party;\" 
 
-- ID (14 signatures): for embezzlement, \"for allowing the 
State Bank to give non-reimbursable loans to private 
institutions... and for the use of public funds of the 
Solidarity Fund... for abandoning his responsibilities to 
participate in the promotion of PSP candidates...for 
importing posters and electoral propaganda from Mexico for 
the 2002 presidential campaign, resulting in his fraudulent 
election;\" 
 
-- Pachakutik (8 signatures): for violation of national 
security, for suggesting publicly that the people might \"burn 
down the courts;\" 
 
-- MPD (3 signatures): for \"betraying the motherland\"...by 
favoring interests of foreign companies which benefit from 
oil fields in production...taking advantage of state 
resources for personal use and abandoning his 
responsibilities for his party...violating national security 
by involving our country in Plan Colombia...violating 
national sovereignty by permitting the sinking of Ecuadorian 
fishing vessels.\" 
KENNEY 
"
"22630","11/8/2004 22:14","04QUITO2941","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 002941 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/AND, TREASURY FOR SIGNORELI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2009 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EC, President, Democracy 
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF FINANCE CONFIDENT OF STABILITY 
 
 
Classified By: ADCM FRED KETCHEM, REASONS 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  Minister of Finance Yepez believes the 
Gutierrez regime can make it through the current crisis, but 
remains handicapped by bad advisors at the top.  The GOE is 
maintaining its responsible fiscal policy and continues to 
work on plans to eliminate the gas subsidy.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) Ambassador had breakfast with Minister of Finance and 
Economy Mauricio Yepez on November 5 to discuss the political 
and economic situation of Ecuador.  In response to 
Ambassador\'s question, Yepez said that he was concerned about 
the political situation, but expected Gutierrez could survive 
the current attempt at impeachment. 
 
Bad Advice 
---------- 
 
3.  (C) Unfortunately, Yepez said, some of Gutierrez\'s 
advisors, in particular Secretary of the Presidency Xavier 
Ledesma and Presidential Advisor Oscar Ayerve, were so bad 
that they could jeopardize the president\'s position.  At 
present Raul Baca, Minister of Government and a sensible 
advisor to the president, had little access.  (Embassy 
sources report on November 8 that Baca has resigned. 
Reported reasons for the resignation are various and 
conflicting.)  For his part, Yepez said, he was avoiding the 
cabinet meetings in order to see the President afterwards in 
small meetings where he was better able to influence him. 
 
Fiscal Continuity 
----------------- 
 
4.  (C) Up to this point, the political situation had not 
affected the budget in significant ways, Yepez said.  He was 
looking at funding completion of some municipal 
infrastructure projects, especially in Quito, as a way of 
strengthening the President\'s position in Congress, 
particularly among members of the Democratic Left (ID) party 
which controls the city government and supports impeachment. 
These were projects which would be funded eventually and the 
money would come from re-prioritizing all the infrastructure 
projects, so the effect on the budget would be nil.  He was 
working with the armed forces on a restructuring package 
which might include a pay raise.  Overall, though, the 
restructuring package would be budget-neutral, streamlining 
military spending and moving funding from unnecessary and 
antiquated efforts to more useful purposes. 
 
5.  (C) Yepez said he was drafting a letter to Treasury 
Secretary Snow to follow up on their meeting in September. 
 
SIPDIS 
He intended to lay out an idea Snow had reacted favorably to 
in their meeting.  The idea was to create a new financial 
instrument under the multilateral development banks to smooth 
out the debt payments developing countries owed to the banks. 
 
6.  (C) Ambassador asked whether Yepez thought his proposal 
to Gutierrez on increasing the price of cooking gas could go 
forward given the current political situation.  Yepez said he 
thought so.  He had good relations with the indigenous and 
was working with them on the idea.  All or most of the 
initial fiscal benefit from eliminating the subsidy would be 
given back to the indigenous and poor through direct payments 
or projects.  He thought they would go for it. 
 
7.  (C) Comment:   Yepez is one of the adults in the 
Gutierrez administration.  His continuation of the 
responsible fiscal policies of his predecessor is one of the 
few real accomplishments of the Gutierrez government.  This 
meeting was another demonstration that he is keeping to that 
line.  Eliminating the gas subsidy would be a huge step 
forward, but would demonstrate a political ability far beyond 
that which the GOE has so far demonstrated. 
KENNEY 
"
"22702","11/9/2004 20:51","04QUITO2943","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE184238","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 002943 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR STATE EB/TPP/ABT EDWARD HEARTNEY AND PASS TO 
COMMERCE/ITA/OTEXA/MARIA D\'ANDREA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTEX, ECON, ETRD, EC, Trade 
SUBJECT: TEXTILES AND APPAREL EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION IN 
ECUADOR 
 
REF: STATE 184238 
 
1.  Summary.  Reftel requests information on the textile and 
apparel sectors in Ecuador.  Statistical information, 
particularly with respect to employment information, is 
highly unreliable in Ecuador.  In general, textile production 
increases appear to have outpaced overall industrial 
production growth, with increases in imports and exports in 
the sector, but it still accounts for a small share of 
Ecuador\'s total trade.  Apparel production has reportedly 
fallen during the 2002-03 period, but the local trade 
association had no specific data on apparel imports and 
exports during that period.  In 2002, the estimated formal 
employment in the manufacturing sector was 121,000 to 
221,000.  According to Ecuador\'s Textile Trade Association, 
current direct employment in the textile sector is 25,000, 
with an additional 100,000 jobs indirectly supported by the 
textile industry.  End Summary. 
 
Production 
---------- 
 
2.  According to Ecuador\'s Census Bureau (INEC), total 
industrial production in the country increased from 2002 to 
2003 at an annual rate of 3%, from $10,886 to $11,213 
million.  Ecuador\'s Textile Industry Association (AITE) 
reports that textile production increased from $248 million 
to $273 million from 2002 to 2003.  However, total apparel 
production fell from $19 to $17 million in 2002-03. 
 
Imports and Exports 
------------------- 
 
3.  INEC reported that textile imports increased by six 
percent from 2002-03 ($229 to $244 million in CIF value). 
Still, textile imports account for a very small share of 
total imports, rising from 3.56% to 3.73% of total imports 
over that same period. 
 
4. According to INEC, textile exports (measured in FOB 
dollars) grew at an annual rate of 13.5% from 2002-03, though 
from a very small base ($66 to $75 million).  Textiles\' share 
of total exports actually fell from 1.31% to 1.24% over that 
same period. 
 
5.  Figures for apparel imports and exports are not 
available, but anecdotal evidence indicates that apparel 
imports from Asia have grown significantly in the past 
several years, resulting in a drop in apparel production and 
employment.  It is widely believed that much of the Asian 
apparel enters Ecuador informally, without passing through 
customs or paying duties. 
 
Employment 
---------- 
 
6.   INEC only reports employment numbers for the formal 
sector and suggests that formal employment accounts for only 
55% of total employment in Ecuador.  In 2002, INEC estimated 
the number of persons formally employed in the manufacturing 
sector to be between 121,000 - 221,000.  INEC statistics do 
not break down manufacturing employment by industry sector. 
Also, reportedly, much of the employment in the textile and 
apparel industry is informal employment.  Therefore, 
employment estimates in those sectors are highly unreliable. 
 
7.  According to AITE, current direct employment in the 
textile sector is 25,000.  However, due to the potentially 
large numbers employed informally, the number could be much 
larger.  In the past several years, AITE puts annual textile 
employment growth at 2.8%.  AITE also claims that 100,000 
additional indirectly supported jobs are created by the 
textile sector.  However, there is no data as to where those 
indirectly supported jobs can be found.  Employment figures 
were not available for the apparel industry in Ecuador. 
 
8.  The government collects statistics annually, and the 
industry collects them sporadically, at best.  We do not 
expect that statistics will be collected more frequently or 
that their reliability will improve in the near future. 
KENNEY 
"
"22770","11/10/2004 22:03","04QUITO2955","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MARR, EC, President 
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION FALLS SHORT ON FIRST IMPEACHMENT VOTE; 
NEXT STEPS 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney for reason 1.4 (b&d) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  The pro-impeachment opposition on November 
9 tried and twice failed to create a special Congressional 
committee to consider impeachment grounds against President 
Lucio Gutierrez, effectively stymieing impeachment efforts at 
an early stage.  The opposition came up short of taking this 
second formal step in the impeachment process, after 
defections by two Social Christian Party (PSC) members and 
one Democratic Left (ID) impeachment petition signers.  The 
failed vote spells a reprieve or at least temporary respite 
for Gutierrez, since to impeach requires a two thirds vote, 
currently well out of reach of the opposition.  Government 
officials tried not to gloat in the wake of the vote; some 
privately expressed appreciation for the Ambassador\'s 
statements in support of democratic stability.  Disgruntled 
impeachment supporters are seeking alternative means to 
restart the impeachment process, but are unlikely to prosper 
until after the next Gutierrez administration blunder.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (U) Congress voted twice on November 9 to conform the 
special impeachment committee.  The first resulted in 50 
votes in favor, one short of a simple majority, with 40 
abstentions.  President of Congress Guillermo Landazuri voted 
in favor, but PSC deputy Rocio Jaramillo of Guayas province 
abstained.  PSC Congressional leader Pascual del Cioppo later 
declared that Jaramillo had been \"bought\" by the President. 
In a second vote later in the day, Jaramillo was absent, and 
two other impeachment petition signers abstained, resulting 
in just 48 votes in favor.  The two defectors included 
another from the PSC (Luis Almeida, who resigned from the 
PSC, denouncing threats and abuse from party leader Leon 
Febres-Cordero and saying he could not vote against 
Gutierrez, a fellow member of the masonic rite) and one from 
the ID (Aurelio Llori, who announced his resignation from the 
party). 
 
Embassy Actions 
--------------- 
 
3.  (C) To promote democratic stability and US interests, we 
have engaged privately and publicly with key interlocutors, 
stressing USG support for electoral democracy and (with the 
opposition) the costs of political instability.  The 
Ambassador most recently did so at an unrelated joint public 
event with President Gutierrez in the National Palace on 
November 5.  PolOffs emphasized the political costs to PSC 
and ID Congressional and party leaders.   Embassy PAS 
conducted extensive public outreach on the U.S. elections, 
emphasizing respect for the will of the electorate and 
democratic process. 
 
4.  (C) Recognizing that President Gutierrez\' personal 
combativeness has fueled the increasingly personal feud with 
Febres-Cordero, the Ambassador spoke with Gutierrez several 
times as the impeachment process played out in Congress, 
offering moral support and counseling public restraint.  She 
also reached out to several other cabinet members (Commerce, 
Economy, Defense and even Health) to signal continued USG 
engagement on issues of mutual interest during this difficult 
period. 
 
5.  (C) We are grateful for the interest and support from the 
Department to implement this pro-stability strategy, 
particularly A/S Noriega\'s interest and DAS Shapiro\'s public 
outreach with key Ecuadorian media. 
 
6.  (C) We also see great opportunities coming up to use VIP 
visits to reinforce the stability message.  These include: 
 
-- Commerce/USTR visit on November 12.  Public speeches and 
private meetings with US companies offer opportunities for 
public diplomacy. 
 
-- SecDef Rumsfeld/Southcom Commander visit November 15-20. 
They will meet with President Gutierrez and the MOD, and have 
press opportunities. 
 
-- The visit by former President Bush on November 22 to 
Guayaquil.  We will suggest that he include stability points 
in his public address and be wary of efforts by former 
President Febres-Cordero to steal the limelight. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (C) The opposition is smarting from their setback in 
Congress, which reflects divisions within their ranks.  The 
PSC has reportedly begun to woo the PRE, which had hoped to 
gain the return of its exiled leader by supporting the GoE. 
Privately, some opposition members have expressed relief that 
the impeachment process, which lacks strong grassroots 
support, has been short-circuited.  Others, including the 
MPD\'s die-hard radicals and also some within indigenous 
Pachakutik, clearly resent the USG in the person of the 
Ambassador for what they incorrectly interpret as USG 
intervention in support of the person of President Gutierrez, 
and a few have called for her withdrawal.  We have emphasized 
to all that this is a misinterpretation of our position, 
which is in support of democratic institutional stability, 
not any individual politician.  We believe it exceedingly 
important to continue to make that distinction, to preserve 
the option to distance ourselves in the event that the 
President make anti-democratic moves or should hard evidence 
of corruption emerge against him. 
KENNEY 
"
"22821","11/12/2004 19:07","04QUITO2980","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE228298","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002980 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: TIER 2 WATCH LIST INTERIM ASSESSMENT 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 228298 
 
     B. QUITO 2595 
     C. QUITO 2252 
     D. QUITO 2773 
     E. QUITO 1877 
     F. QUITO 2861 
     G. QUITO 2274 
     H. QUITO 2874 
 
1.  Summary.  Ecuador has taken significant steps since June 
to combat trafficking in persons (TIP).  The government 
increased public awareness of the problem, reached out to 
source and destination countries, and established a national 
plan.  The GOE has cooperated with the International Labor 
Organization (ILO) to establish a center for TIP victims in 
Machala.  The government has trained police and other 
employees about TIP.  Congress debated the first draft of an 
anti-trafficking bill, and in the meantime judges have 
prosecuted child pornographers under existing laws.  The 
police have stepped up raids on nightclubs and bars where 
minors work as prostitutes, returning numerous TIP victims to 
their families.  Despite these steps forward, key challenges 
remain:  passing pending legislation in a distracted Congress 
and better victims services.  End Summary. 
 
Publicity, the MFA\'s Outreach, and a National Plan 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
2.  Since the publication of our TIP report in June, the GOE 
publicized TIP, created an interagency committee to draft a 
national plan, and reached out to other governments.  On 
August 18, President Gutierrez issued a presidential decree 
that established a national plan and an interagency committee 
to combat trafficking (Ref G); he told the Ambassador on 
October 27 that combating TIP is one of his government\'s 
highest priorities (Ref H).  The decree tasked government 
agencies to cooperate to solve the problem and helped the 
government focus its efforts in a coordinated manner.  Former 
Minister of Government Raul Baca also spoke out publicly at a 
police training session against TIP on September 23 (Ref B). 
On August 12, the Ministry of Government (MoG) placed a 
front-page story in Ecuador\'s largest newspaper highlighting 
the ILO study and recent law enforcement activities aimed at 
combating commercial sexual exploitation of minors (CSEM) 
(Ref C).  During the week of October 4, 60 Voice of America 
radio stations in Ecuador aired an editorial against TIP (Ref 
D).  In early October, the MFA met with the embassies of Peru 
and Spain and discussed ways to combat trafficking rings. 
 
NGOs\' Contributions and Training 
-------------------------------- 
 
3.  The GOE has cooperated with various NGOs who are actively 
involved in fighting TIP.  The ILO will fund, at the GOE\'s 
request, a model facility for TIP victims in Machala in 
January 2005.  Plans are underway for similar projects in 
Quito and Guayaquil (Ref F).  In September and October, the 
MoG and ILO trained 250 police officers on CSEM (Ref C).  In 
November Geneva Global began its search for local partners in 
its small grants program, and Child Defense International met 
with the municipality of Santo Domingo on November 11 to sign 
the agreement to begin a project to fight commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors (CSEM).  That project included the 
establishment of a computerized control and monitoring system 
to track victims\' cases and disseminate information regarding 
CSEM.  Conferences were held in Cuenca (June 30 - July 1) by 
the President of the Ecuadorian Supreme Court and in Quito 
(October 21 - 22) by the MFA to increase awareness of the 
problem and encourage coordination among the GOE, NGOs and 
international organizations (Refs E and F). 
 
Legislation, Prosecution, and Raids 
----------------------------------- 
 
4.  The government has introduced comprehensive anti-TIP 
legislation, which is pending in Congress; meanwhile the 
government has prosecuted the cases it can using existing 
legislation.  On October 20, Congress debated the first draft 
of the anti-TIP legislation (Ref F).  Congress is expected to 
approve the legislation in January 2005, according to the GOE 
and Congressional sources.  The American Bar Association is 
currently reviewing the draft legislation to ensure it meets 
international standards.  In a key TIP-related case, the 
perpetrators in the Burdet-Cedeno child pornography ring were 
convicted on four charges with sentences of 12 to 25 years 
(Refs D and F).  Ecuadorian citizen and U.S. legal permanent 
resident Angel Mariscal was also sentenced to 100 years on 7 
charges of child pornography (Ref D).  However, the case of 
AmCit Joseph Day is no longer moving forward; we believe he 
may be released if no substantive charges are brought against 
him. 
 
5.  Meanwhile, the police child protection unit, DINAPEN, 
dramatically stepped-up raids on nightclubs and discotheques 
to seek TIP victims.  From June 4 - August 7, the police 
engaged in law enforcement activities at 75 establishments 
and rescued minors in 25 of these locations, where 
prostitution is believed to occur.  From August 14 - October 
21, DINAPEN raided 202 nightclubs and bars  and found 246 
minors who are believed to have engaged in prostitution. 
 
6. Comment:  Ecuador has made significant progress on TIP but 
much more remains to be done.  The resignation of Government 
Minister Raul Baca on November 8 was a temporary setback for 
TIP efforts; Baca told the Ambassador on November 10 that he 
sought to continue to promote anti-TIP coordination in an 
advisory capacity and by involving the MFA and National 
Council on Women in the national planning process.  We will 
engage shortly with Baca\'s successor to promote continued 
anti-TIP progress.  National Council on Women Director Rocio 
Rosero will also play a key role in the interagency process; 
we will work with her and other committee members to ensure 
continued progress.  In sum, we believe Ecuador is on the 
right track and is committed at the highest levels to 
furthering its progress on this issue. 
KENNEY 
"
"22962","11/17/2004 21:51","04QUITO3027","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO2955|04QUITO2959","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/17/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, PINR, EC 
SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT MINISTER POLITICAL LIGHTING ROD, 
POSSIBLE ALLY ON TIP 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2955 
     B. QUITO 2959 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, for reasons 1.4 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  Government Minister Jaime Damerval has 
courted controversy since taking office on November 8, 
recently suggesting that the GoE convoke a referendum on 
whether to dissolve Congress to promote constitutional 
reforms.  In a private meeting with the DCM on November 15, 
Damerval backed away from his own proposal, describing it as 
a trial balloon which may not prosper.  What seems clear is 
that Damerval was hired to lead the government\'s 
counter-attack against pro-impeachment forces in Congress. 
That effort became apparent with the organization of 
pro-government rallies outside Congress, where scuffles 
erupted between pro and anti-impeachment legislators.  We 
have forcefully conveyed to Damerval USG support for 
democratic institutions, including Congress, and hope to 
continue USG-GoE collaboration on mutual interests, including 
combating trafficking in persons.  Damerval responded 
positively, but clearly has other priorities.  End Summary. 
 
2.   (C) DCM and PolChief met with Government Minister Jaime 
Damerval Martinez on November 15, at our request.  The DCM 
emphasized USG support for democratic institutions, including 
Congress, and emphasized the cost to Ecuador of political 
instability and uncertainty.  We hope to continue to 
cooperate with the Government Ministry in areas of mutual 
interest, such as combating narco-trafficking and trafficking 
in persons, he said.  The Minister has a leading role to play 
in these vital efforts, which we hope will continue to show 
progress.  He suggested that Damerval name key members of his 
staff to maintain working-level contact with Embassy officers 
on these issues. 
 
3.  (C) Damerval agreed that these are important issues which 
he hoped to turn to once his Ministry team was named later 
that week.  Preoccupied by staff and budgetary constraints, 
Damerval nevertheless said he would personally support 
pending anti-TIP legislation.  He said he hoped to use his 
term in office to promote several other reforms, including 
commercial code reform and privatization of the civil 
registry.  Security is another high priority, he said, and 
Ecuador deserved greater support from its neighbor Colombia 
to handle it.  He characterized the Colombian attitude 
towards Ecuador as \"arrogant\" and described Colombian 
President Uribe\'s response to President Gutierrez\' recent 
request for economic assistance for Colombian refugees in 
Ecuador as \"dismissive.\"  Damerval claimed to be open to 
collaboration with the USG on all issues of mutual interest. 
 
4.  (C) Turning to politics, Damerval said his proposal to 
seek approval by the populace to dissolve Congress already 
faced opposition from President Gutierrez\' brother Gilmar, 
who had publicly stated that any constitutional reform 
initiatives should be handled by Congress, not through 
referendum.  Damerval said his idea was simply to promote 3-6 
key reforms, which involve further reducing the size of 
Congress, giving the Pacific Coastal area a greater say in 
national affairs, and de-politicizing the courts.  Congress 
is naturally opposed and would never support reform, since 
they would reduce its influence.  A referendum to dissolve 
Congress would not be legally binding, he said, but would 
provide \"moral weight\" in favor of reform that Congress could 
not ignore. 
 
5.  (U) Several thousand pro-government indigenous 
evangelicals (FEINE) marched on November 16-17 to protest 
Congressional action against their leader, Marco Murillo. 
Murillo had publicly called for the dissolution of Congress 
when it was moving to impeach President Gutierrez, prompting 
one Congress member to file criminal charges against him. 
Protesters called for an end to the criminal investigation of 
Murillo, and to the Congressional hearing on November 17 to 
censure Minister of Social Welfare Antonio Vargas, an 
indigenous leader from the Amazon region and strong Gutierrez 
ally.  Political analysts speculated that these 
pro-government protests were conceived or supported by the 
GoE, and attribute these aggressive new tactics to Damerval. 
 
6.  (U) Meanwhile, temperatures inside the Congress were 
rising as the government attempted to fashion a 
pro-government majority and the pro-impeachment opposition 
courted the Socialist Party\'s three votes after failing on 
November 9 to muster the simple majority needed to create an 
impeachment committee (Ref A).  Inside the Congress on 
November 16, a scuffle broke out between pro-impeachment 
legislators and Gilmar Gutierrez, the president\'s brother. 
The incident was reportedly sparked by debate over President 
Gutierrez\' announcement on November 15 that the government 
would aggressively pursue debtors who owed money to the 
public purse, including those associated with former 
president Leon Febres-Cordero.  In response to the scuffle, 
PSC legislator Alfonso Harb reportedly pulled out and waved 
his handgun on the floor of Congress.  President of Congress 
Landazuri later announced an investigation of Harb for his 
violation of Congressional etiquette. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (C) We concur with the view that Damerval was chosen to 
more aggressively counter pro-impeachment forces in Congress. 
 However, when the impeachment effort stalled on November 9, 
Damerval suddenly became the wrong person for the wrong job. 
Oblivious to changed circumstances, he has seized on the 
President\'s reform agenda as a vehicle to counter-attack the 
pro-impeachment forces.  The suggestion that Congress be 
dissolved to promote reforms is worrisome and apparently 
designed to get around a constitutional provision that 
requires majority Congressional support to call a referendum 
on constitutional reform.  Any such move would likely 
threaten the government\'s legitimacy.  We are encouraged that 
Damerval seemed chastened by the public rebuke of his idea by 
the President\'s brother. 
 
8.  (C) Nevertheless, we will try to work with Damerval and 
his appointees on essential mutual interests such as TIP and 
counter-narcotics, which will clearly require great effort on 
our part.  Though it is very early to judge, we are concerned 
that Demarval\'s priorities may be elsewhere, and that he may 
seek new opportunities to put pro-impeachment forces on the 
defensive, risking further political destabilization. 
 
Additional Bio Information (Ref B) 
---------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) According to PSC Congress member Marcelo Dotti, 
Damerval is motivated by personal antipathy towards Leon 
Febres-Cordero after losing a ten-year legal battle to the 
ex-president decades ago.  Since that time, Dotti claims, 
Damerval has used his press column to virulently attack 
Febres-Cordero and his party interests, which led Gutierrez 
to select him.  Dotti predicted that Damerval\'s personal 
motives and ambitions would eventually clash with the 
President\'s. 
KENNEY 
"
"22963","11/17/2004 21:51","04QUITO3028","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

172151Z Nov 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2014 
TAGS: MARR, MOPS, PREL, EC, KICC 
SUBJECT: RENEWING THE ARTICLE 98 PUSH 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Article 98 negotiations in Ecuador have 
stagnated of late.  Two factors are to blame:  continued 
push-back from the Embassy\'s prime interlocutors, the Foreign 
Ministry and Congress, and the Gutierrez government\'s focus 
on self-preservation in the face of impeachment proceedings. 
Cognizant that increasing deployments of U.S. forces 
worldwide makes inking an Article 98 with Ecuador imperative, 
we are conducting another offensive.  Recent visits of USG 
VIPs have helped return the issue to GoE radar screens. 
Additionally, the Ecuadorian military\'s own plans to step up 
its fight against narcotraffickers will require greater U.S. 
military assistance, perhaps spurring them to fight (and 
defeat) the MFA in GoE interagency Article 98 battles. 
Finally, imminent turnover in legislative leadership 
positions offer us hope we can dilute (but not remove) 
opposition in Congress. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------- 
Negotiations Stuck in the Mud 
----------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) We have seen no movement on Article 98 since 
Secretary Powell\'s June visit to Quito for the OAS General 
 
SIPDIS 
Assembly.  In a high-level bilat June 7, Ecuador President 
Lucio Gutierrez told the Secretary he had sought Congress\'s 
formal opinion on Article 98\'s constitutionality and 
appropriateness.  We worried then, and are certain now, that 
Gutierrez\'s \"consultations\" were but a time-buying ruse. 
Meanwhile, the MFA\'s Article 98 point-of-contact has 
disappeared, and Congressional moderates\' promises to raise 
the negotiations in committee meetings went nowhere. 
 
3.  (C) Autumn has seen Gutierrez hanging on by a thread.  A 
broad-based Congressional coalition, including center-right, 
center-left, and indigenous political parties, initiated 
impeachment proceedings against him November 4.  Each 
organization filed separate grounds for removal; misuse of 
public funds led the list, but poor defense of national 
sovereignty (by involving Ecuador in Plan Colombia, for 
example) was close behind.  The administration won the first 
battle, as the opposition November 9 was unable to muster 
votes to form a Congressional investigatory committee. 
Gutierrez opponents claim they will fight on, however. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Visitors Underscore Article 98 Imperative 
----------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Just two weeks ago, we could not imagine the 
administration re-engaging on Article 98, as the mere whiff 
of ongoing negotiations on the unpopular measure might have 
convinced teetering legislators to vote to impeach.  The GoE 
emerged more confident after last week\'s legislative victory, 
however, and seems again willing to talk.  Defense Secretary 
Donald Rumsfeld, in Quito for the Defense Ministerial of the 
Americas (DMA), raised Article 98 in a November 16 bilat with 
Gutierrez (Septel).  While Gutierrez\'s response was 
regrettably old-hat - \"I\'m waiting for a Congressional green 
light before proceeding\" - our impatience with the pace of 
talks undoubtedly registered with the Ecuadorian president 
(and foreign minister, who also attended).  In addition, new 
Southcom commander General Bantz J. Craddock, also attending 
the Quito DMA, calls on Ecuador\'s minister of defense and 
service chiefs November 19.  We expect Article 98\'s necessity 
to open his talking points. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Increasing GoE Ops Tempo Necessitates USG Assistance 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
5.  (C) Despite bearing the totality of ASPA sanctions, 
Ecuador\'s military never lobbied hard for Article 98 in the 
GoE interagency.  We surmise they might now rejoin the fight. 
 New Joint Forces Chief Admiral Victor Rosero recognizes 
Ecuador\'s national security threats, shows vision, and takes 
chances.  We could not say the same about his predecessor. 
We have received briefs recently on two politically sensitive 
initiatives - an EC offensive against narcotraffickers in 
Sucumbios province, and Ecuador\'s interest in establishing a 
non-lethal Airbridge Denial (ABD) program - each requiring 
prior Rosero buy-in.  For both, EC military leaders have 
requested USG military assistance. 
 
6.  (C) While non-ASPA-affected program monies could (and 
will) help support these initiatives, we are not missing any 
opportunities to flog the military over the need for Article 
98.  Big-ticket items, such as A-37 upgrades for ABD and 
additional helicopters for Sucumbios, are non-starters until 
we get an agreement, for example.  Further, a joint special 
forces counter-terrorism operation, featuring Blackhawk 
helos, is underway near Quito.  At its conclusion, we expect 
Ecuadorian battalion- and brigade-level officers to push 
their HQ superiors for similar goodies. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Additional Hope From Legislative, Government Changes 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
7.  (C) We are convinced we cannot slip Article 98 by 
Ecuador\'s suspicious, do-nothing Congress; engaging them now, 
even as a deal with the executive remains distant, seems 
proper.  The current Congressional lineup is stocked with 
enemies, from President Guillermo Landazuri (who owes 
Gutierrez the Article 98 response), to International 
Relations Committee Chairman Carlos Vallejo.  Thankfully, the 
presidency, vice-presidency, and committee leadership turn 
over in January 2005, the mid-point of the legislative term. 
While we cannot predict their replacements, we can only see 
improvements.  We will delay our outreach acceleration until 
the impeachment furor dies down, however, not wanting to 
throw Gutierrez\'s many opponents additional political 
ammunition. 
 
8.  (C) Finally, we require approachable MFA interlocutors, 
not the lackeys we endure now.  The designated POC is 
particularly useless, regularly dodging our calls and burying 
our correspondence.  In higher-level Embassy-MFA gatherings, 
we will request that our counterparts name serious officers 
to staff their side. 
 
-------- 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
 
9.  (C) Regrettably, Article 98 seems as distant now as in 
July 2002, when we began the diplomatic effort.  The MFA 
continues to believe it can wait us out.  It cannot.  We are 
helped by Washington re-opening the second front, calling in 
Ecuadorian Ambassador Raul Gangotena for meetings with 
Assistant Secretaries Roger Noriega and Steven Rademaker. 
From Quito, Post will report regularly and often on its own 
renewed push toward securing a deal.  END COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"23156","11/22/2004 18:04","04QUITO3053","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, KIPR, EFIN, EC 
SUBJECT: PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES SEEK USG HELP ON GOE 
PROPOSAL TO LIMIT PROFITS 
 
 
1. See action request paragraph 7. 
 
2. Summary.  Econ and FCS met November 19 with 
representatives from Bristol Meyers and Pfizer.  The 
pharmaceutical representatives complained that the GOE is 
trying to exert further control over drug prices and company 
profits.  This latest initiative by the Ministry of Public 
Health is the second attempt in the last six months at 
decreasing drug prices by limiting drug company profits. 
According to the drug reps, if approved, the regulation would 
adversely affect international and local drug companies in 
Ecuador.  Emboffs explained that Intellectual Property 
Rights, particularly concerning pharmaceutical company 
concerns, have been an important and sensitive part of Andean 
Free Trade Agreement negotiations.  We promised to seek 
Washington guidance as to how to raise this issue with the 
GOE.  End Summary. 
 
 
Another Assault on Profits 
-------------------------- 
 
3. Pharmaceutical representatives explained to econ and 
commercial section officers on November 19 that the GOE was 
trying for the second time in the last six months to limit 
pharmaceutical prices, this time via a Presidential decree. 
Earlier this year, the GOE considered a draft law that would 
have reduced the maximum profit allowed drug companies for 
each individual product or presentation from 20% to 8%. 
After complaints from the industry and discussions with 
Emboffs, the GOE backed off from that initiative. 
 
4. The Ministry of Public Health is behind the latest 
initiative, according to the Bristol Meyers Squibb and Pfizer 
representatives.  Bristol Meyers\' lawyer said the decree 
would redefine and lower the acceptable costs of 
pharmaceutical companies; thus, \"artificially\" inflating 
company profits and forcing them to reduce prices in order to 
keep under the 20% profit ceiling.  Other representatives 
noted that drug prices had already been frozen by the GOE for 
the last two years.  When questioned, they said the proposed 
decree would adversely affect both international drug 
companies and local generic drug producers. 
 
A Topic for the Trade Negotiators 
--------------------------------- 
 
5. Econoffs noted that intellectual property rights (IPR), 
particularly with respect to pharmaceutical products had been 
an important and sensitive part of the ongoing Andean Free 
Trade Agreement negotiations.  Given the sensitivity, the 
Embassy would request instructions from Washington before 
approaching the GOE about this issue. 
 
Comment and Action Request 
-------------------------- 
 
6. This latest salvo from the GOE is another attempt to 
address populist concerns about the price of drugs in 
Ecuador.  The fact that the proposed decree would adversely 
impact both major pharmaceutical companies and local 
producers of generic drugs means both will probably lobby 
against the proposal, making issuance of the decree less 
likely.  Still, any GOE effort to lower drug prices would be 
viewed favorably by many and the Gutierrez administration 
could use all the popular support it can get.  Thus, populist 
concerns could win the day. 
 
7. Action Request.  Post requests guidance from Washington on 
what, if any, next steps to take regarding the proposed 
decree. 
KENNEY 
"
"23284","11/24/2004 20:32","04QUITO3081","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO3037","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MARR, EC, President, Democracy 
SUBJECT: GOE PRESSES ITS LUCK -- NEXT STEPS ON STABILITY 
 
REF: QUITO 3037 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney for reason 1.4 (b&d) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  A concerted USG effort to promote political 
stability contributed to the lessening of political tension 
over impeachment, and will continue to be important in the 
aftermath.  Although the situation has calmed somewhat since 
the failure of an opposition initiative to impeach President 
Lucio Gutierrez on November 9, Congress remains fractured and 
conflictive.  Seeking to reverse its fortunes, but at the 
risk of making things worse, the Gutierrez government has 
launched a counter-offensive against the PSC and its leader, 
Leon Febres-Cordero, attacking his family\'s wealth, the PSC\' 
sinecure in the courts, and working to deny the PSC or its 
allies top leadership positions in Congress.  The result of 
this counter-offensive will become apparent on January 5, 
when the Congress chooses new leadership.   In this context 
of continued conflict and political uncertainty, we believe 
it vital for the USG to continue to exploit opportunities to 
promote democratic stability in Ecuador.  End Summary. 
 
Background on USG Democracy Stabilization Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2.  (SBU) On the eve of a preliminary vote on impeachment 
proceedings, the Ambassador spoke to the press on the margins 
of a US company donation ceremony on November 5, noting 
strong USG support for constitutional democracy, our respect 
for the votes cast by Ecuadorians in 2002 in a free and fair 
election and our strong belief that stability favors economic 
growth and poverty reduction.  The Ambassador\'s remarks made 
headlines and contributed to the subsequent cooling of 
impeachment fervor inside and outside of Congress. 
 
3.  (C) Members of the country team and ConGen Guayaquil have 
echoed the Ambassador\'s message to key contacts in 
government, the military, and civil society.  We have also 
used a series of high-level USG visits to reinforce the 
Ambassador\'s public message with key players in private. 
SecDef Rumsfeld emphasized USG support for democratic 
institutions, including Congress, to President Gutierrez and 
Defense Minister Herrera on November 16.  General Craddock 
made similar points to the Ecuadorian high command on the 
margins of the Defense Ministerial of the Americas conclave. 
We enlisted visiting Commerce DAS Walter Bastian and USTR 
spokesman Richard Mills to include political/economic 
stability points in their appearance before an influential 
private sector audience on November 11. 
 
Opportunities/Next Steps 
------------------------ 
 
4.  (C) We will soon have other opportunities to stress USG 
support for Ecuadorian democracy and stability.  Former 
President Bush\'s visit to Guayaquil has been postponed until 
December; he had helpfully declined a private invitation from 
Febres-Cordero, and had earlier declined a meeting in Houston 
requested during the impeachment process by Vice President 
Alfredo Palacio.  Former President Bush has agreed to include 
an emphasis on political stability in his speech to 
influential private sector leaders in Febres-Cordero\'s 
presence.  Next, CoDel Weller is slated to visit in January, 
and can help encourage the new Congressional leadership get 
down to the business of governance after a long series of 
diversions. 
 
5.  (SBU) Meanwhile, the Gutierrez government faces a series 
of challenges/opportunities in coming months.  On November 
24, Gutierrez\' PSP joined with a coalition reportedly 
including the PRE, PRIAN, independents, MPD, the Socialist 
Party, and others to propose that Jorge Montero, a Congress 
member for the coastal Concentration of Popular Forces party 
(CFP), be named second vice president of Congress.  Media 
speculated that the intent of this move to fill a seat left 
vacant since early 2003 is for Montero to assume the 
leadership in the absence of Congress President Landazuri to 
call an extraordinary session of Congress during the upcoming 
recess.  According to PRE sources, the motion on Montero was 
to be followed by a proposal to restructure the Supreme 
Court, the Constitutional Tribunal, and the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal to reduce the influence of the Social Christian 
Party in these institutions. 
 
6.  (C) The regular Congressional session will end on 
December 3, and be followed by the Quito founding 
celebrations and the holiday recess.  President Gutierrez is 
expected to make Cabinet changes in December which could also 
affect the political climate.  (See Ref A on the impeachment 
process against controversial Social Welfare minister Antonio 
Vargas.)  Next up would be the battle over Congress\' 
leadership positions for 2005-6 (including the presidency, 
two vice presidencies, and committee chairs), to be decided 
by vote on January 5, the first day of the new session. 
After Congressional leadership is decided, the Congress will 
select a new Attorney General, currently under PSC control, 
and may move to fill the still-vacant Comptroller position. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (C) With the PSC damaged by the impeachment vote (down to 
22 seats from 25), the government is clearly seeking to take 
the offensive.  Though GoE leaders have backed away from 
earlier hints that the Congress might be dissolved, Gutierrez 
announced a hard-line \"mano dura\" approach to public debtors, 
including Febres-Cordero\'s relatives, and his Congressional 
supporters now seem intent on building a working anti-PSC 
coalition.  Our view is that prospects for a lasting 
pro-government coalition are remote.  Our sources put pro and 
anti-government forces even at 44 apiece, with the balance in 
the hands of the moderate Popular Democracy Party (4 votes), 
and the Marxist MPD and Socialists, with three votes each. 
While PRE leaders tell us the government has constructed a 
coalition which includes judicial reform and the January 5 
leadership vote, that may be wishful thinking.  Many agree 
that PSC influence in the courts must be reduced, while each 
party individually aspires to Congressional and committee 
leadership positions. 
 
8.  (C) The costs of ongoing political conflict are readily 
apparent here, and affect important U.S. interests.  Despite 
a pressing unmet agenda of national needs, Congress is 
unlikely to act on substance before January 5 (with the 
possible exception of the budget, which will take effect 
automatically if Congress does not act before December 30). 
Of greater concern, each subsequent effort to unseat the 
president builds on the previous and generates a highly 
conflictive aftermath, paralyzing the GoE policy process. 
KENNEY 
"
"23314","11/26/2004 14:32","04QUITO3099","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2773","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER TIP UPDATE 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2773 
 
     B. QUITO 3027 
 
1.  Summary:  This cable reports significant anti-TIP 
developments since our interim TIP report (Ref A).  USAID and 
Geneva Global will mount six new projects to combat TIP 
(Trafficking in Persons) by the end of the year.  We recently 
met with two organizations who provide services to children 
and are interested in adapting their programs to help TIP 
victims.  The director of the Ricky Martin Foundation met 
with government officials to promote anti-TIP television 
broadcasts.  The police continued stepping up TIP efforts by 
conducting 64 raids on nightclubs and bars from October 28 - 
November 11 reuniting 54 minors with their families.  End 
Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Progress on Victims Services 
---------------------------- 
 
2.  USAID and Geneva Global will provide $600,000 to fund 12 
to 15 projects to address TIP issues in Ecuador.  Geneva 
Global held a conference on November 15 with 38 NGOs to 
solicit proposals for projects.  The organization will 
coordinate with the Embassy to choose proposals that target 
Ecuador\'s needs and will choose six projects by the end of 
the year.  The remaining projects will be chosen by March 
2005.  We met with Geneva Global on November 16 to coordinate 
and explain our priorities:  shelters, psychological 
services, and alternative job training for victims. 
 
3.  PolOff and AIDOff recently met with two potential 
providers of victims services:  Street Children and the San 
Jose Foundation.  The former organization is faith-based and 
runs a shelter for 12 to 15 boys; provides food, education, 
and before- and after-school activities to many more 
children; and has victims centers in seven cities.  The San 
Jose foundation is largely funded by the municipality of 
Quito with some support from local businesses.  It will open 
a transitory shelter in January 2005 that will house 60 
people of all ages and currently runs programs to assist 
victims of child labor.  The foundation runs a shelter for 
beggars and impoverished senior citizens.  The directors of 
both organizations were interested in providing services to 
TIP victims but need assistance tailoring their programs to 
meet the needs of TIP victims.  PolOff will work with AID to 
see what assistance we can provide, and we put both 
organizations in contact with Geneva Global. 
 
----------------------- 
Ricky Martin Foundation 
----------------------- 
 
4.  Angel Saltos, executive director of the Ricky Martin 
Foundation (RMF), met with the DCM, PolOff, AIDOff, and IO on 
November 19 to explain RMF\'s interest in combating TIP in 
Ecuador.  Saltos and PolOff met with the National Committee 
on Women and the police on November 22 to encourage further 
cooperation on combating trafficking.  The RMF\'s People for 
Children works to prevent TIP and assist victims, 
particularly children.  The MFA is trying to get free airtime 
for Ricky Martin\'s public service announcements (PSA) against 
trafficking.  These spots have already aired on one 
television channel in Quito in August during the noon news. 
Saltos said that one of the PSAs was aired in Ecuador on 
October 10 in an UNICEF telethon.  He also recorded a 
10-minute radio interview that PAS will distribute to 60 
radio stations and did a radio interview with Radio Quito to 
raise awareness of TIP and its consequences. 
 
-------------------------- 
New Minister of Government 
-------------------------- 
 
5.  The DCM and PolChief met with the new Minister of 
Government, Jaime Damerval, on November 15 (Ref B).  They 
encouraged him to appoint someone soon to cover TIP and call 
a meeting of the Interagency TIP Commission he heads. 
Damerval was more focused on other concerns, such as 
political reforms but said he would personally lobby Congress 
to pass pending anti-TIP legislation. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Sixty-Four Raids in the Last Two Weeks 
-------------------------------------- 
 
6.  From October 28 - November 11, DINAPEN conducted 64 raids 
of nightclubs and bars and found 55 minors who may have been 
involved in prostitution.  With the exception of one minor 
who was taken into protective custody, all victims were 
handed over to family members.  We are requesting additional 
information on the activities of the potential TIP victims. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
News from the Office of the Presidency 
-------------------------------------- 
 
7.  PolOff met with Carlos Larrea, the President\'s legal 
advisor and secretary of the Interagency TIP Commission, on 
November 24.  He said he would lobby in favor of the bill and 
was trying to build a coalition.  However due to Congress\' 
coming recess, he expects no further progress will be made on 
the legislation until mid-January.  Larrea said he would ask 
all committee members to provide him with a report on their 
progress and will continue to press MinGov Damerval to 
appoint someone to cover TIP. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  We will work with organizations, such as Geneva Global 
and the Ricky Martin Foundation, to develop public-private 
partnerships to combat TIP and help victims.  We have 
encouraged the GOE and local NGOs to work with these 
foundations and will consider them for USG matching funds. 
The MFA is taking steps in the right direction by working to 
air the anti-trafficking videos.  Larrea is emerging as a key 
supporter and TIP ally while the new Government Minister 
assembles his team.  We will continue promote GOE 
coordination with NGO\'s, and urge Congress to take up TIP 
reforms. 
KENNEY 
"
"23328","11/26/2004 20:12","04QUITO3102","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2399","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC, Trade 
SUBJECT: FOX VISIT PROMOTES TRADE, INVESTMENT, & 
COOPERATION WITH ECUADOR 
 
REF: QUITO 2399 
 
1.  Summary:  In a brief visit to Quito on November 22-23, 
Mexican President Vicente Fox sought increased bilateral 
investment and trade.  Presidents Fox and Gutierrez discussed 
issues of bilateral interest, including commitments to 
facilitate visa issuance, negotiate an extradition treaty, 
improve justice administration, offer Mexican technical 
training for energy, oil, and tourism, seek Ecuador\'s 
inclusion in the G-3 and swap support for candidates to 
multilateral organizations.  Mexico\'s Oil Institute made a 
commitment to help Ecuador form a similar institution, and 
Ecuador pledged to support observer status for Mexico in the 
Community of Andean Nations.  End Summary. 
 
FOCUS ON TRADE AND INVESTMENT 
----------------------------- 
 
2.  According to Mexican Ambassador Alma Patricia Soria, 
President Fox\'s primary goal was to promote investment and 
trade between both nations.  Ambassador Soria described great 
potential in joint ventures between Mexican and Ecuadorian 
enterprises in the textile, footwear, leather, flowers and 
livestock sectors.  Bilateral trade between the two countries 
totaled $185 million with a negative balance for Ecuador in 
2003.  On the investment front, Mexican investments in 
Ecuador total $800 million, in areas such as 
telecommunications, industrial products, highway 
administration, and over 100 small industry investments. 
 
ENERGY AND OTHER COOPERATION 
---------------------------- 
 
3.  President Gutierrez confirmed publicly that a memorandum 
of understanding and cooperation on energy was signed during 
the visit.  The Mexican Institute of Oil will support the 
creation of a similar agency in Ecuador.  Mexico and Ecuador 
agreed to coordinate strategies for the international 
marketing of hydrocarbons and their derivatives, in addition 
to designing mechanisms to formulate and negotiate work and 
services contracts in the oil industry. 
 
4.  Other issues discussed include technical cooperation for 
the implementation of 14 projects presented by Ecuador to 
Mexico, and technical training on energy, oil, and tourism. 
President Fox also announced 25 fellowships to Ecuadorian 
students to continue their university and graduate studies in 
computer engineering and tourism. 
 
RECIPROCAL SUPPORT IN INTERNATIONAL FORA 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5.  Mexico reportedly sought and obtained GoE support to 
become an observer in the Community of Andean Nations (CAN). 
President of Congress Guillermo Landazuri expressed support 
for Mexican observer status in the CAN at a Congressional 
event honoring Fox.  Fox\'s visit also included an invitation 
for Ecuador to enter the G-3 Free Trade Agreement 
(Mexico-Colombia-Venezuela Group) to which Panama was 
recently added.  The G-3 is a trade and cooperation agreement 
which seeks to abolish trade barriers.  The GoE also sought 
support for Ecuadorian candidates for various multilateral 
fora. 
 
MFA PUSHES EXTRADITION AND MIGRATION ISSUES 
------------------------------------------- 
 
6.  The Ecuadorian MFA\'s bilateral affairs undersecretary, 
Roberto Bentancourt, told the press that Ecuador had proposed 
an extradition treaty to fight against organized crime and 
corruption.  Mexico agreed to coordinate efforts on this 
matter.  According to other MFA officials, President Fox 
agreed to the GoE\'s request to streamline visa procedures for 
Ecuadorians wanting to travel or reside in Mexico. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  Fox\'s pro-FTA commentary during the visit may help reduce 
Ecuadorian skepticism about free trade.  His public discourse 
provided a welcome counter balance to that of recent 
high-profile visitors, such as Brazilian President Lula da 
Silva (reftel). 
KENNEY 
"
"23329","11/26/2004 20:24","04QUITO3103","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO3028","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2014 
TAGS: MASS, PREL, PGOV, EC, KICC 
SUBJECT: ARTICLE 98 BACK IN HEADLINES, POST PRESSES CASE 
 
REF: QUITO 3028 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Recent public comments from high-level USG 
visitors and the Ambassador have put Article 98 back in play 
in Ecuador.  Major newspapers and radio/TV outlets have 
highlighted our efforts, as well as GoE Foreign Minister 
Patricio Zuquilanda\'s November 23 claim that the MFA 
continues to analyze the USG\'s petitions.  To re-start 
moribund Article 98 negotiations, the Embassy is crafting its 
own game plan, heavy on personal diplomacy and media 
education.  Additionally, we are revisiting the idea of \"Plan 
Ecuador,\" a mostly PR effort to recast existing USG 
assistance efforts as political \"payback\" for Article 98. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
VIPs Re-Introduce USG Desires for ICC Protection 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2.  U) Reftel reports visiting Secretary of Defense Donald 
Rumsfeld\'s November 16 bilat with Ecuador President Lucio 
Gutierrez, in which Article 98 featured high.  New Southcom 
commander General Bantz J. Craddock raised the same slate of 
points during his November 19 calls on Ecuador\'s joint 
commander and service chiefs.  Seeking to further pressure 
the GoE to restart good faith talks, the Ambassador, in 
public remarks November 20, described the serious threats 
Ecuador faced from neighboring Colombia\'s conflict.  A flow 
of U.S. military assistance would continue to bolster 
Ecuador\'s defenses, but was far smaller than what Ecuador 
might have received, had the GoE signed Article 98. 
 
3.  (U) Curiosity over USG security engagement in the Andean 
region was high, owing to Secretary Rumsfeld\'s travel to 
Quito and President Bush\'s recent stopover in Colombia.  As 
such, the Ambassador\'s Article 98 comments made the front 
pages.  The Foreign Ministry responded swiftly and 
surprisingly.  Rather than state unequivocally that Ecuador 
was \"not interested,\" as predecessor Nina Pacari had done, FM 
Zuquilanda claimed that Ministry experts \"were studying the 
theme meticulously.\"  Reporters again raised Article 98 
November 25, during the Ambassador\'s Thanksgiving Day trip to 
the Manta Cooperative Security Location (Septel).  Mostly 
neutral before, media coverage turned negative November 26, 
with Quito daily Hoy demanding Ecuador reject the \"Empire\'s\" 
push for blanket immunities. 
 
------------------------------------ 
And Post\'s Working Group Brainstorms 
------------------------------------ 
 
4.  (C) The press and public\'s renewed interest in Article 98 
made us believe the time was ripe to re-engage immediately, 
rather than wait for expected December Cabinet changes and 
January turnover of Congressional leadership (Reftel).  Post 
convened its issue-specific working group November 24 and 
hashed out a near-term Article 98 action plan.  Up first is 
an Ambassador-President Gutierrez sit-down, which we hope to 
organize the week of November 29.  In his earlier meeting 
with SecDef, Gutierrez again declared support for the Article 
98 concept, but noted it was a hard sell, especially with the 
left-leaning legislature.  He would need serious quid pro quo 
to go forward.  At her upcoming meeting with the GoE 
president, the Ambassador will emphasize the futility of 
putting the cart before the horse -- it is nonsense to 
discuss \"rewards\" while the MFA continues to avoid 
negotiations. 
 
5.  (C) Bypassing the grandstanding and mercurial FM 
Zuquilanda, the DCM will target Vice Foreign Minister Edwin 
Johnson.  One of the MFA\'s few thoughtful interlocutors, 
Johnson also owes us one, as the USG supported his candidacy 
for a UN human rights-related position.  In their meeting, 
the DCM will push the need for a serious MFA Article 98 
coordinator, to replace the do-nothing we currently endure. 
 
6.  (C) Public Diplomacy too plays a role in restarting 
negotiations.  PAS, Milgroup, and POL staff soon will host a 
series of roundtables with interested journalists, hoping to 
correct Article 98 misperceptions.  Those same Embassy 
personnel are weighing a possible International Visitor (IV) 
program for Ecuadorian think-tankers and talking heads, whose 
support will be vital come ratification time (and who are 
bashing us now).  In both fora, we will raise Ecuador\'s 
recent assignment of troops to the UN\'s Haiti peacekeeping 
operations, as the contingent could, barring specific 
protections, come under the ICC\'s microscope. 
 
7.  (C) Longer-term, we are revisiting plans for a \"Plan 
Ecuador.\"  In early 2004, Department of State U/S John Bolton 
heard President Gutierrez lobby for an uptick in USG security 
and social assistance, reimbursement for heavy political 
costs that signing an Article 98 agreement allegedly would 
entail.  Believing our aid package already robust but seeing 
utility in providing deliverables, we deliberated in-house 
how best to recast and repackage existing programs for 
maximum political benefit.  The MFA\'s continuing refusal to 
talk text led us to shelve \"Plan Ecuador\" plans, but we are 
prepared for a re-look should circumstances warrant. 
9.  (C) COMMENT:  Just a fortnight ago, we worried that word 
of serious Article 98 negotiations could torpedo the 
teetering Lucio Gutierrez administration.  The following two 
weeks have seen the president\'s political fortunes soar, 
however.  After dodging impeachment proceedings November 9, 
Gutierrez and newfound Congressional allies exacted political 
revenge November 25, and the now-minority opposition is in 
retreat (Septel).  Fortified, he just might weather the 
\"torment\" that serious Article 98 negotiations could unleash. 
 We intend to find out.  END COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"23330","11/26/2004 22:11","04QUITO3108","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO3081","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: PRO-GOVT CONGRESSIONAL MAJORITY FLEXES MUSCLES 
 
REF: QUITO 3081 
 
1.  Summary:  In a marathon session November 25, the new, 
pro-government legislative majority bypassed President of 
Congress Guillermo Landazuri\'s programmed agenda and elected 
Jorge Montero second vice president.  It then replaced the 
members of the Constitutional Tribunal (TC) and the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal (TSE), an attack on the Social Christian 
Party, which before had controlled the TC and heavily 
influenced TSE decisions.  Both moves drew fire from the 
now-minority opposition.  End Summary. 
 
2.  On November 25, the new Congressional majority (SP, PRE, 
PRIAN, MPD-PSE, DP and independents) elected Jorge Montero 
(CFP) as the second vice president of Congress.  The vote 
tally showed 55 votes in favor, 32 abstentions and one vote 
for another candidate.  Montero will hold this post, vacant 
for nearly two years, only until January 2005, when all 
Congressional leadership positions turn over.  This vote 
followed the majority\'s earlier procedural motion to \"appeal\" 
Guillermo Landazuri\'s leadership of the session, thus 
sidelining the Democratic Left (ID) leader and allowing 
changes to the day\'s legislative agenda. 
 
3.  Going well past midnight, the new majority revamped the 
TC\'s and TSE\'s membership.  They cited as grounds for the TC 
restructuring the fact that in March 2003, its members were 
approved in a block, an unconstitutional act.  The TC changes 
dealt a blow to PSC, which lost control of the institution. 
Of the seven members removed (from nine total), five, 
including the president, were PSC.  The others were from 
Pachakutik and ID.  PSC-affiliated court members earlier had 
ruled against the D\'Hondt method of legislative seat 
allocations, harming small party representation and earning 
it the ire of Ecuador\'s numerous minority institutions.  The 
newly elected TC judges will hold their posts until January 
2007. 
 
4.  During the session, opposition (PSC, ID and Pachakutik) 
deputies fought a procedural defense, claiming that a 
\"political trial\", not a resolution, was required to revamp 
court membership (the former requires a two-thirds vote, the 
latter, only a majority).   Sitting TC judges shared this 
opinion, claiming there was no legal grounds for removal by 
resolution. 
 
5.  After the fact, opposition-affiliated politicians and 
business leaders protested loudly.  Ex-TC President Oswaldo 
Cevallos denounced the replacement of TC and TSE members as 
illegal, threatening to file complaints with international 
human rights courts.  Close Embassy contact Luis Fernando 
Torres, a PSC deputy, purportedly claimed that Free Trade 
Agreement concerns were behind the TC purge (the TC will rule 
on its constitutionality), but offered few details.  Business 
leader Blasco Penaherrera claimed the reorganization was 
unconstitutional and akin to a coup d\'etat.  Labor and the 
indigenous differed in opinion, with FEINE, FENOCIN, and FUT 
supporting the court putsch. 
 
6.  According to media accounts, the new majority also hopes 
to elect a new attorney general, comptroller general and 
human rights ombudsman, possibly in January 2005.  To elect a 
new AG, 51 votes are needed, while 67 are needed for the 
other two posts. Currently the majority has a base of 54 
votes.  In its drive to reach 67, the majority hopes soon to 
convert Pachakutik, currently controlling 10 votes. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  The new majority in Congress seems intent on seeking 
revenge against the PSC and, to a lesser extent, ID.  Parties 
of all stripes had railed against the Social Christians for 
its alleged control of Ecuador\'s highest courts.  These 
latest maneuvers thus come as no surprise.  The grounds cited 
to purge the TC are dubious, however, as our glance through 
Ecuador\'s constitution shows no distinction between voting on 
individuals and candidate slates.  But in \"pick and choose 
the law to apply\" Ecuador, this too is no surprise. 
KENNEY 
"
"23429","11/30/2004 13:35","04QUITO3115","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO2923","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID AA/LAC AND USAID/LAC/SA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EC, ECON, EFIS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, SENV, Environment 
SUBJECT: DONORS LOSING PATIENCE WITH MANAGEMENT OF GALAPAGOS 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2923 
 
     B. QUITO 2704 
 
1.  Summary.  Ecuador continues to take two steps backward 
for each step forward in the Galapagos.  President Gutierrez 
signed a decree in October banning the export of shark fins 
from Ecuador (Reftel A), to promote conservation.  The 
Minister of the Environment, Fabian Valdivieso, however, 
replaced the interim director of the Galapagos National Park 
(GNP) yet again with a pro-fishing advocate, to the 
consternation of the donor community.  The Japanese aid 
agency (JICA) is threatening to withdraw funding if stability 
in the GNP is not restored.  In a meeting with the 
Ambassador, Valdivieso acknowledged the problems but 
presented no clear vision on fixing them.  His only request, 
when asked how we could help him, was to ask the Ambassador 
to raise these issues with President Gutierrez.  The Embassy 
is currently re-evaluating our aid program, looking for ways 
to promote conservation in the Galapagos.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Another Interim Director 
------------------------ 
 
2.  Citing the Civil Service Law that only permits interim 
directors to be in place for a period of no more than 60 
days, Minister of the Environment Fabian Valdivieso removed 
Victor Carrion as Interim Director of the GNP on November 11. 
 Valdivieso seems to have broadly (some would say dubiously) 
interpreted this law, which further states that after the 
60-day period has expired a permanent director must be 
installed.  Victor Carrion was only in office for 45 days 
when he was removed.  However, contrary to his own legal 
view, Valdivieso did not name a permanent director.  Instead 
he appointed another temporary director, Marco Hoyos, who had 
been working in the Environmental Education department in the 
GNP.  Hoyos, 60-day term will expire on January 11, 2005. 
Valdivieso also mentioned that he had faced political 
pressure to replace Carrion, thus fueling Mission concerns 
about GOE\'s commitment to depoliticize the GNP. 
 
3.  Hoyos made his agenda clear from day one - aid local 
fisherman.  He removed the Chief of the Marine Reserve Unit 
and the Control and Surveillance Unit.  He also \"recommended\" 
that many of the Marine Reserve guards take vacation until 
their contracts expire at the end of December 2004, the same 
time the lobster-fishing season ends.  These changes will 
severely limit monitoring of the Marine Reserve during this 
critical fishery season. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Minister of the Environment - All Rhetoric/Little Action 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
4.  The Ambassador met on November 26 with Valdivieso to 
discuss the prolonged instability in the Galapagos.  She 
frankly noted that there is a lot of discontent in the 
international community about how management of the GNP is 
spinning out of control.  Donors are contemplating pulling 
out of the Galapagos because of the lack of stability and 
vision in park management, she told Valdivieso.  JICA (the 
Japanese International Aid Organization) sent a strongly 
worded letter to GNP Director Hoyos (which has received wide 
distribution) stating that such abrupt changes in personnel 
would cause the Japanese Government to consider the GNP 
unstable.  They stated that there is clear precedence of JICA 
projects being terminated because of such instability. 
 
5.  In addition to the conflict between \"conservationists\" 
and \"extractionists\", Valdivieso noted that there is a 
growing tension between the tourism and fishing industries 
over the utilization of the marine reserve.  He talked 
obtusely of short-term actions and long-term goals to address 
the conflict between users of the Galapagos Marine Reserve. 
He said he would have the new, permanent director in place 
before Hoyos\' term expires (See Reftel B for explanation of 
proposed process for choosing park directors).  He said he 
would also work to stabilize the contracts of the park 
employees.  (Note: Some 225 GNP yearly contracts expire on 
December 31.  Neither Valdivieso nor Hoyos have indicated if 
those contracts would be renewed or if those workers would be 
replaced with new employees.)  Valdivieso proposed 
establishing a Sub-Secretary position in the Ministry of the 
Environment to oversee the Galapagos.  He would also like to 
convene an international forum here in Ecuador some time in 
the Spring 2005 to address the broader Galapagos issues.  He 
also asked the Ambassador to call President Gutierrez and 
clearly explain the ramifications of continued international 
discontent. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  Valdivieso would be the primary beneficiary from the 
proposed establishment of a Sub-Secretary to oversee the 
Galapagos, because it will give him a ready scapegoat should 
else go wrong in the Galapagos.   We gave a lukewarm response 
to his idea to introduce yet another level of bureaucracy 
into the process. 
 
7.  We support the idea of an international forum on the 
Galapagos to address the long-term issue of sustainable 
development, but have made it abundantly clear to Valdivieso 
that the instability in and politicization of the GNP needs 
to be addressed now, before other donors begin withdrawing 
support.  We are also re-evaluating our Galapagos aid program 
looking for more sticks in addition to the carrots we have 
offered in the past. 
 
8.  The Ambassador regularly bends the President\'s ear on 
Galapagos matters and, given the heightened international 
exasperation with how the Gutierrez administration has 
handled the Galapagos, will raise the issue again.  But, 
without concrete measures by the GOE to stabilize the 
situation, Ecuador will  soon face serious consequences from 
donors and in degradation to this International Heritage 
site. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"23490","12/1/2004 14:57","04QUITO3132","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE241222","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 QUITO 003132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOL/ILAB FOR TANYA RASA, SECSTATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR 
REPRESENTATIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: INFORMATION FOR MEANINGFUL LABOR RIGHTS REPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 241222 
 
1.  Summary:  This cable provides information on labor 
conditions in Ecuador as requested for the Meaningful Labor 
Rights Report, and is keyed to questions included in RefTel. 
End Summary. 
 
Administration of Labor Law 
--------------------------- 
 
2.  The Ministry of Labor and Human Resources (MOL) is made 
up of various administrative divisions, including the Office 
of the Vice Minister, the Undersecretary for the Sierra and 
Amazon, the Undersecretary for the Coast and Galapagos, the 
Labor Inspectorate, International Relations, Planning, 
Communication, Internal Auditing and Legal Advising.  The MOL 
received a proposal from the International Labor Organization 
(ILO) for a restructuring of the MOL which they plan to 
implement in December. 
 
3.  There are 45 labor inspectors nationwide, 11 of whom work 
in Quito.  Article 553 of the labor code defines their 
jurisdiction.  From January through October 2004, the MOL 
conducted 304 inspections.  In accordance with the labor 
inspection law, individual claims can result in fines from 
$5-50.  The Ministry of Labor\'s inspectorate issues 
approximately 30-40 fines a day. 
 
4.  Labor complaints not resolved by MOL administrative 
action are heard in trials before the labor judges within the 
Superior Court.  (It is not necessary to first make a labor 
complaint to the MOL.  However, approximately 95% of cases 
are first heard in the MOL.)  There are about 4,000 labor 
court cases a year.  Since June 2004, a new oral procedure 
was adopted for labor cases.  Now, trials that previously 
took 3-5 years can be resolved in 30-60 days.  From July 
2004, when oral procedures began, to November 2004, the five 
labor judges heard 1348 cases.  Labor court judges told 
LabOff they had reached sentences on approximately 450 of 
these cases.  Labor court judges also told LabOff they did 
not have statistics on the reasons the court cases were 
filed.  The decisions of the court can be appealed to the 
Supreme Court within 10 days after the last hearing.  Most 
cases are filed by workers for violation of contracts or of 
the law and unjustified firings.  Employers and workers 
generally obey the decisions of the labor courts.  In Quito 
and Guayaquil, there are approximately 30,000 pending cases 
that date from before the law was passed and need to be tried 
under the written system. 
 
Freedom of Association 
---------------------- 
 
5.  The Constitution and labor code provide most workers with 
the right to form trade unions.  According to the AFL-CIO 
Solidarity Center, about 390,000 workers in Ecuador are 
unionized (approximately 8.5% of the Ecuadorian economically 
active population).  Of these, approximately 120,000 are 
members of one of the five union \"centrals\" or labor 
confederations, while 270,000 are independent.  Those outside 
of the union confederations include drivers, public servants, 
health workers, teachers and oil workers.  The MOL has 
approved 878 unions since 1985.  No unions are registered in 
the Export Processing Zones (EPZs). 
 
6.  Under the law, unions may freely join federations or 
confederations.  The two largest single labor unions, the 
National Union of Educators and the Union of Social Security 
Workers, are allied with the Democratic Political Movement, a 
far-left party.  There are five large labor confederations; 
no confederation was allied with a political party.  There 
are approximately 70 labor federations established in 
Ecuador.  Important federations include health, electrical 
workers, public servants, oil workers and municipal workers. 
 
7.  The labor code explicitly prohibits employers from 
interfering in the establishment or functioning of worker 
organizations.  The code also explicitly prohibits employers 
from dismissing workers while they are forming a union or 
negotiating a collective contract; however, the penalties for 
violations are relatively minor and not always enforced in 
practice.  Members of the police, the military, and most 
public sector employees are not free to form trade unions. 
Some public sector employees, however, are covered by the 
labor code and able to form unions and bargain collectively. 
While public sector employees not covered by the labor code 
cannot form unions, they are free to form associations 
 
8.  The 1991 labor code reforms set the number of workers 
required for an establishment to be unionized at 30.  In 
2002, the ILO criticized the 30-worker minimum as too high 
and called for the government to take the necessary measures 
to amend the code.  In its 2002 Annual Survey of Violations 
of Trade Union Rights, the International Confederation of 
Free Trade Unions reported that 60 percent of the enterprises 
in the country employed fewer than 30 workers, effectively 
excluding 1 million workers from organizing a union. 
 
9.  Labor laws intended to protect workers\' rights to freedom 
of association sometimes failed to deter employers from 
retaliating against workers for organizing.  Reinstatement is 
not a legal right of workers fired for union activity. 
 
10.  While employees of state-owned organizations enjoyed 
rights similar to those in the private sector, the law 
prevents the majority of public sector employees from 
exercising collective bargaining rights.  However, most 
public employees maintained membership in some labor 
organization. 
 
 
Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively 
------------------------------------------ 
 
11.  According to the MOL, there are currently 651 active 
collective contracts, which cover 134,762 workers (88,694 in 
the public sector and 45,053 in the private sector.) 
However, according to the AFL-CIO Solidarity Center, 
currently 28,260 workers in Ecuador are covered by collective 
bargaining agreements.  None of these are in the EPZs.  As of 
November 2004, there have been 49 collective bargaining 
agreements signed in 2004 (previous years:  2003: 114, 2002: 
124, 2001: 134).  According to the AFL-CIO Solidarity Center, 
there are three primary reasons why the number is so low for 
2004.  These are the closing of many businesses due to the 
poor economy, no new formation of unions due to the 30 person 
minimum, and the public sector not bargaining collectively 
due to the new law on standardizing salaries.  In accordance 
with the labor code, unionized as well as non-unionized 
workers are protected by collective contracts. 
 
12.  The labor code provides for resolution of labor 
conflicts through an arbitration and conciliation board that 
consists of one representative of the Ministry of Labor, two 
from the union, and two from management. 
 
13.  The labor code requires workers to be represented by 
only one labor union.  It prohibits discrimination against 
union members and requires that employers provide space for 
union activities upon the union\'s request.  If the Ministry 
of Labor rules that a dismissal of an employee is 
unjustified, it can require the employer to pay severance to 
the worker of 125 percent of a month\'s salary for each year 
worked, although the reforms set a cap on such payments. 
 
14.  During the past year, there have been five strikes, two 
in the public sector and three in the private sector. 
According to the MOL, this is due to increased dialogue and 
intervention on the part of the MOL.  There are few 
restrictions on the right of workers to strike, although a 
10-day cooling-off period is required before a strike can be 
declared.  The labor code limits solidarity strikes or 
boycotts to 3 days, provided that the MOL approves them.  In 
some industries, during a legal strike, workers may take 
possession of the factory or workplace (thus ending 
production at the site) and receive police protection during 
the takeover.  However, in other industries, such as 
agriculture, the law requires a 20-day waiting period from 
the day the strike is called.  During this time, workers and 
employers must agree on how many workers are needed to ensure 
a minimum level of service, and at least 20 percent of the 
work force must continue to work in order to provide 
essential services. 
 
15.  The labor code provides that \"the employer may contract 
substitute personnel\" only when striking workers refuse to 
send the number of workers to provide the minimum necessary 
services in service industries.  The employer must pay all 
salaries and benefits during a legal strike; the labor code 
protects strikers and their leaders from retaliation. 
 
16.  The law does not provide public workers with the right 
to strike and includes a provision that striking public 
sector workers are liable to between 2 and 5 years in prison; 
however, there were frequent unauthorized work stoppages by 
public sector workers.  In September, Congress passed a civil 
service reform law that creates a unified salary structure 
for some public workers (it excludes the police, military, 
teachers, and health care workers).  The law reiterates the 
prohibition against strikes by most civil service employees. 
 
17.  There is no special prosecutor assigned to handle 
extreme cases of anti-union discrimination or acts of 
interference, such as murders and beatings, however these are 
not common crimes in Ecuador.  The Ministry of Labor is the 
organization within the Ecuadorian government responsible for 
ensuring the respect of workers\' rights. 
 
Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor 
----------------------------------------- 
 
18.  The Government has proposed legislation to reform the 
penal code to criminalize prostitution of minors under 18 and 
trafficking in persons (TIP).  On August 18, the president 
signed a decree establishing a national commission to fight 
TIP and provide social services to victims.  The Executive 
branch submitted its package of legislative reforms in 
September, which remains under Congressional review.  The 
reforms are designed to bring the penal code into compliance 
with international conventions against trafficking in persons 
and alien smuggling. 
 
19.  The government and NGOs are designing programs to assist 
trafficking victims.  The ILO with GoE cooperation plans to 
open a shelter for minors who are victims of commercial 
sexual exploitation in Machala by January 2005.  USAID and 
Geneva Global will provide $600,000 to fund 12 to 15 projects 
to address TIP issues in Ecuador.  Geneva Global held a 
conference on November 15 with 38 NGOs to solicit proposals 
for projects. 
 
Child Labor 
----------- 
 
20.  Child labor remains a major problem in Ecuador. 
However, the GoE, NGOs and other institutions are taking 
steps to combat worst forms of child labor in Ecuador.  More 
clearly needs to be done, particularly in the enforcement of 
child labor laws and the rehabilitation of child laborers. 
In July 2004, the Ministry of Labor created a Division for 
Child Labor comprised of three officers, augmenting the 
previous single position for Child Labor, which was also 
responsible for international affairs.  The Division meets at 
least monthly with the MOL and inter-agency National 
Committee for the Progressive Eradication of Child Labor. 
 
21.  In May 2004, the MOL hired eighteen new child labor 
inspectors, bringing the total nationwide to 19.  Currently 
there are 16 inspectors due to resignations; the MOL is in 
the process of hiring six more.  According to the ILO, the 
inspectors have found 500 child laborers in the field. 
Nation-wide the budget to prevent and combat child labor is 
$465,000.  Of this $300,000 went to the Ministry of Social 
Welfare and still has not been spent, $25,000 to the MOL, and 
$140,000 for inspectors\' salaries. 
 
22.  The Institute for the Child and Family (INNFA) has a 
$3.5 million budget to work on child labor issues.  (INNFA\'s 
funds do not come from the national budget; most funds come 
from import taxes.)  Most of this money goes towards 
scholarships for poor children, while a smaller program is 
aimed towards moving children out of dangerous work.  INNFA 
provides support for child labor inspectors and helped create 
an inspection manual.  INNFA has worked to address the 
problem of child labor in the flower sector by providing 
information on child labor to all the major flower producers. 
 
 
23.  The ILO-IPEC began a child labor Time-Bound Program in 
October 2003 with action plans in the banana, flower, 
construction, trash and commercial sex exploitation of minors 
aiming to get children out of work and back in school.  USDOL 
awarded $3 million to Catholic Relief Services to target 
child laborers and children at risk of entering the flower 
and banana sectors. 
 
24.  The Child Worker Program funded by the Central Bank of 
Ecuador, has developed a workshop program called \"Panita\" 
which meets three times a week to promote civic values and to 
work with families and schools on the issue of child labor. 
The Child Worker Program is also planning a community 
ombudsman program to hire a community group to receive and 
act on reports of child labor.  The Central Bank provided 
$200,000 annually for the Child Worker Program. 
25.  The labor code needs to be harmonized with the Code for 
Children and Adolescents (passed in Congress in December 
2002), which sets higher standards.  The Child and 
Adolescents Code raised the fine for child labor violations 
to $200-1000; the labor code fine remains at 50 sucres 
(Ecuador\'s obsolete currency).  In the labor code, the 
minimum work age is 12 for work as domestics or artisans and 
14 for all others, while in the Child Code it is 15 for all. 
 
Minimum Wage 
------------ 
 
26.  The minimum wage is defined in Article 94 of the labor 
code and is annually updated by the Ministry of Labor.  (The 
MOL\'s National Technical Secretariat of Human Resources and 
Remuneration Development sets the minimum wage for public 
sector workers and the National Salary Council sets those for 
the private sector.)  The current minimum wage as of November 
2004 is $135.62 per month and $0.95 per hour.  This is the 
general minimum wage and the MOL also sets minimum wages by 
sectors.  There are reports of non-compliance with the 
minimum wage, particularly for foreign workers. 
 
Occupational Safety and Health 
------------------------------ 
 
27.  The MOL reported that it received 71 work accidents 
complaints, 9 of which were deaths, during 2003.  Workers can 
file complaints with the MOL\'s labor inspectorate or with the 
Social Security Institute.  Occupational safety and health 
regulations are better enforced for those workers covered by 
collective bargaining agreements.  The construction, flower 
and agro-industrial sectors reportedly suffer higher than 
average safety and health problems. 
KENNEY 
"
"23553","12/2/2004 22:14","04QUITO3146","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO3108","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003146 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/02/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: CONGRESS GOES ON HOLIDAY, BUT REST UNLIKELY 
 
REF: QUITO 3108 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, for reason 1.4 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  Congress ended its stormy fall calendar on 
December 2, releasing its combative politicians until January 
4.  Political leaders are likely to stay busy during holiday 
season, as all parties regroup for the battle over 
Congressional leadership and control of the Supreme Court set 
to recommence next month.  Having survived an impeachment 
attempt, President Gutierrez and his new allies have seized 
the political offensive from pro-impeachment forces, 
capitalizing on resentment of the PSC to purge its influence 
in the Supreme Electoral Tribunal and Constitutional Court 
using dubious legislative tactics (RefTel).  In a meeting 
with the Ambassador on December 2, Gutierrez defended his 
tactics as intended to strengthen Ecuador\'s democratic 
institutions.  With the balance in Congress still very fluid, 
political maneuvering (and the potential for disturbances) 
will intensify as January approaches, with both sides seeking 
to attract Congressional swing votes.  End Summary. 
 
President Sees Things Differently 
--------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) At a breakfast with President Gutierrez on December 
2, the Ambassador and DCM expressed concern about the current 
combative political situation and questionable moves by the 
government\'s new \"progressive alliance,\" emphasizing the need 
for respect for constitutional due process and democratic 
institutions, including Congress and the judiciary.  The 
Ambassador urged the president to increase transparency by 
explaining to the public the content of proposed political 
reforms and the government\'s respect for constitutional 
guarantees and due process.  She also suggested that 
Gutierrez maintain political dialogue with the opposition. 
 
3.  (C) Gutierrez appeared confident and assured. He said 
this was not a personal vendetta against PSC leader Leon 
Febres-Cordero, as some have portrayed it.  While slyly 
acknowledging his own \"political interests,\" Gutierrez went 
on to claim that constitutionality was his foremost concern 
in drafting still-unrevealed political reforms to shrink the 
size of Congress, reduced the mandatory retirement of Supreme 
Court justices, and purge the courts of interference by 
political parties.  Nor is the government targeting 
Febres-Cordero\'s family for economic retribution, he claimed. 
 Rather, the government is seeking to recoup debts owed by 
more than 200 individuals, not just members of 
Febres-Cordero\'s family. 
 
4.  (C) Political reforms soon to be proposed by the 
government, Gutierrez said, will be submitted to Congress as 
draft legislation, not as a popular referendum.  The 
government is reaching out to all parties to support the 
reforms; he recognized that there are reasonable members of 
the ID and PSC, apart from the top leadership.  While joining 
in praise for former Government Minister Raul Baca, Gutierrez 
justified Baca\'s replacement with Jaime Damerval, which had 
succeeded in diverting political heat away from the person of 
the President. 
 
Will the \"Progressive Alliance\" Endure? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (C) The so-called progressive alliance of 
PSP-PRE-PRIAN-MPD-Socialists-Independents united to purge the 
electoral tribunal and Constitutional Court of PSC control on 
November 25.  Since doing so, however, leftist small party 
members (MPD and Socialists) have publicly declared that 
their participation in the alliance is over.  Our PRIAN 
contacts dispute that claim, saying the alliance will last at 
least through the selection of new Congressional leadership 
on January 5 (giving the PRE the presidency), and possibly 
through reform of the Supreme Court in early 2005. 
Negotiations continue within the alliance over how to go 
about the court reform (the PRIAN opposes the PRE\'s wish to 
do so by simple resolution, which would violate 
constitutional principles), and who gets what positions in 
Congress (in addition to the Presidency and two vice 
presidencies, the presidencies of all 15 Congressional 
Committees are up for grabs). 
 
Opposition Rising? 
------------------ 
 
6.  (C) PSC insiders have told us that Febres-Cordero is 
still in shock over the November 9 impeachment defeat in 
Congress.  Febres-Cordero is on his heels, they said, and had 
not expected Gutierrez to turn things around so quickly and 
take the offensive.   PSC leaders are firmly convinced that 
the progressive alliance\'s actions against the electoral 
tribunal and constitutional court were unconstitutional; 
destitution required a 2/3 vote, not the simple majority 
used.  The Administration is reaching out to the PSC through 
intermediaries, offering to back off its anti-PSC campaign if 
the PSC ousted corrupt Febres-Cordero nephew Miguel Orellana 
and confidant Xavier Neira.  The PSC wants nothing to do with 
the Congressional presidency, leaving it to the ID and PRE to 
fight it out. 
 
7.  (C) Other opposition leaders, meanwhile, discount the 
prospects of the alliance enduring through January 5, and are 
courting the alliance\'s leftist \"swing vote.\"  Democratic 
Left (ID) legislative leaders warn that a PRE presidency of 
Congress would be disastrous for democratic institutions, as 
that party seeks to dismantle charges against its exiled 
leader, permitting his return.  The PRE would ultimately turn 
on the government and compete directly for votes in the 2006 
presidential election with PRIAN presidential hopeful Alvaro 
Noboa. 
 
8.  (C) Meanwhile, indigenous leaders are fighting among 
themselves.  Indigenous umbrella organization CONAIE will 
choose its leadership later this month.  Pachakutik recently 
expelled four of its eleven Congressional deputies. 
Pachakutik leader Jorge Guaman told us on December 2 that the 
President had called seeking his support for political 
reform.  Pachakutik will not agree absent concrete support 
for indigenous priorities.  He warned that the alliance\'s 
tactic of expelling sitting justices with a simple majority 
was a distortion of the legislative process and a precedent 
which could be used against Gutierrez in the future. 
Indigenous demonstrations are unlikely in December, he said, 
but might occur in January, depending on the situation. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  (C) President Gutierrez has again demonstrated canny 
survival instincts but we need to continue to fortify GoE 
respect for democratic institutions and constitutional 
procedure.  With the reversal of fortunes on Thanksgiving 
Day, the Gutierrez Administration backed off earlier threats 
by some members of the GoE--although not Gutierrez 
personally--to dissolve Congress.  Since then, there have 
been few signs of a PSC counter-offensive or an indigenous 
mobilization in the works; both are more likely to take place 
in January than in December.  Regardless, we are redoubling 
our outreach with political party leaders of all parties, 
counseling respect for constitutional processes and seeking 
to anticipate possible future instability.  All actors agree 
that the holidays will be busy for political leaders of all 
stripes, and that results will be publicly revealed on 
January 5 when the Congress decides on its leadership. 
KENNEY 
"
"23582","12/3/2004 15:20","04QUITO3147","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003147 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, EC, Regional 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT SOUTH AMERICAN 
INTEGRATION 
 
 
1.  (SBU) On December 2, President Gutierrez discussed with 
the Ambassador his upcoming trip to Peru.  He will 
participate there in a meeting of Andean presidents and later 
join South American leaders in signing a declaration to move 
toward the creation of a Community of South American Nations. 
 Gutierrez said he believed the accord represented an 
important step toward further South American cooperation and 
integration.  The Ambassador welcomed any effort to promote 
trade and cooperation, and overcome debilitating border 
disputes.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Gutierrez said he would visit Peru December 5-9, 
and would later attend a meeting of Amazonian presidents in 
Brazil December 18-19.  The Peru visit was especially 
exciting, he said, to ratify recent agreements between the 
CAN and MERCOSUR which would spur South American integration 
over the next 10-20 years.  Gutierrez expressed hope that the 
accord would spur continental cooperation in the short term, 
specifically in construction of a South American road system. 
 
3.  (U) Andean Parliament Vice President Freddy Ehlers had 
earlier raised the significance of the Peru events with us. 
Ehlers, a passionate proponent of the dream of South American 
unity, told us the Andean Parliament had approved (by a vote 
of 24-1) a motion to promote its own integration with 
MERCOSUR\'s parliament.  South American Presidents would 
ratify the accord in Lima on December 9.  Ehlers added that 
the media had missed the significance of this accord, which 
is an important step toward eventual political integration of 
all South American countries into one nation.  A united South 
America would be in U.S. interests, Ehlers reasoned;  without 
it, each country will always blame its ills on us.  He 
suggested that an expression of general USG support for South 
American political integration would be helpful to the cause. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Gutierrez was clearly fishing for a USG response, 
perhaps concerned that the USG might see these efforts as a 
challenge to our efforts toward a hemispheric trade accord. 
Realizing that South American integration is a very long ways 
off, the Ambassador told President Gutierrez that efforts to 
promote hemispheric cooperation are always welcome.  She 
reiterated the USG interest in increasing hemispheric 
cooperation through our free trade negotiation efforts both 
regionally (through CAFTA and Andean FTA negotiations) and 
the FTAA. 
KENNEY 
"
"23601","12/3/2004 20:53","04QUITO3151","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 003151 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: CAREER DIP TO HEAD ECUADOR\'S WASHINGTON EMBASSY 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reason 1.4 (b) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  President Lucio Gutierrez told the 
Ambassador on December 2 that he would nominate MFA Bilateral 
U/S Roberto Betancourt to head Ecuador\'s embassy in 
Washington.  The career diplomat will replace political 
appointee Ambassador Raul Gangotena, who submitted his 
resignation November 30.  Betancourt has not been an ally on 
issues of USG interest in the past but, unlike Gangotena, he 
enjoys excellent relations with Foreign Minister Patricio 
Zuquilanda.  We believe it would be counter-productive to 
deny agrement and recommend instead that Washington officials 
seek to engage Betancourt early on key bilateral issues, such 
as ongoing FTA talks and stalled Article 98 negotiations. 
Biodata appears in Paragraph 7.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) FM Zuquilanda called the Ambassador on November 29 to 
preview the replacement of Gangotena with a \"more dynamic\" 
career diplomat, saying President Gutierrez had suggested we 
be informed before making the change public.  The Ambassador 
expressed regret and praised Gangotena as an ally on the FTA. 
 The next day, Gangotena called the Ambassador to inform her 
that he had submitted his resignation at the FM\'s request, 
understanding the need of the president for flexibility 
building political coalitions at home.  He later spoke to the 
press, which reported Gangotena\'s respect for the president\'s 
need for \"utmost flexibility in personnel matters.\" 
 
3.  (C) Gutierrez told the Ambassador and DCM at a December 2 
working breakfast that he would nominate Roberto Betancourt, 
the MFA\'s Number 3, to head Ecuador\'s mission in Washington. 
The key position required a professional diplomat, the 
president believed, skilled in negotiation and well-versed in 
trade matters.  Betancourt fit the bill. 
 
4.  (C) The Ambassador thanked the president and offered 
Embassy assistance in the agrement process.  She regretted 
the resignation of Gangotena, noting that Gangotena was a 
credit to the GoE\'s diplomatic corps, and would be missed. 
 
5.  (C) COMMENT:  Like most MFA diplomats, Betancourt is 
polished and professional.  Unfortunately, he also shares 
with his colleagues less attractive attributes, namely a 
1960s-era anti-Americanism and enduring skepticism of USG 
motives.  As Ecuador\'s Article 98 POC, for example, he 
steadfastly skirted good faith negotiations, preferring to 
seek waivers instead.  Similarly, as the Foreign Ministry\'s 
FTA coordinator, he earned the ire of our U.S. Trade 
Representative colleagues for diversionary tactics. 
 
6.  (C) Seeking the silver lining in this nomination, we are 
left with Betancourt\'s close relations with boss Zuquilanda. 
Although neither would admit problems, it was an open secret 
the FM and Ambassador Gangotena rarely spoke, much less 
coordinated on policy.  We feel assured that Washington 
entreaties toward the new Ecuadorian envoy will quickly reach 
Quito.  As a skilled and trusted diplomat, Betancourt will 
likely be trusted to engage on the substance of key bilateral 
issues, including Article 98 and the FTA.  The Foreign 
Ministry has already requested agrement; despite Betancourt\'s 
previous unhelpfulness, we believe it counterproductive to 
reject the request.  To temper negative attitudes and make 
bilateral progress, we recommend Washington officials reach 
out to Betancourt early and often.  END COMMENT. 
 
7.  (U) BIOGRAPHICAL DATA:  Roberto Betancourt Ruales, 54, 
entered Ecuador\'s diplomatic academy in 1969.  After 
graduation, he earned an advanced degree in economics from 
Quito\'s Catholic University, studied regional development at 
the Federal University in Belem, Brazil, and attended the 
Chilean government\'s diplomatic school.  His resume 
highlights both bilateral and multilateral assignments; 
Betancourt has served in Ecuador\'s embassies in Chile, 
Uruguay, and Colombia, as well as in its UN, WTO, FAO, and 
Andean Community of Nations (CAN) missions.  Before assuming 
his current role as chief of bilateral affairs, he headed the 
MFA\'s multilateral office and was Ecuador\'s FTAA head of 
delegation. 
KENNEY 
"
"23606","12/3/2004 23:10","04QUITO3153","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO2642","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 003153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SECSTATE PLEASE PASS TO US TRADE REPRESENTATIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR LABOR UPDATE 
 
REF: QUITO 2642 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  Following are recent labor-related 
developments of interest: 
 
--Changes at the MOL (para. 2) 
--MOL Izurieta Meets With Congress\' Paez (3) 
--Chamber of Commerce Challenges Subcontracting Decree (5) 
--Hunger Strike by Public Sector Workers (6) 
--Penitentiary and Health Worker Strikes (7) 
--ILO Reaches Out To Unions (9) 
--MOL Working on Child Labor Issues (10) 
--CRS DOL-Funded Child Labor Project Underway (12) 
--Former Petroecuador Workers Remain Jobless (13) 
--Immigrants Vulnerable to Employer Abuse (14) 
 
Changes at the MOL 
------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) At a December 2 meeting, Ministry of Labor (MOL) 
Finance Director Genny Velez told LabOff the MOL will be 
reorganized starting in January 2005.  The Ministry will be 
renamed the Ministry of Labor and Employment, and will get 
computers for every office, including a computer for every 
labor and child labor inspector.  The MOL will also begin 
publishing a regular statistics bulletin.  (We have been 
urging this to complete our reporting requirements.)  Velez 
said that during a conference in Cancun, she had visited 
Mexican job banks and would like to promote the same in 
Ecuador.  Velez requested USG assistance in bringing Mexican 
experts to advise on this project.  We will investigate 
options within the Mission and Washington agencies. 
 
MOL Izurieta Meets with Congress\' Paez 
-------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Velez said she and Minister of Labor Raul Izurieta 
had met with Andres Paez, President of the Labor Commission 
in Congress, earlier on December 2.  According to Velez, 
Izurieta and Paez discussed labor reform, particularly of 
some specific issues raised in the National Labor Council 
such as eliminating or reforming mandatory company retirement 
schemes and setting a maximum number of days for strikes. 
They also discussed the subcontracting law proposals 
currently under review in Congress.  Velez said Paez will 
raise the proposals at the next session of the National Labor 
Council.  As far as we know, this would be Paez\'s first 
invitation to attend a National Labor Council meeting. 
 
4.  (SBU) In a December 1 meeting, Paez told PolChief and 
LabOff he had already unified the four subcontracting law 
proposals in Congress.  Paez also requested funds for 
computers and other equipment for the new oral system in the 
labor courts.  By all accounts, the oral system has been very 
successful, reducing the average time of a labor trial from 
2-3 years to 2-3 months, and will be implemented in other 
courts.  We hope to be able to contribute to the reform\'s 
continued success and are investigating possible funding 
sources. 
 
Chamber of Commerce Challenges Subcontracting Decree 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Alberto Dassum, President of the Chamber of 
Industry of Guayaquil, informed EconOff on November 18 that a 
constitutional challenge to the presidential decree on 
subcontracting had been submitted to the Constitutional 
Court.  Dassum said the Chamber had argued that the decree 
establishes obligations and restrictions that limit 
individual rights, and introduces regulations not covered in 
the labor code, both violations of the Constitution.  Dassum 
said the Chamber would also try to convince the Labor 
Minister to modify the decree. 
 
Hunger Strike by Public Sector Workers 
-------------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) On October 14, 41,000 public servant workers in the 
Ministries of Education, Agriculture, Environment, 
Government, and Commerce went on strike demanding a $100 
million 2005 budget to fund a public sector unified salary 
structure approved by Congress in September 2003.  Eight 
public servants went on a hunger strike on November 16 to 
pressure Congress to approve the requested funds.  On 
November 30, Congress approved a total of $60 million, $30 
million more than the $30 million the Government had 
originally proposed to finance salary unification.  Of the 
additional $30 million, $10 million will come from the 
Ministry of Economy and $20 million will come from unrelated 
cuts in personnel costs.  Public sector workers, however, 
continue to protest.  Press reported that the Government 
planned to offer 5,000 retirement packages in 2005 to reduce 
the budget for salaries, funded with a $100 million dollar 
loan from the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 
 
Penitentiary and Health Worker Strikes 
-------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) In other strike action, penitentiary workers from 34 
prisons nationwide went on strike November 26 to push 
Congress to approve $78 million for their 2005 budget.  The 
Government had only approved $25 million. 
 
8.  (U) Meanwhile, approximately 14,000 health workers went 
on strike October 4 to demand the signing of a two-year 
collective bargaining contract which would take effect 
January 1, 2005.  This was not a total or national strike, as 
some workers were not in favor of striking.  The strike was 
suspended in early November, but health workers have 
announced they may strike again in December if the pact is 
not approved. 
 
ILO Reaches Out to Unions 
------------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) On November 19, unions attended a meeting of the 
National Labor Council on November 18 where ILO Lima\'s 
Ricardo Hernandez Pulido gave a presentation on generating 
employment.  Child labor ILO director in Ecuador Magne 
Svartbekk also held meetings with the leaders of all five 
union confederations encouraging them to stay engaged with 
the Council despite their misgivings about the Labor 
Minister\'s credibility. 
 
MOL Working on Child Labor Issues 
--------------------------------- 
 
10.  (U) Starting in early November, MOL-produced commercials 
with a child labor awareness message began airing on 
Ecuadorian television.  According to Dr. Ruth Mosquera of the 
MOL\'s Child Labor Division, two spots will air for a total of 
three months.  The message of the first ad is to respect the 
rights of working adolescents over 15.  The message of the 
second is to eliminate child labor.  The MOL is also planning 
a series of regional training workshops for those who monitor 
child labor inspectors.  Representatives from NGOs, union, 
and other organizations accompany child labor inspectors to 
prevent corruption.  The workshops will begin on December 15 
and are scheduled for Quito, Guayaquil, and Cuenca.  Mosquera 
said the MOL, in coordination with the ILO, held a workshop 
November 30 to increase child labor awareness among 40 
businessmen and women in the flower sector. 
 
11.  (U) According to a report presented by the ILO on 
October 9, Ecuador, Guatemala, and Honduras have the highest 
rates of child labor in Latin America.  In Ecuador, 41% of 
adolescents between 15 and 17 work while 15% of children 5 
through 15 work.  In the Andean region, 60% of child labor is 
in the agricultural sector. 
 
CRS DOL-Funded Child Labor Project Underway 
------------------------------------------- 
 
12.  (U) Catholic Relief Services (CRS) has hired key staff 
for the $3 million USDOL-funded child labor project awarded 
in September.  Thus far, they have hired a Director 
(Alexandra Moncada), Education Specialist (Patricio Cajas), 
Evaluation Specialist (Luis Stacey from CARE), and one 
technical support person.  CRS will be meeting on December 7 
with a consultant, Donald Spears of Management Systems 
International, hired by USDOL to develop their operational 
plan.  CRS plans to inaugurate the project in the first 
quarter of 2005. 
 
Former Petroecuador Workers Remain Jobless 
------------------------------------------ 
 
13.  (SBU) LabOff met with Mario Escobar, former state 
petroleum company worker on October 5 at Escobar\'s request to 
discuss the 2003 firing of Petroecuador workers.  Employees 
of the parastatal petroleum company claim they held peaceful 
meetings in June 2003 to protest against the new Minister of 
Energy and did not disrupt oil production.  The Minister of 
Energy assumed direct control of oil production with support 
of the Armed Forces and accused the workers of sabotage and 
terrorism.  The Acting Vice Minister of Labor then gave the 
Energy Minister permission to fire the 33 workers without 
compensation.  In August 2004, the Supreme Court found the 
workers innocent of the charges.  Twenty workers are filing 
court cases to receive indemnization since under the labor 
code reinstatement is not required for illegally firing 
workers engaged in union activity. 
 
Immigrants Vulnerable to Employer Abuse 
--------------------------------------- 
 
14.  (U) Press reported that day laborers from Colombia and 
Peru receive lower wages and worse working conditions than 
their Ecuadorian counterparts.  Foreign workers seek 
employment in Ecuador to earn higher wages.  Luis Urgiles, 
human rights ombudsman for Azuay province, publicly claimed 
that Peruvian workers in the region do not make formal 
complaints despite receiving bad treatment from employers. 
KENNEY 
"
"23731","12/7/2004 23:01","04QUITO3167","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04QUITO3108","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003167 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT GUTIERREZ CALLS CONGRESS BACK TO DEBATE 
COURT REFORM 
 
REF: QUITO 3108 
 
1.  (SBU) On December 5, in a surprise exercise of 
constitutional privilege, President Gutierrez canceled his 
planned trip to Peru and called Congress back from recess 
into extraordinary session on December 8.  In so doing he 
requested that they consider three issues:  1) the censure of 
recently expelled members of the constitutional court; 2) the 
constitutionality of the current composition of the Supreme 
Court; and 3) the system for division of provincial and 
municipal council seats among minority parties.  The move has 
generated controversy within the government\'s \"progressive 
alliance\" (for not being consulted), and among the 
opposition.  Both sides were meeting today to define strategy 
for the session.  Gutierrez appears intent on exploiting his 
alliance to purge the courts of opposition manipulation, and 
willing to invoke dubious constitutional arguments to justify 
the move.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) Gutierrez convoked the Special session after a 
Pichincha court ruled on December 3 in favor of an injunction 
request to suspend Congress\' November 25 Congressional 
resolution replacing members of the Constitutional Court.  A 
government legal advisor later asserted that the review of 
the current composition of the Supreme Court derives from the 
fact that the current court was selected under the previous 
constitution.  The 1998 constitution called for transitional 
appointments to end on January 1, 2003.  Gutierrez also 
publicly accused Supreme Court President Hugo Quintana of 
lobbying the local judge to accept the injunction request, 
from two former CC magistrates affiliated with the main 
opposition Social Christian Party. 
 
3.  (SBU) Gutierrez had given no hint of the surprise move in 
a meeting with the Ambassador and DCM on December 2, 
expressing respect for the Constitution and anticipation of 
his visit to Peru for the creation of the Community of South 
American nations. 
 
4.  (U) On December 4 the provincial judge ruled in favor of 
suspension of the Congressional measure replacing most 
members of the Constitutional Court, putting the legality of 
the move into question. 
 
5.  (U) The \"progressive alliance,\" which includes President 
Gutierrez\' Patriotic Society Party, had approved the law 
replacing seven of nine Constitutional Court judges on 
November 25, with a simple majority of 55 votes (RefTel). 
The coalition also includes the PRE, PRIAN, MPD, DP, 
Socialist Party, CFP, and numerous independent deputies. 
Some members of the alliance publicly expressed pique at not 
being consulted by the President before he made the surprise 
announcement. 
 
6.  (U) Opposition leaders in the PSC and ID denounced the 
President\'s proposed agenda as \"dictatorial\" and 
unconstitutional and met on December 7 to discuss their 
opposition strategy.  ID leader Guillermo Landazuri said the 
ID would boycott the session, but has apparently changed tact 
and will now attend.  PSC leader Febres-Cordero launched a 
media blitz criticizing the move and alleging evidence of new 
corruption within the government.  He said the PSC would 
attend the session to oppose the President\'s agenda. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The President\'s decision to call a special session 
came during speculation that Congress President Landazuri was 
himself considering calling Congress back to discuss issues 
which divide the alliance.  This and the injunction appear to 
have spurred the Administration to seize the initiative and 
seek to exploit its current alliance to purge the courts of 
PSC control.  Given the fragility of the alliance and the 
thin constitutional justification for interference with the 
courts, the government may find it difficult to pass 
substantial court reform, even with a simple majority. 
Electoral reform and the censure motion against the dismissed 
constitutional judges are more likely to prosper.  All 
members of the alliance voted for the replacement of the 
judges and want to cover their legal flank; all are also 
minority parties which suffered from the constitutional 
court\'s rejection of the prior method to boost minority 
representation on city and provincial councils. 
KENNEY 
"
"23732","12/7/2004 23:05","04QUITO3168","Embassy Quito","SECRET","04QUITO3081","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003168 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MARR, EC, Democracy 
SUBJECT: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR ECUADORIAN 
DEMOCRACY 
 
REF: QUITO 3081 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney for reason 1.4 (b&d) 
 
1.  (S) President Gutierrez\' call for a special Congressional 
session, while controversial, is unlikely to directly 
threaten political stability.  Nevertheless, this event bears 
watching, given the proven potential for Congressional 
conflicts to lead to unforeseen consequences on stability in 
this country.  In our view, the opposition is not poised to 
convert Congressional controversy into mass mobilization in 
the short run, pushing off prospects for serious instability 
at least into the new year.  Serious potential challenges to 
political stability remain, however.  We have persistently 
encouraged Gutierrez and the opposition to respect 
constitutional due process, and see further opportunities for 
the USG to fortify Ecuadorian democracy in the near future. 
End Summary. 
 
Special Session Controversial 
----------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) SepTel reports the controversial call by President 
Gutierrez for a special session of Congress on December 8 to 
discuss various judicial reforms.  The controversy stems from 
the methods favored by the government to replace the members 
of the Supreme Court, largely affiliated with the PSC. 
Constitutional controversy centers on whether the Congress 
has authority to interfere in Court activities under the 1998 
constitution.  Gutierrez is apparently willing to press its 
tentative and simple majority to take further steps into a 
constitutional grey area, if only to maintain its momentum in 
the run-up to selection of the Congressional leadership on 
January 5.  Defense Minister Herrera immediately expressed 
full military for the government. 
 
3.  (C) The opposition, meanwhile, seems unprepared to 
capitalize on the situation.  However, the indigenous 
movement remains divided and focused on changing its 
leadership later this month, delaying the potential for 
massive anti-government protest.  The Democratic Left is 
still being consolidated under the new leadership of 
Guillermo Lanzaduri, who was recently elected party president 
after a dismal effort as President of Congress.  And the main 
opposition PSC has yet to recover after the early demise of 
its impeachment effort.  Party leader Febres Cordero has 
become a target of opportunity for the government, rallying 
elements of the opposition behind the government\'s effort to 
limit his party\'s power in the judiciary. 
 
More Challenges Ahead 
--------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Several events over the coming month are likely to 
increase the potential for political instability, including: 
 
-- the effects of a rumored Cabinet shakeup, especially if it 
affects the defense minister  (the economic team will not 
change, according to Gutierrez); 
 
-- the looming fight over Congressional leadership positions, 
which affects all Congressional factions; 
 
-- the anti-government potential of the indigenous movement; 
 
-- the Government\'s proposed (but unrevealed) referendum to 
promote political reforms, possibly including reorganization 
of the courts, giving the President the power to dissolve 
Congress, and permitting re-election of the President; 
 
-- the destabilizing prospect of the possible return from 
exile of former president Abdala Bucaram. 
 
Opportunities 
------------- 
 
5.  (C) While the challenges to this government\'s longevity 
remain daunting, we see many opportunities to promote respect 
for political stability and democratic institutions. 
 
-- The Ambassador strongly cautioned the President to respect 
democratic due process in their last meeting, on December 2. 
 
-- We have redoubled our outreach with members of the 
alliance and the opposition, encouraging all to respect 
constitutional limits. 
 
-- We will closely monitor the special session on December 8 
and the indigenous movement\'s selection of new leaders on 
December 19-20. 
 
-- After a hiatus in contact with PSC leader Febres-Cordero, 
who masterminded the ill-fated impeachment effort, CG 
Guayaquil and PolCouns will re-engage with him. 
 
-- Former President Bush\'s private visit to Guayaquil has 
been rescheduled for January 14, and may include a meeting 
with Gutierrez. 
 
-- DAO and MLGRP will continue to closely monitor key 
military units and the military hierarchy\'s posture for signs 
of concern or opposition. 
Comment 
------- 
6.  (S) The President\'s efforts to purge the judiciary of PSC 
influence do raise serious constitutional issues, and will 
certainly not contribute to democratic stability.  U.S. 
interests mandate continued vigilance and engagement, but we 
are reluctant to inject ourselves publicly into the 
still-evolving Congressional debate over judicial and 
political reform.  The President\'s congressional gambit could 
well fail, and at a minimum risks a change in political 
momentum which could rejuvenate the opposition.  Serious 
destabilization of the government, however, is more likely to 
come from the streets than from Congressional debate (barring 
renewed impeachment efforts), where the distracted indigenous 
movement traditionally holds sway, or from the military, 
which shows no signs of unrest. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"23863","12/9/2004 22:31","04QUITO3192","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE259685","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003192 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: CUBA: NSC-DIRECTED COUNTRY-BY-COUNTRY REVIEW 
REGARDING SUSPENSION OF TITLE III OF THE LIBERTAD ACT 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 259685 
 
     B. SECSTATE 248337 
 
1.  After checking with the MFA, we have been unable to 
confirm any recent Ecuadorian government actions to advance 
democracy, human rights, and fundamental freedoms in Cuba. 
Ecuador abstained from the UNHRC Cuban human rights 
resolution in 2004.  Further information on this subject may 
be available through the EC mission in Geneva, according to 
the MFA.  As far as we know, the GOE does not maintain 
information on investments by Ecuadorian individuals or 
entities in Cuba.  We are verifying that with the Finance 
Ministry and will report any additional information SepTel. 
KENNEY 
"
"23921","12/10/2004 17:15","04QUITO3202","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04GUAYAQUIL1303","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003202 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, PGOV, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR PREPARING TO MOVE FORWARD ON CIVIL 
AVIATION LEGISLATION 
 
REF: GUAYAQUIL 1303 
 
1.  Summary.  Ecuador\'s Congress is preparing for the second 
debate on proposed civil aviation legislation sometime in 
January.  A legal advisor to the committee in which the draft 
legislation is pending says a vote on the floor of the 
Congress is likely sometime in February.  The passage of this 
legislation would represent a necessary step towards Category 
I status under the International Aviation Safety Assessment 
(IASA) program.  The Embassy is pushing for passage of this 
legislation and is working with the Ecuadorian Civil Aviation 
Authority (DGAC) and U.S. Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) officials to ensure that the final legislation will 
meet security standards.  Many special interests groups are 
already lobbying on behalf of the legislation and urging 
Congress to move as quickly as possible.  Despite past 
delays, we believe prospects for Congressional passage are 
good.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Civil Aviation Legislation - Long Time Coming 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  Civil aviation legislation meeting international security 
standards has languished in Congress since early 2003. 
Several reviews and revisions have taken place since then. 
In April 2003, the FAA reviewed the draft legislation and 
provided feedback to the DGAC about necessary revisions to 
meet FAA\'s International Aviation Safety Assessment (IASA). 
In the ensuing year and a half, FAA officials have met with 
DGAC officials to provide additional guidance.  The FAA 
agreed to give the legislation a final review in December 
2004. 
 
------------------- 
Let\'s Pull Together 
------------------- 
 
3.    The Embassy has been working closely with the FAA and 
DGAC to ensure that Ecuador\'s legislation meets international 
standards.  In addition to the Embassy, many special interest 
groups are lobbying for passage of this legislation.  The 
Congressional committee overseeing this legislation has 
already received numerous inquiries from the DGAC, airline 
associations, pilots associations, and other groups. 
 
4.  The Ambassador stopped over in Guayaquil en route to the 
Galapagos and met with Nicholas Romero, Director of 
Guayaquil\'s Airport, to discuss the legislation (Reftel). 
She told Romero and Guayaquil Consulate officials that active 
participation from stakeholders in Guayaquil would be 
necessary for passage of the legislation.  She urged them to 
work together to present a united front in favor of passage. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
5.  We are cautiously optimistic that the Congress will pass 
civair legislation early next year.  Our key concern has been 
making certain that the legislation passed actually meets 
standards. 
KENNEY 
"
"24290","12/17/2004 22:25","04QUITO3256","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO3151","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003256 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/16/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MASS, MARR, PGOV, EC, KICC 
SUBJECT: ARTICLE 98:  GOE AWARE OF NETHERCUTT-BACKS 
 
REF: A. QUITO 3151 
 
     B. QUITO 3150 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Word of the Nethercutt Amendment, which 
mandates reductions in Economic Support Funds (ESF) available 
to non-Article 98 signers, has reached GoE leaders, and they 
are worried.  In a pull-aside at a diplomatic reception 
recently, the foreign minister requested clarification and 
inquired about the possibility of a waiver for Ecuador.  The 
Ambassador, expressing USG frustration over Ecuador\'s refusal 
to negotiate Article 98 seriously, suggested an alternative 
strategy:  that the GoE\'s new Ambassador in Washington engage 
U.S. Article 98 interlocutors immediately, in hopes of 
finding mutually acceptable language.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) On December 16, the Ambassador joined third-country 
counterparts at a GoE-hosted diplomatic corps lunch. 
President Gutierrez and Foreign Minister Patricio Zuquilanda 
cornered her at its conclusion, seeking a discreet 
pull-aside.  The foreign minister did most of the talking. 
 
3.  (C) Zuquilanda was troubled over news of Congressional 
passage of the Nethercutt Amendment, which President Bush 
recently had signed into law.  The legislation forced ESF 
reductions, if not complete cutoffs, to nations, like 
Ecuador, not having entered into Article 98 agreements with 
the United States.  According to the Ecuadorian embassy\'s 
analysis, which the FM requested the Ambassador peruse, 
Nethercutt\'s impact on Ecuador could reach $13 million.  The 
reduction\'s effects on USAID Quito\'s Northern Border program 
worried Zuquilanda the most.  Ecuador\'s precarious security 
situation and compelling needs mandated a Nethercutt waiver, 
the FM asserted. 
 
4.  (C) The Ambassador agreed that ESF cutbacks might occur, 
were Ecuador not to sign Article 98, but cautioned Zuquilanda 
that Washington had not yet fully analyzed the implications 
for Ecuador.  She emphasized that waiver relief was not 
possible, since the total of Article 98-signing nations was 
nearing 100.  Besides, USG frustration over Ecuadorian 
intransigence was growing -- any request for special 
treatment, as long as the GoE refused to engage in good-faith 
Article 98 negotiations, would fall on deaf ears in 
Washington (DCM had transmitted same message in a December 16 
lunch with GoE Chief of Staff Xavier Ledesma). 
 
5.  (C) Instead, the Ambassador suggested the GoE consider an 
alternate track.  Roberto Betancourt, Ecuador\'s U.S. 
ambassador-designate (Ref B), was well-versed in Article 98, 
owing to his short-lived role as the MFA\'s point of contact 
for negotiations with the Embassy.  Upon arriving in 
Washington, the Ambassador offered, Betancourt should engage 
State, DoD, even U.S. Congress contacts, to begin 
negotiations of an accord.  To be taken seriously, however, 
Betancourt must be prepared to talk specifics -- no \"we\'re 
continuing to analyze various texts\" or \"we\'re seeking our 
legislature\'s green light to negotiate\" allowed.  Neither 
Zuquilanda nor the president responded substantively. 
 
6.  (C) COMMENT:  We are impressed that the GoE\'s Washington 
embassy did its homework on Nethercutt Amendment implications 
to USAID\'s Ecuador program.  A week ago, Zuquilanda\'s cryptic 
public comments regarding $4 million in imminent U.S. 
assistance cutbacks left us wondering whether he referred to 
ASPA\'s military assistance reductions (actually closer to $7 
million) or to possible, Nethercutt-related sanctions.  Now 
we know.  But we are left questioning the real reasons for 
Zuquilanda\'s concern.  Do the ESF cutbacks represent threats 
to important GoE initiatives on the northern frontier, thus 
spurring the MFA to engage constructively on Article 98?  Or 
does Zuquilanda simply want confirmation of Nethercutt 
assistance reductions, in order to polish a strategy to 
temper negative Ecuadorian media coverage that undoubtedly 
awaits? 
 
7.  (C) We lean toward the latter, unfortunately.  Recent 
press on Article 98 has been uniformly negative, with 
journalists demanding the GoE not barter Ecuador\'s 
sovereignty for $7 million in U.S. military assistance.  News 
of the potentially graver ESF cutbacks, rather than push the 
MFA to the table, might actually raise further hackles.  We 
understand the Department is analyzing the Nethercutt 
Amendment and soon will issue guidance to embassies.  Until 
then, we will answer private and public inquiries by noting 
that Nethercutt is U.S. law, adding that Washington agencies 
continue to study its implementation and effects on foreign 
nations.  END COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"24291","12/17/2004 22:28","04QUITO3257","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO3099","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003257 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: DECEMBER TIP UPDATE 
 
REF: QUITO 3099 
 
1. Summary.  Ecuadorian police conducted 130 raids from 
November 12 to December 9 and found 28 minors who may be 
trafficking victims.  The congressional committee reviewed 
the Trafficking in Persons (TIP) bill, and it has been 
amended and is ready for Congress\' second reading.  Several 
embassies are committed to fighting trafficking, and we will 
work with them to promote GOE engagement.  The new Minister 
of Government has named an undersecretary as his ministry\'s 
POC on TIP.  End Summary. 
 
Police Conduct 130 Raids Looking for TIP Victims 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
2.  The unit of the police dedicated to protecting children, 
DINAPEN, conducted an impressive 130 raids from November 12 - 
December 9.  DINAPEN clarified that males found in these 
raids are not believed to be TIP victims; they are usually 
picked up for underage consumption of  alcohol or, in a 
lesser number of cases, soliciting the services of sexually 
exploited females.  Twenty-eight females were found who may 
be trafficking victims. 
 
TIP Bill Ready for Congress\' Second Review 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3.  The congressional committee reviewing trafficking 
legislation recently gave us the revised version Congress 
will debate after the holidays.  (A copy was emailed to 
WHA/PPC and G/TIP on December 15.)  The bill correctly 
defines the crime of TIP and raises the age of consent to 18. 
 The penalties for traffickers range from 12 to 25 years, and 
criminals typically receive a more severe sentence when the 
victim is a minor.  The ABA will travel to Ecuador in 
mid-January and will review anti-TIP bills. 
 
Diplomatic Community Supports Trafficking Fight 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
4.  Several other embassies are interested in working to 
encourage the GOE to fight TIP.  We have spoken with the 
Spanish, French, Peruvian, Colombian, Belgian, and Dutch 
embassies between November 29 and December 9.  All expressed 
interest in cooperating with us and the GOE to combat TIP. 
PolOff will contact the MFA and set up a joint meeting with 
the other embassies to show the importance of combating 
trafficking to jointly encourage GOE anti-TIP efforts. 
 
New Advisor for TIP 
------------------- 
 
5.  On December 15, PolChief and PolOff met with newly-named 
Undersecretary of Government Eduardo Ruiz, who was designated 
by Government Minister Damerval to handle the TIP portfolio. 
We explained the differences between trafficking and alien 
smuggling, the USG\'s trafficking report and tier levels, and 
our impressions of the GOE\'s efforts to fight TIP.  We 
encouraged Ruiz to convoke the GOE\'s inter-institutional 
anti-TIP group, which his minister heads.  He pledged to do 
so, and said Minister Damerval was ready to lobby Congress in 
support of pending anti-TIP legislation. 
KENNEY 
"
"24375","12/20/2004 20:52","04QUITO3260","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003260 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USTR BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, ECIN, ECON, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trade, FTA 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR SPLIT ON SUPPORT OF FREE TRADE AGREEMENT 
 
 
1. Summary.  A public opinion poll sponsored by USAID shows 
that about half of the Ecuadorian public has heard about the 
FTA and about half of the public (both informed and 
uninformed) supports it.  Not surprisingly, solid majorities 
believe that the FTA will benefit the U.S. far more than 
Ecuador.  About half of those polled expressed no confidence 
in Ecuador,s negotiating team and the vast majority felt 
that the GOE is not adequately informing the public about the 
process.  Almost 85% feel the FTA should be put to a popular 
vote.  While the GOE flatly opposes a referendum on the FTA, 
an uneducated population and mandatory voting could present 
an obstacle to the FTA if a vote were to take place.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  As part of USAID,s campaign, a public opinion poll was 
conducted on the FTA between the U.S. and the Andean 
countries.  The poll was conducted from November 16 through 
December 4, 2004.  The sample was 2,673 persons between the 
ages of 18 and 65.  The sample error is  /- 1.9%.  The 
results were mixed and sometimes contradictory. 
 
------------- 
Mixed Results 
------------- 
 
3.  Half of those polled had heard of the FTA negotiations. 
About half of those polled, both those who were aware of the 
negotiations and those who were not, said an FTA with the 
U.S. would be beneficial for Ecuador.  Roughly one third 
thought it would be detrimental for Ecuador. 
 
4.  The poll reflects the contradictory gut reactions of 
Ecuadorians to both like and mistrust the U.S.  Two-thirds of 
the sample, without regard to socio-economic class or age, 
saw the U.S. as a friend of Ecuador, but an interested 
friend, a country whose friendship was conditioned by its own 
interests.  While majorities thought the FTA would bring more 
employment (54%) to Ecuador, increase exports (58%) to the 
U.S., and bring more U.S. investment (82%) to Ecuador, a 
majority (58%) also felt that the U.S. would benefit more 
from this agreement than Ecuador.  Moreover, vast majorities 
felt that the U.S. was looking to take advantage of 
Ecuador,s natural resources (74%) and would impose 
conditions on Ecuador that would favor the U.S. market (78%). 
 Far more respondents thought an FTA with Europe would be 
beneficial to Ecuador (70%) than thought the same about an 
FTA with the U.S. (50%).  The perception of benefit from a 
U.S. agreement was slightly greater among people aged 18 to 
35 (51-53%), than among older respondents (46-47%). 
 
5.  More than half (54%) felt that big business would be the 
greatest beneficiary from the FTA.  Politicians came in 
second at 18%.  A likely result of a campaign by small 
business leaders against the FTA was that small enterprise 
was thought by 27% of the respondents to be the group that 
would be affected most detrimentally by the FTA.  Agriculture 
came in second with 18% of respondents, behind both \"other\" 
and \"don,t know\", possibly reflecting the fact that 
agricultural interests will likely be among those most 
benefited, as well as those most challenged, under the FTA. 
 
6.  Most people (85%) did not know who was negotiating the 
FTA for Ecuador.  Of those who did (15%), most only knew 
Ivonne Baki, the flamboyant Minister of Trade.  Despite not 
knowing who was negotiating the agreement for Ecuador, half 
gave a vote of no confidence to the team, 22% were confident, 
and 28% were undecided.  Of those who knew of the negotiating 
team, about half still (52%) had no confidence in them, 
although the number who did feel confident increased from 22 
to 37%. 
 
7.  Almost half (46%) felt the GOE was not adequately 
informing the public about the negotiations.  Only 10% felt 
adequately informed.  By far, Ecuadorians received most of 
their information about the FTA from television (72%) and 
radio (9%).  Only 6% gained their information from newspapers. 
 
8.  Not surprisingly, most people thought the FTA should be 
subject to a popular vote (84%).  Of those who thought there 
should be a popular vote, 38% said they would vote in favor 
of the FTA, 30% would vote against it, and 32% were 
undecided.  The large number of undecided voters is probably 
a good thing, since it implies that prejudices are not 
decisive, but this certainly points to a great deal of work 
still to be done by the GOE in getting the word out. 
 
--------------- 
More To Be Done 
--------------- 
 
9.  The USAID campaign has made tremendous headway in 
educating the Ecuadorian public about the FTA.  Through its 
partnership with Comisin Negociadora, about 150 workshops 
have taken place, its Website is up and receiving hits, and 
several events have taken place with Congress.  The current 
phase of the campaign is expected to inform directly more 
than 8,000 persons. 
 
10.  The next phase is currently being planned and will 
involve more Congressional interaction and probably dialogues 
with specific sectors addressing their concerns with impact 
analyses. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
11.  The fact that half of the population supports the FTA 
makes us optimistic that, once an agreement is reached, it 
will enjoy enough support to pass the Ecuadorian Congress. 
The clear desire for a popular vote on the FTA reflects a 
concerted effort by civil society groups including the main 
indigenous organization to compel a referendum on the 
subject.  Their effort to collect nearly one million 
signatures, however, has fallen flat (so far only 35,000). 
Business groups claim they have collected three times as many 
signatures in favor of an FTA (115,000).  The GOE is 
adamantly against a referendum on the FTA. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"24377","12/20/2004 22:07","04QUITO3262","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003262 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SECSTATE PLEASE PASS TO US TRADE REPRESENTATIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, ETRD, EC, Labor 
SUBJECT: MOL UNDERSTANDS NEED FOR LABOR CODE REFORM 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  While Minister of Labor Izurieta 
understands the need for labor code reform, he is not focused 
on freedom of association issues.  The Embassy has made it 
clear to Izurieta that the U.S. Congress is less likely to 
pass a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) including Ecuador unless 
the labor code is reformed to address freedom of association 
weaknesses.  Izurieta said the GoE is working with Congress 
and the International Labor Organization (ILO) on labor code 
reform.  We have offered technical assistance to help focus 
these reforms on freedom of association issues, and move 
labor code reform forward.  End Summary. 
 
Embassy Reiterates Congressional Concerns on Labor 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
2.  (SBU) PolChief and LabOff met with Minister of Labor Raul 
Izurieta on December 16 to reiterate USG concern that 
significant labor reform is necessary to bring the GoE into 
compliance with its ILO commitments.  Without this type of 
reform, the U.S. Congress would be unlikely to approve an FTA 
with Ecuador.  To provide concrete examples of areas needing 
reform, we shared with Izurieta copies of ILO recommendations 
for reform, as well as the Human Rights Watch and US/LEAP 
petitions for the Andean Trade Preferences Act (both of which 
LabOff had previously provided to Izurieta) that outline 
weaknesses in Ecuadorian labor law.  We also provided 
Izurieta with another copy of the March 5 letter from 34 
members of the U.S. Congress to Minister of Trade Ivonne 
Baki, highlighting the concluding phrases which refer to the 
need for significant labor reform in Ecuador in order for the 
U.S. Congress to approve an FTA.  PolChief noted the current 
pro-government Congressional majority and asked whether the 
GoE was considering using this majority for labor code reform. 
 
MOL Working on Labor Code Reform... 
----------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Izurieta said that he fully understood the need for 
labor reform and currently has a consultant working on a 
reform proposal by December 30.  Izurieta said he intends to 
present these reform proposals to the National Labor Council 
for discussion, to be followed by submission to Congress. 
Izurieta described his 12-point labor reform priority list 
which included replacing profit sharing with other benefits 
such as travel benefits, housing loans and educational 
scholarships for workers\' families, replacing private 
retirement schemes with public ones, and having employers 
contribute at higher rates to Social Security.  Izurieta said 
getting rid of private retirement schemes will help workers, 
because currently many workers are fired before being vested 
in retirement benefits after 25 years with a company. 
Izurieta\'s list did not include any freedom of association 
issues and he stated he did not believe there were any laws 
impeding the formation of unions.  Izurieta said most workers 
choose of their own volition not to join a union because this 
could put their employment at risk. 
 
...Yet Key Issues Not Addressed 
------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) We explained that while important, Izurieta\'s 
reform priorities were not likely to be recognized as 
\"significant\" in the context of U.S. Congressional debate of 
an FTA including Ecuador.  More likely to be considered 
significant would be steps addressing the ILO\'s call for 
reduction of the 30-person minimum to form a union, the right 
to reinstatement for workers illegally fired for union 
activity, authorization of industrial unions, and protections 
against anti-union discrimination in hiring.  Izurieta said 
he would review the documents we provided to see how these 
concerns could be addressed. 
 
5.  (SBU) On \"industrial\" or sector-wide unions, Izurieta 
said these already existed without the sanction of the law. 
He cited the example of the national drivers union as a de 
facto industrial union.  The AFL-CIO Solidarity Center in 
Ecuador confirmed to us that this sector-wide union does 
exist, as well as province-wide unions in the banana industry 
(with a goal to form a nationwide union).  However, when 
flower workers tried to form a sector-wide union, they were 
denied by the current Minister.  (Izurieta said the labor 
code neither permits nor prohibits sector-wide unions.) 
 
Other Upcoming Issues 
--------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) According to Izurieta, Andres Paez, President of 
the Labor Committee in Congress, will attend an upcoming 
National Labor Council meeting to discuss Paez\' proposed 
subcontracting law.  However, Izurieta is concerned that Paez 
will not retain the Labor Committee Chair after the January 5 
reshuffle of Congressional leadership positions.  Izurieta 
also said he is in close contact with the ILO on employment 
issues.  Izurieta stated that the upcoming restructuring of 
the Ministry of Labor will focus on promoting employment and 
improving worker training programs.  We suggested greater 
collaboration with the ILO on freedom of association issues. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Unions already view Izurieta as biased in favor of 
business and Izurieta\'s reform proposals will reinforce this 
view.  To help refocus the Minister\'s energies on more 
significant reforms, we are exploring the possibility of 
offering technical assistance on labor code reform through 
USAID.  We will also explore the possibility of having a 
Chilean expert on labor reform visit Ecuador to share that 
country\'s experiences.  Meanwhile, we have encouraged private 
and direct dialogue between key labor and business leaders, 
to explore the possibilities of a shared labor/business 
reform agenda.  The current Congressional majority is 
fragile, and the government is not in a position to impose 
any labor agenda without labor or business support. 
KENNEY 
"
"24511","12/22/2004 20:24","04QUITO3280","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE271552","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 003280 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-O, WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: CONTACT INFO FOR GOE OFFICIALS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 271552 
 
1.  In response to Reftel, Post provides the following 
contact information for Government of Ecuador leadership: 
 
HEAD OF GOVERNMENT/STATE 
LAST NAME:  GUTIERREZ 
FIRST NAME: LUCIO 
TITLE:      PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC 
OFFICE PH:(593-2) 2580833 / 2588888 
CELL:     (593)94-236187 
COMMENTS:   GUTIERREZ SPEAKS BASIC ENGLISH, STRONGLY PREFERS 
SPANISH.  PRIVATE SECRETARY IS MONICA ACOSTA (593)94-236187; 
AIDE IS RAFAEL POVEDA, (593)2450145 (EITHER RECEIVES 
AFTER-HOURS CALLS) 
 
VICE PRESIDENT 
LAST NAME:  PALACIO 
FIRST NAME: DR. ALFREDO (MD) 
TITLE:      VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC 
OFFICE PH:(593-2) 2584242 / 2584280 
CELL:       (593)99-663246 (SECRETARY:  MARIA LUISA TAPIA, 
BEST FOR AFTER HOURS CALLS) 
COMMENTS:   PALACIO SPEAKS FLUENT ENGLISH.  TRAVELS 
FREQUENTLY TO USA ON PUBLIC HEALTH ISSUES.  AIDE IS ROBERT 
PINZON, (593-2) 2584242 / 2584421. 
 
INTERIOR MINISTER 
LAST NAME:  DAMERVAL 
FIRST NAME: JAIME 
TITLE:      MINISTER OF GOVERNMENT 
OFFICE PH:(593-2) 2958642 / 2958652 
COMMENTS:   DAMERVAL SPEAKS BASIC ENGLISH, STRONGLY PREFERS 
SPANISH.  SECRETARIES ARE ZORAYA FLORES, ALICIA DE LLENARES 
(593-2) 2584919. 
 
FOREIGN MINISTER 
LAST NAME:  ZUQUILANDA 
FIRST NAME: PATRICIO 
TITLE:      MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
OFFICE PH:(593-2) 2993201 / 02 / 03/ 04 
CELL:     (593)96-005801 (SECRETARY:  ANA CECILIA) 
COMMENTS:   ZUQUILANDA SPEAKS FLUENT ENGLISH.  CHIEF OF STAFF 
IS MINISTER JOSE SANDOVAL (593)98-504253 (AFTER HOURS).  MFA 
SWITCHBOARD OPEN 0800-2000. 
 
DEFENSE MINISTER 
LAST NAME:  HERRERA 
FIRST NAME: NELSON 
TITLE:      MINISTER OF DEFENSE 
OFFICE PH:(593-2) 2587197 / 2284107 
COMMENTS:   HERRERA SPEAKS BASIC ENGLISH, STRONGLY PREFERS 
SPANISH.  JUDITH AGUIRRE IS PRIVATE SECRETARY (593)99-667441 
(AFTER HOURS). 
 
LAST NAME:  A-BAKI 
FIRST NAME: IVONNE 
TITLE:      MINISTER OF FOREIGN TRADE AND COMMERCE 
OFFICE PH:(593-2) 2906127 / 2505072 / 2509804 
CELL:       (592) 98-201348 (SECRETARY:  ALICIA DE URIARTE, 
RECEIVES AFTER-HOURS CALLS) 
COMMENTS:   A-BAKI SPEAKS FLUENT ENGLISH.  FORMER AMBASSADOR 
TO USA. 
KENNEY 
"
"24585","12/23/2004 19:53","04QUITO3289","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE240980","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 QUITO 003289 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR USTR G. BLUE AND BENNETT HARMAN AND FOR STATE EB/MTA/MST 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EFIN, EC, Trade 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR 2005 NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE REPORT 
SUBMISSION 
 
REF: STATE 240980 
 
1.  Below is Embassy Quito\'s submission for the 2005 National 
Trade Estimate Report.  A copy of the report has been 
provided to USTR Bennett Harman via email.  The report was a 
collaborative effort between State, the Commercial Service 
and the Foreign Agricultural Service. 
 
 
TRADE SUMMARY 
------------- 
 
According to US Bureau of Census statistics, the United 
States, trade deficit with Ecuador was $1.3 billion in 2003 
(agricultural trade accounted for $850 million of the 
deficit).  That was an increase of $762 million from the $538 
million deficit in 2002.  U.S. goods exports in 2003 were 
$1.4 billion, down 9.9 percent from the previous year ($1.6 
billion).  Corresponding U.S. imports from Ecuador in 2003 
were $2.7 billion, up 27 percent.  U.S. agricultural imports 
from Ecuador in 2003 were $1.09 billion, a 4% increase from 
2002 ($970 million).  Ecuador is currently the 51st largest 
export market for U.S. goods. 
 
Ecuadorian Central Bank statistics estimate the stock of 
foreign direct investment (FDI) in Ecuador in 2003 was $1.5 
billion.  U.S. FDI in Ecuador in 2003 is estimated at $204 
million, primarily in the oil sector. 
 
Free Trade Area Negotiations 
---------------------------- 
 
In November 2003, the United States announced its intention 
to begin free trade negotiations with Colombia, Peru, Ecuador 
and Bolivia, the four Andean Trade Preference Act beneficiary 
countries.  The negotiations began on May 18, 2004 with 
Colombia, Ecuador and Peru. The Andeans collectively 
represent a market of about $7.1 billion for U.S. exports in 
2003, and are home to about $4.2 billion in U.S. FDI. The 
negotiation will complement the goal of completing a Free 
Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA). 
 
IMPORT POLICIES 
--------------- 
 
A. Tariffs 
 
When Ecuador joined the WTO in January 1996, it bound most of 
its tariff rates at 30 percent or less.  Ecuador\'s average 
applied tariff rate is 13 percent.  Ecuador applies a 
four-tiered structure with levels of five percent for most 
raw materials and capital goods, 10 percent or 15 percent for 
intermediate goods, and 20 percent for most consumer goods. 
A small number of products, including planting seeds, are 
subject to a tariff rate of zero.  Some agricultural products 
(193), most of which are chemicals and veterinary products, 
are imported duty free. 
 
As a member of the Andean Community of Nations (CAN), Ecuador 
grants and receives exemptions on tariffs (e.g., reduced ad 
valorem tariffs and no application of the Andean Price Band 
System) for products from the CAN countries (Bolivia, 
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela).  Currently, these 
countries have an Andean Free Trade Zone and apply Common 
External Tariffs (CET), as stated in CAN Decision 370.  There 
is a proposal for a new CET, with a three-tiered structure, 
with levels of 5, 10 and 20 percent tariffs for agricultural 
products.  The proposed structure has not been approved by 
the CAN. 
 
Ecuador maintains the Andean Price Band System (APBS) on 153 
agricultural products (13 &marker8 and 140 &linked8 
products) imported from outside the CAN.  The 13 &marker8 
products are wheat, rice, sugar, barley, white and yellow 
corn, soybean, soybean meal, African palm oil, soy oil, 
chicken meat, pork meat and powder milk.  Under this system, 
the ad valorem CET are adjusted (increased or reduced) 
according to the relationship between international reference 
prices, established floor and ceiling prices and the 
importation price of the commodity.  Upon accession to the 
WTO, Ecuador bound its ad valorem tariffs (including the 
additional levy from the APBS) for these commodities between 
31.5 and 85.5%. 
 
As part of its WTO accession, Ecuador committed to phase out 
its WTO-authorized price band system, starting in January 
1996 with a total phase out by December 2001.  No steps have 
been taken to comply with this commitment.  Instead, Ecuador 
adopted the APBS, which applies the reduced CET to the CAN 
and increased tariffs to other WTO members.  This decision 
did not comply with Ecuador,s commitments to the WTO. 
However, Ecuador maintains that, as the highest rate under 
the APBS us beneath the bound tariff rate, Ecuador,s 
participation in the APBS is WTO-consistent. 
 
B. Non-Tariff Measures 
 
 
Ecuador has failed to eliminate several non-tariff barriers 
since its WTO accession.  Importers must register with the 
Central Bank, through approved banking institutions to obtain 
an import license.  In order to get this license, an importer 
must first obtain, inter alia, a tax registration number from 
Ecuador,s Internal Revenue Service (SRI).  Ecuador requires 
prior authorization from various government agencies, e.g., 
the Ministry of Agriculture (MAG) for importation of most 
commodities, seeds, animals, and plants.  Also, the Ministry 
of Health must give its prior authorization (i.e., sanitary 
registration) before the importation of processed, canned, 
and packed foods as well as food ingredients and beverages, 
cosmetics and pharmaceutical products.  Another 
administrative hurdle agricultural importers must overcome is 
the MAG,s use of &Consultative Committees8 (Committees). 
The Committees, mainly composed of local producers, often 
advise the MAG against granting import permits to foreign 
suppliers.  The MAG often requires that all local production 
be purchased at high prices before authorizing imports. 
 
Ecuador also continues to maintain a preshipment inspection 
(PSI) regime.  Preshipment inspection by an authorized 
inspection company (both before shipment and after specific 
export documentation has been completed at the intended 
destination) results in delays far exceeding the time saved 
in customs clearance.  Customs authorities sometimes perform 
spot-checks, causing further delays.  These practices 
generally add six to eight weeks to shipping times.  The 
following imports are exempt from verification: imports below 
FOB $4000, arms and defense materials, newspapers and printed 
material, traveler,s personal effects, donation to the 
public sector, imports by diplomatic missions, imports by the 
public sector that are financed by international loans, 
imports of gas, fuel, equipment made by the state oil 
company, imports destined for temporary entry, coffins and 
samples with no commercial value. 
 
Ecuador maintains bans on the import of used motor vehicles, 
tires, and clothing.  Ecuador applies a 27 percent markup on 
imported distilled spirits for excise tax purposes.  As 
excise taxes on imports are calculated on CIF value plus 
import duties, the effective rate is higher for imports than 
domestic products.  Ecuador has not equalized the application 
of excise taxes between imported and domestic products. 
 
In December 1999, the MAG, through the Ecuadorian Animal and 
Plant Health Inspection Service (SESA), issued a requirement 
that all importers must present a certificate stating that 
imported agricultural products (plants, animals, their 
products or byproducts) have not been produced using modern 
biotechnology.  In November 2002, the President issued 
Executive Decree 3399 creating the National Commission for 
Biosafety as an office of the Ministry of Environment.  It 
will be responsible for biotechnology-related products and 
regulations issues.  However, no rules have yet been enacted. 
 
STANDARDS, TESTING, LABELING AND CERTIFICATION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
National standards are set by the Ecuadorian Norms Institute 
(INEN) of the Ministry of Commerce and generally follow 
international standards.  SESA (an agency of the Ministry of 
Agriculture) is responsible for administering Ecuador\'s 
sanitary and phytosanitary controls.  According to Ecuadorian 
importers, bureaucratic procedures required to obtain 
clearance still appear to discriminate against foreign 
products.  Ecuador must comply with the WTO Agreement on the 
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Measures, yet 
denials of SPS certification often appear to lack a 
scientific basis and to have been used in a discriminatory 
fashion to block the import of U.S. products that compete 
with Ecuadorian production.  This occurs most often with 
poultry, turkey and pork meats, beef, dairy products and 
fresh fruit.  The ability to import some products, such as 
rice, corn, soybeans, and soybean meal depends entirely on 
the discretion of the MAG, which will often look to the 
Consultative Committees for direction. 
SESA follows the &Andean Sanitary Standards8 established 
under the Andean Community of Nations (CAN).  Some standards 
applicable for third countries are different from those 
applied to CAN members.   For example, there can be 
differences in the requirements for CAN and third countries 
for the importation of live animals, animal products, and 
plants and plant by-products.  SESA also requires 
certifications for each product stating that the product 
complies with risk analysis and that the country of origin or 
the area of production is free from certain exotic plant or 
animal diseases. 
 
Sanitary registrations are required for imported as well as 
domestic processed food, cosmetics, pesticides, 
pharmaceuticals, and syringes, as well as some other consumer 
goods.  However, in a side agreement to its WTO Accession 
Agreement, Ecuador committed to accept the U.S. Certificate 
of Free Sale authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, instead of the Government of Ecuador,s 
Sanitary Registration.  In August 2000, the Government of 
Ecuador passed a law (Ley de Promocion Social y Participacion 
Ciudadana, Segunda Parte ) also known as Troley II) followed 
by application rules issued in June 2001 to reform the 
issuance of sanitary permits for food products.  This is a 
step towards modernizing the issuance of sanitary 
registrations with new regulations that allow the acceptance 
of free sale certificates, require that the government issue 
sanitary permits within 30 days of the receipt of the 
request, and reduce the number of documents required to 
obtain a permit.  However, these regulations are not being 
applied consistently.  U.S. firms report that the Izquieta 
Perez National Hygiene Institute (INHIP - the agency 
responsible for registering imported processed food products) 
office in Guayaquil has refused to accept U.S. Certificates 
of Free Sale and continues to apply the old regime for 
sanitary permits.  In addition, non-transparent bureaucratic 
procedures and inefficiency have delayed issuance beyond 30 
days and in some cases blocked the entry of some imported 
products from the United States. 
 
U.S. companies have expressed concerns regarding regulations 
issued by Ecuador,s public health ministry requiring foreign 
food manufacturers to disclose confidential information such 
as formulas of imported food and pharmaceutical products. 
This requirement appears to go beyond the requirements of the 
Codex Alimentarius Commission on Internationals Standards and 
Labeling. 
 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
---------------------- 
 
Government procurement is regulated by the 1990 public 
contracting law.  Foreign bidders must be legally represented 
in Ecuador.  There is no legal requirement to discriminate 
against U.S. or other foreign suppliers.  Bidding for 
government contracts can be cumbersome and insufficiently 
transparent.  Ecuador is not a signatory to the WTO Agreement 
on Government Procurement. 
 
EXPORT SUBSIDIES 
---------------- 
 
Ecuador has created a semi-independent agency, the 
Corporation for the Promotion of Exports and Investments 
(Corpei), to promote Ecuadorian exports.  Using a European 
Union loan, Corpei offers matching grants to exporters to 
help fund certain expenses, including international 
promotional events and export certifications.  The individual 
grant amount varies according to the project. 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR) PROTECTION 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
In 1998, Ecuador enacted a comprehensive law that 
significantly improved the legal basis for protecting 
intellectual property, including patents, trademarks, and 
copyrights.  The intellectual property law provides greater 
protection for intellectual property; however, it is 
deficient in a number of areas and the law is not being 
adequately enforced.  Enforcement of copyrights remains a 
significant problem, especially concerning sound recordings, 
computer software, and motion pictures. 
Ecuador\'s current intellectual property regime is provided 
for under its intellectual property rights (IPR) law and 
Andean Pact Decisions 486, 345, and 351.  Ecuador is a member 
of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and is 
a member of the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty.  Furthermore, Ecuador has 
ratified the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary 
and Artistic Works, the Geneva Phonograms Convention, the 
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 
and the WIPO Patent Cooperation Treaty. 
 
A. Copyrights 
 
The Government of Ecuador, through the National Copyright 
Office,s Strategic Plan against Piracy, has committed to 
take action to reduce the levels of copyright piracy, 
including implementation and enforcement of its 1998 
Copyright Law.  Article 78 of the 1999 Law on Higher 
Education appears to permit software copyright violations by 
educational institutions. 
 
B. Patents and Trademarks 
 
Ecuador\'s 1998 IPR law provided an improved legal basis for 
protecting patents, trademarks, and trade secrets.  However, 
concerns remain regarding several provisions, including a 
working requirement for patents, compulsory licensing, and 
the lack of enforcement in the protection of test data. 
 
Government of Ecuador health authorities continued to approve 
the commercialization of new drugs which were the 
bioequivalents of already approved drugs, thereby denying the 
originator companies the exclusive use of their data.  In 
effect, the Government of Ecuador is allowing the test data 
of registered drugs from originator companies to be used by 
others seeking approval for their own pirate version of the 
same product.  Also, U.S. companies are concerned that the 
Government of Ecuador is implementing a policy that a company 
that had patented a compound for one use cannot subsequently 
patent a second use of that compound.  This puts Ecuador at 
odds with international norms. 
 
C. Enforcement 
 
There continues to be an active local trade in pirated audio 
and video recordings, computer software, and counterfeit 
brand name apparel.  The International Intellectual Property 
Alliance estimates that piracy levels in Ecuador for both 
motion pictures and recorded music has reached 95 percent, 
with estimated damage due to music piracy of $50-60 million. 
At times, judges in IPR cases, before issuing a preliminary 
injunction, demand a guaranty and evidentiary requirements 
that exceed legal requirements and in effect limit the 
ability of rights holders to enforce their rights.  The 
national police and the customs service are responsible for 
carrying out IPR enforcement but do not always enforce court 
orders.  Some local pharmaceutical companies produce or 
import pirated drugs and have sought to block improvements in 
patent protection.  U.S. industry estimates damage due to the 
failure to provide data exclusivity is at least $5 million. 
 
SERVICES BARRIERS 
----------------- 
 
Ecuador has ratified the WTO Agreement on Financial Services. 
 The 1993 Equity Markets Law and the 1994 General Financial 
Institutions Law significantly opened markets in financial 
services and provided for national treatment.  Foreign 
professionals are subject to national licensing legislation, 
and the Superintendent of Banks must certify accountants. 
 
In the area of basic telecommunications, Ecuador only 
subscribed to WTO commitments for domestic cellular services. 
 It did not make market access or national treatment 
commitments for a range of other domestic and international 
telecommunications services, such as voice telephony and 
data.  In addition, Ecuador did not adhere to the 
pro-competitive regulatory commitments of the WTO Reference 
Paper.  Several U.S. telecommunications companies have had 
their international circuits disconnected without proper 
notice of alleged infractions.  The Government has also used 
Ecuadorian courts to delay implementation of an arbitral 
award in favor of a U.S. company. 
INVESTMENT BARRIERS 
------------------- 
 
Ecuador\'s foreign investment policy is governed largely by 
the national implementing legislation for Andean Pact 
Decisions 291 of 1991 and 292 of 1993.  Foreign investors are 
accorded the same rights of establishment as Ecuadorian 
private investors, may own up to 100 percent of enterprises 
in most sectors without prior government approval, and face 
the same tax regime.  There are no controls or limits on 
transfers of profits or capital.  The U.S.-Ecuador Bilateral 
Investment Treaty (BIT) entered into force in May 1997 and 
includes guarantees regarding national and 
most-favored-nation treatment, prompt, adequate and effective 
compensation for expropriation, freedom to make financial 
transfers, and access to international arbitration.  U.S. 
companies are sometimes reluctant to resolve commercial 
disputes through the Ecuadorian legal system, fearing a 
prolonged process and a lack of impartiality. 
 
Certain sectors of Ecuador\'s economy are reserved to the 
state.  All foreign investment in petroleum exploration and 
development in Ecuador must be carried out under contract 
with the state oil company.  U.S. and other foreign oil 
companies produce oil in Ecuador under such contracts. 
Several of these companies are involved in a dispute with the 
government of Ecuador regarding the refund of value-added tax 
rebates.  In 2004, one U.S. company won a $75 million 
international arbitration award against the government of 
Ecuador regarding this dispute.  The Government has requested 
a judicial review of the arbitration award.  After notice of 
the award, Ecuador,s Solicitor General (Procurador General) 
initiated an investigation of the company and has since 
advocated the nullification of the company,s contract and 
seizure of the company,s considerable assets in Ecuador. 
 
Foreign investment in domestic fishing operations, with 
exceptions, is limited to 49 percent of equity.  Foreign 
companies cannot own more than 25 percent equity in broadcast 
stations.  Foreigners are prohibited from owning land on the 
frontier or coast. 
 
Appropriate compensation for expropriation is provided for in 
Ecuadorian law but is often difficult to obtain.  The extent 
to which foreign and domestic investors receive prompt, 
adequate, and effective compensation varies widely.  It can 
be difficult to enforce property and concession rights, 
particularly in the agriculture, oil and mining sectors. 
Foreign oil, energy, and telecommunications companies, among 
others, have often had difficulties resolving contract issues 
with state or local partners.  Several U.S. companies have 
also raised concerns about the lack of transparency, 
predictability, and stability in Ecuador,s legal and 
regulatory regime, which increases the risks and adds to the 
cost of doing business in Ecuador. 
 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 
------------------- 
 
Ecuador passed an electronic commerce law in April 2002 that 
makes the use of electronic signatures in business 
transactions on the Internet legally binding and makes 
digital theft a crime. Ecuador has initiated a program for 
e-government services and universal access to information 
technology through funding from international financial 
institutions. 
KENNEY 
"
"24697","12/28/2004 15:46","04QUITO3302","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","04QUITO3151","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003302 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/22/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EC 
SUBJECT: EX-FINMIN MAY REPLACE CAREER DIP AS AMB-DESIGNATE 
 
REF: QUITO 3151 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  GoE President Lucio Gutierrez is 
reconsidering his earlier designation of career diplomat 
Roberto Betancourt to head Ecuador\'s embassy in Washington 
(Reftel).  According to separate Embassy Quito sources, 
former Minister of Finance Mauricio Pozo now appears the 
preferred candidate, although Foreign Minister Patricio 
Zuquilanda, Betancourt\'s primary patron, is fighting the 
switch.  U.S.-educated, a thoughtful technocrat and 
well-liked in IFI circles, Pozo is a fine choice to represent 
Ecuador in Washington.  Despite our obvious preference for 
the ex-minister and our intention to \"lobby\" discreetly, the 
Embassy will avoid the appearance of taking sides in the 
brewing appointment battle.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) Over lunch December 15, GoE Presidential Secretary 
Carlos Polit informed the Ambassador that Gutierrez was 
mulling a change for Ecuador\'s mission in Washington.  Rather 
than Betancourt, for whom the GoE recently had requested 
agrement, the president was considering Mauricio Pozo, one of 
the architects and chief proponents of the GoE\'s responsible 
economic program.  (Pozo resigned office in early 2004, 
placating Gutierrez\'s populist, left-leaning opposition and 
perhaps extending the president\'s tenure.  The transition 
between him and his successor, the ideologically similar 
Mauricio Yepez, was this administration\'s smoothest and 
reflects the continued close relationship between Pozo and 
Gutierrez.) 
 
3.  (C) Pozo would make a fine chief of mission, the 
Ambassador asserted, extolling his reputation in Washington, 
impeccable economic credentials and prominence in 
international financial institution (IFI) ranks.  Careful to 
avoid the impression of overt lobbying, she also praised 
competitor Betancourt\'s professional expertise.  The Embassy 
must tread lightly over GoE personnel decisions, the 
Ambassador explained, and not provide grist to rabid 
nationalists on constant alert for signs of \"U.S. meddling.\" 
 
4.  (C) The Ambassador raised the Washington vacancy during 
her December 16 call on Gutierrez.  The president 
unfortunately refused the bait and moved quickly to other 
topics of conversation.  Following up, she hosted Pozo for 
breakfast December 23.  After discussing the Andean Free 
Trade Agreement and Ecuador\'s recent, positive macroeconomic 
performance, she queried the former finance minister on 
future career plans.  Pozo revealed that Carlos Polit wanted 
him in Washington.  Running the mission intrigued him, 
although he worried that Ecuador\'s volatile political 
environment meant he would enjoy little job security.  As 
\"insurance,\" he pondered whether to demand a guaranteed 
follow-on assignment at a more stable multilateral 
organization. 
 
5.  (C) Pozo\'s character, background, and political savvy 
made him a tremendous ambassadorial candidate, the Ambassador 
offered.  Trade issues would dominate the short-term 
U.S.-Ecuador bilateral relationship, with technical Andean 
FTA negotiations nearing conclusion and the difficult stage 
-- obtaining political buy-in from respective legislatures -- 
remaining.  Pozo\'s previous experience lobbying Ecuador\'s 
Congress could prove invaluable, she asserted.  While the 
Foreign Ministry already had requested agrement for career 
diplomat Roberto Betancourt, that process could be halted, 
should the GoE desire.  The Ambassador again emphasized she 
must avoid the impression of favoring a candidate, however. 
 
6.  (C) Later December 23, Polit telephoned the Ambassador to 
recount his recent conversation with the president. 
Gutierrez loved the idea of Pozo in Washington.  Foreign 
Minister Patricio Zuquilanda did not, however, and was 
pushing the president to keep his commitment to Betancourt. 
Polit\'s unspoken (but barely) request was that the Ambassador 
call Gutierrez in support of Pozo\'s candidacy. 
 
7.  (C) COMMENT:  On both substance and personality, Post\'s 
preferred candidate for the Washington mission is Pozo; his 
continuing friendship with the president is gravy.  Further, 
our relations with this impressive ex-minister were always 
top-notch and our access immediate, things we cannot say of 
Betancourt.  In this battle, however, we must be stiletto, 
not battle-axe.  First, the optics are terrible -- hint of 
our involvement could easily reach the loser.  Were it 
Betancourt, the Foreign Ministry might leak the news 
immediately, spawning a media firestorm over U.S. 
\"interference.\"  Worse, MFA resentment could tarnish 
working-level relations we need to advance key substantive 
issues (Article 98 comes to mind) and ensure the Embassy 
receives adequate MFA administrative support. 
 
8.  (C) We also worry a jilted MFA could make Pozo\'s days 
difficult in Washington.  Ecuador\'s last ambassador, Raul 
Gangotena, too enjoyed a close relationship with Gutierrez. 
Poor dealings with Zuquilanda resulted in his isolation, 
limited effectiveness, and eventual short tenure, however. 
END COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"24701","12/28/2004 19:20","04QUITO3303","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 003303 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF, EC 
SUBJECT: REFUGEE REPORT HIGHLIGHTS NEW TRENDS 
 
 
1.  Summary:  A recent study by a Quito human rights 
organization, the Center for Documentation of Human Rights 
Segundo Montes Mozo (CSMM), highlights strengths and 
deficiencies in the GoE\'s and civil society responses to the 
issue of Colombian refugees.  The study says that while 
Ecuador has good legislation on refugees, there is an over 
emphasis on Colombians as threats to national security. 
Current refugee efforts focus on the border regions while 
refugees are increasingly found in Quito, Guayaquil, and 
Cuenca.  The CSMM report recommends a more coordinated 
national policy on refugees and awareness campaigns on the 
magnitude of the refugee situation.  It comes at the same 
time as media and NGOs are alleging the restart of coca 
fumigations in Colombian border province, Putumayo.  End 
Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
GoE Strengths and Weaknesses 
---------------------------- 
 
2.  While the GoE has passed legislation meeting 
international standards on refugee issues, including Decree 
3301 (1992) incorporating the wider definition of \"refugee\" 
(still not adopted by other neighboring countries), there are 
several current trends that may limit the human rights of 
refugees, according to CSMM\'s report.  CSMM found a growing 
invisibility of the human rights concerns of legitimate 
Colombian refugees.  At the same time, CSMM noted an 
increasing emphasis on national security issues at the 
border.  GoE attention is focused on migratory control as 
well as the militarization of borders.  The study recommends 
that the GoE find a balance between keeping dangerous 
elements from crossing its borders, while making sure 
legitimate refugees receive the asylum they are guaranteed 
under international agreements. 
 
3.  CSMM recommends that the GoE work on a coordinated 
national refugee policy that respects Ecuador\'s commitments 
under international agreements.  CSMM also found a general 
perception among Ecuadorians of the Colombian refugees as a 
homogenous group, which they do not believe to be true.  They 
called on the GoE to gather more data on the age, gender, 
occupation, etc. of the refugees in order to respond more 
appropriately to their needs.  The report also commented that 
the new requirement of a police record check for Colombians 
crossing into Ecuador, intended to keep out irregulars and 
criminals, is increasing the number of refugees who are not 
registered and have irregular status. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Stigmatization of Colombian Population 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4.  The study found a growing stigmatization of the Colombian 
population as criminals, reinforced by some public statements 
by high government officials.  In March 2003, the newspaper 
El Comercio published a Letter to the Public stating that 
Ecuador should initiate a \"Plan Ecuador\" and claiming all of 
the violence in Ecuador was due to Plan Colombia and 
Colombians.  However, from January to December 2003, 
Colombians represented less than two percent of those 
arrested for illegal activities, according to statistics 
provided to the UNHCR by the National Police.  This 
stigmatization leads to discrimination in hiring, schooling, 
and health.  The human rights group recommends the government 
launch an awareness campaign to help the public recognize the 
magnitude of the legitimate refugee situation. 
 
--------------------------- 
Civil Society Participation 
--------------------------- 
 
5.  CSMM asserts that Ecuadorian civil society has actively 
participated in analysis and research on the topic of 
Colombian refugees, as well as legal reform proposals and the 
promotion of peace negotiations in Colombia.  However, the 
study found that there needs to be more cooperation between 
Ecuadorian and Colombian civil society.  Ecuadorian civil 
society also needs to help promote a government policy on 
refugees, the report suggests. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Refugees Arriving in Interior Cities 
------------------------------------ 
 
6.  CSMM found that, increasingly, Colombian refugees are 
settling not along the border region, but in interior cities 
such as Quito, Guayaquil, and Cuenca, where there are greater 
economic opportunities.  Refugees may also feel more secure 
the farther they are from the Colombian border.  Cuenca, for 
example, received 826 applications between January and 
September this year compared with 532 last year.  This year\'s 
applications in Cuenca are of note as they represent 12.8% of 
all applications nationwide.  Quito received the highest 
percentage of applications with 45.9%.  The report suggests 
more research and data is needed on these refugees, as most 
of the current information focuses only on the border region. 
 
------------------------- 
CSMM Call for U.S. Action 
------------------------- 
 
7.  The Director of CSMM, Pablo de la Vega, said the MFA 
should seek greater international support for the refugee 
issue.  At the presentation of the study, De la Vega called 
for U.S. proposals to address the refugee problem as he 
considers the U.S. the main player in the regional crisis. 
De la Vega said $10 million a day is spent by the various 
groups on the conflict.  He suggested that because of the 
large amount of money invested in the conflict, many of the 
players, including the USG and the GoC, do not want the 
conflict to end.  De La Vega insisted there could be no 
military solution to the problem. 
 
------------------------- 
MFA Reaction to the Study 
------------------------- 
 
8.  In public comments, Christian Espinoza of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs\' (MFA) Refugee Office disagreed with some 
points of the report including the statement that half of the 
Colombian population in Ecuador are refugees.  The study also 
emphasized that the refugee population is not homologous, 
with many professionals settling in the cities of Ibarra and 
Quito.  Espinoza, however, said that the number of 
professionals is minimal and the vast majority of refugees 
are peasants, day laborers, and indigenous.  Espinoza 
believes that the refugee population continues to reside 
primarily in the border area.  Both the MFA and UNHCR 
concurred that the best durable solution to the Colombian 
refugee issue is local integration.  The two other durable 
solutions are voluntary repatriation and resettlement in a 
third country.  The MFA said they intend to keep the refugee 
issue permanently on their bilateral agenda with Colombia as 
Ecuador has to bear the burden of the problem. 
 
----------------------- 
Statistics from the MFA 
----------------------- 
 
9.  Espinoza said there are three legal and 23 illegal border 
crossings between Ecuador and Colombia.  There have been 
29,331 refugee applications from 2000 to November 2004, 8357 
of which were approved.  Espinoza said the number of refugee 
applications in 2003 rose due to the UNHCR opening more 
offices in the country.  There has been a 6100% rise in 
refugee applications in the past four years. 
 
------------------------ 
MFA Visits Border Region 
------------------------ 
 
10.  As a new round of coca fumigations allegedly began in 
Colombia, according to press reports and NGO statements, the 
MFA\'s Franklin Chavez, director general for Amazonian and 
Regional Affairs, as well as representatives from the MFA\'s 
Refugee Office, the military, the National Police, and the 
group Ecological Action, traveled to the border region in 
Sucumbios province on December 23 to study fumigation\'s 
effects on inhabitants of the region.  The group Federation 
of Peasant Organizations of the Ecuadorian Border Cordon of 
Sucumbios (FORCCOFES) claimed the fumigations put eight 
communities in San Miguel at risk.  FORCCOFES leaders say a 
shelter is needed for \"internally displaced persons\" because 
of spraying\'s effects and are planning to ask the Church as 
well as UNHCR to provide shelter to these Ecuadorians. 
However, UNHCR says it has a clear mandate in Ecuador which 
does not include sheltering Ecuadorian citizens within 
Ecuador (which is the responsibility of the GoE, with 
assistance from the Red Cross and the Church if needed).  On 
December 26, press reported an MFA statement announcing that 
the MFA had determined that fumigations had not restarted, 
after having conducted interviews with the local population 
and local authorities.  Samples of water and soil from the 
region were collected for analysis.  The MFA also concluded 
that no persons were internally displaced. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
11.  UNHCR representatives consider CSMM a moderate 
organization that uses statistical data to back up its 
claims.  However, a weakness of the study is that its authors 
did not interview the MFA nor UNHCR.  The report notes some 
trends, such as the movement of refugees to the interior of 
the country and the growing stigmatization of the Colombian 
population, that need to be addressed both by the GoE and 
civil society.  Overall, however, the GoE seems to be taking 
more positive steps to address the Colombian refugee 
situation than neighboring countries. 
KENNEY 
"
"24702","12/28/2004 19:22","04QUITO3304","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003304 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: INDIGENOUS ORGANIZATION ELECTS NEW HEAD 
 
 
1.  Summary:  The Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities 
of Ecuador (CONAIE) on December 23 elected Luis Macas 
president of the organization, a post he previously held 
twice.  Macas, a former Minister of Agriculture and an ethnic 
Saraguro indian from the south of the country, will lead the 
organization until 2007 and replaces Leonidas Iza. 
Postulated by the highlands-based ECUARUNARI and supported by 
the coastal CONAICE organization, Macas is expected to 
maintain distance from the Gutierrez administration and its 
Minister of Social Welfare, indigenous leader Antonio Vargas. 
 Pro-government Amazonian indigenous were accused of 
attempting to disrupt the Congress as well as of threatening 
indigenous leaders.  Biographical information is included in 
paragraph 10.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Macas Wins, Santi Offers Support 
-------------------------------- 
 
2.  Macas, with 300 votes, defeated Marlon Santi, the 
candidate of the Amazonian indigenous federation CONFENIAE, 
who received 181 votes, at the CONAIE congress on December 
23.  Macas is considered to be part of the older generation 
of indigenous leaders, with a great deal of experience within 
the indigenous movement.  After the vote, Santi expressed his 
support for Macas, quelling fears of further division within 
the organization.  Santiago de la Cruz, a coastal Chachi 
indian and member of the CONAICE, was elected vice-president. 
 Amazonians will hold posts in the International Relations 
and Natural Resources divisions. 
 
3.  According to press reports, as a candidate, Macas said 
his priority would be the creation of a plurinational state 
and he emphasizes the process of \"interculturality,\" 
including bilingual intercultural education.  Macas believes 
the country should look for alternatives to the Free Trade 
Agreement with the U.S.  Macas pledged to work closely with 
the base organizations to strengthen currently weak ties, as 
displayed by the disappointing indigenous anti-government 
mobilizations earlier this year.  Macas has said he will not 
enter into dialogue with the current government. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Mobilizations and Other Topics Discussed 
---------------------------------------- 
 
4.  A total of 1070 delegates attended the congress including 
regional delegates from 30 indigenous nationalities and 
domestic and international observers.  The congress featured 
debates on the current political situation, GoE energy 
policy, education, indigenous nationalities, and statute 
reform.  On December 22, CONAIE leaders discussed a future 
mobilization to protest Congress\' dismantling of the Supreme 
Court and the government\'s referendum.  CONAIE leaders feel 
this call for mobilization will have a greater response than 
the two Leonidas Iza organized earlier this year. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Divisive Elements Removed From Congress 
--------------------------------------- 
 
5.  On December 20, Jose Quenama of CONFENIAE was expelled 
from the congress for promoting violence and for his ties to 
Antonio Vargas.  Fifty Quenama supporters tried to get 
Quenama\'s name on the ballot for president despite his not 
having support from the bases.  According to the CONAIE 
website, the group then removed cables from computers to 
impede registration for the congress.  Representatives of six 
of the ten nationalities within CONFENIAE voted to remove 
Quenama from CONFENIAE which he previously headed.  Many 
leaders of the Cofan, Siona, and Secoya nationalities left 
the congress, in support of Quenama. 
 
6.  CONAIE members also accused Quenama of aiding the 
government\'s effort of creating divisions within the 
organization.  On December 23, a small group of Quenama 
supporters met in Quito to create a CONAIE 2, with support 
from the government.  Bolivar Gonzalez, Undersecretary for 
Social Welfare and the primary advisor to Minister Antonio 
Vargas, also made a statement concerning rebuilding CONAIE. 
According to the press, Quenama said his supporters reject 
Macas\' victory as they feel the electoral process was 
illegal, since Quenama was not allowed to participate as a 
candidate for the presidency.  Quenama said Macas will not be 
allowed to travel to Amazonian territory. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Candidates Allegedly Receive Death Threats 
------------------------------------------ 
 
7.  On December 20, Leonidas Iza, the CONAIE\'s 
then-president, accused the government of a campaign of 
intimidation against indigenous leaders.  Iza said that many 
leaders had received threats over the telephone.  Santi, the 
CONFENIAE candidate, said to the press that he received 
anonymous phone calls on December 21 and 22 threatening that 
if he were elected CONAIE president, he would be dead within 
24 hours.  Santi said his lawyers planned to file a complaint 
with the OAS\' Inter-american Commission on Human Rights, 
accusing the government of ordering the threats.  According 
to the press, Santi also claimed Quenama offered him $25,000 
in order to support the latter\'s candidacy. 
 
----------------------- 
CONAIE Issues Manifesto 
----------------------- 
 
8.  During the congress, CONAIE issued a manifesto, published 
on its website, expressing its rejection of the alleged 
intentions of the government, the PRE party, the PRIAN party, 
and the U.S. \"to annihilate and destroy all the social and 
popular organizations in the country.\"  CONAIE accused the 
\"treasonous and dictatorial government of Lucio Gutierrez, in 
complicity  with a reduced group of opportunist followers of 
Antonio Vargas and Jose Quenama bought by the government, of 
attempting to boycott the congress and create a parallel 
congress.\"  CONAIE called on the Ecuadorian people to stay 
alert to the GoE\'s increasing dictatorial bent. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  Macas stood out as a strong candidate during the congress 
and, with the support of his challenger Santi, seems to enjoy 
a certain legitimacy.  Pro-government indigenous, on the 
other hand, were discredited by the majority of CONAIE 
members and are increasingly isolated.  They will no doubt 
continue to attempt to organize, but their reputation seems 
to have been tarnished.  Macas appears confident that he will 
have greater success mobilizing the indigenous, and a future 
attempt to organize a protest of the recent dismantling of 
the Supreme Court is possible.  We will attempt to reach out 
to Macas and open lines of communication with the Embassy. 
Macas so far does not seem to spew as much anti-U.S. rhetoric 
as his predecessor Iza; however, CONAIE\'s latest manifesto 
expresses great suspicion of the U.S.  End Comment. 
 
--------------- 
Bio information 
--------------- 
 
10.  Luis Macas, a member of the Saraguro ethnicity (part of 
the Quichua group), was born on June 3, 1950 in Saraguro, 
Loja province.  Macas studied anthropology at Quito\'s 
Catholic University, jurisprudence at the Central University, 
and linguistics, also at Quito\'s Catholic University.  In 
1978, Macas was part of a group of 12 indigenous leaders who 
sought a meeting of representatives from Ecuador\'s three 
regions: Sierra, Amazon, and Coast.  This meeting was not 
held until 1980, after the fall of the dictatorship, and was 
a first step towards the first CONAIE congress held in Quito 
in 1986.  In 1986, Macas became head of communications for 
CONAIE and released its first newspaper, \"Indian 
Nationalities.\"  In 1988 he became vice-president and in 1990 
became president of the organization.  Macas was reelected 
president from 1993-1996.  In 1996, he became a Congressional 
deputy and worked to promote the passage of the Indigenous 
Nationalities Law and the creation of the Indigenous Fund. 
In 2003, he held the post of Minister of Agriculture during 
Pachakutik\'s alliance with Gutierrez\' government.  Currently 
he serves as acting rector of the Intercultural University of 
Indigenous Nationalities and Pueblos \"Amawta Wasi\" and is 
director of the Scientific Institute of Indigenous Cultures, 
posts which he is expected to relinquish in order to head 
CONAIE. 
KENNEY 
"
"24913","1/4/2005 15:21","05QUITO20","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 000020 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2015 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: WHO WILL LEAD ECUADOR\'S CONGRESS? 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b) 
 
1.  (U)  SUMMARY:  January 5 marks the mid-point of the 
congressional term in Ecuador; on that date, legislators will 
elect a president, two vice presidents, and the membership of 
18 committees to lead Congress until January 2007.  The 
presidential race, pitting opposition (ID) and pro-government 
(PRE) parties, promises to be close, controversial, and quite 
possibly chaotic.  Both organizations claim entitlement to 
the legislature\'s highest position, yet appear to lack the 
votes necessary to invest respective candidates.  As such, 
small parties and independent deputies are likely to play a 
deciding role in the vote.  Neither party\'s nominee 
consistently has staked pro- or anti-U.S. positions; USG 
interests are best served by the candidate most dedicated to 
tackling Congress\'s ample agenda.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Constitutional Questions Muddy Internal Elections 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2.  (U) Ecuador\'s constitution awards the presidency of 
Congress during the first half of the term to the party \"with 
the greatest legislative representation;\" the first 
vice-presidency belongs to the second-ranking organization 
(with minority parties owning the second VP slot).  At the 
two-year mark, the parties swap positions, the second-ranking 
organization inheriting Congress\'s top job.  The Social 
Christian Party (PSC) won 26 of the legislature\'s 100 seats 
in Ecuador\'s October 2002 elections, easily surpassing the ID 
(16) and PRE (15) totals.  For reasons still unclear, in the 
elections\' aftermath PSC leader and Congressional Deputy Leon 
Febres-Cordero refused the leadership position entitled to 
his party. 
 
3.  (U) The presidency thus fell to the second-most voted 
party, apparently the ID.  PRE leaders protested, pointing 
out that two of the ID\'s deputies won office in alliances 
with other parties and should not count toward the ID\'s 
total.  The PRE\'s 15 were \"pure PRE,\" however, entitling the 
Coast-based, populist party of former President Abdala 
Bucaram to the presidency.  In response to pleas from both 
groups, Ecuador\'s Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) considered 
the matter in late 2002, but issued an inconclusive finding. 
The controversy diminished only after Congress itself passed 
a resolution proclaiming the ID Ecuador\'s second political 
force and allowing Deputy Guillermo Landazuri to assume the 
presidency. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Gutierrez Comeback, Alliance Threaten Continued ID Reign 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
4.  (U) Until barely two months ago, few believed the PRE 
could challenge the ID for Congressional leadership. 
Bucaram\'s forces enjoyed few legislative allies apart from 
President Lucio Gutierrez\'s Patriotic Society Party, and the 
president, facing ID- and PSC-supported impeachment charges, 
was fighting for his political life.  Removal proceedings 
faltered November 9, however, and Gutierrez, with PRE 
backing, counterattacked.  Via resolutions passed by a slight 
majority in Congress, the president and allies in the 
legislature purged Ecuador\'s highest courts of most PSC 
influence.  They have now turned sights on Congress, with PRE 
leaders demanding the top legislative job for 2005-2007. 
 
5.  (SBU) They continue to trumpet the \"pure vs. alliance\" 
argument to justify the party\'s standing as Ecuador\'s 
second-ranking political party.  In addition, PRE bosses 
claim that two defections have reduced the ID\'s total deputy 
count to 14, removing any claim by the latter to the 
presidency.  Ecuador\'s imprecise constitution and a 
characteristic of the Spanish language -- heavy use of the 
subjunctive -- lend weight to second point, since Article 129 
states that \"for the second two years, the president and vice 
president will be elected from the parties and movements that 
have obtained (hayan obtenido) the second and first 
majorities, respectively.\" 
 
6.  (U) From self-imposed exile in Panama, Bucaram December 
27 announced that Deputy Omar Quintana should take Congress\'s 
reins at the January 5 election.  Quintana, a Guayaquil 
businessman and the brother-in-law of PRIAN party founder and 
presidential candidate Alvaro Noboa, enjoys full PRE, PRIAN 
and PSP support.  However, smaller parties that pepper the 
current majority in Congress, namely the far-left Socialists 
and MPD, have withheld backing.  MPD officials announced 
December 30 they favor a different PRE candidate, Marco 
Proano, for the post. 
 
7.  (U) Dissension appeared to plague ID ranks as well. 
Rather than one, ID leadership December 29 presented four 
\"pre-candidates\" for the presidency of Congress:  Carlos 
Gonzalez, Wilfrido Lucero, Jorge Sanchez, and Andres Paez. 
Guayaquil daily El Universo claimed January 4 that ID 
leadership, in a three-hour meeting, chose Lucero, a veteran 
legislator and member of the International Relations 
committee.  Lucero\'s staff later confirmed the El Universo 
account. 
 
---------------------------- 
All Signs Point to Confusion 
---------------------------- 
 
8.  (U) Pablo Santillan, for 11 years a Congressional staffer 
and currently director of legislative services, provided 
Poloff December 30 his analysis of the PRE-ID dispute and a 
possible scenario of January 5 events.  Blame for the impasse 
lay with the TSE for not issuing a definitive ruling naming 
the PRE or ID Ecuador\'s second party for the full 2003-2007 
term.  The legislature\'s subsequent, pro-ID resolution was 
politically motivated and thus open to challenge from 
Congress itself, Santillan reasoned.  And the PRE might have 
votes to do it. 
 
9.  (U) He foresaw lame-duck Congressional President 
Landazuri opening the legislative session by referring to the 
earlier resolution favoring the ID.  Landazuri would announce 
the ID\'s candidate and open the floor to debate.  Santillan 
doubted sufficient support existed, however.  Instead, 
Landazuri would have to accept the PRE demand to open 
discussion on Omar Quintana.  Quintana had support from the 
PRE, PRIAN, PSP and many independents, and the MPD likely 
would support him after its political wish list was met.  It 
still did not sum to 51, Santillan feared, meaning lengthy, 
loud, and messy negotiation would follow.  PSC Deputy Carlos 
Torres predicted a similar scenario in a December 29 
conversation with Poloff. 
 
---------------------------- 
Interested Parties Speak Out 
---------------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) PRE Deputy Ernesto Valle provided us the party 
line December 29.  The PRE\'s right to the legislative 
presidency lay in Article 129 of the constitution, Valle 
argued.  His party was determined not to allow the ID to 
steal it again.  Omar Quintana enjoyed the support of both 
Bucaram and grassroots PRE leaders, and pressure from allied 
parties, no matter how strong, would not sway PRE leadership. 
 Valle, too, believed the MPD would come around, after its 
leaders obtained PRE promises for a stronger MPD presence in 
the Legislative and Codification Commission, a body that 
backstopped Congress when it was out of session.  The 
Socialists were demanding control over Ecuador\'s Social 
Security program (IESS), a harder demand to meet, he 
believed, but not impossible. 
 
11.  (U) Edy Suarez, an aide to Socialist legislator Segundo 
Serrano, informed Poloff December 30 that his party had yet 
to determine how to cast its votes.  It did not see itself as 
a government ally nor opponent, and would consider both the 
ID and PRE candidates.  A fellow minority party, the MPD had 
done well to link its vote to promises to share political 
riches; the Socialists might do the same.  Surprisingly, 
Suarez considered his party ideologically closer to the 
populist PRE than the left-center ID, hinting that, if forced 
to choose, the Socialists would support Quintana. 
 
12.  (SBU) Electing a PRE deputy president of Congress was 
unconstitutional, ID pre-candidate Andres Paez told Poloff 
December 30, himself citing Article 129 and the legislature\'s 
earlier resolution favoring his party.  Worse, it represented 
an additional step toward a Gutierrez \"dictatorship,\" as 
dangerous as December\'s judicial purge.  The ID had but 42 
secure votes and securing nine more looked difficult, Paez 
added. 
 
-------- 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
 
13.  (C) Ecuador\'s rapidly shifting alliances and general 
political cannibalism make us expect a messy and 
unpredictable legislative battle January 5.  The most likely 
outcome, a PRE victory, would represent a further step in 
Gutierrez\'s remarkable and rapid comeback, reinforcing his 
flanks against future Congressional attempts to remove him. 
It might also raise concern and protest, however, amongst 
opposition groups perceiving a dangerous concentration of 
government powers. 
 
14.  (C) The legislature faces a daunting agenda in 2005. 
Many projects involve U.S. interests, from ratifying the 
Andean Free Trade Agreement (if signed) to approving 
bilaterally beneficial civil aviation, anti-TIP, and 
anti-money laundering legislation.  We stand to benefit 
should a workaholic, issues-focused legislator win the 
presidency.  Neither Lucero nor Quintana are standouts in 
this regard, however.  END COMMENT. 
KENNEY 
"
"25048","1/6/2005 19:48","05QUITO42","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","05QUITO3302","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 000042 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EC 
SUBJECT: MFA WINS PRESIDENT\'S EAR; BETANCOURT TO WASHINGTON 
 
REF: A. QUITO 3302 
 
     B. QUITO 3151 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
1.  (U) This telegram contains an action request; please see 
Paragraph 4. 
 
2.  (C) President Lucio Gutierrez, in January 3 comments to 
Ecuador\'s Channel 1 television, revealed his candidate to 
head the GoE\'s embassy in Washington:  Roberto Betancourt, 
currently the MFA\'s subsecretary (U/S equivalent) for 
bilateral affairs.  Betancourt was Gutierrez\'s early choice, 
the president informing the Ambassador December 2 he required 
a professional diplomat in Washington, skilled in negotiation 
and well-versed in trade matters (Ref A).  Two weeks later, 
however, presidential insider Carlos Polit told the 
Ambassador that Gutierrez was reconsidering, instead eyeing 
ex-Finance Minister Mauricio Pozo for the key Washington 
posting (Ref B). 
 
3.  (C) Over lunch with the Ambassador January 5, Commerce 
Minister Ivonne Baki confirmed that Gutierrez solidly backed 
the career dip.  She and Polit had lobbied hard for Pozo, but 
had lost the battle to Foreign Minister Patricio Zuquilanda, 
Betancourt\'s primary patron. 
 
4.  (SBU) ACTION REQUEST.  We understand that, upon receipt 
of Ref B, the Department slowed agrement processes, pending 
clarification of Gutierrez\'s commitment to a candidate.  With 
the GoE\'s preference now clear, we recommend the Department 
restart agrement for Roberto Betancourt, Ecuador\'s U.S. 
ambassador-designate. 
KENNEY 
"
"25100","1/7/2005 20:38","05QUITO54","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","05QUITO20","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 000054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, EC 
SUBJECT: PRE\'S QUINTANA ELECTED NEW CONGRESS PRESIDENT 
 
REF: QUITO 0020 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  Congressman Omar Quintana, of the 
Ecuadorian Roldosista Party (PRE), was elected President of 
Congress on January 5 after receiving 52 votes from members 
of the government\'s \"progressive alliance.\"  Opposition 
deputies abandoned the session after failing to elect their 
preferred candidate, and criticized the majority\'s actions as 
illegitimate.  Some participated in a subsequent session on 
January 6, however.  Alliance members failed to name most of 
the other leadership positions--they will attempt to do so in 
the next session on January 11.  Quintana\'s election was 
welcomed by President Gutierrez and by PRE leader Abdala 
Bucaram. 
End Summary. 
 
Opposition Gambit Fails 
----------------------- 
 
2.  (U) Outgoing Congress President Guillermo Landazuri (ID) 
opened the January 5 session proposing Wilfredo Lucero (ID) 
as his replacement, arguing that the ID was declared the 
second largest party in 2002, and was therefore due the 
presidency for the next two years under congressional rules. 
Lucero received 44 votes in favor, 53 against.  Landazuri 
then declared the session closed. 
 
3.  (U) The pro-government majority promptly reopened the 
session under the authority of Congress VP Jorge Montero 
(CFP), noting that the Constitution mandates that Congress 
elect new authorities on January 5 and does not permit the 
outgoing president authority to suspend the session. 
Congressional deputies from the PRE (15), PRIAN (9), PSP (5), 
Socialists (3), CFP (1) and 16 independents then recognized 
the PRE as the second force in Congress and elected Quintana. 
 
Opposition Cries Foul, Again 
---------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) The opposition PSC, ID and Pachakutik later protested 
that the session could not be reopened except by Landazuri or 
with approval of 3/4 of the Congress.  The election of 
Quintana, they claimed, was therefore illegitimate.  PSC 
leader and ex-president Leon Febres-Cordero called on the 
public to express its disapproval through street protests. 
No such protests have been reported. 
 
While the Alliance Celebrates 
----------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) Meanwhile, alliance members celebrated their victory. 
 President Gutierrez pronounced the results legitimate and 
good.  From self-imposed exile in Panama, Bucaram expressed 
satisfaction with the results, crediting his son Jacob for 
organizing support for Quintana. 
 
An Unfinished Job 
----------------- 
 
6.  (U) In addition to Quintana, the alliance renewed the 
mandate of Montero as Congress\' second VP.  However, it did 
not name a first VP (the PSC refused to name a 
representative) or to approve a full list of memberships and 
presidents of Congress\' 18 committees.  Press reported that 
some of these positions had been filled, but our inquiries 
confirmed that these appointments are not yet official. 
Congress reconvened briefly on January 6, but again failed to 
agree on these appointments.  Congress will reconvene on 
January 11 to attempt to finish this process. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The victory of Quintana, a close friend and 
associate of ex-president Bucaram, will increase the 
alliance\'s control over the congressional agenda and help 
consolidate alliance gains at the cost of the opposition. 
Without official action to divvy up committee chair 
positions, however, the alliance could soon begin to fray. 
The January 5 opposition boycott and the PSC\'s refusal to 
present a candidate for the vice presidency reflect the 
opposition\'s rejection of the majority\'s action, but not the 
institution;  PSC (but not ID or Pachakutik) deputies 
attended the inconclusive January 6 session.  End Comment. 
END COMMENT. 
 
BIO INFORMATION -- OMAR QUINTANA 
-------------------------------- 
8.  (U) Omar Quintana, aged 62, is a Guayaquil-based 
businessman and longtime political ally and friend of 
Bucaram.  A high school graduate, Quintana has represented 
Avis Rent-a-Car for over 30 years, owns a travel agency and 
currency exchange house, but is best known here as the 
president of a prominent Guayaquil soccer club (Emelec).  He 
has been active in politics and affiliated to the PRE party 
for 20 years.  He is also the brother-in-law of PRIAN leader 
and banana magnate, Alvaro Noboa. 
 
9.  (SBU) Quintana served as municipal council member of 
Guayaquil from 1994-96, when he was named by then-president 
Bucaram as president of the National Modernization Board 
(CONAM).  Press reports Quintana was jailed in 1985 for 
defrauding the Machala branch of the central bank of import 
duties owed on imported medical equipment.  In 1995 a warrant 
was issued against him on charges that he benefited from a 
scam to sell falsified central bank monetary stabilization 
bonds.  In July 1996 a court revoked the warrant. 
KENNEY 
"
"25104","1/7/2005 21:57","05QUITO57","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","05STATE270998","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 000057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO USTR CHARLIE HOOKER AND BENNETT HARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, WTO 
SUBJECT: US SERVICE MARKET ACCESS PRIORITIES IN ECUADOR 
 
REF: STATE 270998 
 
Per reftel request, below is Mission Ecuador\'s response 
regarding U.S. service market access priorities. 
 
WTO SERVICES PRIORITIES         Priority    Openness 
Legal services                        3             M 
Accounting, audit and bookkeeping     4             H 
Taxation                              4             H 
Architectural                         3             M 
Engineering & integrated engineering  3             M 
Urban plan. & landscape architecture  5             M 
Computer and related services         2             H 
Research & Development                5             M 
Real estate                           4             M 
Rental/Leasing                        3             M 
Advertising                           2             H 
Market res, public opinion, polling   4             H 
Management consulting                 1             M 
Technical testing and analysis        2             M 
(including Energy related) 
Services incidental to agriculture    4             M 
hunting, forestry, fishing 
Mining                                4             M 
Energy Services                       1             M 
Services incident to energy distrib.  4             L 
Placement and supply of personnel     4             L 
Investigation & security              3             H 
Related scientific and tech consult   1             M 
Maintenance & repair                  1             H 
Building cleaning                     5             M 
Photographic                          5             H 
Packaging                             3             H 
Printing & publishing                 3             M 
Convention services                   4             H 
Courier services                      1             L 
Telecommunications                    1             L 
Audiovisual                           3             M 
Construction & related engineering    1             M 
Distribution services                 2             M 
(commission agents, wholesale trade, 
retailing, franchising) 
Educational                           4             M 
Environmental                         3             L 
Insurance                             2             M 
Banking and other financial           2             L 
(opportunity to manage private sector 
management of social security funds) 
Tourism                               3             H 
Recreation and sports                 5             H 
 
 
1 = Highest Priority to US commercial interests 
5 = Lowest Priority 
H, M, L = High, Mid, Low market openness 
KENNEY 
"
"25190","1/10/2005 22:54","05QUITO60","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","03QUITO3217","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 000060 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: GOE NOTES USG CONCERN OVER SUPREME COURT CHANGES; 
PRESIDENT GUTIERREZ TO VISIT NEW YORK JANUARY 18-19 
 
REF: A. 03 QUITO 3217 
 
     B. 03 QUITO 3248 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney, Reason 1.4 (b) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  MFA U/S for Multilateral Affairs and the 
GOE\'s designate for Ambassador to the U.S., Roberto 
Betancourt, invited the DCM to his office on January 10 to 
inquire about recent statements by the Embassy spokesman. 
The DCM stood by the statements as an accurate reflection of 
USG concern that the Ecuadorian Congress\' recent replacement 
of the Supreme Court and other judicial institutions did not 
strengthen democratic institutions.  Betancourt also provided 
information on President Gutierrez\' planned visit to New York 
later this month.  End Summary. 
 
GOE Concerned about USG Concern 
------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) Betancourt said he had been asked by FM Zuquilanda to 
inquire about recent statements by the Embassy spokesman of 
concern over recent moves by the majority in Congress to 
replace the Supreme Court and other judicial institutions. 
Betancourt cautioned that the media would use such statements 
for political ends. 
 
3.  (C) The spokesman\'s comments were in response to press 
inquires to local publication of Michael Shifter\'s opinion 
piece originally published in the Los Angeles Times, alleging 
that the USG was indifferent to the weakening of democratic 
institutions here.  The spokesman responded to press 
inquiries here saying the USG is not indifferent, noting that 
the Ambassador had, publicly and subsequently privately with 
President Gutierrez, expressed USG support for independent 
democratic institutions, and our concern about the Congress\' 
actions.  The statements ran in local media January 8-10. 
 
4.  (C) The DCM noted that the Embassy spokesman\'s statements 
simply reiterated the USG position of concern and support for 
democratic institutions.  They reflect long-standing USG 
support for Ecuadorian democracy, and repeat what the 
Ambassador expressed on several previous occasions in 
December, both publicly and in private to President Gutierrez 
(RefTels).  This concern has been echoed in U.S. the media 
and civil society.  The Inter-American Dialogue would meet to 
discuss Ecuadorian democracy later this week.  The DCM noted 
that we are encouraged by President Gutierrez\' stated 
intention of strengthening the independence of the judiciary. 
 
 
Gutierrez to New York 
--------------------- 
 
5.  (C) Betancourt said President Gutierrez, accompanied by 
Finance Minister Mauricio Yepez and Ecuador\'s 
Ambassador-designate to the UN, would depart Ecuador for New 
York on January 15, to attend meetings on January 18-19, and 
return to Ecuador on the 20th.  The agenda for the visit is 
being finalized, but will likely include talks with financial 
institutions on debt swaps, a meeting with the Ecuadorian 
community representatives, an event at the Council of the 
Americas, and perhaps a call at the UN.  President Gutierrez 
is not seeking to visit Washington.  The DCM suggested that 
Gutierrez be well prepared to address the Supreme Court issue 
at any public events. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (C) Betancourt, who currently awaits USG agrement as 
Ambassador-designate to the U.S., made his inquiries gently, 
clearly under orders to signal GOE concern.  Thus far the GOE 
has not reacted publicly and seems unlikely to do so.  We are 
comfortable that our message of concern for democratic 
institutions, coupled with deference to Ecuadorians as 
arbiters of their own constitution, is entirely appropriate 
and eminently defensible. 
 
7.  (C) We had counseled against a presidential trip to the 
U.S. at this time, and partially succeeded in turning off a 
visit to Washington.  Gutierrez apparently hopes to highlight 
his administration\'s economic successes on this visit and 
perhaps to escape political pressures building at home. 
KENNEY 
"
"25191","1/10/2005 22:57","05QUITO61","Embassy Quito","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 000061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/10/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EC 
SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT MINISTER SHARES (BIZARRE) VIEWS 
 
REF: 03 QUITO 3027 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kristie A. Kenney.  Reason 1.4 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  In a December 7 tour d\'horizon with the 
Ambassador and DCM, Government Minister Jaime Damerval 
expressed willingness to cooperate to combat trafficking in 
persons.  He also shed (sometimes disturbing) light on his 
thinking on a range of other issues, including the drug war, 
the government\'s referendum proposal, USG support for 
democracy, and security burdens caused by Colombia 
spill-over.  Given his views, we consider it fortunate that 
Damerval is apparently not a member of the President\'s inner 
circle.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador invited Damerval to breakfast at the 
residence to lobby for the minister\'s personal involvement on 
the TIP issue, which he accepted eagerly (SepTel).  He 
dominated the conversation in a stream-of-consciousness flow 
which, while respectful, included several statements of 
concern. 
 
Neighbors No Help, U.S. to Blame 
-------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) In a reference to his ongoing dispute with Guayaquil 
leaders about security there, Damerval complained that his 
police and prison resources are stretched thin because of the 
need to bolster security along northern border provinces. 
Finance minister Yepez is no help, he said, strictly holding 
the line on budget increases.  He hoped for help from the 
Spanish government on prisons.  Colombia, never a good 
neighbor to Ecuador, had showed no willingness to acknowledge 
responsibility for some of Ecuador\'s security-related 
expenses. 
 
4.  (C) The narcotics trafficking which undermines Ecuadorian 
security, he said, stems from the personal weakness of U.S. 
drug users.  Continuing on Guayaquil, his native city, the 
minister said it had been difficult to craft the referendum 
to be proposed by the President by January 21, and that one 
key element would be increased autonomy for the city, and 
possibly other areas. 
 
5.  (C) Damerval then laid into Ecuador\'s southern neighbor, 
citing the US for guaranteeing a peace which cheated Ecuador 
on its eastern frontier.  The US should encourage Peru to 
reopen the 1996 peace treaty, and move the riverine border 
east. 
 
Congress Not Worth It? 
---------------------- 
 
6.  (C) Discussing TIP, Damerval acknowledged the difficulty 
of dealing with Congress, but cited his personal friendship 
with the newly-elected Congress President as a potential 
asset.  Acknowledging his reputation as a political 
provocateur, he slyly noted USG support for President 
Fujimori even after he dissolved the Peruvian Congress.  The 
Ambassador noted that USG support is for Ecuador\'s democratic 
institutions, including Congress, and that the USG is seeking 
ways to strengthen them. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (C) Damerval, appointed in November to lead the Gutierrez 
government\'s defense against impeachment, appeared 
uncomfortable but eager to please, highlighting his language 
ability, support for a free trade agreement, and his personal 
affinity for the U.S., and agreeing wholeheartedly with the 
Ambassador\'s request that he show greater leadership on TIP. 
His comments revealed a darker side, however, and a tendency 
common to intellectuals of his generation to implicitly blame 
the U.S. for Ecuador\'s problems, hold irrational fears of 
Peru, and seek US intervention to solve Ecuador\'s problems. 
Given these views, we believe it is fortunate for Ecuador 
that Damerval is clearly not trusted by Gutierrez to chart 
GOE policy, and hope rumors of his impending dismissal prove 
correct. 
 
 
KENNEY 
"
"25297","1/12/2005 16:30","05QUITO75","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED","04QUITO1501|04QUITO1559|04QUITO2502|04QUITO2614|04QUITO565","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 000075 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ECON, EFIS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, SENV, EC, Environment 
SUBJECT: GALAPAGOS NEW YEAR: NO CAUSE FOR CELEBRATION 
 
REF: A. A. 04QUITO 2614 
     B. B. 04QUITO 565 
     C. C. 04QUITO 1501 
     D. D. 04QUITO 1559 AND 1571 
     E. E. 04QUITO 2502 
 
1. Summary.  Violent strikes, instability, disregard for 
conservation, and political expediency have plagued the 
Galapagos over the past year.  Unfortunately, the New Year 
brought no cause for celebration.  It now appears likely that 
the Minister of the Environment, Fabian Valdivieso, will open 
the Galapagos Marine Reserve to longline fishing. 
Valdivieso,s commitment to transparency and independence in 
the Galapagos National Park (GNP) Director selection process 
also appears to be waning (Ref A).  The lack of protection of 
the resources in the Galapagos under the current GNP 
Director\'s tenure garnered front-page coverage in the local 
press and forced the President to call for an investigation. 
The Ambassador and members of the Mission continue to push 
for stability and conservation with targeted members of the 
GOE. End Summary. 
 
------------------ 
2004: A Sad Review 
------------------ 
 
2.  The past year in the Galapagos has been tragic.  A series 
of violent strikes and a parade of park directors have 
destabilized management of the park and virtually paralyzed 
monitoring and enforcement in the Galapagos Marine Reserve. 
The Gutierrez administration has politically exploited the 
park in order to garner votes from other political parties to 
support the President. 
 
3.  The year started off with the fishermen in the Galapagos 
protesting in January over environmental regulations.  The 
fishermen restricted access to the GNP and the Charles Darwin 
Research Station but were not violent (Ref B).  In May, the 
fishermen protested a decision to regulate the sea cucumber 
season (Ref C).  In June, this developed into a full strike 
that became violent.  The fishermen blockaded the island of 
Hispanola, not permitting tourists to enter or depart.  The 
fishermen completely took over the GNP, cutting off all 
access to and from the park.  The strikers attacked two 
police vehicles, briefly took over a gas station, and hurled 
rocks and Molotov cocktails at GNP buildings (Ref D).  In 
September, the employees of the GNP went on strike, 
protesting the replacement of the park director with someone 
closely aligned with the fishing sector (Ref E).  While the 
park employees were not violent, club-wielding fishermen 
stormed the park in order to install their man as park 
director. 
 
4.  The revolving door of GNP Directors has, more than 
anything, destabilized park management and caused paralysis 
within the park.  In the eight years prior to President 
Gutierrez assuming office the GNP had only one Director. 
Over the past two years there have been ten directors, four 
from September to December 2004. 
 
5.  Further, a majority (226) of the GNP\'s employees (roughly 
300) work under contracts that expired on December 31, 2004. 
The interim director, who is also a favorite son of the 
fishing interests, has said that there is no money available 
in the Ministry of Finance to renew non-essential contracts. 
Accordingly, he decided that the head of monitoring and 
enforcement for the marine reserve was one of the 
non-essential positions.  Even though Valdivieso later 
reversed this decision publicly, the incumbent\'s contract was 
never renewed.  The same is occurring with other essential 
positions, such as the Chief of the Marine Reserve on Isabela 
Island.  Currently, only 76 of the contract positions have 
been renewed, leaving the 138,000 square kilometer marine 
reserve essentially unmonitored. 
 
------------------------------ 
2005: No Cause for Celebration 
------------------------------ 
 
6.  This year is shaping up to be as bleak as last.  Having 
essentially taken over control of the GNP, the fishermen are 
now proposing opening parts of the marine reserve to longline 
tuna fishing.  The economic basis of the proposal seems to be 
more the potential lucrative gains from the bycatch (shark 
and other high value species) than the more modest earnings 
possible from the tuna fishery. 
 
7.  The independent and transparent process for selecting 
permanent GNP Directors is floundering.  The current Minister 
has not shown any intent to implement the process.  He has 
not even submitted the required Presidential Decree for 
review.  The proposed process may be shelved if Valdivieso is 
replaced with his likely successor, Ruben Moreno, the current 
number two at the Ministry. 
 
8.  The mismanagement of 2004 has also adversely affected the 
GNP\'s international standing and ability to compete for 
funding.  Both the Ford and Moore Foundations have suspended 
potential donations to the GNP because of instability in the 
park. 
 
9.  On an optimistic note, a new marine research and patrol 
vessel (financed by the International Development Bank) has 
been commissioned.  This vessel can stay at sea for extended 
periods of time, and should give monitoring personnel greater 
enforcement capability, if their contracts are renewed. 
Also, recent press coverage and editorial commentary has 
echoed the concerns of conservation and donor groups over 
instability and lack of vision in the Galapagos.  This 
prompted President Gutierrez to call for an investigation of 
GNP management. 
 
-------------------- 
U.S. Mission Actions 
-------------------- 
 
10.  Post continues to press the GOE to prioritize 
conservation of the Galapagos.  The Ambassador has instructed 
USAID to visit the Galapagos to meet with new political 
authorities, evaluate the use of our resources in the 
archipelago, and unify the message of concern with other 
donors.  Political officers will raise the issue of 
conservation and donor investments with key members of 
Congress.  Economic officers will meet with Ministry of 
Finance officials to push for funding for appropriate 
staffing levels in the GNP.  MilGroup will lobby for 
stepped-up patrolling and increased vigilance to eliminate 
violent strikes in the GNP.  Consulate Guayaquil and Embassy 
will press key tourist sector contacts to become more vocal 
in expressing environmental concerns.  And the Ambassador 
will continue to lobby the President and the Ministers of the 
Environment and Tourism for stability, transparency, and 
increased conservation. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
11.  Rumors continue to fly that MOE Valdivieso,s days are 
numbered.  His likely successor, Ruben Moreno, is the current 
number two at the ministry ) and well known to us as a 
political operative loyal to Gutierrez with no background or 
interest in environmental matters.  It became evident over 
the past six months that his was the hand behind the turmoil 
in the GNP, trying to buy congressional votes with park 
positions.  If he is named Minister, conservation will 
undoubtedly take even more of a back seat to political 
expediency. 
 
KENNEY 
"
"25307","1/12/2005 20:59","05QUITO78","Embassy Quito","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","05SECSTATE274736","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS QUITO 000078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EC, Trafficking 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY MOTIVATES GOE TO MOVE FORWARD ON TIP 
 
REF: SECSTATE 274736 
 
1. (U) Summary:  In a meeting on January 7, Minister of 
Government Jaime Damerval expressed his commitment to 
fighting trafficking in persons (TIP) to the Ambassador and 
DCM.  He subsequently convoked the first meeting of the GOE\'s 
interinstitutional committee.  He also re-assigned the 
portfolio to U/S Vicente Olmedo.  Presidential advisor Carlos 
Polit also assured the DCM that TIP is one of President 
Gutierrez\'s top priorities.  End Summary. 
 
Ministry of Government Called TIP Meeting 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) On January 7, in a wide-ranging conversation 
(reported septel) Minister Damerval praised TIP as one of his 
ministry\'s priorities.  He was very enthusiastic but not 
well-versed on the topic.  The Ambassador emphasized the need 
for Damerval to lead the government to take additional steps 
to fight against trafficking including promoting legal 
reforms and using them to prosecute traffickers.  She 
provided him a copy of the interim Tier 2 watch list report, 
nothing that much more needed to be done.  At her suggestion, 
Damerval agreed to convoke the GOE\'s interinstitutional 
committee.  Damerval said he is a good friend of Omar 
Quintana, the new president of Congress, and that he would 
use his contacts to encourage Congress to pass TIP 
legislation. 
 
3. (U) Following up on the Ambassador\'s meeting, on January 
11 PolOff met with Undersecretary of Government Vicente 
Olmedo to whom Damerval assigned the trafficking portfolio. 
Olmedo was not very knowledgeable about TIP but said he was 
personally committed to fighting the problem.  He confirmed 
the inter-institutional meeting scheduled for January 13, 
saying he would lead the GOE\'s committee with the assistance 
of the Director of Gender Affairs, Nelly Jacome.  (Jacome is 
known favorably to us--she understands the TIP issue well.) 
Olmedo invited PolOff to attend the interinstitutional 
meeting and speak about the USG\'s TIP policy.   PolOff 
accepted and encouraged Olmedo to coordinate on combating TIP 
with the Spanish and Peruvian embassies as well. 
 
Presidency Re-commits to Fight Against TIP 
------------------------------------------ 
 
4. (U) Carlos Polit, high-level advisor to the President, 
responded very positively to the DCM\'s call on January 3 
explaining the interim assessment report and soliciting his 
assistance in making trafficking a key item on the GOE\'s 
agenda.  Polit said President Gutierrez had told him on 
January 2 that the government should focus on combating TIP. 
Polit said he would consult with Damerval to move this issue 
forward. 
 
MFA Falling Behind 
------------------ 
 
5. (U) On January 4, PolOff met with Carmen Larrea, acting 
director of the Human Rights Office at the MFA, to present 
the GOE an advance copy of the interim watch list report, and 
explain what we hope to see from the GOE in coming months: 
i.e., legal reform, a national plan, and coordinated efforts 
to put traffickers behind bars.  Larrea was slightly 
defensive but clearly understood the issue and the Embassy\'s 
interest in seeing additional progress. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
6. (U) The interim assessment report and the Ambassador\'s 
meeting with Damerval set off positive events: a planned 
meeting of the interinstitutional committee and assignment of 
the TIP portfolio at the working level.  The GOE\'s leaders 
have been distracted with  political stability issues for the 
past few months but appear to be getting back on track with 
TIP.  We will attempt to take advantage of this momentum to 
encourage key steps, such as development of a national plan, 
progress on pending legislation, and prosecution of 
traffickers. 
KENNEY 
"