
"24867","1/3/2005 14:48","05WARSAW13","Embassy Warsaw","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS WARSAW 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
Sensitive 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NCE TARA ERATH AND MICHAEL SESSUMS 
USDOC FOR 4232/ITA/MAC/EUR/JBURGESS AND MWILSON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA MATTHEW GAERTNER AND ERIC MEYER 
FRANKFURT FOR TREASURY JIM WALLAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ETRD, PARM, PREL, PL, Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT:  Further Press Stories on Alleged Polish Bribery 
Case 
 
Ref: 2004 Warsaw 4013 
 
(U) This cable is sensitive, but unclassified, and NOT for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1. (U) Summary: Polish papers continue to follow allegations 
that a shadowy Polish tycoon, Marek Dochnal, bribed a 
parliamentarian related to the privatization sale of a steel 
mill.  There are also allegations that Dochnal was involved 
in the campaign by Russian companies to buy shares in 
Poland\'s largest oil refinery.  On December 21, the district 
court in Lodz extended the term of Dochnal\'s detention by 
three months to give prosecutors additional time to build 
their case.  While formal charges have yet to be filed, 
parliament has lifted the immunity of the deputy whom 
Dochnal allegedly bribed.  End Summary 
 
2. (U) Since his arrest in September for allegations of 
bribery, Marek Dochnal has continued to attract considerable 
attention in the Polish press.  Polish prosecutors in Lodz 
are still investigating his activities, but it has been 
reported in the press that Dochnal bribed Andrzej Peczak, a 
parliamentarian from the Social Democratic Left Party (SLD), 
by giving him a Mercedes in exchange for information related 
to the privatization of a Polish state-owned steel mill to 
the Netherlands-Antilles based LNM company (reftel).  Some 
papers have also reported that Dochnal may have bribed 
Peczak on behalf of a Russian client seeking to buy shares 
in Poland\'s largest oil refinery, PKN Orlen.  (There is an 
ongoing parliamentary investigation into allegations that 
Russian companies and their Polish agents distributed $80 
million in bribes in pursuit of Orlen shares in what has 
been dubbed \"Orlengate.\")  Dochnal\'s spokesman has denied 
all charges in interviews with the press, telling reporters 
Dochnal \"lent\" Peczak the Mercedes. 
 
3. (U) Prosecutors are also investigating allegations that 
one of Dochnal\'s companies, Larchmont Capital Group, sought 
to influence the privatization sale of PHS to LNM. 
Larchmont earned substantial fees for its role in this 
privatization (in which US Steel was an unsuccessful 
bidder).  Polish papers have also reported that Larchmont 
was actively involved in a proposed sale of a second Polish 
steel mill, Czestochowa, in which LNM and a Ukrainian 
company were bidding.  Polish papers have reported that 
Dochnal was involved with LNM\'s Ukrainian competitor for the 
sale, Donbas, in a conspiracy to rig the bidding to create 
the impression of competition.  An LNM spokesman told the 
press the company \"had no knowledge\" of the allegations 
against Dochnal. 
 
4. (U) Meanwhile, Polish and British papers have reported 
extensively on Dochnal\'s elaborate social connections, 
having spent more than 5 million pounds over five years to 
become a leading figure in British polo.  Polish papers have 
asserted that Dochnal pursued such social connections as a 
way of gaining influence with top government leaders. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: We will continue to follow this case in 
the press, although, for now, the primary impact seems to be 
on the ongoing investigation into the commercial activities 
of Poland\'s largest refinery, PKN Orlen.  On December 21, 
the district court in Lodz ruled that Dochnal would remain 
in custody for a further three months to give prosecutors 
more time to investigate the various aspects of this case. 
We will watch carefully to see if Polish prosecutors file 
any formal charges related to bribery of Polish officials on 
behalf of foreign companies. 
 
Ashe 
 
 
NNNN 

 2005WARSAW00013 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 

"
"24931","1/5/2005 6:21","05WARSAW26","Embassy Warsaw","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  WARSAW 000026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
Sensitive 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NCE TARA ERATH AND MICHAEL SESSUMS 
USDOC FOR 4232/ITA/MAC/EUR/JBURGESS AND MWILSON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA MATTHEW GAERTNER AND ERIC MEYER 
FRANKFURT FOR TREASURY JIM WALLAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PREL, PL, Economy 
SUBJECT:  Polish Parliament Enacts 2005 Budget with Lower 
Deficit 
 
Ref: 2004 Warsaw 3343 
 
(U) This cable is sensitive, but unclassified, and NOT for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Just before Christmas, the Polish 
Government completed work on a 2005 budget which has a lower 
deficit for the first time in three years (forecast at 3.7% 
of GDP compared to 4.8% in 2004).  In drafting the 2005 
budget, the GOP built on its success in 2004 in revitalizing 
the privatization program, which enabled the government to 
meet its year-end debt targets.  The 2005 budget expects 
that revenues will increase 8.9%, based on continued strong 
export growth and an increase in investments, while 
expenditures will increase only 1.4% in real terms.  There 
is some concern that the GOP may have difficulty passing 
three fiscal reform measures in parliament expected to save 
$1.45 billion.  Some of these potential losses in savings 
could be made up by increased privatization sales during the 
year.  Market reaction has been positive, lauding the 
government for generally realistic targets.  Although 
upcoming general elections in 2005 will make this year more 
uncertain than last, the 2005 budget will provide a good 
base for the new government in drafting its own financial 
program.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On December 23, President Kwasniewski signed the 2005 
budget, completing its enactment.  This budget is noteworthy 
for several reasons.  In addition to paying a full year\'s 
worth of EU membership dues for the first time, Poland will 
pay up front significant co-financing obligations for 
Structural and Cohesion funds from the budget.  Despite 
these challenges, the GOP reversed the trend of the last 
three years and lowered its budget deficit to 35 billion 
Zloty ($11.29 billion), a significant reduction from 2004\'s 
deficit target of 45 billion Zloty ($12.23 billion at the 
then-current exchange rate).  This will reduce Poland\'s 
deficit-to-GDP ratio from 4.8% in 2004 to 3.7% in 2005 on 
track to meet the commitment Poland made in its convergence 
plan to lower this figure to 3% by 2007.  Finally, this 
budget will be the last passed by this parliament, as 
general elections will be held in 2005. 
 
Revenues: 
- - - - - - - 
 
3. (U) The 2005 budget forecasts that revenues of 174.7 
billion Zloty ($56.35 billion) and expenditures of 209.7 
billion Zloty ($67.65 billion), for a deficit of 35 billion 
Zloty ($11.29 billion).  In real terms, revenues are 
expected to increase by 8.9%, while expenditures will grow 
by 1.4%.  The most important sources of revenue will be VAT 
(42%), followed by excise taxes (24%) and Personal Income 
Tax (PIT, 13%).  The government also forecast that it would 
receive 5.7 billion Zloty ($1.84 billion) in privatization 
revenues, a figure the market believes is low. 
 
Planned Budget Revenues (in billions of Zloty; one dollar 
equals 3.1 Zloty) 
 
               2004           2005 budget    Percent change 
 
Total               156.1          174.7          11.9 
Total Taxes         136.8          154.4          12.8 
(of which) 
VAT            63.5      73.0      14.9 
Excise              37.2      43.0      15.6 
Lottery Tax         0.8         0.9          12.5 
PIT            22.1      23.5       6.3 
CIT            13.2      14.7      11.4 
Non-tax 
Revenues       16.9      16.5      -2.4 
(of which) 
Dividends      1.3         1.0          -23.0 
NBP profits         4.0         4.6          15.0 
Customs Duties      2.2         1.5          -25.0 
Budget Unit 
Revenues       7.6         7.6          - 
Local Gov 
Payments       1.2         1.2          - 
EU budget 
Support        2.3         2.7          17.4 
 
Expenditures 
 
 
- - - - - - - - 
 
4. (U) Overall expenditures are set to increase 1.4% in real 
terms. The sectors that will see the biggest increases 
include information technology, defense, justice and 
education. Overall spending on defense will increase by more 
than 11% in nominal terms, in part reflecting Poland\'s 
participation in NATO modernization, in part reflecting a 
reclassification of budget items to include spending under 
defense which had previously been listed in the education 
and cultural sectors of the budget.   This budget calls for 
a one percent nominal increase in social expenditures (a 
1.9% decrease when inflation is factored in) to 63.5 billion 
Zloty ($20.48 billion).  Roughly half of this amount will be 
transferred as subsidies to the Farmers Social Security 
System (KRUS, 14.2 billion Zloty, $4.58 billion) and the 
General Social Security Fund (FUS, 18.6 billion Zloty, $6 
billion).  There is a 12% decrease in real terms on 
infrastructure spending, reflecting expected EU assistance. 
 
Main items of budgetary spending: 
(in billions of Zlotys) 
               2004 budget    2005 budget    Percent change 
 
Total               199.9          209.7          4.4 
(of which) 
Agriculture         3.1       2.6       -17.6 
Forestry       0.04      0.03      -18.3 
Fishery             0.033          0.026          -19.3 
Mining              2.1       1.7       -18.9 
Industry       0.33      0.25      -24.3 
Trade               0.92      0.73      -20.6 
Hotels/ 
Restaurants         0.02      0.02      - 
Transport/ 
Communications 5.0       4.1       -18.2 
Tourism        0.04      0.03      -11.7 
Housing        1.6       1.4       -11.0 
Services       0.6       0.4       -34.7 
Info Tech      0.15      0.2       27.4 
Science        2.9       2.9       - 
Public Admin        7.8       7.7       -1.4 
Admin Organs        1.6       1.9       15.0 
Defense        11.3      12.6      11.4 
Social Security     46.0      43.0      -6.6 
Public Security     8.7       9.0       3.0 
Justice             6.4       7.0       9.9 
Debt Service        26.8      27.4      2.4 
Various 
Settlements         42.9      49.4      15.0 
Education      1.1       1.3       18.3 
Higher Education    8.9       9.6       7.6 
Health care         3.6       3.7       1.9 
Social Welfare      10.4      11.4      9.7 
Other social 
Policy items        5.3       8.0       49.6 
 
A Question of Assumptions: 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (U) In preparing the budget, the Finance Ministry assumes 
that inflation will average 3.0% in 2005, and that economic 
growth will average 5%, both of which the markets regard as 
reasonable projections.  Parliament arbitrarily increased 
the expectations for excise tax revenue by 800 million Zloty 
to justify increased spending on several pet projects. 
Market analysts are not sure the government will be able to 
raise this amount from excise.  In constructing its 
expenditure plans, the government also assumed that 
parliament would pass three reform bills as part of the 
Hausner plan: a bill reforming the Social Security Fund 
(FUS), saving 200 million Zloty; a bill increasing social 
security contributions from larger companies, increasing 
revenues by 1.6 billion Zloty; and a bill reforming the 
Agricultural Social Security System (KRUS), saving 1.7 
billion Zloty.  Finally, parliament passed a bill 
reinstating a 50% Personal Income Tax rate on the richest 
Poles over the government\'s objections, which parliament 
expects will raise 250 million Zloty.  The GOP has dragged 
its feet about implementing the bill, raising serious 
questions about whether it will generate any revenue.  Taken 
together, these shortfalls total 4.5 billion Zloty ($1.45 
billion). 
 
 
Macroeconomic assumptions: 
                         2004      2005 
 
GDP, billion Zlotys           884.0          952.6 
GDP growth %             5.7       5.0 
Domestic demand growth %      4.7       5.1 
CPI year end %           4.0       2.8 
CPI average %                 3.4       3.0 
Unemployment rate %      19.3      18.2 
PLN/USD, average              3.75      3.68 
PLN/EUR, average              4.6       4.42 
Current account deficit, % of GDP  1.6       2.2 
 
 
Debt Levels: 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
6. (U) The budget forecasts debt-to-GDP will be at 48.2% 
(using ESA-95 methodology) by the end of 2005, under the 50% 
level at which the constitution begins to impose 
restrictions.  Government debt is expected to dip just below 
51% at the end of 2004, a slight reduction from the 2003 
total of 51.6%.  In the budget, the government forecasts 
that its budget deficit will be 3.7% of GDP in 2005, which 
will decline to 3.1% in 2006 and 2.7% in 2007, on track to 
meet the important Maastricht criteria of 3.0% deficit-GDP 
ratio. 
 
7. (SBU) Some analysts see financing of the deficit as the 
weakest link in the 2005 budget. The net government 
borrowing requirement is 46.5 billion Zloty, a slight 
decline from 2004\'s requirement of 50.8 billion Zloty. The 
Ministry of Finance has created some room for maneuver for 
itself by planning on borrowing more than the expected 
decrease in the deficit would imply.  This is intended to 
leave room in case the government receives less money from 
privatization than planned, has to pay more than planned for 
pre-financing EU assistance and/or in case it has to extend 
emergency loans to local health care units.  There may also 
be some positive carryover from the 2004 budget if the final 
deficit is lower than has been assumed in the 2005 budget 
(the 2005 budget forecasts that the final 2004 deficit will 
be 1.6 billion Zloty lower than expected, while market 
analysts have concluded it could be up to 4 billion Zloty 
lower).  Finally, the GOP may also have created some wiggle 
room by using a conservative Zloty/dollar exchange rate 
forecast of 3.68 for 2005.  Should the average exchange rate 
for the year be closer to today\'s rate of 3.1, the GOP could 
save up to one billion dollars in debt service costs. 
 
Comment: 
- - - - - - - 
 
8. (SBU) Financial markets are very pleased with this 
budget.  The government has continued the trend begun in 
2004 of increasing transparency, with fewer items off-budget 
and based on sober projections for growth and income. In 
drafting this budget, the GOP faced several challenges.  The 
GOP managed to lower the budget deficit for the first time 
in three years despite the fact that Poland will have to pay 
its first full year of dues to the EU, and pay up front its 
contribution to EU Structural and Cohesion Funds.  This feat 
is all the more remarkable considering that it was done by a 
technocratic government with low levels of popular support 
and that general elections are expected in the summer or 
fall of 2005.  The revival of privatization is a big part of 
the story.  For the first time since 2000, the Finance 
Ministry did not have to make up shortfalls in revenue late 
in the year, allowing the government to meet its debt 
targets.  Despite being largely written off by market 
analysts, the government intends to campaign for important 
structural reforms to the social security systems, which 
will be important if Poland is to meet its target of 
adopting the Euro by 2009.  At the very least, the pressure 
to enact fiscal reforms is expected to mute parliament\'s 
inclination to pursue populist spending programs in advance 
of the general elections.  Regardless of the outcome of 
elections, the 2005 budget will provide a good base for the 
new government to begin work on its financial program. 
 
Ashe 
"
"24994","1/6/2005 6:27","05WARSAW58","Embassy Warsaw","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  WARSAW 000058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
Sensitive 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NCE TARA ERATH AND MICHAEL SESSUMS 
USDOC FOR 4232/ITA/MAC/EUR/JBURGESS AND MWILSON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA MATTHEW GAERTNER AND ERIC MEYER 
FRANKFURT FOR TREASURY JIM WALLAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PREL, PL, Economy 
SUBJECT:  Markets Show Increasing Appreciation for the 
Polish Zloty\'s Strength 
 
Ref: 2004 Warsaw 386 
 
(U) This cable is sensitive, but unclassified, and NOT for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: The Zloty appreciated the most of any 
convertible currency against the Dollar, growing 20% in 
2004.  Most observers attribute this rise to a mix of 
factors, including greater political stability under the 
current technocratic government, Poland\'s entry into the EU 
in May, and the relatively high interest rate offered on 
Polish government bonds.  The Polish Government and 
financial markets are still trying to assess whether the 
Zloty\'s rise reflects a long-term shift in fundamental 
economic conditions, or whether it is a short-term 
phenomenon related to Poland\'s EU accession.  Most analysts 
believe it is the former, and expect the Zloty will 
appreciate further in 2005.  Although the Government would 
prefer to continue to let markets set the exchange rate, it 
will be forced to begin taking a stand on what the Zloty\'s 
`real\' value is as part of its preparations to enter the ERM 
II in 2007 on the way to adopting the Euro by 2009. 
Pressure for the Government to intervene to lower the 
Zloty\'s value to help exporters has been muted until now, as 
exports have continued to grow.  Additional appreciation may 
increase calls from exporters for some relief, particularly 
given that 2005 is an election year.  End Summary 
 
The Zloty a Highly Appreciated Currency 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (U) Despite a rough start, 2004 proved to be a banner 
year for the Polish Zloty (which means golden in Polish). 
The Zloty appreciated more than any other convertible 
currency against the dollar, gaining 20.14%, outpacing other 
Central European currencies by a comfortable margin 
(including the Hungarian Forint at 13.9%, the Slovak Koruna 
at 13% and the Czech Koruna at 12.4%).  By the end of the 
year, the dollar had fallen below three Zloty per dollar, 
the lowest level it has been in seven years.  The Zloty 
appreciated more than 14% against the Euro.  Private sector 
economists attributed the Zloty\'s rise to: the stabilization 
of the political scene after the appointment of Belka\'s 
technocratic government in July; improving economic 
fundamentals; Poland\'s entry into the EU on May 1; and the 
attractive carried interest rate on Polish Government bonds. 
 
2004: A Very Good Year: 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. (U) In terms of fundamentals, for the fourth year in a 
row, exports were up significantly, growing approximately 
20% for the full year in 2004.  This strong growth helped 
push the current account down to 1.8%.  Exports helped push 
economic growth to an estimated 5.6% for the entire year. 
For the first time in three years, investment grew, by 4.1% 
through the first ten months (preliminary estimates suggest 
the full year\'s total could be up to 8%).  Foreign Direct 
Investment remained relatively constant, at an estimated $6 
billion, due in part to the revival of the government\'s 
privatization program. 
 
4. (U) Poland\'s entry into the EU opened Polish investments 
to many foreign investors (e.g., pension funds) who would 
not have previously bought government bonds or shares. 
Coupled with the stabilization of the political scene since 
the installation of a technocratic government, many 
investors perceived an \"established\" country\'s level of 
political risk with an emerging market\'s level of return 
(one-year Polish Government bonds averaged close to 6.35% 
for the year, reflecting lower ratings by investment 
agencies compared to other Central European counterparts). 
As a result, Poland attracted $12.2 billion of portfolio 
investment, the highest level since 2000.  This total 
includes $8.7 billion in foreign purchases of government 
bonds, more than three times the average level of 2001-3. 
This, combined with $680 million invested in Poland\'s stock 
markets, helped strengthen the Zloty.  The National Bank of 
Poland (Poland\'s Central Bank, NBP) does not believe that 
most of the portfolio investment increase is hot money, but 
is comprised primarily of more stable investors such as EU 
pension funds. 
 
How Golden is the Zloty? 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (U) The question is whether the Zloty will remain as 
attractive in 2005.  Government and private sector 
economists expect that investments will be the main driver 
for the 2005 economy.  Capacity utilization rates are at 
historic highs, and more than eight quarters of strong 
export growth have delivered good profits to Polish 
companies, which are now sitting on very large corporate 
bank accounts.  The one great unknown has been the 
composition of the new government that will take office 
after general elections later this year.  As this situation 
becomes clearer, Polish companies are expected to begin 
investing, which in turn should sustain economic growth, 
forecast at 5.0%. 
 
6. (U) The Polish Government anticipates completing several 
large privatizations in 2005.   The GOP conservatively 
forecasts that it will earn 5.7 billion Zloty ($1.84 
billion) from these sales, several of which are expected to 
attract foreign investors (including the state insurance 
company PZU, chemical and energy plants and industrial 
concerns).  The Polish Government will also embark on a 
number of EU funded projects, particularly in the 
infrastructure sector, taking advantage of its first full 
year of EU membership.  There should be significant inflows 
of EU money by the end of the year (up to 3 billion Euro). 
 
Pressure on Exporters: 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. (U) Polish exporters have begun to complain that the 
relentless appreciation is making their exports less 
competitive.  Their complaints have been muted in part 
because a number of their inputs, including gasoline and, in 
some cases, bank loans, have been priced in dollars, meaning 
that their relative input costs were stable or declining 
while their revenues - measured either in Euro or Zloty - 
were appreciating.  Polish exporters have also compensated 
by increasing productivity throughout 2004, which has 
enabled them to continue making good profits even at the 
cost of having to trim prices to compensate for the stronger 
Zloty.  Productivity increases in 2004 outpaced appreciation 
against the Euro, although not against the dollar.  Market 
economists have estimated publicly that exporters would 
begin to feel the pinch at around 4.25 Zloty per Euro (it 
was trading just over 4.10 during the last week of 
December).  Bankers and companies tell us they remain 
confident about their ability to continue export growth, 
although further appreciation will pressure them to cut 
costs, including by freezing or cutting employment to lower 
labor costs.  Polish importers report they have been hit 
harder by the dollar\'s fall, as some industries compete with 
Asian suppliers who price their goods in dollars. 
 
Fundamental Shift or Short-Term Blip? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
8. (SBU) An NBP exchange rate expert recently explained the 
Bank\'s dilemma in determining whether the Zloty\'s 
appreciation represents a fundamental change in the real 
economy, or whether it represents a temporary shifting of 
prices following Poland\'s accession to the EU.  NBP\'s 
inclination is that most of the Zloty\'s appreciation can be 
explained by a fundamental shift in the real economy rather 
than a short-term market, or speculative spike.  NBP expects 
that the real effects of joining the EU will continue to 
build, potentially even doubling total trade with the EU as 
smaller companies develop the ability to participate in the 
broader EU market.  This greater economic participation 
would justify a higher exchange rate. 
 
9. (SBU) The expert noted that the sharp fall of the dollar 
(35% against the Euro in three years) has exaggerated some 
of the Zloty\'s movement.  The Zloty has been more stable 
against the Euro in 2004, increasing 14%, versus 20% against 
the dollar.  He explained that the dollar\'s sharp fall has 
accelerated a shift in the Zloty\'s foreign exchange 
\"basket,\" (a rough benchmark used by the market to gauge 
whether the Zloty is under- or over-valued) away from the 
traditional 55% Euro pricing/45% dollar pricing to something 
closer to 70/30.  The slower rise against the Euro has 
tended to shift greater volatility towards the dollar, 
compounded by currency arbitrage, typically betting against 
 
 
the dollar. 
 
10. (SBU) There is a real possibility, however, that the 
Zloty overshot in 2004, and that there could be some 
retreat, particularly if markets become more nervous about 
the effect of a new government after general elections later 
this year.  A new government will have an important effect 
in determining tax rates, the pace of inflation through its 
control of fiscal policy, and indirectly, on the exchange 
rate.  Many Polish companies will wait to invest until they 
have a better sense of which parties will form a new 
government, and what policies they will implement.  As a 
result, 2005 is likely to see more volatility than 2004. 
Most analysts, however, expect fundamentals to take over 
again by the end of the third quarter, and the Zloty to 
appreciate by year end. 
 
Interventions? 
- - - - - - - - 
 
11. (U) The question of whether and how the GOP should 
respond to the Zloty\'s appreciation has become a central 
question for policy makers.  The Central Bank and Ministry 
of Finance have welcomed the effect appreciation has had in 
damping down inflation after accession to the EU in May. 
However, they are also getting more nervous that the Zloty 
is appreciating too rapidly.  On November 30, a deputy NBP 
governor sparked a flurry of media attention by suggesting 
that Central Bank intervention in the exchange rate was 
technically possible under certain conditions.  The next 
day, NBP Governor Balcerowicz said publicly that NBP\'s 
strategy of \"not intervening\" was working well, and 
suggested the Zloty had further room for appreciation. 
Markets did not react to the specific event, but have begun 
a broader discussion about the possibility of interventions. 
 
12. (SBU) Market analysts tend to doubt that the Central 
Bank would intervene, noting that Poland has been steadfast 
in its adherence to free floating exchange rates.  There 
have been no interventions since 1998.  Central Bank 
officials also point out that it would be very hard to get 
the amount of intervention right, particularly in the 
current situation when the government statistical office is 
undergoing significant revamping of the way it collects 
basic data, including trade and investment.  Without a 
better sense of events in the real economy, the Central Bank 
is unlikely to intervene on currency markets, which could 
risk setting off market reactions which would take much 
longer to stabilize than adjusting to the current 
appreciation. 
 
13. (U) The Monetary Policy Council could respond by cutting 
its monetary policy bias, as an indication of the future 
direction of interest rates.  Currently, it remains 
negative, signaling its determination to fight inflation. 
The MPC could decide, however, that it needs to cut interest 
rates to ease pressure on the Zloty.  The MPC would prefer 
to have more data indicating that inflation really is on the 
way back down after the sharp spike after EU accession 
(prices increased from just under 2% inflation to 4.5%). 
Most analysts have interpreted public NBP and MPC comments 
as an attempt to signal a desire to ease monetary policy 
without cutting rates, sending a signal to potential 
speculators that they do not want to Zloty bid up 
artificially at the expense of exporters. 
 
ERM-II 
- - - - - - 
 
14. (SBU) The question of getting the exchange rate right is 
a crucial question for the GOP to resolve as part of its 
obligation to adopt the Euro.  Ministry of Finance and 
Central Bank officials will meet at the end of January to 
begin discussing policy towards entering the Exchange Rate 
Mechanism (ERM-II) required by the EU on the road to 
adopting the Euro.  Once countries meet the Maastricht 
criteria, they can apply for ERM II membership, during which 
they must remain in compliance with these criteria to 
demonstrate stability before entering the Euro zone.  NBP 
and Finance must jointly agree on a central exchange rate 
target to join ERM II, which in turn requires broad 
agreement on monetary and fiscal policy to keep inflation in 
check.  The GOP would then negotiate with the EU to fix a 
central exchange rate for the ERM II.  The GOP has already 
 
 
set out its policy targets in the Convergence Strategy it 
submitted last fall to the European Central Bank.  The 
challenge is for the current government to set Poland on a 
path to meet its Convergence targets and be ready to enter 
the ERM II in 2007 at an exchange rate which will sustain 
long-term growth.  From comments made by EU counterparts, 
GOP officials have the impression that some of Poland\'s EU 
trading partners may try to pressure Poland to adopt a less 
competitive exchange rate to reduce competition from Polish 
companies. 
 
15. (SBU) In informal talks with the ECB, GOP officials 
understand that it is virtually certain that Poland will be 
able to operate within the wide band of a central parity 
exchange rate while in the ERM II.  Poland had been 
concerned in 2004 by EU member state comments implying that 
Poland could be required to maintain a narrow band (of 2.5%) 
around the parity, and that the EU would pay particular 
attention to any sharp depreciations.  The dollar\'s 
continued sharp fall in 2004, particularly against the 
Zloty, would have made it exceedingly difficult to remain 
within that band, as three month volatility averages by the 
end of the year were still over 11%, compared to a more 
stable Euro range of 7.3%.  NBP notes that Poland expects to 
meet the Maastricht criteria on budget deficit/GDP by a 
relatively narrow margin (2.7% compared to the limit of 3%), 
suggesting that adopting a narrow band would have little 
credibility. 
 
Comment: 
- - - - - - 
 
16. (SBU) Perversely, the Zloty\'s appreciation is a 
byproduct in part of the political stability in 2004 which 
companies have long sought.  The silver lining for exporters 
is that the elections this year may stem the Zloty\'s rise 
for a while, although most observers expect the Zloty will 
appreciate further based on solid economic fundamentals. 
So far, most of the discussion about the exchange rate has 
been held within technical or financial market circles. 
Continued appreciation of the Zloty will increase calls from 
exporters, however, for politicians to \"do something,\" 
particularly given that 2005 is an election year.  While the 
GOP would clearly prefer to let markets set the Zloty\'s 
exchange rate, it will have to take a policy stand on what 
the central parity exchange rate should be in order to meet 
its goal of entering the ERM II in 2007. 
 
Munter 
"
"25223","1/11/2005 13:32","05WARSAW206","Embassy Warsaw","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  WARSAW 000206 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NCE TARA ERATH AND MICHAEL SESSUMS 
USDOC FOR 4232/ITA/MAC/EUR/JBURGESS AND MWILSON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA MATTHEW GAERTNER AND ERIC MEYER 
FRANKFURT FOR TREASURY JIM WALLAR 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, ENRG, EPET, PREL, PL, Poland-Russia 
SUBJECT:  Poland Pleasantly Surprised at Upturn in 
Commercial Relations with Russia 
 
 
 (U) This cable is sensitive, but unclassified, and NOT for 
Internet distribution. 
 
1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Polish and Russian firms had feared 
that Poland\'s EU accession would disrupt trade, in part 
because the EU required Poland to abrogate its bilateral 
trade agreement with Russia.  Despite problems in some 
sectors, trade has expanded significantly.  Polish exports 
were up more than 80% in the first ten months of 2004. 
Poland is lobbying Brussels for some changes in the EU- 
Russian agreement which set tariffs and quotas for the new 
members.  Poland is particularly concerned to resolve issues 
related to meat and agricultural exports, and would like to 
lower tariffs on furniture.  Poland supports Russia\'s entry 
into the WTO, but would like to see Russia adopt market 
based reforms first.  Poland\'s relations with Russia on 
energy are more sensitive.  The EU rejected the prospect of 
the two countries concluding a bilateral agreement on energy 
in October.  Poland and Russia plan to meet on the margins 
of President Putin\'s trip to Poland at the end of January to 
discuss a range of energy issues.  End summary. 
 
2.  (U)  The Director for Bilateral Economic Relations with 
Russia at the Ministry of Economy, Elzbieta Bodio, provided 
an overview of Polish-Russian economic relations over the 
last year.  Poland\'s entry into the EU forced several 
important changes in the economic relationship, including 
the EU requirement that Poland abrogate its bilateral 
economic treaty with Russia.  Both Poland and Russia wanted 
to avoid a second shock to trade relations, given that 
companies are just now recovering from the drastic shock in 
the wake of the 1998 Russian financial collapse, which 
caused Polish exports to fall $2.2 billion in 1997 to $760 
million.  The big concern was that Poland\'s EU accession 
would force Poland to abrogate the bilateral economic 
treaty, which governed a number of sectors, including 
setting tariffs and import quotas in some areas.  Russian 
companies were concerned they would lose market share. 
Russian exporters were particularly vocal in airing their 
fears, demanding in the fall of 2003 that the Russian 
government impose punitively high tariffs on Polish exports. 
 
3.  (U)  Despite the fears that the worst would come to 
pass, 2004 turned out to be a year of progressively 
improving relations, at least outside of energy.  It has 
turned out that Russian firms have benefited handsomely from 
the accession.  Bodio said that tariffs on ten percent of 
Russian goods had declined, while they had increased on 5%, 
and stayed the same on energy (85% of the total).  Through 
the first ten months of 2004, Polish exports were up 80%, 
despite problems in food exports.  Some of the biggest 
increases have come in machines and medicines, and even in 
furniture, despite prohibitively high Russian tariffs. 
 
4.  (U)  Poland and Russia had hoped to complete a new 
bilateral agreement which would comply with Poland\'s EU 
obligations regarding the internal market and competition 
before May 1.  However, this proved impossible.  The EU 
concluded an agreement with Russia on May 21, which set 
tariff rates and quota levels for Polish-Russian trade.  In 
a number of areas, relatively short transition periods were 
set up, some of which will expire early in 2005.  Meat 
exports and veterinary certificates are one of the most 
sensitive issues.  Under the agreement, Russia authorized 19 
Polish meat exporters to enter the Russian market; Russia 
left the choice of firms up to the GOP.  Poland is trying to 
find a more permanent resolution.  Poland is now lobbying 
Brussels on other areas, including pharmaceuticals, 
textiles, fertilizers, construction, cosmetics, furniture, 
meat, sugar and agricultural products.  Poland is lobbying 
Brussels to reduce the current 6% tariff on Russian aluminum 
imports. 
 
Economic Framework and Investment 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5.  (SBU)  Poland and Russia have subsequently signed a 
framework document which replaced some of the elements of 
the previous agreement, including setting up a joint 
commission.   Poland would very much like to conclude an 
investment agreement with Russia.  In 1992, the two 
governments agreed to a text, which was presented to the 
Duma in 1994, but never ratified.  On November 1, Hausner 
 
and Gref held initial talks on concluding a new investment 
agreement.  The Ministry of Economy reports that it has 
prepared a draft agreement, but will have to wait for the 
outcome of consultations with the EC and Russia\'s reaction. 
 
WTO 
------ 
 
6. (SBU) Poland supports the principle of Russia\'s entry 
into the WTO, which it believes will stabilize both Russia 
and Poland\'s overall trade relations.  However, Poland also 
wants to see Russia fully implement market reforms to meet 
the requirements of WTO membership.  Poland also has some 
bilateral concerns, particularly related to cotton and wool, 
which it has communicated to Brussels.  Poland is aware that 
Russia is lobbying heavily to join the OECD early, even 
though it has not yet met the basic requirement of WTO 
membership. 
 
Coal 
----- 
 
7. (SBU) Despite fears to the contrary, the Polish 
Government reports that its concerns about Russian dumping 
of coal have diminished considerably.  Bodio said that the 
general increase in world prices has helped, reducing the 
incentive to dump coal at low prices on the Polish market. 
Russian exports are down to between one and 1.5 million tons 
a year, which reflects the previous bilateral quota levels. 
Ministry of Economy Coal Department Director Bogolubow said 
that most of Russia\'s exports are now soft coal, which is 
less sensitive, as more valuable coke exports have been sent 
elsewhere.  Part of the explanation is that Russia has 
pursued other higher priced markets.  Poland had been very 
concerned that unfairly low Russian coal imports would 
disrupt the government\'s politically sensitive coal sector 
restructuring program.  However, since January 2004, there 
have been no significant problems. 
 
Energy 
-------- 
 
8. (SBU) Poland had proposed signing an energy agreement 
with Russia, setting out the quantities of oil and gas to be 
imported, and pledging cooperation on related areas.  First 
the Russian Government gave the idea a cold reception in 
November, and then the EU told Poland that such an agreement 
would violate internal market provisions.  Poland is 
concerned that there may be disruptions in the supply of 
Russian oil, connected to the Yukos nationalization, and 
that Russia may be pursuing alternatives to developing the 
Yamal II pipeline.  Polish and Russian delegations will meet 
to discuss energy issues on the margins of President Putin\'s 
visit to Poland at the end of January for the Auschwitz 
liberation anniversary commemoration. 
 
Ashe 
"