
"18120","6/24/2004 13:23","04KIGALI877","Embassy Kigali","SECRET","04KIGALI871","O 241323Z JUN 04
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0728
INFO NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE IMMEDIATE
RWANDA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
","S E C R E T KIGALI 000877 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF DAS YAMAMOTO, AF/C AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PINS, MOPS, RW, CG 
SUBJECT: KAGAME REPORTEDLY DISAPPOINTED WITH LACK OF USG 
CRITICISM OF KABILA 
 
REF: KIGALI 000871 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: ERIC WONG, POLITICAL OFFICER.  REASON: 1.4 (D). 
 
1. (S/NF) ON JUNE 24, A SENIOR RWANDAN GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL IN 
THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT PROVIDED COMMENTS ON THE REACTION 
OF PRESIDENT PAUL KAGAME TO A MEETING WITH VISITING AF DAS 
DON YAMAMOTO AND AF/C DIRECTOR AL EASTHAM ON JUNE 23 IN 
KIGALI. 
 
2. (S/NF) KAGAME WAS REPORTEDLY DISAPPOINTED THAT THE USG 
OFFICIALS SAID LITTLE THAT WAS CRITICAL OF PRESIDENT JOSEPH 
KABILA.  HE BELIEVED THAT THE OFFICIALS FOCUSED TOO STRONGLY 
ON THE QUESTION OF WHETHER RWANDA WOULD SEND TROOPS INTO 
EASTERN CONGO, WITHOUT ADDRESSING THE ISSUE OF MOST CONCERN 
TO RWANDA: THE FAILURE OF THE DRC GOVERNMENT TO DISARM AND 
REPATRIATE THE RWANDAN REBELS IN THE EASTERN DRC. 
 
3. (S/NF) THE GOR OFFICIAL NOTED THAT KAGAME\'S DISAPPOINTMENT 
STRENGTHENED INTO ANGER WHEN HE LEARNED THAT, LATER ON JUNE 
24, THE UNSC HAD ISSUED A STATEMENT (S/PRST/2004/21) THAT, IN 
THE VIEW OF THE RWANDANS, WAS MORE CRITICAL OF RWANDA THAN IT 
WAS OF THE DRC.  IN ADDITION, THE UK GOVERNMENT WARNED RWANDA 
IN STRONG TERMS TO AVOID A NEW INTERVENTION IN THE EASTERN 
DRC.  THESE STATEMENTS, ACCORDING TO THE RWANDAN OFFICIAL, 
WERE ALSO OVERLY CRITICAL OF RWANDA, WHILE AVOIDING THE REAL 
ISSUE OF THE FAILURE OF THE DRC TO IMPLEMENT DISARMAMENT, 
DEMOBILIZATION, REINTEGRATION AND RESETTLEMENT OR 
REPATRIATION OPERATIONS (DDRRR) OF REBEL COMBATANTS. 
 
4. (C) COMMENT: KAGAME\'S JUNE 24 MEETING WITH YAMAMOTO, 
EASTHAM, AMBASSADOR AND POLOFF (NOTE-TAKER) WAS CORDIAL.  THE 
JUNE 24 UNSC STATEMENT CALLS ON THE GOR TO REFRAIN FROM 
SUPPORTING ARMED GROUPS IN THE CONGO, PARTICULARLY THOSE LED 
BY GEN. LAURENT NKUNDA AND COL. JULES MUTEBUSI, BUT MAKES NO 
REFERENCE TO THE EX-FAR/INTERAHAMWE OR FDLR.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
MCMILLION 
"
"19701","8/13/2004 5:35","04KIGALI1162","Embassy Kigali","CONFIDENTIAL","03KIGALI1990|04KIGALI105","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KIGALI 001162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/C AND DRL: MICHAEL ORONA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/13/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, PINS, RW 
SUBJECT: SPECIAL INTELLIGENCE UNIT INFILTRATES RWANDA\'S 
INDEPENDENT NEWSPAPER 
 
REF: A. KIGALI 00105 
     B. 03 KIGALI 01990 
 
Classified By: Maya Dietz, Political Officer.  Reason 1.4 (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: The new Chief Editor of Rwanda\'s most 
independent newspaper, \"Umuseso\", Charles Kabonero, was 
detained for six weeks in December 2003, not recently as 
reported by international media.  He reports that a special 
intelligence unit within the National Police\'s Criminal 
Investigation Department (CID), tasked with \"shutting down\" 
the paper, recruited and armed an \"Umuseso\" employee who 
spied on the paper for the GOR.  The police continue to 
threaten to confiscate the paper when it prints articles 
critical of the government or government officials.  Most 
recently, only intervention by the RDF\'s Chief of General 
Staff prevented authorities from confiscating an issue that 
published an article suggesting a Burundi clique was 
challenging President Kagame\'s power.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) Contrary to recent reports in the international press, 
Charles Kabonero, Chief Editor of Rwanda\'s primary 
independent newspaper, \"Umuseso\", has not been in detention 
for the last six weeks.  He explained to Poloff in an August 
6 meeting that he had been detained beginning in December 
2003, and was held day and night for six weeks, without being 
charged.  He, along with other \"Umuseso\" journalists and 
editors, were held at a Department of Military Intelligence 
(DMI) center in Dikaranga. (Note: Post has not been able to 
confirm such a location.  End Note.) 
 
3. (C) Kabonero, and the newspaper, however, have been 
experiencing difficulties over the past two months.  In early 
June, according to Kabonero, an Assistant Commissioner in the 
Criminal Investigation Department (CID) and Director of the 
Special Intelligence Unit, John Gacinya Rugumya, approached a 
new \"Umuseso\" journalist and offered him Rwf 5 million 
(approximately USD 8,700) to help the CID shut down the 
newspaper.  The journalist accepted the offer and began 
providing the CID with names of \"Umuseso\" sources, 
information about its employees, and an analysis of the 
paper\'s strengths and weaknesses.  Kabonero alleges that 
Gacinya even gave the spy a handgun, suggesting that he could 
either \"cause trouble\" at the newspaper\'s office, forcing the 
police to come and arrest everyone; or, more sinisterly, the 
spy could kill those present in the office, and the CID would 
burn the building. 
 
4. (C) Kabonero learned of the plot when \"Umuseso\" employees 
who had been emailed by the informant asked Kabonero why this 
new employee was seeking sensitive information from them. 
Kabonero then gathered evidence and wrote letters--first to 
the Commissioner General of the CID, then to the Minister of 
Information and the President of the High Council of the 
Press.  While there was an encounter between the spy and 
Kabonero at the newspaper\'s office on July 31, Kabonero and 
other employees were only temporarily detained by the 
judicial police.  Instead, the CID froze \"Umuseso\" bank 
accounts, Kabonero said.  The judicial police have begun 
questioning the \"Umuseso\" marketing representative and 
accountants, hoping to find some irregularity on which to 
detain the staff and/or shut down the paper, according to 
Kabonero. 
 
5. (C) Kabonero believes there is little recourse for him or 
his journalists in the Rwandan system.  The High Council has 
refused to take up their case, and \"Umuseso\" has already lost 
one lawyer due to pressure from GOR officials to desist from 
his work on their behalf.  \"Umuseso\" most frequently faces 
harassment for publishing articles concerning army officials. 
 Kabonero claims the police never question the truth of the 
articles, but rather seek to learn where the paper gets its 
information.  Kabonero stated that he has been told while in 
detention that he will be punished \"with rules not in the 
official books\". 
 
6. (C) According to Kabonero, the judicial police threatened 
to confiscate the most recent issue of \"Umuseso\", which 
featured an article written by Kabonero suggesting that an 
alliance of returnees from Burundi was beginning to challenge 
President Kagame\'s authority.  The article suggests that 
Denis Polisi (Deputy Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies), 
Charles Murigande (Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
Cooperation), and Francois Ngarambe (RPF Secretary General) 
form the power-center of this group.  One example Kabonero 
gave was Polisi\'s blocking of legislation that came directly 
from the President\'s office.  Kabonero believes this issue 
was not confiscated because he appealed to the RDF Chief of 
General Staff, Major General James Kabarebe, for help. 
Kabarebe, he said, called the head of judicial police, 
Emmanuel Bayingana, and told him not to confiscate the paper. 
 The three accused (Polisi, Murigande, and Ngarambe) have 
publicly denounced the accusations; Polisi called a press 
conference earlier this week to announce he would take legal 
action against \"Umuseso\". 
 
7. (C) COMMENT: Over the past two years, the quality of 
\"Umuseso\" reporting has steadily decreased, as GOR harassment 
and repeated detentions have led editor after editor to flee 
the country and seek asylum.  On the other hand, it remains 
the only newspaper in Rwanda willing to print stories 
critical of the GOR, and many Rwandans believe its news to be 
credible.  The alleged intelligence operation against the 
paper suggests that the GOR wants to eliminate the paper 
entirely, not just weaken it.  As Kabonero points out, the 
paper has never been accused of violating the media law, 
which would allow the GOR to close the paper permanently. 
Instead, it seems the GOR is using the flailing paper to 
identify any possible leaks in the government. 
 
8. (C) On several occasions, the GOR has gone to great 
lengths to confiscate issues of \"Umuseso\" that report 
derogatory information on senior GOR officials.  In November 
2003, authorities entered BBC\'s Kigali offices to seize 
information on the Secretary General of the National Security 
Service that had been passed to BBC by \"Umuseso\" (ref B). 
When the GOR has allowed \"Umuseso\" to criticize GOR 
officials, their resignations have followed.  Earlier this 
year, the GOR allowed \"Umuseso\" to publish allegations of 
financial improprieties that implicated former Prosecutor 
General and Supreme Court Vice President Gerald Gahima (ref 
A).  Within weeks, Gahima resigned and his brother, former 
Ambassador to the U.S. Theogene Rudasingwa, immediately 
announced a sudden leave of absence from his post as 
President Kagame\'s Chief of Staff.  That the GOR has allowed 
\"Umuseso\" to publish a report claiming that the Foreign 
Minister and other senior officials are challenging Kagame\'s 
power may therefore reflect tensions within the 
administration.  END COMMENT. 
O\'LEARY 
"
"19708","8/13/2004 9:30","04KIGALI1163","Embassy Kigali","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS KIGALI 001163 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INFO HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//ECJ33/// 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, AF/C, AND AF/E 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MASS, RW, SU, NL 
SUBJECT: DARFUR:  PROBLEMS WITH RWANDAN TRANSPORT 
 
 
1.  (SBU)  Charge spoke with Dutch Charge the morning of 13 
August regarding the movement of a company of Rwandan 
soldiers to Darfur to provide protection to AU observers. 
According to Dutch Charge, one commercial aircraft will 
transport RDF troops and equipment in two or three sorties 
from Kigali.  As of 1020 GMT, the aircraft had not arrived in 
Kigali.  Despite previous estimates that it would require 
three days to load the aircraft once it had landed, both the 
Dutch Charge and the RDF were hopeful that the plane could 
take off for Darfur tomorrow (8/14) as planned.  As one 
senior RDF officer put it, they \"will work through the night\". 
 
2.  (SBU)  A last minute problem has arisen over the 
transport of RDF ammunition.  Apparently, the RDF was not 
aware of international rules for the transport of hazardous 
goods, such as ammunition, and did not prepare the ammunition 
properly.  The Dutch Charge said that he is working with the 
RDF to try to resolve the issue, and the AU is assisting.  At 
present, it appears the RDF will charter a local air cargo 
service, Silverback, to take the hazerdous material.  It has 
not been resolved who will pay for this second charter, but 
the RDF is hopeful that either the AU or the Dutch will foot 
the bill. 
 
3.  (U)  Embassy will continue to monitor and advise of any 
undue delays in the Rwandan movement. 
 
4.  (U)  Khartoum minimize considered. 
O\'LEARY 
"
"19715","8/13/2004 10:25","04KIGALI1165","Embassy Kigali","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KIGALI 001165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/C AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF, SMIG, RW, CG, BY, UNHCR 
SUBJECT: RWANDA\'S UNHCR CAMPS FACE RESETTLEMENT CHALLENGE 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: The United Nations High Commission for Refugees 
(UNHCR) runs three refugee camps and three transit centers 
in Rwanda.  The camps house Congolese and Burundian 
refugees, while the transit centers provide for Rwandans 
returning from neighboring countries.  During recent visits 
to the UNHCR camps at Gikongoro and Kibuye, refugees 
expressed gratitude for the work of UNHCR, but also 
explained that the absence of viable options for leaving 
the camp, especially the slow process of resettlement, 
remained their greatest challenge.  The United States has 
accepted many refugees for resettlement, but it is the 
Government of Rwanda\'s (GOR) delay in granting exit visas 
that presents the main hindrance to the resettlement 
option.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------- 
THE UNHCR IN RWANDA 
------------------- 
 
2. UNHCR, which began current operations in Rwanda in 1995, 
works with the Ministry for Local Government, Rural 
Development and Social Affairs (MINILOC); and it currently 
runs three refugee camps in the country.  The Gikongoro 
camp is specifically for Burundian refugees, while both the 
Kibuye and Byumba camps are for Congolese refugees 
(primarily Banyarwanda Tutsis from North Kivu).  The camps 
collectively hold close to 35,000 refugees and provide 
housing, health services, and educational opportunities. 
In addition to the refugee camps, UNHCR has three transit 
centers in Rwanda to reintegrate Rwandans returning from 
neighboring countries. 
 
3. UNHCR offers three options for refugees to leave the 
camps: repatriation returns refugees back to their home 
country; integration finds space for them in their country 
of refuge (Rwanda); and resettlement relocates the refugee 
to a third country (usually the United States or Canada). 
As both the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and 
Burundi remain conflict zones, repatriation is not a viable 
option.  Considering the population density of Rwanda, 
integrating refugees into its land is unrealistic. 
Resettlement remains the only viable option, yet 
difficulties in the process have hindered its successful 
completion.  Thus, many refugees remain in the UNHCR camps 
for extended periods. 
 
-------------- 
GIKONGORO CAMP 
-------------- 
 
4. The UNHCR camp in Gikongoro houses approximately 750 
Burundian refugees escaping Burundi\'s civil war.  Many 
refugees escaped to Rwanda in 1972, while others have 
arrived post-1994.  Emboff visited the Gikongoro camp on 
August 4 and met with the camp manager.  The budget of the 
camp reflects its small size, and the camp seems to be 
struggling for resources.  The camp lacks the implementing 
partner organizations that often provide additional 
services to UNHCR refugees, and most of its facilities 
suffer as a result. 
 
5. The Gikongoro camp has a small, two-room dispensary 
staffed by two \'medical\' employees, neither of them 
physicians.  The dispensary lacks capacity to treat most 
illnesses, and thus refers most cases to hospitals outside 
the camp.  The high altitude of the camp causes respiratory 
problems for many of the refugees.  HIV/AIDS, the flu, eye 
problems, psychological issues, and intestinal illnesses 
resulting from the close living quarters also affect the 
camp residents. 
 
6. Regarding education, the Gikongoro camp has its own 
facilities providing the first three years of primary 
education (P1-P3), with 132 children currently enrolled. 
These children study in small, one-room tents.  One tent in 
the makeshift school is a storeroom, and was virtually 
empty during Poloff\'s visit.  Teachers complain that the 
lack of books and other teaching materials presents the 
greatest challenge for them.  Children attend a nearby 
Rwandan primary school for the latter half of their primary 
education (P4-P6), where 87 refugee students are currently 
enrolled.  Currently, 42 Gikongoro refugees study outside 
the camp-site at Rwandan secondary schools.  [COMMENT:  It 
is unclear whether all children have the opportunity to 
continue to local Rwandan schools or only a select number 
may do so.  END COMMENT].  In addition to these educational 
opportunities, the Gikongoro camp offers basic computer 
training and is beginning a sewing program for its 
residents. 
 
7. There are no televisions or other forms of entertainment 
available to the refugees, and they complain that there is 
nothing to do at the camp.  The lack of job opportunities 
restricts their options of finding other ways to pass the 
time.  Frustrated by the inability to return to their 
country, the impossibility of integrating in Rwanda, and 
the slow and limited process of resettlement, many refugees 
leave the camp in frustration. 
 
8. Many refugees express gratitude for the work of UNHCR, 
and say that they get along with their Rwandan neighbors. 
Still, they express a desire to return home as soon as 
possible. 
 
----------- 
KIBUYE CAMP 
----------- 
9. The UNHCR Kibuye camp is home to approximately 16,500 
Congolese refugees mainly escaping the ongoing conflict in 
the eastern DRC.  The camp, which was originally in Gisenyi 
province, now is situated in an isolated part of Kibuye 
province; and the refugees have few neighbors.  The Kibuye 
camp has a number of implementing partner NGOs that improve 
the atmosphere for the refugees, including the American 
Refugee Committee (ARC), Africa Humanitarian Action (AHA), 
Jesuit Relief Services (JRS), and Right-to-Play.  As a 
result, the Kibuye camp has better facilities than the 
Gikongoro camp. 
 
10. The hospital at Kibuye camp consists of 3-4 buildings, 
including a maternity ward, and is equipped and managed by 
AHA.  The hospital, staffed by an Ethiopian surgeon and 
many assistants, provides excellent healthcare for the 
refugees. 
 
11. The Kibuye camp has on its grounds both a primary and 
secondary school, consisting of many small tents.  In 
addition, a women\'s cooperative provides sewing 
opportunities for the women, while men learn shoemaking and 
carpentry. 
 
12. The Kibuye camp also lacks televisions, but Right-to- 
Play provides sports, games, and life-skills for the 
refugees.  The refugees\' main complaints are that food 
rations are inadequate and the resettlement process is 
inefficient. 
 
-------------------------- 
THE RESETTLEMENT CHALLENGE 
-------------------------- 
 
13. Budget restraints challenge both refugee camps and 
cause other problems to arise.  The World Food Program 
(WFP) calculates food rations and, except for a two-month 
reduction earlier this year, has provided the standard 
package to all refugee camps.  Still, refugees complain 
that the quantities are insufficient.  They also comment 
that there are few opportunities to generate income and 
that other options to pass the time are nonexistent.  But 
by far the greatest complaint is the lack of alternatives 
to staying at the refugee camp.  Many refugees resent that 
repatriation is not an option and resettlement is an 
extremely slow process. 
 
14. The resettlement process consists of a UNHCR interview 
and petition to a third-party country for resettlement, an 
interview conducted by the resettlement country, a medical 
examination, cultural lessons, and an exit visa granted by 
the current host country (Rwanda).  It is the exit visa 
that presents the problem for many refugees looking to 
resettle. 
 
15. Considering the small size of the Burundi camp in 
Gikongoro, UNHCR has attempted to resettle the entire camp. 
However, despite United States agreement to accept many of 
the refugees for resettlement, the Burundians remain in 
Rwanda.  UNHCR officials explained that the GOR has delayed 
in granting their exit visas.  Before clearing the visa, 
the GOR investigates the refugees\' involvement in the 1994 
Genocide, as thousands of Burundian Hutus fled to Rwanda in 
1972 following heavy persecution in Burundi and were in- 
country during the Genocide.  This investigative process 
has been very slow.  UNHCR officials had hoped that the 
process would be faster for Burundians entering Rwanda 
after 1994, but this has not been the case. 
 
16. UNHCR says that the GOR promised a reply by June on the 
status of the refugees\' exit visas, but to date no reply 
has come.  UNHCR explains that the Burundian refugees are 
investigated by the GOR\'s National Security Service, and 
UNHCR is prevented from checking their progress.  The 
Burundian refugees are supposed to be cleared on an 
individual basis, but thus far none of them have been 
granted exit visas.  This hindrance has prevented all 
Burundian refugees from resettling elsewhere and is the 
cause for much of their frustration.  Congolese refugees 
face fewer problems concerning resettlement--as most 
Congolese were not in Rwanda before 1994 and therefore are 
not believed to have participated in the Genocide--and many 
were resettled as recently as May. 
 
O\'LEARY 
"
"19721","8/13/2004 10:43","04KIGALI1166","Embassy Kigali","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS KIGALI 001166 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/C, AF/RSA AND AF/SPG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, MASS, PHUM, RW, SU, Vetting 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR RWANDAN DEFENSE FORCES 
DEPLOYING TO DARFUR 
 
REF: BITTRICK-RUFFING EMAIL OF 08/12/04 
 
1. This is an action request for the Department (please see 
paragraph 4). 
 
2. The RDF will deploy the following unit to Darfur, on or 
around August 14: 
 
-- A Co, 99th BN, 305th BDE, from Kibuye 
 
The company is not (NOT) a composite unit. 
 
-- The following officers are OPCON in support of the 
operations: 
 
CAPT Fred Muziraguharara      Deputy Commander 
CAPT (DR) Mark Rugyeminiwaza  Unit Physician 
LT Abdhl Kabagyema            Translator/staff officer 
WO1 Gabriel Gahondogo         Logistics Officer-in-Charge 
 
3. Embassy Kigali has reviewed its files and has found no 
information concerning gross human rights violations by the 
unit or any of the individuals named above. 
 
4. ACTION REQUEST FOR DEPARTMENT: Please complete human 
rights vetting for these names as soon as possible and inform 
Embassy of findings. 
 
5. Inquiries regarding this information may be directed to 
LTC John Ruffing, DAO, Embassy Kigali. 
O\'LEARY 
"
"19779","8/16/2004 7:46","04KIGALI1169","Embassy Kigali","SECRET","04KIGALI730","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 KIGALI 001169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/C AND PRM 
EUCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/16/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PREF, SMIG, RW, CG 
SUBJECT: CONGO\'S VICE PRESIDENT RUBERWA VISITS RWANDA TO 
URGE BANYAMULENGE\'S RETURN 
 
REF: KIGALI 00730 
 
Classified By: ERIC WONG, POLITICAL OFFICER.  REASON: 1.4 (D). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: Following meetings in Kigali with President 
Kagame and other GOR principals, DRC Vice President Ruberwa 
met with Banyamulenge refugees in Cyangugu and urged them to 
return to eastern Congo.  Banyamulenge are concerned about 
their personal safety and economic security, including lost 
government jobs.  Ruberwa\'s unanticipated visit came one day 
after a Banyamulenge leader was to have met senior GOR 
officials.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (S/NF) On August 10 and 11, DRC Vice President Azarias 
Ruberwa led a ministerial delegation to Kigali to discuss the 
situation of approximately 3,500 Banyamulenge refugees who 
have fled eastern DRC for Rwanda since May (reftel).  The 
GDRC delegation--comprised of the Minister of Social Affairs 
and three vice ministers (including interior and 
security)--met with senior GOR officials, including President 
Paul Kagame, Foreign Minister Charles Murigande, and Special 
Envoy for the Great Lakes Amb. Richard Sezibera. 
 
3. (S/NF) Ruberwa and the GDRC delegation met with the 
Banyamulenge refugees at Cyangugu on August 11, addressing 
the refugees as a group, and then meeting selected refugee 
leaders.  Ruberwa urged the refugees to return to the DRC, 
assuring them it would be safe to do so.  Some refugees 
responded to Ruberwa\'s comments, most indicating that they 
believed it was still too dangerous to return to their homes 
in the DRC.  A major concern of the refugees was that those 
who had been government employees learned that they had been 
replaced and had lost their jobs. 
 
4. (U) State-run Radio Rwanda reported Ruberwa\'s meeting with 
Banyamulenge refugees who cited incidents of harassment and 
who called for Gen. Mbusa Mabe\'s removal.  MONUC\'s Radio 
Okapi also reported on Ruberwa\'s visit. 
 
5. (S/NF) Ruberwa and the DROC delegation proposed the 
following course of action to the refugees: 
 
-- the GDRC would assure their security by deploying troops 
to their home regions; 
 
-- those refugees who had been employed by the GDRC would 
return home first, and would be 
entitled to return to their positions in the government; 
 
-- the government would arrange for those who return home 
first to communicate with their families still in Rwanda and 
arrange for their eventual return. 
 
Ruberwa assured the refugees that they would not be forced to 
return to the DRC until they felt secure. 
 
6. (S/NF) Ruberwa\'s visit to Rwanda was hastily arranged.  He 
arrived in Bukavu on August 7 and proposed the visit on 
August 9.  GOR officials were unhappy about the lack of prior 
notice, but believed they could not reject his proposal. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
BANYAMULENGE LEADER NOTES GDRC HARASSMENT 
----------------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Ruberwa visited Kigali the day after a Banyamulenge 
community leader, Etienne Rusimara, was to have met Amb. 
Sezibera and Dr. Emmanuel Ndahiro, Kagame\'s former national 
security advisor who now serves as Director of External 
Intelligence.  In an August 9 meeting with Poloff, Rusamira 
discussed the GDRC\'s victimization of Banyamulenge (septel), 
citing intimidation and harassment--including \"hate radio\" 
broadcasts by \"Radio Patriot\"; special government checkpoints 
at Uvira and Bukavu for Banyamulenge; and incidents of 
military forces, not civilians, targeting Banyamulenge. 
Rusamira said that Banyamulenge refugees who had fled to 
Rwanda needed not only military but also social protections, 
citing concerns about jobs.  While outlining the plight of 
the Banyamulenge, Rusamira nevertheless criticized the GOR 
for using attacks on Banyamulenge to justify possible 
military intervention, saying such statements endangered 
Banyamulenge in the DRC by playing into fears that they were 
pawns of Rwanda.  (NOTE: Ruberwa and Rusamira both made their 
comments before the August 13 attack on Gatumba refugee camp 
in Burundi that claimed the lives of 170 Banyamulenge; in a 
August 14 communique (septel), the GOR attributes the attack 
to ex-FAR/Interahamwe collaborating with Mai-Mai and FNL 
rebels.  END NOTE.) 
 
8. (C) COMMENT: While rhetoric describing a \"massacre\" or 
\"genocide\" of Banyamulenge in eastern DRC is likely 
inflammatory, the refugees\' comments to Ruberwa--coupled with 
Rusimara\'s observations--highlight that acts of violence and 
intimidation have led Banyamulenge refugees to flee to 
Rwanda.  Rwandaphone Congolese---whether Banyamulenge from 
South Kivu, or Banyarwanda from North Kivu--have struggled 
for decades for Congolese citizenship and recognition.  They 
are likely to remain in Rwanda until their genuine concerns 
about personal safety and economic security are addressed. 
END COMMENT. 
 
9. (U) Bujumbura minimize considered. 
PATRICK 
"
"19797","8/16/2004 14:15","04KIGALI1175","Embassy Kigali","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KIGALI 001175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/C 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/16/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PREF, MOPS, RW, BY, CG 
SUBJECT: RWANDAN GOVERNMENT CONDEMNS ATTACK ON BURUNDI 
REFUGEE CAMP 
 
Classified By: ERIC WONG, POLITICAL OFFICER.  REASON 1.4 (D) 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY.  The Rwandan foreign ministry issued a 
communique dated August 14 condemning the recent attack on 
Burundi\'s Gatumba refugee camp that killed up to 170 
Banyamulenge refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo. 
The GOR communique attributes the attack to \"a combined 
force\" of ex-FAR/Interahamwe, Mai-Mai and FNL.  The GOR calls 
for the forcible disarmament of ex-FAR/Interahamwe, noting 
that failure to do this \"... may force Rwanda to take 
measures which may not necessarily be in the line of the 
thinking of (the) International Community.  Rwanda is not 
prepared to tolerate the status quo.\" 
 
2. (U) BEGIN TEXT. 
 
Republic of Rwanda 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation 
 
Communique 
 
The Government of Rwanda is shocked and horrified to learn of 
a massacre of more than 150 Banyamulenge in the refugee camp 
of Katumba, in Burundi, which occurred on the night of the 
13th to 14th August 2004.  Information available to 
Government indicates that this despicable act was perpetrated 
by a combined force of Ex-FAR Interahamwe (calling themselves 
FDLR/FOCA) and Mayi Mayi from the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, in cooperation with elements of the FNL/PALIPEHUTU. 
 
Government wishes to remind the International Community that 
during, and following the May/June 2004 events in Bukavu, 
Banyamulenge refugees in Rwanda and Burundi have consistently 
affirmed that they fled targeted and systematic massacres 
against them by Armed Forces of the DRC under the command of 
Mbuza MABE acting in concert with the Ex-FAR/INTERAHAMWE. 
Surprisingly, MONUC, which is the voice of the International 
Community in the region claims they have seen no evidence of 
targeted massacres of this community.  The latest massacre 
lays this lie to rest. 
 
Government strongly condemns this recent targeted massacre of 
Banyamulenge which is a result of the genocidal ideology that 
currently holds sway in our region, nurtured and propagated 
by the Ex-FAR/INTERAHAMWE forces and those in the region and 
the wider International Community who give them assistance 
and succour. 
 
Government is gravely disturbed that for the last ten years 
the International community has consistently refused to 
disarm the Ex-FAR/Interahamwe, a force that committed 
genocide in Rwanda.  Despite numerous UNSC resolutions 
calling on all UN Member States to refrain from giving 
military, political and diplomatic support to these genocidal 
forces, some members of the international community have 
consistently continued to extend support to them. 
 
Although MONUC regularly meets the leadership of the 
Ex-FAR/Interahamwe and is fully aware of the location, 
strength and movements of the EX-FAR/Interahamwe towards and 
across the border between the DRC and Rwanda and Burundi, it 
has never intervened to foil attacks on Rwanda or Burundi or 
even warned these two countries of impending attacks, with 
devastating consequences for innocent civilians in these two 
countries.  MONUC and the DRC 10th Military Region have 
recently watched and/or facilitated the return into their 
mother units, of genocidal troops fleeing military operations 
carried out by Burundi Armed Forces. 
 
We call upon the International Community to stop watching 
unmoved, this incipient ethnic cleansing now taking root in 
the region and especially in the Eastern DRC.  We also 
reiterate our demand for the forcible disarmament, 
demobilization and repatriation of the Ex-FAR/INTERAHAMWE now 
deployed along Rwanda\'s border and in many cases co-located 
with DRC armed forces, failure of which may force Rwanda to 
take measures which may not necessarily be in the line of the 
thinking of International Community.  Rwanda is not prepared 
to tolerate the status quo. 
 
Done in Kigali, 14th of August 2004. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
3. (C) COMMENT: The attack on Banyamulenge refugees in 
Burundi comes days after DRC Vice President Ruberwa\'s visit 
to Banyamulenge refugees in Rwanda, and highlights the GOR\'s 
concerns that Banyamulenge have been the target of 
politically motivated ethnic killings.  Rwanda\'s Presidential 
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes, Amb. Richard Sezibera, 
accompanied by Rwanda\'s Minister of Interior, were en route 
to Burundi to attend funeral ceremonies for those killed at 
Gatumba.  Rwandan Defense Forces deployed to Darfur, Sudan, 
on August 14-15.  Senior GOR officials have stated that if 
the RDF can intervene in Darfur to prevent ethnic killings, 
then perhaps they should do so in DRC as well.  The GOR\'s 
communique suggests military intervention in DRC is a 
possibility Kigali has not ruled out.  END COMMENT. 
 
4. (U) Bujumbura: minimize considered. 
PATRICK 
"
"19897","8/19/2004 11:30","04KIGALI1193","Embassy Kigali","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE176594","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS KIGALI 001193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/C 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, KNNP, MNUC, RW 
SUBJECT: NAM DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO RWANDAN OFFICIALS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 176594 
 
Reftel talking points were delivered August 17 to the 
Director of the Americas Division, Augustin Rutikara, in 
Rwanda\'s Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Cooperation 
(MINAFFET).  Rutikara said he would deliver the talking 
points immediately to the Secretary General.  There was no 
immediate response, but Rutikara reiterated the GOR\'s support 
of the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI). 
PATRICK 
"
"19922","8/20/2004 8:03","04KIGALI1208","Embassy Kigali","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KIGALI 001208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USTR PASS TO CMILLER AND PCOLEMAN 
GENEVA FOR USTR - TAGLIANI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, PREL, EAGR, KTEX, EINV, RW, AGOA 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY KIGALI PARTICIPATION IN SEVENTH 
ANNUAL RWANDAN TRADE FAIR 
 
1. Summary.  Post sponsored a booth at the seventh 
annual Rwandan Trade Fair that showcased Rwandan 
exports to the United States and provided information 
on the theme \"Global Business Partners.\"  The 
presentation, the first of its kind to be offered by 
any diplomatic mission in Rwanda, was well received by 
the Rwandan government and the business community. 
End summary. 
 
------------------------ 
GLOBAL BUSINESS PARTNERS 
------------------------ 
 
2. The Government of Rwanda (GOR), through the Rwanda 
Private Sector Federation, held its seventh annual 
International Trade Fair August 7-15 in Kigali. 
Boasting over 240 vendors and businesses in and around 
Rwanda, the fair attracted over 100,000 visitors. The 
theme of the fair was \"Producing For Export.\" 
 
3. Post\'s Economic and Commercial Section sponsored a 
booth at the annual event, the first of its kind by 
any diplomatic mission in Rwanda. Under the theme 
\"Global Business Partners,\" the booth highlighted 
current Rwandan exports to the United States and 
opportunities under the Africa Growth and Opportunity 
Act (AGOA). In addition, U.S. Mission staff provided 
hundreds of U.S. Foreign Commercial Service brochures 
and other information materials. A computer 
workstation was available for accessing information on 
BuyUSA.com via the Internet. 
 
4. The USG-sponsored booth showcased a number of 
Rwandan products as export success stories under AGOA 
or Generalized Specialized Preferences (GSP). The 
items included handicrafts, baskets, textile goods, 
coffee, tea, peppers, and other agricultural products 
representing eight business organizations in Rwanda. 
 
--------------- 
POSITIVE IMPACT 
--------------- 
 
5. The American booth attracted a great deal of 
favorable attention both with visitors at the fair and 
in local media. President Paul Kagame paid a personal 
visit to the booth and was impressed by the items 
displayed and American interest in Rwandan products. 
Rwandan television and newspapers lauded the positive 
impact of the Embassy\'s efforts to promote further 
exports from Rwanda to the United States. Moreover, 
hundreds of visitors, including several key ministers 
and elected representatives, took a keen interest in 
the booth, and many were surprised that items were 
already being exported to the United States. During 
closing ceremonies for the Trade Fair, Post received a 
trophy award for having made the most positive impact 
towards the overall fair theme of \"Producing For 
Export.\" 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6. Comment: Rwanda\'s participation in AGOA has begun 
and continues to show great promise. Rwandan 
entrepreneurs and those with venture capital are 
beginning to take a strong interest in trade 
opportunities under AGOA and GSP. The GOR is also 
enthusiastic about supporting these efforts. With 
continued stability in the country, prospects are good 
for further expansion of exports under AGOA that will 
be important for Rwanda\'s overall trade balance. 
Export-oriented job growth will also help lead Rwanda 
away from aid dependence to greater integration into 
the global economy. Rwanda has a niche in that global 
economy that can be exploited to its advantage 
economically. Specialty coffee, exquisite basketry, 
spicy peppers, and beautifully sewn textile goods 
ranging from aprons to patch quilts can command a 
market niche and profit that can have a tremendous 
impact in this very poor country. American marketing 
and distribution linkages are beginning to take root 
and will need to be cultivated and supported in every 
way possible. Americans also know about Rwanda and its 
efforts to rebuild from the horrible losses of the 
1994 Genocide and war. Capitalizing on these 
advantages, Rwandan exports to the United States help 
build a free market economy here, create a stronger 
commercial partnership between the two nations, and 
hold the promise of a better life for thousands of 
impoverished Rwandan families. End Comment. 
 
PATRICK 
"
"25164","1/10/2005 13:19","05KIGALI27","Embassy Kigali","UNCLASSIFIED","04KIGALI1416|04KIGALI198|04KIGALI322","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KIGALI 000027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/C AND DRL/PHD:M.ORONA 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, RW 
SUBJECT: KAGAME CRITICIZES NATION\'S OFFICIALS FOR ALLOWING 
MISBEHAVIOR AND LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY 
 
REF: A. 04 KIGALI 1416 
B. 04 KIGALI 322 
B. 04 KIGALI 198 
 
1. SUMMARY: In his closing address to over 800 GOR 
officials attending a constitutionally mandated \"National 
Council of Dialogue\", President Kagame hailed \"good 
governance, security and patriotism\" -- rather than 
\"foreigners\' wishes and beliefs\" -- as the foundation for 
Rwanda\'s development.  He emphasized the importance of 
communities rooting out \"bad behaviour\", and called for 
greater accountability for officials implementing 
government directives.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. On December 21-22, 2004, President Paul Kagame chaired 
Rwanda\'s second annual \"National Council of Dialogue \", in 
accordance with the 2003 Constitution.  Article 168, in the 
section of the constitution on decentralized authority, 
establishes a \"National Council of Dialogue\" -- consisting 
of the President, and five representatives of each of 
Rwanda\'s town councils, municipalities, and 106 districts 
-- to be chaired by the President and attended by cabinet 
members, members of parliament, and all 12 provincial 
governors.  Over 800 participants attended the 2004 forum 
in Kigali, whose agenda called for participants to make 
recommendations about good governance, security, 
patriotism, poverty reduction and economic prosperity. 
 
3. In his closing remarks, President Kagame emphasized 
government officials\' responsibilities and accountability 
for promoting quality public service.  Post\'s informal 
translation of key excerpts from Kagame\'s remarks 
(originally delivered in Kinyarwanda) follows below. 
 
4. BEGIN TEXT: 
 
\"In this Dialogue Forum, Rwanda\'s problems have been 
discussed, and strategic plans have been set up.  The next 
step is to take specific actions for social and economic 
development.  Good governance, security, and patriotism 
must be foundations of this social and economic 
development.  Rwanda has the capacity, but specific actions 
must occur.  The most important thing will be changing our 
ways of thinking [imyumvire] to aim at allowing efficient 
ways of actions [imikorere], and commitment to productivity 
[umusaruro mwiza].  People in leadership positions at all 
levels must commit themselves to teach those values to 
others through examples.\" 
 
\"This second National Dialogue Summit should be the 
beginning of new methods of action that must characterize 
Rwanda in the near future.  People, especially those in 
leadership positions, must understand that their actions 
must be done in the public interest, in order to create a 
brighter future for future generations.  Rwanda\'s 
development cannot depend on foreigners\' wishes and 
beliefs.\" 
 
\"[...] Questions have frequently been raised related to 
community responsibility.  The community must have 
characteristics reflecting everybody\'s values.  The 
community must be characterized by values that don\'t allow 
wrongdoing [ikibi] and their consequences.  Wrongdoers must 
be responsible for their acts.  They should be blamed 
and/or punished as a means to learn how to do good things. 
Those who refuse to change their bad behavior -- commonly 
known as the incorrigible [ruharwa], who will never listen 
to advice -- must also respond, through their acts, and 
stop continuing their bad behavior.\" 
 
\"If the community tolerates bad behavior, even by an 
individual, the bad behavior risks becoming the community\'s 
behavior.  People start thinking that that bad behavior is 
something worth imitating, especially when there are 
benefits attached to it.  That\'s how bad behaviors take 
root in the community.\" 
 
\"[...] Questions were also raised about repeating 
objectives that are never implemented.  People should think 
about the reasons for that: when there is evidence that 
some objectives were previously either implemented 
voluntarily or by coercion. People should think about the 
reasons why the same objectives become stagnant at a 
certain point.  In my view, the reason behind that is that 
people let it become this way.  People in charge of 
coordinating the implementation of these objectives only 
talk -- instead of acting, coordinating, and enforcing 
actions.\" 
 
\"Take the example of environmental degradation: the 
consequence for the community is erosion and a reduction of 
rainfall, but there is no direct consequence for 
individuals who caused environment degradation.  There must 
be something not quite right, related to fulfilling duties, 
on the part of people in leading positions.  We must make 
introspection and discover what it is.\" 
 
\"People in the leadership sometimes fail to distinguish 
between personal and public interests linked to their 
responsibilities.  I think the major problem lies there. 
Most of the time, they spend more time on things that 
relate to personal interests than community interests.  I 
think this is the only reason why things are never 
implemented.  However, you may think about it another time, 
and maybe you can identify other reasons.\" 
\"There are a lot of repeated recommendations from various 
meetings and seminars, including Cabinet meetings.  If 
tapes of the meetings were played, one would notice that 
there are people repeating the same things all along for 
years.  We must establish responsibilities, in order to ask 
for an explanation each time there is no action taken when 
a decision was taken.  There should be a way to request 
accountability in order to promote attentiveness [kwirinda 
uburangare] and respect for hierarchy [kwirinda ukutumva].\" 
 
\"I think we should find time to evaluate the implementation 
of strategies and recommendations we make year after year. 
We should establish accountability at all levels. 
Otherwise, we will repeat over and over again the same 
things.\" 
 
\"Accountability also refers to business agreements at all 
levels (in agriculture, construction, and other sectors). 
I think people should develop a culture to abide by 
contracts.  Each party in a contract must be aware of the 
other party\'s interests.  They both must understand the 
importance of fulfilling their duties.  Otherwise, it can 
lead to a misconception of duties, when there is no direct 
consequence affecting individual interests.  We must 
develop a community that cannot tolerate any failure to 
fulfill quality/responsibility.  A sense of quality and 
responsibility can influence the community\'s ways of 
thinking and its objectives.\" 
 
\"[...] I met a participant in this Forum who complained 
about food poisoning.  Later, I was informed that about a 
hundred participants were hospitalized because of food 
poisoning.  In my opinion, the food caterer must be held 
responsible for his poor services, and no payment should be 
made before clarifying the reasons for these poor 
services.\" 
 
\"People lacking sufficient business experience don\'t bother 
taking enough care of their services, and customers 
sometimes accept expensive and health-threatening services 
without objection.  People should be held accountable for 
bad services.  This also applies to elected people on the 
basis of the quality of their services, who must be 
accountable for meeting their responsibilities.\" 
 
\"[...] In meetings like this one, people always contribute 
good ideas, which are never implemented as a result of 
individuals\' and our community\'s tolerance of lack of 
accountability.  Every bad service and bad habit must be 
denounced, wherever it is found.\" 
 
\"[...] People sometimes prefer not to denounce bad service 
or bad habits because of personal interests, thus 
sacrificing the community\'s interests.  This should be 
tolerated only when efforts are being for improvement.\" 
 
\"For example, \'genocide ideology\' has become a discussion 
topic during meetings.  People should dare to be frank with 
individuals with the ideology, because the consequences of 
their ideology can fall upon the community.  Another 
example can be people destroying anti-erosion utilities 
while others are watching.  I would like to emphasize the 
importance of accountability and responsibility.\" 
 
\"Talking about corruption in general, remember some people 
were compelled to resign their positions.  There must be a 
continuous effort to make people distinguish public 
interests from personal interests.  We should stop allowing 
people to sacrifice public interests for their own 
interests.  There must be consequences.  Authorities at all 
levels (cabinet ministers and local authorities) should be 
the primary actors to promote accountability.  We must 
avoid becoming a country in which everybody prefers not to 
denounce bad quality service and criminal acts.\" 
 
\"The best thing about leadership is that everybody is free 
either to participate in it or not.  Nobody can be coerced 
to become a leader.  Once into the leadership, people 
should be ready to fulfill their responsibilities, and to 
be accountable in case they fail.  The population has the 
right to request leaders\' accountability.  I would like to 
encourage them to use their rights.\" 
 
\"Corruption is sometimes justified on the pretext of 
poverty.  Obviously, there is scarcity of resources, but it 
cannot be a pretext for misusing resources.  Let\'s work 
step by step.\" 
 
\"I would recommend that participants in the next Forum come 
with measurable steps to implement the recommendations of 
the current Dialogue Forum.\" 
END TEXT. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
CRITICISM OF OFFICIALS FORESHADOWS PURGE? 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5. COMMENT: Kagame\'s critical remarks foreshadowed the 
Christmas week announcement that Minister of State for 
Energy and Infrastructure Sam Nkusi -- the infrastructure 
ministry\'s second-highest official and thus a junior member 
of cabinet -- had resigned amid accusations of corruption. 
According to an official from Rwanda\'s energy monopoly, 
Electrogaz, Nkusi (formerly director-general of Electrogaz 
and director-general of the telephone monopoly, Rwandatel) 
was believed to have had strong ties with South African 
business interests competing against the German company 
that ultimately received approval to manage Electrogaz 
before its privatization. 
 
6. Kagame\'s reminder that \"some people were compelled to 
resign their positions\" likely refers to the high-profile 
departures earlier in 2004 of Supreme Court Vice President 
Gerald Gahima (previously Rwanda\'s Prosecutor General and 
chief interlocutor with the ICTR) and Gahima\'s brother, 
former Ambassador to the U.S. Theogene Rudasingwa (who 
abruptly announced taking a leave of absence from his 
position as Kagame\'s presidential chief of staff).  Both 
officials left amid accusations they misused their 
positions for personal gain (ref B), although neither faced 
prosecution. 
 
7. Kagame used the national meeting as an opportunity to 
remind government officials of the continued danger of 
\"genocide ideology\", the subject of a major parliamentary 
report adopted in early 2004 that led to restrictions on 
NGOs and to the suspension of teachers as late as October 
(ref A).  His repeated references to \"leadership\" echo his 
February 2004 remarks to the NEPAD African Peer review 
Forum, at which he hailed Rwanda as a model for good 
governance and attributed the 1994 genocide to a \"climax of 
bad leadership\" (ref C).  Kagame\'s statement that 
communities risk being undermined by an individual\'s \"bad 
behaviour\" --  coupled with his admonition to confront 
individuals with \"genocide ideology\" -- will likely 
embolden local officials to take stronger actions against 
activities either deemed \"divisionist\" or contrary to the 
\"good governance, security, and patriotism\" that Kagame 
asserts must serve as the foundation of Rwanda\'s 
development.  END COMMENT. 
 
PATRICK 
"